=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: black routes to islam.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 330
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:53:54.418029
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Black Routes to Islam


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Critical Black Studies Series
Institute for Research in African-American 
Studies
Edited by Manning Marable
The Critical Black Studies Series features readers and anthologies examining challenging top-
ics within the contemporary black experience in the United States, the Caribbean, Africa, and 
across the African diaspora. All readers include scholarly articles originally published in the 
acclaimed quarterly interdisciplinary journal Souls, published by the Institute for Research in 
African-American Studies at Columbia University. Under the general editorial supervision of 
Manning Marable, the readers in the series are designed both for college and university course 
adoption as well as for general readers and researchers. The Critical Black Studies Series seeks to 
provoke intellectual debate and exchange over the most critical issues confronting the political, 
socioeconomic, and cultural reality of black life in the United States and beyond.
Titles in this series published by Palgrave Macmillan:
Racializing Justice, Disenfranchising Lives: The Racism, Criminal Justice, and Law Reader (2007)
 Edited by Manning Marable, Keesha Middlemass, and Ian Steinberg
Seeking Higher Ground: The Hurricane Katrina Crisis, Race, and Public Policy Reader (2008)
 Edited by Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke
Transnational Blackness: Navigating the Global Color Line (2008)
 Edited by Manning Marable and Vanessa Agard-Jones
Black Routes to Islam
 Edited by Manning Marable and Hishaam D. Aidi 
Barack Obama and African-American Empowerment: The Rise of Black America’s New 
Leadership
 Edited by Manning Marable and Kristin Clarke
New Social Movements in the African Diaspora: Challenging Global Apartheid
 Edited by Leith Mullings
The New Black History: The African-American Experience since 1945 Reader
 Edited by Manning Marable and Peniel E. Joseph
Beyond Race: New Social Movements in the African Diaspora
 Edited by Manning Marable
The Black Women, Gender, and Sexuality Reader
 Edited by Manning Marable
Black Intellectuals: The Race, Ideology, and Power Reader
 Edited by Manning Marable


--- PAGE 4 ---
Black Routes to Islam
Edited by Manning Marable and Hishaam D. Aidi


--- PAGE 5 ---
black routes to islam
Copyright © Manning Marable and Hishaam D. Aidi, 2009.
All rights reserved.
First published in 2009 by PALGRAVE MACMILLAN® in the United States—a division 
of  St. Martin’s Press LLC, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Where this book is distributed in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world, this is by 
Palgrave Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited, registered in England, 
company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies and has 
companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-4039-8400-5
Paperback ISBN: 978-1-4039-7781-6
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Black routes to Islam / edited by Manning Marable and Hishaam D Aidi.
       p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-4039-7781-6—ISBN 978-1-4039-8400-5  1.  African American Muslims—
History. 2.  African Americans—Religion—History. 3.  Islam—United States—History. 
4.  African Americans—T ravel—Islamic countries.  I. Marable, Manning, 1950– II. Aidi, 
Hishaam D. 
  BP67.U6B53 2009
  297.8'7—dc22                                2009016317
A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
Design by Scribe Inc.
First edition: August 2009
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2 1
Printed in the United States of America.
This volume includes articles that originally appeared in Souls, published by the Institute 
for Research in African-American Studies, Columbia University.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
  Introduction: The Early Muslim Presence and Its Significance 1
 Hishaam D. Aidi and Manning Marable
 I Geographies and the Political Imagination
 1  Locating Palestine in Pre-1948: Black Internationalism 17
 Alex Lubin
 2 Black Orientalism: Its Genesis, Aims, 
and Significance for American Islam 33
 Sherman A. Jackson
 3 Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics: 
Black Muslims in the Era of the Arab Cold War 49
 Edward E. Curtis IV
 4 East of the Sun (West of the Moon): 
Islam, the Ahmadis, and African America 69
 Moustafa Bayoumi
 5 Representing Permanent War: Black Power’s 
Palestine and the End(s) of Civil Rights 79
 Keith P. Feldman
 II Solidarity and Resistance
 6 From Harlem to Algiers: T ransnational Solidarities between the 
African American Freedom Movement and Algeria, 1962–1978 99
 Samir Meghelli
 7 Let Us Be Moors: Race, Islam, and “Connected Histories” 121
 Hishaam D. Aidi
 8 Constructing Masculinity: Interactions between Islam 
and African American Youth Since C. Eric Lincoln’s 
The Black Muslims in America 141
 Richard Brent Turner
 9 Through Sunni Women’s Eyes: 
Black Feminism and the Nation of Islam 155
 Jamillah Karim


--- PAGE 7 ---
Contentsvi
 10 Black Arabic: Some Notes on African American 
Muslims and the Arabic Language 167
 Su’ad Abdul Khabeer
 11 Lights, Camera, Suspension: Freezing the Frame 
on the Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf-Anthem Controversy 191
 Zareena Grewal
12 Protect Ya Neck (Remix): Muslims and the Carceral 
Imagination in the Age of Guantánamo 207
 Sohail Daulatzai
 III Urban Encounters
 13 Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives: South Asian 
Muslims in U.S. Communities of Color, 1880–1970 227
 Vivek Bald
 14 West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem: 
Immigration, Islam, and the Black Encounter 249
 Zain Abdullah
 15 The Blackstone Legacy: Islam and the Rise of Ghetto Cosmopolitanism 271
 Rami Nashashibi
 16 Jihadis in the Hood: Race, Urban Islam, and the War on T error 283
 Hishaam D. Aidi
 IV Conclusion
 17 Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life: 
A Historian’s Adventures in Living History 299
 Manning Marable
About the Contributors 317
Index   321


--- PAGE 8 ---
I NTRODUCTION
The Early Muslim 
Presence and Its 
Significance
Hishaam D. Aidi and Manning Marable
In the name of God The Compassionate . . . I am not able to write my life. I have 
forgotten much of the language of the Arabs. I read not the grammatical, but very little 
of the common dialect. I ask thee, O brother, to reproach me not, for my eyes are weak, 
and my body also.
—Omar ibn Said, Muslim slave in North Carolina, 
Letter to a friend in West Africa (1836)
A little known fact that continues to inspire incredulity is that 
America’s first Muslims arrived chained in the hulls of slave ships. In 1977, when 
ABC television broadcast the miniseries Roots to an unprecedented 130 million 
viewers, this skepticism came into full view. The miniseries based on Alex Haley’s 
eponymous novel would spark a great interest in African cultural retentions and 
ethnic and racial genealogy, but also disbelief—particularly over the scenes show-
ing how Kunta would avoid eating pork and kneel in prayer facing east. A year 
after the novel’s publication, critic James Michener took issue with a scene that 
described Africans praying to Allah in the interior of a ship making the trans-
atlantic crossing: “T o have Kunta Kinte, or one of his fellows praying to Allah 
while chained in the bottom of a Christian ship is an unjustified sop to contem-
porary developments rather than a true reflection of the past.”
1 Critics suspected 
that Haley had inserted the scenes of Kunta Kinte praying simply to lend some 
historical precedent and legitimacy to the Black Muslim and Black Power move-
ments of the 1960s and 1970s.
2 This skepticism would obviously increase as vari-
ous genealogists contested Haley’s claims that Kunta was his seventh-generation 
ancestor taken from the village of Juffure in the Gambia in 1767 and sold into


--- PAGE 9 ---
Black Routes to Islam2
slavery in Maryland. It was long considered improbable that the African slaves 
in America may have been Muslim, and even more unlikely that they continued 
to practice their faith and transmitted their culture to their children in the New 
World. As one popular textbook put it, “what Muslim faith they [the African 
slaves] brought with them was quickly absorbed into their new Christian milieu 
and disappeared.”
3
But scholarship over the last two decades, inspired in part by the debate over 
Roots, has revealed a “subtle Muslim presence” in America since the early 1500s. 
Historians have unearthed texts written by Muslim slaves in English and Arabic, 
shedding light on a far-flung population of Muslim Africans enslaved throughout 
the New World, many of whom were distinguished by their literacy, and who strug-
gled to maintain their faith through rituals and naming practices, by reading the 
Koran and writing Arabic, sometimes even launching jihads against their overlords. 
While historians will continue to debate the number of Muslims enslaved in the 
New World,
4 it has become increasingly clear that Muslim slaves in Anglo-America 
were treated comparatively better than their counterparts in Latin America, and 
their presence would shape not only racial categories and stratification in the United 
States but also inform early American views of the “Orient.” The impact of the early 
Muslim presence on American racial discourse and representations of the Islamic 
world is critical to understanding the different Islamic and quasi-Islamic move-
ments that emerged in early twentieth-century African America.
Texts and Retentions
The historical research on African Muslim slaves in the New World reveals a dif-
ference between the treatment of Muslim slaves in Spanish territories and those 
in French and English territories. Michael Gomez notes that whereas the experi-
ence of Muslim slaves in Latin America, the Spanish-speaking Caribbean, and 
Brazil was characterized by “severe political repression,” since these communities 
were often seen as threatening, the “Muslim communities in the United Sates 
were comparatively quiet and compliant.” In addition, throughout the French- 
and English-speaking Caribbean and North America, Muslim slaves—who were 
often Mande, Fulbe, and from Senegambia—would be elevated above other 
slaves and given less arduous work. “Patterns of privileging Muslim individuals 
would develop all over Anglophone America,” writes Gomez, “and they stand 
out in sharp relief against the anti-Muslim mania of the Spanish and Portuguese 
domains.” Why this difference? A central reason is that these “new” encounters 
were an extension of centuries-old interactions in the Old World, and the differ-
ing treatments of Muslim slaves reflect the European states’ disparate relationships 
to North Africa and the wider Muslim world. The Spanish and Portuguese states, 
who were battling Islam within their borders, were obsessed with the Moorish 
threat and would take great measures to prevent the importation of Muslim Afri-
cans to the New World, even persecuting those slaves suspected of being Muslim. 
If the relationship between Africans and Spanish and Portuguese in Latin America


--- PAGE 10 ---
The Early Muslim Presence and Its Significance 3
was a continuation of a history of violence that had existed on the Iberian Pen-
insula for centuries, “England had no such tradition and therefore had no reason 
to anticipate religious hostility in any a priori fashion.”
5 One indicator of this 
comparative tolerance—even preference—for Muslim slaves that existed in the 
United States was the considerable writing (journalistic, scholarly, and even fic-
tion) that emerged about Muslim slaves and their narratives.
Slave narratives are a precious resource for understanding the experiences of 
Muslim slaves in America and how they were treated and represented. The Mus-
lim slaves who captured the American imagination in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries were all distinguished by their leadership qualities and learning. Some of 
these individuals would become local legends spawning a spate of literature trying 
to explain their literacy and supposed “Oriental” origins. The firsthand accounts of 
contemporaries who encountered Muslim slaves have turned out to be critical in 
shedding light on the lives and habits of Muslim slaves. Consider the reference in 
Georgia Conrad’s memoir, Reminiscences of a Southern Woman, to a Muslim family 
she met on Sapelo Island, off the coast of Georgia, in the mid-1850s: “On Sapelo 
Island near Darcen, I used to know a family of Negroes who worshipped Mahomet. 
They were tall and well-formed, with good features. They conversed with us in 
English, but in talking among themselves they used a foreign tongue that no one 
else understood. The head of the tribe was a very old man named Bi-la-li. He always 
wore a cap that resembled a T urkish fez. These negroes held themselves aloof from 
others as if they were conscious of their own superiority.”
6 Conrad was referring to 
Bilali, a Muslim slave who would gain notoriety for his literacy and valor. Wylly 
Spaulding, the grandson of Thomas Spaulding, who was Bilali’s master, also writes 
about his grandfather’s slaves of “Moorish or Arabian descent, devout Mussulmans, 
who prayed to Allah . . . morning, noon, and evening.”
7
The said Bilali would make a lasting mark in the American cultural and liter-
ary imagination, becoming the subject of two children’s books by Joel Chandler 
Harris—The Story of Aaron (So Named) the Son of Ben Ali (1896) and Aaron in the
Wildwoods (1897); he would be invoked as a Muslim ancestor in T ony Morrison’s 
novel Song of Solomon (1977), and mentioned in Julie Dash’s 1991 film Daughters of
the Dust. Bilali gained notoriety after the War of 1812, during which he and eighty 
slaves successfully fought and prevented the British from invading Sapelo. He is also 
remembered for an Arabic text that he wrote and had placed in his coffin along with 
his Quran and his prayer rug. The text—a collection of pieces from the Maliki legal 
text ar-Risala—attempted to reconcile the law of Islam with leading a principled 
life and showed how the author was struggling to maintain his iman in the land 
of America.
8 Because of his outstanding qualities, Bilali would be appointed the 
manager of his master’s plantation, overseeing approximately five hundred slaves.
Ethnographic work in the 1930s about the Muslim community of Sapelo 
and St. Simon’s Island during the antebellum period—by linguist Lorenzo Dow 
T urner and the Georgia Writers’ Project—showed that the islands’ relative isola-
tion allowed for a preservation of Muslim traditions. This decades-old research 
on the Georgia Sea Islands has proven to be an invaluable source on Muslim slave


--- PAGE 11 ---
Black Routes to Islam4
life (and further added to Bilali’s reputation since a number of the individuals 
interviewed during the 1930s were Bilali’s descendents). 9 Particularly intriguing 
was Lorenzo T urner’s hypothesis that the “Ring Shout,” a Southern Baptist ritual 
in which worshippers move in a circle around an altar at the center of the church 
clapping, shuffling their feet, and praying aloud, may derive from the Muslim 
ritual of circumambulating the Kaaba. Lorenzo T urner noted that “Shout = a 
religious ring dance in which the participants continue to perform until they are 
exhausted” and proposed that the origin of the word “Shout” is the Arabic shaut,
which means “to move around the Kaaba (the small stone building at Mecca 
which is the chief object of the pilgrimage of the Mohamedans) until exhausted.”
10
Another possible Muslim retention that still absorbs scholars involves the fact that 
the Christian congregation on Sapelo Island prays toward the east and the church 
itself is built facing that direction. Worshippers are taught to pray facing east 
because “the devil is in the other corner”; and in this congregation, even the dead 
are buried facing east. While “the east” in this case might simply mean Africa and 
not necessarily Mecca, historians continue to ponder if this peculiarity—along 
with other Shouters’ prayer rituals—including being barefoot at church, kneeling 
on a piece of fabric, performing a ritual handshake followed by the touching of 
the left breast by the right hand—are “Islamic traits.”
11 Without more evidence 
to substantiate these claims of Muslim retentions in African American culture, 
these hypotheses remain speculative; but these claims of Muslim “survivals” and 
“continuities” would become critical to the twentieth-century social movements 
discussed in this volume that would use these alleged retentions as raw material 
for their ideological and cultural repertoires.
Drivers and Overseers
While the cultural influence of the early Muslim presence remains a matter of 
speculation, the impact of the Muslim slave population on the hierarchy of the 
American South is less disputed. As Gomez has argued, “the most lasting [and] . . . 
most salient impact” of Islam in colonial and antebellum America “was its role 
in the process of social stratification within the larger African American soci-
ety,” adding that “the early Muslim community contributed significantly to the 
development of African American identity.”
12 Many of the Muslim slaves were of 
Fulbe, Mande, and Senegambian background, whose features were thought to be 
closer to those of Europeans than of Africans, and American slave owners invari-
ably saw Muslim slaves “as more intelligent, more reasonable, more physically 
attractive, more dignified people.”
13 The “European” features and intelligence 
were seen as obviously linked. This bias reflected the influence of the notorious 
Hamitic thesis—the argument, popular in nineteenth-century European colonial 
thought, that North Africans and Central Africans with “thin” features were actu-
ally Africans of Caucasian origin who had migrated from the West to Africa; thus, 
Senegambians, the Fulbe, and T utsis, for instance, were said to be not of Afri-
can origin but of European, Egyptian, or Arab descent. The Hamitic thesis and


--- PAGE 12 ---
The Early Muslim Presence and Its Significance 5
the belief in the alleged superiority of the “Mohammedans” would make its way 
across the Atlantic and be invoked to explain the literacy of Muslim slaves in the 
New World. In his America Negro Slavery, Ulrich Phillips observes that plantation 
owners often thought the Senegalese were the most intelligent because they “had 
a strong Arabic strain in their ancestry.”
14
Because of this thinking, Muslims slaves in the United States were often placed 
in positions of power over other non-Muslim slaves. In his book Prince Among
Slaves—about the life of another prominent Muslim slave, Ibrahima Abdal Rah-
man—T erry Alford notes that Muslim slaves were used as “drivers, overseers and 
confidential servants with a frequency their numbers did not justify.”
15 Muslim 
overseers informed on disobedient slaves and crushed slave uprisings, earning the 
distrust of other Africans. In a treatise he wrote calling for the “benign” treat-
ment of slaves, Zephaniah Kingsley noted how Muslim drivers on Sapelo Island 
jointly crushed a slave revolt. Referring to events along the Georgia coast dur-
ing the Anglo-American War of 1812, Kingsley alludes to “two instances, to the 
southward, where gangs of negroes were prevented from deserting to the enemy 
[England] by drivers, or influential negroes, whose integrity to their masters and 
influence over the slaves prevented it; and what is still more remarkable, in both 
instances the influential negroes were Africans; and professors of the Mahom-
medan religion.”
16 Muslim slaves often took the side of the slave owner, and 
this—along with the preferential treatment they received—created a rift between 
Muslim and non-Muslim slaves.
Literacy and Genealogy
The impact of the Muslim presence on American racial discourse is also evident 
in how scholars and journalists of the day sought to explain the origins of Muslim 
slaves. A great deal of energy was expended by antebellum writers and owners try-
ing to ascertain the genealogy of the Muslim slaves and to find a way to classify 
them so that their Arabic literacy would not threaten the ideological underpin-
nings of racial slavery. The case of Omar ibn Said is illustrative: because of his Ara-
bic literacy, he was identified as a Moor. “He is an Arab by birth of royal blood” 
who had been enslaved by Africans, “whom he had always hated,” explained The
Providence Journal in 1846.
17 But it is the tales spun around Omar’s origins that are 
most dubious—and revealing. On January 22, 1847, The Wilmington Chronicle
accurately described Omar as a “Pulo” (Fulbe), but the writer notes, “the Foulahs, 
or Falatas, are known as descendents of the Arabian Mohamedans who migrated 
to Western Africa in the seventh century. They carried with them the literature of 
Arabia, as well as the religion of their great Prophet, and have ever retained both. 
The Foulahs stand in the scale of civilizations at the head of all African tribes.”
18
This tendency to depict African Muslim slaves as Moorish, Arab, or of Oriental 
origin was widespread. The aforementioned Bilali of Sapelo Island would be simi-
larly “Orientalized,” portrayed as “an Arab—man of the desert—slave hunter” 
in Joel Chandler Harris’s novel The Story of Aaron (So Named) the Son of Ben Ali.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Black Routes to Islam6
The literacy and education of the Muslim slaves was rarely seen as a result of 
their exposure to Islam or Arabic education in West Africa but was attributed to 
their Arab, Berber, or Moorish origin. Muslim slaves were thus separated from 
other Africans, not only physically—in the work and positions they were given—
but also ideologically and epistemologically. And these Muslim slaves—many of 
whom distanced themselves from their non-Muslim counterparts—would accept 
these labels and often eagerly claim Moorish, Arab, or Berber origin themselves. 
(For instance, Ibrahima Abd ar-Rahman, a Fulbe, is reported to have insisted 
that he had no “Negro” blood and “placed the negro in a scale of being infinitely 
below the Moor.”) This air of superiority would fuel the resentment of other 
slaves, with those of Muslim, Moorish, and Arab identity being suspected of 
being proslavery and antiblack, while also luring other slaves to claim Moorish 
or Muslim identity.
But why the need for these utterly fictitious genealogies? Why the effort to “de-
Negroize” the Muslim slave? As Henry Louis Gates has observed, the Enlighten-
ment discourse of this era viewed writing as “the visible sign of reason,”
19 and, as 
such, the literacy of Muslim slaves posed a challenge. Diouf argues that accepting 
these Muslim slaves as Africans would have posed an ideological threat to the 
American racial order: “It was more acceptable to deny any Africanness to the dis-
tinguished Muslims than to recognize that a ‘true’ African could be intelligent and 
cultured but enslaved nonetheless. So, gradually, the African Muslims were seen 
as owing their perceived superiority not to their own ‘genes,’ not even to their 
culture or proximity to the Arab world, but to foreign ‘blood.’”
20 This reasoning 
grew out of a peculiarly American race regime, which, unlike its counterparts in 
Latin America, did not recognize the intermediate strata of mulattos, creoles, or 
mestizo, with different meanings of intelligence and privilege attached to these 
categories. As Diouf observes, in the more rigid American racial order with its 
Manichean categories, an “intelligent black” was categorized not as black but 
as close to white—a Moor or Arab; blacks were thus still seen as inferior, but 
those of alleged Moorish or Arab origins were seen as suited for higher posi-
tions where they could monitor the majority of blacks and enforce the rules of 
the slave society.
If Muslim slaves in the United States had to be categorized and represented in a 
way that would not unsettle the country’s racial order, their narratives—the slave 
narrative—would emerge as a literary genre in the United States in a way unseen 
in Latin America and pose a challenge to reigning assumptions about human races, 
modernity, and the Enlightenment. As one literary critic asked, “What happened 
when a significant number of literate enslaved Muslims gave the incontestable lie 
to the notion that blacks were incapable of reason—possessing neither books nor 
history nor scriptural/revealed religion—were, in short, a cultural tabula rasa?”
21
One way to deal with this challenge was by presenting the Muslim slave’s life story 
as a tale of uplift from heathenism and an espousal of Christianity and American 
values. The popular narrative that emerged around Omar ibn Said, for example, 
tells of an Arab Muslim’s difficult journey to freedom and enlightenment: after


--- PAGE 14 ---
The Early Muslim Presence and Its Significance 7
enduring slavery in South Carolina, he ran away before he was taken in by John 
Owen, the former governor of North Carolina who was impressed by his literacy 
and helped him convert to Christianity.
In these accounts, the Muslim slave’s conversion to Christianity was also often 
accompanied by an express desire to return to Africa to spread the gospel and 
American civilization. The first Muslim slave known to have gained freedom 
because of his literacy was Ayyub bin Suleiman (also known as Job the Son of Sol-
omon), a Fulbe from a prominent family who was enslaved in Maryland, where 
white children “would mock him and throw dirt in his face” as he attempted to 
recite his prayers in the woods. His literacy and piety would draw the attention of 
an English minister who would begin to press for his manumission. Henry Louis 
Gates identifies the 1731 letter of Ayyub bin Suleiman Diallo to his father—ask-
ing that he ransom him out of slavery—as the first instance in modernity when an 
African literally wrote his way out of slavery.
22 The London-based Royal African 
Company would eventually arrange for Ayyub’s return to Bondu, where he would 
assist the Royal African Company in their trade of rum, gold, and slaves. Literacy 
would in fact help a number of African Muslim slaves earn their liberty, as they 
offered their services to American and English colonial projects in West Africa.
The widespread interest in the stories of the Muslim slaves must be viewed in 
historical context. Of the hundreds of narratives written in North America, very 
few were written by African-born slaves and even fewer—the most notable excep-
tion being Olaudah Equiano’s autobiography published in 1789—would gain a 
wide readership. Abolitionists who promoted slave narratives generally did not seek 
the texts of African-born slaves since they thought these would be seen as too alien 
to gain a wide readership and aid the abolitionists’ cause.
23 Moreover, unlike most 
slave narratives that detailed the horrors of life under slavery and crackled with 
tales of escape and adventure, the Muslim slaves’ narratives were not so suspense-
ful, often simply giving descriptions of Islamic teachings and portrayals of daily 
life in Africa. Yet despite their few numbers, the Muslim slave narratives would 
draw considerable attention because of the Haitian Revolution (1791–1803) and 
because of the Barbary wars (1801–5), which made the figure of a disobedient 
slave or educated Muslim slave rather unsettling. As African American slave narra-
tives were gaining a readership, the captivity narratives of white Americans held in 
North Africa were also becoming popular, and, jointly, these texts would engage 
the American popular imagination and disturb the racial status quo.
White Slaves, African Masters
The attacks on American vessels off the Barbary Coast, and the enslavement of 
scores of white Americans by Africans in a distant Muslim land since the mid-
eighteenth century, produced a range of reactions from American observers 
and touched on myriad cultural and political issues. Since the 1700s, American 
observers would view their country’s racial predicament through the prism of 
Barbary and the wider Orient.
24


--- PAGE 15 ---
Black Routes to Islam8
Critics would point to North African slavery and despotism to tell America that 
it had to live up to its principles and abolish bondage—that it could not descend 
to such barbarous behavior. As early as 1700, the renowned jurist Samuel Sewell 
wrote The Selling of Joseph , the first antislavery pamphlet condemning bondage 
in America and highlighting the hypocrisy of those who decried slavery in North 
Africa: “Methinks, when we are bemoaning the barbarous Usage of our Friends 
and Kinsfolk in Africa: it might not be unreasonable to enquire whether we are 
not culpable in forcing the Africans to become Slaves amongst our selves.”
25 In 
1776, Samuel Hopkins, a Congregationalist minister and early abolitionist, exco-
riated his fellow Northerners who seemed appalled by North African slavery but 
silent about bondage at home: “If many thousands of our children were slaves 
in Algiers or any part of the T urkish dominions . . . how would the attention of 
the country be turned to it! Would it not become the chief topic of conversa-
tion? Would any cost or labor be spared . . . in order to obtain their freedom? . . . 
And why are we not as much affected with the slavery of the thousands of blacks 
among ourselves whose miserable state is before our eyes.” He continued, “The 
reason is obvious . . . It is because they are Negroes and fit for nothing but slaves. 
’Tis because they are negroes, and we have been used to look on them in a mean, 
contemptible light.”
26 Hopkins would go on to ban slave owners from his congre-
gation and found the American Colonization Society to return blacks to Africa.
The “Barbary problem” emerged as a contentious issue at the Constitutional 
Convention of 1787, with the Federalists calling for the establishment of a navy 
to meet the corsair threat and the anti-Federalists resisting the expansion of the 
federal state’s power. At the convention in Philadelphia, representative Hugh 
Williamson of North Carolina would ask publicly, “What is there to prevent an 
Algerine pirate from landing on your coast, and carrying your citizens into slav-
ery? You have not a single sloop of war?”
27 After the Barbary wars, the regencies of 
North Africa would cease to pose a threat to American commercial interests, but 
the narratives written by Americans enslaved in North Africa would gain a new 
significance in the antebellum years, as these texts, like the Muslim slave narra-
tives, became part of the debate over slavery. Abolitionists and white supremacists 
alike would use the narratives of released captives to protest or defend slavery on 
American soil.
The Barbary captivity narratives had existed since the 1600s, but only became 
popular in the first half of the nineteenth century as the number of slaves in the 
United States increased rapidly—from one million in 1807 to two million by 
1837
28—at the same time as African American slave narratives rose in popularity. 
As the dispute over slavery intensified, so did the interest in the writings of ex-
slaves—whites held captive in Barbary but also the accounts of free blacks—from 
Omar ibn Said’s autobiography (1831) to Frederick Douglas’s best-selling narra-
tive (1845) to Harriet Jacobs’s Incidents in the Life of A Slave Girl (1861)—which 
were used to bolster the abolitionist case. In his White Slavery in the Barbary States
(1853), the abolitionist Charles Sumner observed that the interest in Barbary 
captives fed interest in slavery at home: “The interest awakened for the slave in


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Early Muslim Presence and Its Significance 9
Algiers embraced also the slave at home. Sometimes they were said to be alike 
in condition; sometimes, indeed it was openly declared that the horrors of our 
American slavery surpassed that of Algiers.”
29
The Barbary captivity narrative depicted a trajectory of religious redemp-
tion that was the reverse of the Muslim slave’s account, which portrayed morally 
redeemed figures crossing the Atlantic to return to their African homelands, but 
both texts depicted individuals set on helping America live up to its principles. In 
the African American Muslim narrative, the slave would suffer in bondage before 
a kind master would discover his Muslim (“Oriental”) origins and manumit him; 
the grateful African would then embrace Christianity and pledge to serve America 
upon returning to his homeland, enlightened and intent on spreading American 
ideals. In the Barbary narrative, by contrast, the white slave would endure brutal-
ity and resist conversion to Islam before defeating his Moorish master, who would 
then embrace Christianity and American antislavery liberalism, and the captive 
would then return to America vowing to abolish slavery. Despite their predictable 
“plotline,” both types of narratives resonated deeply, challenging American racial 
hierarchies and the young republic’s moral authority and self-image.
The Barbary narratives helped shape, and were shaped by, the debate over slav-
ery that was dividing the country. Tales of white bodies possessed and violated by 
African masters presented a distorted mirror image of the situation in America, 
causing considerable anxiety and challenging racial slavery’s black-white divide 
and its foundational assumptions about white supremacy and African primitiv-
ism. North African slavery posed a similarity and a parallel between America and 
the Orient that was profoundly disturbing: not only were they capable of enslav-
ing white Americans, but how could we denounce their slavery while maintaining 
slavery at home? This contradiction produced varied reactions from those who 
would compare the two systems of slavery and denounce the South for stooping 
to Oriental levels of cruelty to those who were sickened by North African “bar-
barousness” and concluded that the blacks in America could never be ready for 
emancipation.
The most popular, and possibly the most influential, Barbary narrative to be 
sold in the United States was Captain James Riley’s 1817 account of his capture by 
“wandering Arabs” in northwest Africa. His book, Suffering in Africa, which drew 
attention to the country’s moral blind spot of slavery while speaking of America’s 
providential role, sold nearly a million copies and was adapted into an illustrated 
children’s storybook. The narrative told the story of how Captain Riley and his 
crew endured slavery in the desert after their ship Commerce was shipwrecked off 
the coast of modern-day Mauritania. When finally liberated by a compassion-
ate Muslim traveler, Riley vows to devote the rest of his life to ending slavery in 
America. Recalling black slaves he had seen on the auction block in New Orleans, 
Riley’s narrative ends with a plea to Americans to chop down the “cursed tree of 
slavery” and obliterate “the rod of oppression.”
30 When he returns to Washington, 
Riley meets President Monroe, who encourages him to publish his story. Riley’s 
Suffering in Africa came out in at least twenty-eight editions and is still in print


--- PAGE 17 ---
Black Routes to Islam10
today. It is perhaps the most influential Barbary captivity narrative since it is said 
to have been one of Abraham Lincoln’s all-time favorite books—along with The
Bible and John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress—and is believed to have shaped the 
future president’s views on slavery.
31 These narratives would shape early American 
representations of Africa and the Orient, unsettling American racial formations 
and showing how such racial constructs were often projected onto the Muslim 
world. From the mid-eighteenth century onward, in part because of these narra-
tives, many Americans would view the Islamic world through the prism of race 
and slavery.
Muslim Slaves and the Colonization of Liberia
A number of the abolitionists who pointed to North Africa to highlight Ameri-
ca’s bane of slavery came to believe that returning blacks to West Africa was the 
best solution to the country’s racial discord. Thus, the ardent abolitionist Samuel 
Hopkins thought that equality was not possible for blacks in America because 
of widespread racism and white fears of uprisings by freed blacks, and came to 
believe in “colonization” or the repatriation of freed blacks to Africa. The rever-
end underlined the economic gains of planting a colony of African Americans 
in Africa. “Such a settlement, promoted by the Americans,” he enthusiastically 
wrote a fellow minister in 1793, “would not only tend to the good of the Africans, 
but would, in time, be a source of profitable trade to America, instead of the West 
India trade, which will probably fail more and more.”
32
The American Colonization Society’s attitude toward Muslim slaves is particu-
larly interesting. For the repatriation movement, Muslim slaves, with their Arabic 
literacy, were seen as a valuable tool for opening up West Africa to American 
economic and political interests. The Muslim slaves were seen as natural inter-
mediaries with the Muslims and pagans of the West African Coast; they had, 
after all, embraced Christianity, were indebted to America for their newfound 
freedom and faith, and would help spread American civilization in Africa. As 
the repatriation movement grew in influence, Muslim slaves and their narratives 
gained greater political significance, and individuals like Ibrahima Abdul Rahman 
would—along with other Muslim slaves—become central to the debate about 
Liberia, and, often feigning conversion to Christianity, would volunteer to return 
to Africa to spread the Gospel’s good news. Muslim slaves would work with the 
American Colonization Society to gain passage to Africa. According to The Afri-
can Repository, the mouthpiece of the American Colonization Society, in 1835, 
Lamine Kaba (“Paul”), who had served for almost thirty years as a slave in Georgia 
and South Carolina, addressed a group of white philanthropists about his sudden 
conversion to Christianity following his manumission and his desire to pursue 
missionary work in Africa, where he would join his family. T raveling under the 
name of Paul A. Mandingo, Kaba would reach Liberia in August 1835 and would 
settle in Sierra Leone, but he would remain in contact with Muslim slaves that he 
had befriended in America. (The letter quoted in the beginning of this chapter


--- PAGE 18 ---
The Early Muslim Presence and Its Significance 11
was written by Omar Ibn Said to Kaba in 1836, showing that literate Muslim 
slaves maintained ties across the Atlantic. 33) The Muslim slaves’ eagerness to get 
involved in the repatriation effort—as a way to gain passage home—undoubtedly 
incensed black abolitionists opposed to the Liberia project, which they saw as a 
ruse to rid America of its African population.
African American Muslim slave narratives continue to be discovered: Omar bin 
Said’s Arabic text turned up in an old trunk in Virginia in 1995; the narrative of 
Shaykh Sana See of Panama was discovered in 1999; and the 1873 autobiography 
of Nicolas Said of Alabama was stumbled upon in a library annex in 2000.
34 As 
more of these texts come to light, we will undoubtedly learn more about the lives 
of Muslim slaves and ex-slaves. The foregoing discussion of the early Muslim pres-
ence on the American plantation, the literacy of Muslim slaves, the reactions to 
Muslim Arabic writing, and the simultaneous appeal of narratives by and about 
Muslim slaves and the Barbary captivity narratives are all critical to understand-
ing early (black and white) American attitudes toward Islam, the rise of modern 
Islamic movements, and contemporary representations of Islam and the Orient. 
Since the American Revolution, Islam has been contentiously associated with race 
and slavery—as revealed by the politics surrounding the Barbary and Muslim 
slave narratives—and with American interests in Africa and the Orient.
By the early twentieth century, there would be a clear association in the African 
American community between Arabic and erudition, and between Islam, libera-
tion, and black empowerment. The experiences and narratives of Muslim slaves—
combined with the writings of Edward Blyden, who, while in Liberia, was deeply 
impressed by the civilization and political autonomy of Islamic states in West 
Africa—laid the intellectual groundwork for the Black Muslim movements of the 
early and mid-twentieth century. Yet, at the same time, there was a growing resent-
ment of Muslims as arrogant “house negroes” who denied their blackness and 
preferred to pass for “Arab” or “Oriental” or even as race traitors all too willing to 
defend the institution of slavery and partake in pernicious colonization projects. 
The preferential treatment afforded Muslim slaves by the American racial order 
encouraged other blacks to claim Moorish or Arab descent and even “incentiv-
ized” conversion to Islam.
35 The association of Islam with preferential treatment 
and “passing” would grate the nerves of prominent black leaders. Reflecting this 
view, Booker T . Washington, in his autobiography Up From Slavery, scoffs at how 
a “dark-skinned man . . . a citizen of Morocco” is allowed into a “local hotel” from 
which he, “an American Negro,” is banned.
36 The belief that Muslim identity 
and conversion to Islam constituted a form of “passing” would echo deep into 
the twentieth century and would only be reinforced by the fact that many Afri-
can Americans who embraced Islam were not “Jim Crowed.” As Dizzy Gillespie 
famously pointed out in the 1950s, many jazz musicians who took on Muslim 
names could enter “whites only” restaurants and even had “white” stamped on 
their union cards.
37


--- PAGE 19 ---
Black Routes to Islam12
In short, decades before the post-1945 era when the United States began to 
establish a presence in the Middle East, and before the advent of immigrants from 
North Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia, the labels “Arab,” “Moorish,” and 
“Muslim” already referred to loaded, polarizing categories. By the mid-nineteenth 
century, a discourse had evolved that separated the (“sophisticated”) Arab/Moor 
from the African, and split Northern Africa (“The Orient”) from Black Africa 
(“Africa”). These efforts to separate Arab from African identity, seen in the Orien-
talizing (“de-Negroizing”) of Muslim slaves, is still evident in contemporary dis-
courses on Northern Africa, specifically Sudan, where Arabic-speaking blacks are 
habitually described as “settlers” or “nonindigenous.” The emergence of various 
Islamic and quasi-Islamic movements in African America in the early twentieth 
century, which would overlap with the rise of the northern ghetto and American 
global power, would resourcefully adapt and contest these historic categories and 
representations. The postwar ascent of the United States and the country’s sub-
sequent expansion into the Muslim world—particularly the Middle East—com-
bined with the influx of immigrants from these regions into the United States, 
would all increase the appeal of Islam in the country’s urban core, producing 
myriad trends and movements—secular and religious—that would claim solidar-
ity or a connection to some region or people in the Islamic world.
The chapters in this volume address various aspects of this historic and evolv-
ing relationship between Islam and black America. The authors included in this 
volume explore different dimensions of the more than century-long interaction 
between black America and Islam. Starting with the nineteenth-century nar-
ratives of African American travelers to the Holy Land, the following chapters 
probe Islam’s role in urban social movements, music, and popular culture, gender 
dynamics, relations between African Americans and Muslim immigrants, and the 
racial politics of American Islam with the ongoing war in Iraq and deepening U.S. 
involvement in the Orient.
Notes
 1. James A Michener, “Roots, Unique In Its Time,” New York Times Book Review , February 
26, 1977, 41.
 2. Alex Haley, Roots: The Saga of an American Family (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1976). 
The novel contains various scenes highlighting Kunta’s Islamic faith and practices: “As the 
sun began to set, Kunta turned his face toward the East, and by the time he had finished 
his silent evening prayer to Allah, dusk was gathering” (Haley, 173). Elsewhere, Haley 
writes, “Through the night, he lay drifting into and out of sleep and wondering about 
these black ones who sounded like Africans but ate pig. It meant that they were all strang-
ers–or traitors–to Allah. Silently he begged Allah’s forgiveness in advance if his lips would 
even touch any swine without his realizing it, or even if he ever ate from any plate that any 
swine meat had ever been on” (Haley, 178).
 3. Caesar E. Farah, Islam: Beliefs and Observances, 7th ed. (New York: Baron’s Educational 
Services, 2003), 323.
 4. Allan Austin estimates that 7 to 8 percent of the Africans enslaved in America between the 
seventeenth and nineteenth centuries were Muslim. Based on a 10 percent estimate of all


--- PAGE 20 ---
The Early Muslim Presence and Its Significance 13
West Africans introduced between 1711 and 1808, Austin has also suggested that there 
was a total of 29,695 Muslim slaves in the Americas. Allan D. Austin, African Muslims in
Antebellum America: A Sourcebook (New York: Routledge, 1984). Michael Gomez thinks 
“thousands if not tens of thousands” of Muslim slaves were brought to the United States. 
Michael Gomez, “Muslims in Early America,” Journal of Southern History 60 (November 
4, 1994): 682.
 5. Michael Gomez, Black Crescent: The Experience and Legacy of African Muslims in the Amer-
icas (London: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 58.
 6. Georgia Bryan Conrad, “Reminiscences of a Southern Woman,” from Southern Workman,
1901, cited in Lydia Parrish, Slave Songs of the Georgia Sea Islands (Athens: University of 
Georgia Press), 28.
 7. Charles Spaulding Wylly, The Seed That Was Sown in Georgia (New York: Neale, 1910).
 8. For more on Bilali’s Arabic manuscript, see Joseph H Greenberg, “The Decipherment of 
the ‘Ben Ali Diary,’ a Preliminary Statement,” Journal of Negro History 25  (July 1940): 
372–75.
 9. Katie Brown, one of Bilali’s great-granddaughters—and, at the time of the WPA inter-
view, described as “one of the oldest inhabitants” of Sapelo Island—told her interviewer 
that Bilali’s seven daughters were named “Margret, Bentoo, Chaalut, medina, Yaruba, 
Fatima, and Hestuh.” Katie went on to describe her grandmother Margret’s Islamic head-
dress, which differed from the scarf that she (Katie) wore, and to explain how her grand-
mother would make rice cakes (saraka) for the children on religious holidays, and how 
Bilali and his wife Phoebe used to “pray on duh bead,” a reference to the Islamic rosary 
(tasbih): “Margaret an uh daughter Cotto use tuh say dat Bilali an he wife Phoebe pray on 
duh bead. Dey wuz bery puhticluh bout duh time dey pray and dey bery regluh bout duh 
hour. Wen duh sun come up, when it straight obuh head and wen it set, das duh time dey 
pray. Dey bow tuh duh sun an hab lill mat tuh kneel on. Duh beads is on a long string. 
Belali he pull bead an he say, ‘Belambi, Hakabara, Mahamadu.’ Phoebe she say, ‘Ameen, 
Ameen.’” See Drums and Shadows: Survival Studies among the Georgia Coastal Negroes, by 
the Georgia Writers’ Project Savannah Unit (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1940), 
158–61.
 10. Lorenzo Dow T urner, Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect (1949; New York: Arno, 1969).
 11. Sylviane A. Diouf, Servants of Allah: African Muslims Enslaved in the Americas (New York: 
New York University Press, 1998), 190. Washington Creel notes that the Gullah peo-
ple buried their dead so that their body faced east. See Margaret Washington Creel, “A 
Peculiar People”: Slave Religion and Community-Culture among the Gullahs,” Journal of
Southern History 56, no. 2 (May 1990): 332–33.
 12. Michael Gomez, Exchanging Our Country Marks: The Transformation of African Identities 
in the Colonial and Antebellum South (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
1998), 60.
 13. See Newbell N. Puckett, Folk Beliefs of the Southern Negro  (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1926), 528–29.
 14. Ulrich Bonnell Phillips, American Negro Slavery (New York: D. Appleton, 1918), 42. 
The influence of the Hamitic thesis in the American South is evident in the writings of 
scholar-diplomat William Brown Hodgson. In his Notes on Northern Africa, the Sahara 
and the Sudan (New York, 1844), he states emphatically that “the Foulahs are not Negroes. 
They differ essentially from the Negro race, in all the charactertistics that are marked by 
physical anthropology. They may be said to occupy the intermediate space between the 
Arab and the Negro. All travelers concur in representing them as a distinct race, in moral 
as in physical traits . . . They concur also in the report, that the Foulahs of every region


--- PAGE 21 ---
Black Routes to Islam14
represent themselves to be white men, and proudly assert their superiority to the black 
tribes, among whom they live.”
 15. T erry Alford, Prince Among Slaves (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986).
 16. Zephaniah Kingsley, A Treatise on the Patriarchal or Cooperative System of Society as it Exists
in Some Governments and Colonies in America, and in the United States, Under the Name of 
Slavery, with its Necessity and Advantages, 2nd ed. (Freeport, NY: Books for Libraries Press, 
1971), 13–14.
 17. Austin, African Muslims in Antebellum America, 474.
 18. Ibid., 473.
 19. Henry Louis Gates, The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of Afro-American Literary Criticism
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), 13.
 20. Diouf, Servants of Allah, 102.
 21. Keith Cartwright, Reading Africa into American Literature: Epics, Fables, and Gothic T ales
(University Press of Kentucky, 2004), 158.
 22. Henry Louis Gates, Figures in Black (1987), 12–13; Gates, The Signifying Monkey, 148, 
163.
 23. See Diouf, Servants of Allah, 140.
 24. Lotfi Ben Rajab, “America’s Captive Freemen In North Africa: The Comparative Method 
In Abolitionist Persuasion,” Slavery & Abolition 9, no. 1 (1988): 57–71.
 25. Samuel Sewell, The Selling of Joseph: A Memorial, ed. Sidney Kaplan (Amherst: University 
of Massachusetts Press, 1969), 11.
 26. Stanley K. Schultz, “The Making of a Reformer: The Reverend Samuel Hopkins as an 
Eighteenth-Century Abolitionist,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society  115, 
no. 5 (October 15, 1971).
 27. Hugh Williamson, Speech at Edenton, North Carolina, New York Daily Advertiser, Febru-
ary 26, 1788, in The Documentary History of the Ratification of the Constitution 25, 206.
 28. Paul Baepler, ed., White Slaves, African Masters: An Anthology of American Barbary Captiv-
ity Narratives (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 25.
 29. Charles Sumner, White Slavery in the Barbary States (1853) (Ayer, 1947), 83.
 30. James Riley, Sufferings in Africa: An Authentic Narrative (New York: Potter, 1965), 
445–47.
 31. Gerald R. McMurtry, “The Influence of Riley’s Narrative Upon Abraham Lincoln,” Indi-
ana Magazine of History 30 (1934): 133–38.
 32. Samuel Hopkins, Discourse (Boston: Doctrinal T ract and Book Society, 1852), 611, 608–
12; the Dialogue (1785; reprinted, Arno Press, 1970), 584.
 33. George E. Post, “Arabic-Speaking Negro Mohammedans in Africa,” The African Repository
(May 1869): 130–31.
 34. Moustafa Bayoumi, “Moving Beliefs: The Panama Manuscript of Sheikh Sana See and 
African Diasporic Islam,” Interventions 5, no. 1 (April 2003): 58–81; Precious Rasheeda 
Muhammad, “The Autobiography of Nicholas Said: A Native of Bornou, Eastern Soudan, 
Central Africa,” Journal of Islam in America (2001).
 35. While Ibrahima’s case was in the headlines, just before his return to Africa, others began 
claiming Muslim descent and Oriental ancestry, including “Abdullah Mohammed,” who 
claimed to have been abducted from his native Syria by pirates, and “Almourad Ali,” who 
raised $1500 for his passage back home to T urkey before it was discovered that he was 
from Albany, New York. See Alford, Prince Among Slaves, 137.
 36. Booker T . Washington, Up From Slavery (New York: Carol, 1993), 103.
 37. Dizzy Gillespie and Al Frazer, T o Be or Not to Bop (New York: Da Capo, 1979), 293. As 
Gillespie put it, “‘Man, if you join the Muslim faith, you ain’t colored no more, you’ll be 
white,’ they’d say. You get a new name and you don’t have to be a nigger no more.”


--- PAGE 22 ---
P ART  I
Geographies and the 
Political Imagination


--- PAGE 23 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 24 ---
C HAPTER  1
Locating Palestine 
in Pre-1948
Black Internationalism
Alex Lubin
At the 1955 Asian-African conference held in Bandung, Indonesia,
Pan-Africanists and anticolonial leaders from Asia and North Africa met to discuss 
the politics of nonalignment. The conference addressed many themes, including 
the possibilities for Afro-Asian solidarity, the complexities of anticolonial struggle 
within Cold War hegemony, and the enduring colonial occupations of North 
Africa, parts of Southeast Asia, and Palestine.
Written as part orientalist travel narrative and part journalistic report, Richard 
Wright’s The Color Curtain: A Report on the Bandung Conference (1956) rendered 
the conference themes to American audiences by locating it within the contexts 
of the Cold War and Pan-African politics.
1 While Wright’s tone was generally 
celebratory, Curtain was firmly rooted in a Western aesthetic that treated the 
nonaligned geographies as exotic and irrational. For example, Wright’s report-
age lacked serious engagement with the North African and Arab contingents at 
Bandung, and his depictions of the conference as a place where “black Africans 
mingled with swarthy Arabs” delimited his view of Bandung’s potential (176). 
Thus, while Curtain illustrates anticolonial politics in Palestine and North Africa, 
Wright’s report on Bandung illustrates the ways that Palestine, in particular, was 
an ambivalent geography in Wright’s imaginary.
During his flight to Bandung, Wright engaged North African delegates who 
insisted on making the question of Palestine central to conference’s agenda: “[I was 
shown] photos of Arab refugees driven by the Jews out of their homes. I leafed 
through the bundle of photos; they were authentic, grim, showing long lines of 
men, women and children marching barefooted and half-naked over desert sands, 
depicting babies sleeping without shelter, revealing human beings living like


--- PAGE 25 ---
Black Routes to Islam18
animals” (76). Shocked by scenes of Palestinian subjugation, Wright was none-
theless reluctant to support Arab anticolonial politics. Instead, he suggested that 
the question of Palestine was primarily one of religious fanaticism and irrational-
ity, not colonialism: “It was strange how, the moment I left the dry, impersonal, 
abstract world of the West, I encountered at once: religion . . . And it was passion-
ate, unyielding religion, feeding on itself, sufficient unto itself. And the Jews had 
been spurred by religious dreams to build a state in Palestine . . . Irrationalism 
meeting irrationalism . . . Though the conversation about the alleged aggression 
of the Jews in Palestine raged up and down the aisles of the plane, I could hear 
but little of it” (77–78). For Wright, the Arab-Israeli conflict, even as it engaged 
issues of exile and homeland that were central to his own cosmopolitanism, was 
illegible as a question of colonialism.
As an exile from the United States writing with the support, in part, of the 
Central Intelligence Agency, Wright conveys a doubleness in his prose, writing 
both as a Western observer of the nonaligned world and a critic of Western forms 
of colonialism and racism.
2 In this way, he not only suggests the sort of double 
consciousness defined by W . E. B. Du Bois but also a doubleness related to his sta-
tus within and outside of the West. For Du Bois, double consciousness described 
how black people lived within and beyond the world of color, “a world which 
yields him no true self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself through the 
revelation of the other world.”
3 While Wright expresses double consciousness in a 
Du Boisian sense, he is similarly “double” regarding his status as a Western subject 
who, seeking freedom outside of Western geographies and forms of racial belong-
ing, was nevertheless fully part of the West. In this way, Wright viewed Palestine 
in ways similar to many orientalists, while also viewing it as an important site for 
anticolonial politics.
I am using Edward Said’s term “orientalism” with full recognition that African 
American relationships to orientalism raise certain problematics. For Said, “orien-
talism” is the epistemological basis of imperialism—it is a textual formation that 
divides the world into two uneven entities called “occident” and “orient.” The 
occident defines itself, its notions of progress, and modernity through compari-
son to the orient’s supposed primitiveness and exoticism. Said imagined oriental-
ism in terms of dominant cultural productions; he therefore did not account for 
the ways subaltern populations within the occident, who lacked access to imperial 
authority, might relate to orientalism. The concept of orientalism thus obscures 
the liminality of African American thought about the orient, which was, I con-
tend, simultaneously orientalist and critical of Western modernity’s reliance on 
black slaves and antiblack racism.
4 African American orientalism thus represents 
a variation on Said’s definition, suggesting ways that imperial regimes shaped 
African American modes of viewing the Middle East, even while those regimes 
excluded black subjectivity.
Black political thought concerning Palestine is often understood within a con-
temporary political context that assumes an inevitable Israeli conclusion to Pal-
estinian history, while also assuming global Jewish belonging to Israel. Moreover,


--- PAGE 26 ---
Locating Palestine in Pre-1948 19
this framework locates black politics surrounding Palestine within the context 
of black/Jewish relations in the United States in ways that links black support 
for Palestinians to ethnic and racial antipathy between black and Jewish Ameri-
cans.
5 This framework elides important routes of black internationalist politics 
that extend to the Arab/Islamic world, while also forgetting the pre-1948 history 
of Palestine.
This chapter is concerned with charting routes linking African America to 
pre-1948 Palestine in order to trouble some common assumptions about African 
American relationships to Palestine and Israel. For many African American radi-
cals, Palestine has been a generative site for articulating anticolonial and antiracist 
politics. Because of the parallels between anti-Jewish anti-Semitism and antiblack 
racism within the West, Jewish and African diasporic politics have often over-
lapped. Many African Americans have viewed Jewish Zionism as an anticolonial 
and antiracist movement; when the state of Israel was created in 1948, African 
American radicals like W . E. B. Du Bois, Paul Robeson, and many others firmly 
supported the creation of the Jewish state. Yet, over time, some African Americans 
who had supported the creation of the modern state of Israel began to identify 
Zionism as a colonial discourse, such as when Du Bois criticized Israeli aggression 
in his poem “Suez.” Locating Palestine in African American politics prior to the 
creation of the state of Israel generates an opportunity to examine when antiracist 
and anticolonial politics become rooted in territory and Western forms of govern-
mentality and the ways that internationalist politics work within and against the 
governing logics of empire.
6
It should be noted that different groups of African Americans employed orien-
talism to different ends. For Pan-Africanists, Palestine was a primitive geography 
that spoke to the needs of a new modernity in the orient. In this way, oriental-
ism helped Pan-Africanists build a case for settler colonialism in Africa. For civil 
rights activists, Zionist settlements represented progress to the primitive orient 
and exemplified proof that peoples exiled from the West could find freedom by 
looking to the nation-state as the most appropriate rubric for redress. Hence, in 
the Zionist desire for a Jewish state, African American civil rights leaders saw a 
model for addressing racial exclusion and terror in the United States. For African 
American Christian Zionists, the orient was in need of Christian restoration, and 
this could only be accomplished through Jewish return to historic Israel followed 
by Jewish conversion to Christianity. This group saw the Zionist movement not 
in terms of redress for Jewish anti-Semitism but instead in terms of biblical proph-
ecy. Each of these views of the orient rested on a form of orientalism but often 
for different ends. Moreover, each group of African American travelers employed 
Zionism in order to better understand how exiled peoples could imagine home 
and politically mobilize to reach a “promised land.”
During the second half of the nineteenth century, African Americans, like 
many other Americans, began to document their travel to “the orient.” The travel 
narrative was a medium for African Americans to narrate as Western travelers and 
thereby gain subjectivity and recognition as Western subjects. This writing took


--- PAGE 27 ---
Black Routes to Islam20
place during a ninety-year period that was framed by the end of slavery in the 
United States, the colonial occupation of “the Levant” in the wake of World War 
I, and the genocidal Holocaust taking place in Europe. Pan-Africanists, African 
Americans seeking rights within the United States, and African American Chris-
tian Zionists each rendered Palestine through orientalism; yet because they were 
themselves displaced within the West, Palestine was also viewed with a great deal 
of identification and longing because of its status as the site of exodus.
7 Thus, 
the travel narratives discussed here document the presence of pre-1948 Palestine 
in African American intellectual and political thought; but, more importantly, 
they illustrate the complexities of black internationalist politics when framed by 
orientalism and Zionism.
The first African American Holy Land travel narrative was written by David 
Dorr, who was a slave brought to Europe and the orient by his master. Born in 
1827 or 1828 in New Orleans, Dorr traveled through Europe and the Ottoman-
controlled orient with his master between 1851 and 1854. Upon returning to the 
United States, Dorr fled his master, who had failed to guarantee his freedom, and 
in 1858, he published A Colored Man ’Round the World. As Malini Johar Schuller 
has suggested, Dorr’s narrative is marked by a gentlemanly tone that establishes 
the authority of a slave to speak and define for American readers the non-Western 
world.
8 In this way, Dorr participates in orientalism through his construction of 
knowledge about the orient and through his geographic and cultural descriptions 
of the orient in comparison to the occident.
For example, after describing a bucolic experience traveling through Europe, 
Dorr relates his journey from Paris to Egypt by juxtaposing Parisian civility with 
oriental savagery: “If you have, see me alike, pulling away from the festal abode 
of Paris’ comfort, and loosening the tie of familiar smiles, for a hard journey over 
a rough see, dead lands, and a treacherous people” (63–64). In Egypt, Dorr’s 
accommodations were “sickening,” and he was continually appalled by what he 
considered Arab laziness. While traveling down the Nile, Dorr described “some 
places, when the boat was shoving out, some great, fat and lazy Arab would come 
blowing and panting to the edge of the Nile with one single egg, that he had 
been waiting for the hen to lay . . . T o believe what an Arab says when trying to 
sell anything, would be a sublime display of the most profound ignorance a man 
could be guilty of” (172–73). Dorr’s frequent allusions to the backward orient 
gained him entrance into a Western authority to gaze east.
Yet Dorr’s narrative is not merely orientalist; it also makes subtle allusions to 
slavery and, in this way, is critical of Western modernity’s slavery and racial ter-
ror. The book is dedicated “to my slave mother.” In the dedication to the book, 
Dorr writes the inscription, “Mother! Wherever thou art, whether in Heaven or 
a lesser world; or whether around the freedom Base of a Bunker Hill, or only at 
the lowest savannah of American Slavery, thou art the same to me, and I dedicate 
this token of my knowledge to thee mother, Oh, my own mother, Your David.” 
This dedication intervenes in the teleology of occidental modernity made possible 
through the travel narrative. It underscores that this purveyor of the Western gaze


--- PAGE 28 ---
Locating Palestine in Pre-1948 21
is himself the product of an enduring slavery and that travel in the orient signifies 
a level of freedom unknown to the author in the United States.
Furthermore, Dorr represents the orient as a place of African self-rule when he 
visits the pyramids of Egypt. There he notes the similarities in T urkish rule in the 
Ottoman Empire to the rule of Egyptian monarchs, “though black.” In this way, 
Dorr exposes the black origins of Egyptian civilizations, thereby locating blacks 
within both the orient and occident. This doubleness allows Dorr to assume an 
authority not only over the orient and its indigenous populations but also over 
the Christian sites of the Holy Land. Because he claims parts of the orient as 
his ancestral homeland, Dorr is critical of Christian tourists who cannot “know” 
what he can. For Dorr, it was the Western tourist and not the black slave who was 
a foreigner. In Jericho, for example, Dorr scoffs at a guide who explains that the 
source of a spring is “because the jawbone that Sampson fought so bravely with 
was buried here.” Since he imagines a privileged place for himself in the biblical 
landscape of exodus, Dorr “was not inclined to believe anything I heard from the 
people about here, because I knew as much as they did about it. I came to Jerusa-
lem with a submissive heart, but when I heard all the absurdities of these ignorant 
people, I was more included to ridicule right over these sacred dead bodies, and 
spots, than pay homage” (186). Dorr makes clear his belief that members of the 
African diaspora are not foreigners to Palestine when he compares the consistency 
of the waters of the Jordan to that of the Mississippi; both rivers share in the black 
imaginary as sites of emancipation and the comparison links Dorr to the orient.
By engaging the legacy of slavery in the context of an orientalist travel narrative, 
Dorr’s story takes on the political significance of a slave narrative, but one routed 
not South to North but internationally, West to East. As Schuller has noted, Dorr 
challenges slavery through cultures of taste; his ability to assume Western respect-
ability and to narrate the orient enables him an authority to challenge slavery. 
Ultimately, however, Dorr’s travel narrative is a call for a new modernity in the 
United States, one that locates exodus and the acknowledgment of black civiliza-
tion at the center of the West rather than the orient. In this way, Dorr’s interna-
tionalism is rooted in the West even while it is staged in the orient.
Subsequent African American travel writers would employ orientalist travel 
accounts to similar ends; but those published after 1890 had only to look to the 
growing Zionist movement as a touchstone around which criticism of slavery 
could be elaborated. In 1896, Theodore Herzl, responding to anti-Jewish anti-
Semitism in France, published his treatise on Jewish Zionism called The Jewish
State. Although Herzl set eyes on Palestine as the only homeland for the Jewish 
state, some Zionists were less committed to Palestine as homeland and would 
settle for any territory where Jews could establish self-rule.
Arguably, the most sophisticated articulation of the territorial Zionist position 
was not by a Jewish intellectual but by an African intellectual from the Americas 
named Edward Wilmot Blyden. Blyden had also witnessed the Dreyfus affair (as 
had W . E. B. Du Bois), had grown up among Jews in the Danish colony of 
St. Thomas, and became one of the founding fathers of Pan- Africanism and


--- PAGE 29 ---
Black Routes to Islam22
a supporter of Liberian colonization. Blyden’s travel narrative suggests ways that 
black travel to the orient could deploy orientalism in order to posit a new moder-
nity. As a Pan-Africanist, Blyden was interested in articulating an internationalist 
politics for all blacks as well as in advocating settler movements in Africa.
9
Blyden’s travel narrative From West Africa to Palestine (1873), along with his 
essays “Mohammedism and the Negro Race” (1877) and “The Jewish Question” 
(1898), convey the complex alchemy of orientalism, Zionism, and Pan-African-
ism in Blyden’s writing. From West Africa to Palestine, like Dorr’s travel narrative, is 
orientalist in the ways it establishes a Western authority to gaze at the orient. For 
example, the travel narrative is filled with geographic descriptions of the orients’ 
barrenness as well as its exotica. Blyden is “struck with the bareness of the moun-
tains of all forest trees of natural growth” while also taken by the “sublimity of 
scenery—the overpowering charms of the tout ensemble of a summer-evening view 
from the summits of Lebanon.”
10 These geographic observations helped Blyden 
establish a hierarchy of the orient’s inhabitants, with native Arabs on the bottom 
and recent settlers, including missionaries at the American University of Beirut, at 
the top. The orient was, for Blyden, disorganized and poorly ruled: “There seems 
to be no law or order to regulate the tumultuous and boisterous crowds which 
overwhelm the new comer to these Oriental ports” (154).
Because Blyden viewed Arabs as irrational and Ottoman rule as insufficient, he 
advocated Western imperial administration of Palestine:
When one . . . visits [Palestine] and perceives how, under the misrule of the T urks—
a misrule rather of negligence and omission than of elaborate design—everything 
lies waste and desolate—how the land is infested with thieves and robbers—how 
some of the most interesting localities cannot be visited without a strong and expen-
sive guard—when he sees sacred places under the surveillance of T urkish solders 
who have no respect for that which the Christian venerates—he wonders why it is 
that the land has not passed long ago into the hands of one of the Great Christian 
Powers . . . the land is desolate and overthrown by strangers. (192–93)
Blyden’s orientalism rests on his assumptions about the beneficent role of occi-
dental imperial administration.
Yet Blyden also sought to challenge how Western cultures had assumed blacks’ 
inability to be fully modern and to assume self-rule. Thus, he supported Zionism 
and embraced Pan-Islamism in order to show how, without the racial slavery and 
racial terror of the West, blacks were fully capable of being modern and establish-
ing self-rule. T o this end, Blyden was especially interested in identifying the Afri-
can origins of Egyptian civilization. In Egypt, Blyden finds himself most capable 
of expressing the possibilities for a new and African modernity: “I felt lifted out of 
the commonplace grandeur of modern times; and, could my voice have reached 
every African in the world, I would have earnestly addressed him in the language 
of Hilary T eage—‘Retake your fame’” (105).
11
Blyden sought to illustrate how Egyptian civilization was central to Western 
civilization and then to show how, because blacks were of the West, they were


--- PAGE 30 ---
Locating Palestine in Pre-1948 23
capable of ruling Liberia: “Now that the slave-holding of Africans in Protestant 
countries has come to an end . . . it is to be hoped that a large-hearted philosophy 
and an honest interpretation of the facts of history, sacred and secular, will do 
them the justice to admit their [black Egyptians’] participation in, if not origina-
tion of, the great works of ancient civilization” (106). If blacks originated “the 
great works of ancient civilization,” Blyden argued, they were certainly capable of 
participating in the civilizing authority of colonial administrations.
Blyden’s case for self-rule in Liberia thus rested on the racial logic of colonial-
ism and orientalism. His case for Liberia was made through an orientalist travel 
narrative touting the benefits of Western colonialism in the Levant. Moreover, 
Blyden looked to settler-colonialism in North America as a useful model for Afri-
can American colonization of Liberia: “While the American Indians, who were, 
without doubt, an old a worn-out people, could not survive the introduction 
of the new phases of life brought among them from Europe, but sunk beneath 
the unaccustomed aspect which their country assumed under the vigorous hand 
of the fresh and youthful Anglo-Saxon and T eutonic races, the Guinea Negro, 
in an entirely new and distant country, has entirely delighted in the change of 
climate and circumstances, and has prospered, physically, on all that great con-
tinent and its islands, from Canada to cape horn” (109–10). African Americans, 
unlike American Indians, had prospered in North America and other slavehold-
ing regions; thus, according to Blyden, they were fit to rule.
From 1885 through 1919, the British and French empires acquired vast areas of 
Liberia’s original 1821 boundaries. In Zionism, Blyden likely saw a useful model 
for black self-determination during a time when Liberian independence was in 
question. In order to develop his case for Liberian independence, Blyden turned 
to Jewish diasporic history. In his 1898 essay, “The Jewish Question,” he links 
the Jewish and black diasporas as having “a history almost identical of sorrow 
and oppression.” In Zionism, Blyden saw a movement of suffering people to a 
national homeland, and, given his interest in bringing African Americans to Libe-
ria, Zionism seemed to him a “marvelous movement”: “The question [of Zion-
ism] is similar to that which at this moment agitates thousands of the descendants 
of Africa in America, anxious to return to the land of their fathers . . . And as the 
history of the African race—their enslavement, persecution, proscription, and 
sufferings—closely resembles that of the Jews, I have been led also by a natural 
process of thought and a fellow feeling to study the great question now uppermost 
in the minds of thousands, if not millions of Jews.”
12 Although Blyden believed 
“[all] recognize the claim and right of the Jew to the Holy Land,” he did not 
believe that the Zionist movement required settlement of Palestine. Importantly, 
he therefore did not support imperial intervention on behalf of Jews: “The ‘ideals 
of Zion’ can be carried out only by the people of Zion. Imperial races can not do 
the work of spiritual races.”
For Blyden, Zionism was not an imperialist, but a panhumanist, movement 
that could “bring about the practical brotherhood of humanity by establishing, 
or rather propagating, the international religion in whose cult men of all races,


--- PAGE 31 ---
Black Routes to Islam24
climes, and countries will call upon the Lord under one name.” Blyden was not 
merely a Zionist, but also part of a black Atlantic tradition that looked beyond the 
nation-state in order to find freedom.
13 Therefore, while he saw the nation-state 
as the most appropriate rubric for black self-rule, Blyden also believed that the 
Zionist movement did not need to be rooted in a particular geography; indeed, 
he advocated African settlement for Jewish Zionists: “If what I have here written 
should have no other effect than to attract the attention of thinking and enlight-
ened Jews to the great continent of Africa . . . I should feel amply rewarded.”
14
Blyden embraced Zionism as an internationalist movement operating within 
and against the West; hence, for him, Zionism was not incompatible with advo-
cating Islam as a humanistic faith in Africa. Blyden recognized that Arab colonial 
powers for whom Islam was the main religion created relative equality among 
their colonized subjects. In his 1877 essay, “Mohammedism and the Negro Race,” 
Blyden challenged the Christian teleology of empire embodied in the Crusades 
and British and French empires and wrote to a Methodist audience about Islam 
as a humanistic faith. Moreover, he argued that colonial powers guided by Islam 
were far less oppressive, at least in Africa, than were those guided by Christian-
ity: “Wherever the Negro is found in Christian lands, his leading trait is not 
docility as has often been alleged, but servility. He is slow and unprogressive . . . 
there is no Christian community of Negroes anywhere which is self reliant and 
independent.”
15
On the other hand, Blyden viewed Arab colonial powers, and Islam, as less 
degrading to Africans: “If the Mohammedan Negro had at any time to choose 
between the Koran and the sword, when he chose the former he was allowed to 
wield the latter as the equal of any other Moslem; but no amount of allegiance 
to the Gospel relieved the Christian Negro from the denigration of wearing the 
chain which he received with it, or rescued him from the political and, in a mea-
sure, ecclesiastical proscription which he still undergoes in all the countries of 
his exile” (115). For Blyden, who learned Arabic but never converted to Islam, 
Arab-Islam was less violent in its administration of colonial rule. Moreover, 
even for Blyden, the Christian minister, embracing aspects of Islam and Zionism 
were not contradictory—each discourse spoke to Western forms of racial violence 
and terror.
Although, for Blyden, Zionism could be embraced as a diasporic movement 
that spoke to African American settler projects in Africa, to Christian Zionists, 
Jewish Zionism could be embraced as the first stage in Christian restoration in 
the Holy Land. African American Christian Zionists’ eschatological view of the 
Holy Land employed orientalism and Zionism to different ends than Blyden and 
Dorr. Indeed, one year prior to Herzl’s inauguration of the Zionist movement, 
an African Methodist Episcopalian minister named Daniel P . Seaton published a 
travel account espousing Jewish return to Palestine following Jewish conversion 
to Christianity. Seaton’s The Land of Promise: The Bible Land and Its Revelation
(1895) offered readers a history of the Bible’s geography. Seaton, who had traveled 
to Palestine on at least two occasions, sought to render biblical stories through


--- PAGE 32 ---
Locating Palestine in Pre-1948 25
geographic descriptions of Palestine; yet Seaton also sought to locate African 
American Christians as the beneficiaries of Zionism. In doing so, Seaton narrated 
as an orientalist by describing Palestine and its people as primitive, exotic, and in 
need of Western intervention. Seaton’s disdain for Palestine’s inhabitants included 
the Jews he encountered there. His advocacy of Jewish return to Palestine was 
directed at European Jews who had received the benefits of Western civilization; 
moreover, Jewish resettlement of Palestine was merely the first stage in Jewish 
conversion to Christianity.
Palestinians were, according to Seaton, primitive: “These farmers have lived 
too greatly isolated from the modern people and so far behind the march of civili-
zation they would not know how to use the farming implements used in modern 
times.”
16 Seaton believed the natives required colonial intervention in order to 
improve their lot: “[In Joppa] the stranger finds himself in a most repulsively filthy 
place, with a wild looking people, of all complexions, among whom ignorance is 
dominant, excepting those who have settled there from countries of progressive 
civilization, and you can find but few natives who have been taught to appreci-
ate a higher state of manhood” (48). Only in the American colony did Seaton 
find any relief from the primitive landscape: “It should be stated concerning the 
American Colony at Joppa they are doing well, and have done much to change 
the habits of many of the natives, who, at the time they landed, were not far above 
the average heathen: they have built a commodious little village to themselves in 
the most healthy section of town, and have organized a church and school, which 
has done an incalculable amount of good” (46).
Although the Zionist movement had not yet formed, Seaton drew on a history 
of Christian Zionism that viewed Jewish return to Palestine as the precursor to 
the return of the Messiah. Thus, while he regarded the Jews he encountered in the 
same contemptuous way he did the Arab Muslims, Seaton nevertheless saw them 
as redeemable, especially as more European Jews settled in Palestine:
[Jews] have a hopeful future; the time is coming when they will fully accept Christ, 
whom their fathers nailed to the cross, and reverently come before Him in devout 
worship, return to their own land, and pay Him their tribute on the very summit 
where the pathetic prayer was offered by the Lord Jesus, in their behalf, while the 
arrows of death were piercing His soul . . . If we have noticed the predictions con-
cerning the future of this people, we cannot be otherwise then inclined to the opin-
ion, that a restoration of the Jews will take place . . . What a glorious time, what a 
blessed period when the people, once dispersed and unsettled, shall again “sing the 
Lord’s song” in their own land! (140–43)
Seaton sought to participate in a Christian Zionist movement that could return 
“the people” to “their own land.” In this way, Promise’s engagement with Zionism 
enabled Seaton to imagine a future promised land for all Christians, even as that 
future was based on Western colonialism and Jewish conversion to Christianity.
For the Reverend W . L. Jones, Palestine was not merely a metaphor for African 
American diasporic longing; it was the actual scene of African American restoration.
17


--- PAGE 33 ---
Black Routes to Islam26
Jones began his 1907 travel account, The Travel in Egypt and Scenes of Jerusalem
with the following: “For a long time, yes fifteen years, I have had a desire to visit 
the old world. I first felt that it was my calling to Africa, and for several years 
I was troubled with that thought; afterwards my mind was disabused of that 
idea, for a new one, that of Jerusalem. And for more than ten years I have had 
a restless desire for the Holy Land and especially for Jerusalem” (5). Jones left 
for Jerusalem in 1897. Like Seaton’s Promise, Jones’s travel account represents 
Palestine through orientalist tropes: “There is nothing beautiful about the 
little city Joppa. The streets are narrow and not as clean as they ought to be, 
and full of Arabs, T urks, Bedouins, donkeys, and camels” (71). The conflation
of the native with the natural—people with animals—was a staple of orientalist 
travel literature.
Orientalist descriptions of geography also shaped Methodist Episcopalian 
Bishop William Sampson Brooks’s 1915 travel narrative Footprints of a Black
Man.
18 Brooks was a Pan-Africanist born in Maryland. During the first half of 
the 1920s, Brooks served as the bishop of West Africa who contributed to the 
construction of Monrovia Normal and Industrial College in Liberia. By the 
time of Brooks’s travel narrative, Jewish Zionists had begun establishing colonies 
in Palestine. Brooks observes these colonies and applauded the settler-colonial 
movement, especially the German colony he encountered in Haifa: “It owes its 
progressiveness and beauty to the indefatigable industry and thrift of a small Ger-
many colony nestling at the foot of the mountain.” According to Brooks, the 
inhabitants of the colony were German Americans who combined “their Ameri-
can ideas, methods and tools with the incompatible German spirit for progress, 
and they have accomplished the salvation of the city. They have revolutionized the 
city from the filth and squalor of the T urks to its present condition” (123).
Brooks also supported European Jewish Zionists who were creating colonies 
in Jerusalem and other parts of Palestine. He distinguished between the “native” 
Jews who had lived in Jerusalem for centuries and the new settlers from Europe: 
“The [Jewish] quarter reeks with filth. About ten thousand men, women, and 
children live in its wretched tenements in the most abject squalor and wretched-
ness” (185). This native Jewish neighborhood, however, was described in sharp 
contrast to the Zionist settlement outside the old city walls. There was, by the 
time of Brooks’s travel, the “‘Zion Suburb,’ a new settlement of Jews who live 
in comfortable homes, and commodious tenements, and enjoy real cleanliness 
and sanitation.” Whereas the Jewish settlers were “making themselves respected 
in the business and commercial life of Palestine, in spite of the great obstacles 
and restrictions the T urkish Government place in their path . . . The Moslems 
of Jerusalem are among the most fanatic and rapacious in Palestine, and derive 
great profit from brisk traffic in souvenirs of the Holy Land and in showing tour-
ists places of interest connect with the life of Christ and the days of the kings” 
(186). T o Brooks, the Arabs he encountered were a people without history, merely 
there to provide a service industry for Christian travelers. While he looked for-
ward to Jewish conversion to Christianity, he also believed that European Jewish


--- PAGE 34 ---
Locating Palestine in Pre-1948 27
settlement of Palestine would improve the land and make it more hospitable for 
Christian tourists such as him. Thus as the Zionist movement became a settler 
movement in Palestine, some African Americans saw it as an opportunity to create 
a new modernism in a primitive landscape. As an ideal, the new modernism of 
Palestine, or, in the case of Blyden and Brooks, Liberia, would replicate forms of 
colonial governmentality yet would challenge Western forms of racial belonging 
and violence. However, as facts on the ground challenged this hopeful vision and 
as racial politics in the United States changed, African American relationships to 
Zionism and modernism were transformed.
By the 1920s, the context for African American travel narratives had dra-
matically changed. In the wake of the imperial World War I, the British and 
French empires expanded their reach in the Middle East. Moreover, the Zionist 
movement gained momentum by the outcomes of the war, as many Zionist Jews 
fought on behalf of the British army in Palestine. In 1914, the Jewish population 
in Palestine was estimated at 7.5 percent. In 1922, the year of the British Man-
date over Palestine, the Jewish population was at 11.1 percent. This percentage 
grew steadily to nearly 30 percent in 1941.
19 While these changing demographics 
meant many different things to different groups in the region, to the West’s trav-
elers, it appeared that Palestine was becoming more Western and, by extension, 
more modern. Many African American travelers saw Jewish return to Palestine, 
especially in the wake of World War II, as the just solution to racial terror. Yet 
even with the belief the Jewish return to historic Israel was a just solution, African 
American writing about Zionism and anti-Semitism was saturated by orientalist 
tropes and diasporic longings that had structured African American writing about 
the region prior to a large Western Jewish population in Palestine.
In the wake of the World War I, Zionism changed from what Blyden identi-
fied as a humanist antinationalist movement to one operating within the imperial 
logics of the West. As Israeli historian Ilan Pappe has noted, Zionists joined the 
imperial movement in the Middle East and would adopt a Western framework, 
the settler colonial nation-state, as the rubric for achieving its goals.
20 Zionism 
was less about exile and panhumanism and more about the possibilities of the 
nation-state as a rubric for redressing anti-Jewish racism. Moreover, as Zionism 
became tied to the geopolitical question of Palestine, there was growing interna-
tional concern about the Nazi party’s massacre of Jews and many others. These 
and many other factors transformed how African Americans took up the question 
of Zionism.
Similarly, major changes were shaping black politics across the Atlantic in the 
United States. The 1920s and 1930s witnessed the development of a variety of 
internationalist, diasporic, and anticolonial movements, including the rise of the 
negritude movement routed through Paris and Marcus Garvey’s black-nationalist 
movement in the United States. Many African Americans, especially those par-
ticipating in what would be known as the Harlem Renaissance, organized politics 
that were not only based on inclusion and equality within the U.S. nation-state 
but were also diasporic and spoke to the shared experience of blacks across the


--- PAGE 35 ---
Black Routes to Islam28
globe.21 Within this context of black internationalist politics, the question of Pal-
estine, now framed as a solidly “Jewish question,” took on new importance in 
African American intellectual thought.
In her 1928 book, My Trip Through Egypt and the Holy Land , the African 
American writer Carolyn Bagley illustrates the growing presence of Western ame-
nities in the Holy Land. While traveling across Palestine, she encountered a fellow 
passenger who shares his personal story: “I learned that he was a Jew living in the 
Jewish city of T el Aviv near Jaffa . . . Here the business was not so remunerative as 
before but he felt free and a man of an equal chance with others . . . Passing along 
a ridge overlooking large plains below, we passed several villages containing many 
stone houses with pretty red tops, surrounded by a background of green hills and 
fertile, well-kept farms. All these belonged to the new Zionists districts, which 
America has done so much to promote.”
22 Bagley viewed Jewish settlements as 
European transplants in a primitive landscape, yet she also believed that Jews “felt 
free” and had “equal chance with others” in Palestine. Like many African Ameri-
can travelers to British-controlled Palestine, Bagley saw stark differences between 
the primitive and the modern; moreover, Zionism, while replicating Western 
forms of colonialism, also promised freedom for those excluded and terrorized 
within Western metropoles.
It was within a context of black internationalist politics and civil rights activ-
ism that the famous pastor of Harlem’s Abyssinian Baptist Church, Adam Clay-
ton Powell, Sr., traveled to Palestine, a country then under the British mandate 
and wrote a travel narrative. Contained in a two-book volume titled Palestine
and Saints in Caesar’s Household , the narrative is framed as a challenge to the 
growing trend of anti-Semitism sweeping the European continent. Powell was 
especially interested in understanding how Zionist settlements in Palestine had 
created spaces of freedom for Jewish victims of anti-Semitism. He believed that 
the Balfour declaration clearly established a Jewish national home in Palestine, yet 
he was critical of Western imperial rule in Palestine and believed it had created 
animosity between Jews and Arabs that had not been in force prior to World War 
I. He thus looked to Zionism in order to criticize Western racism and imagine 
possible routes of black American liberation in the United States.
The preface of Palestine frames the travel narrative in orientalist terms as Powell 
attempts to dispel for his readers any romantic notions they may have had about 
the Holy Land: “Before he had spent a week in the Holy Land, he had met people 
characterized by all the bad qualities possessed by the worst in New York and in 
the mountains of Kentucky. That little strip of land between the Jordan and the 
Mediterranean produced more holy characters and more holy literature than any 
one of the five continents, but the men and their literature have had more influ-
ence for good upon the citizens for Chicago than upon the natives.”
23
If Powell was unwilling to write a romantic story of the orient it was because, 
to him, the orient was geography of liberation and not merely an historical 
landscape. The orient’s significance was in its sacred history as the site of exo-
dus and thus as a counterexample to Western racism. Powell punctuated his


--- PAGE 36 ---
Locating Palestine in Pre-1948 29
travel narrative with references to anti-Semitism and the regular abuse of African 
Americans in the United States, and he framed his travel narrative as an interven-
tion into the West’s disregard for Jewish victims European racism: “The second 
reason for writing . . . this book is to help stem the world’s rising tide of fierce, 
ungodly anti-Semitism . . . The colored people should be the last, even by their 
silence, to give consent to the brutal persecution of the Jews. For if this campaign 
of inhuman cruelty against the Jews should succeed, show knows by what the 
same evil forces would next attempt to put the colored people on the rack” (viii). 
Powell develops authority as an orientalist narrator while also locating racism and 
violence at the center of Western imperialism. He therefore embraced Zionism as 
representative of a new modernism within a primitive landscape. As he describes 
his interaction with “the Zion movement” in T el-Aviv, for example, he represents 
Jewish settlements in terms of modernity—the neighborhoods’ technology, clean-
liness, and civility: “The Zion movement, one of the most significant in the world 
today, is made up of Jews in all parts of the world, some of whom are moving back 
to Palestine to live the remainder of their lives. These settlers, who have met with 
such bitter antagonism, are more prosperous in the Jaffa section than in any other 
part of Palestine” (24).
Because he understood the Zionists movement as an antiracist movement, 
and one that could be emulated by African Americans, Powell was unable to 
understand Arab protest as anything but anti-Jewish. He witnessed daily violence 
between settlers and indigenous Arabs, yet he interpreted Arab animosity toward 
Jews only as anti-Semitic without recognizing how the process of settler-colonial-
ism in the region shaped Arab responses to Jewish colonization: “Arab after Arab 
said to me, ‘Before we will let the Jews come back here and rule the Holy Land 
they desecrated, every one of us will die with our shoes on.’ They say this with a 
look of cruel murder on their faces and the hiss of serpent in their voices” (29).
Yet Powell also understood that prior to the British invasion of Palestine “the 
Jews and Arabs lived side by side, in Palestine and other countries, without expe-
riencing any serious trouble” (29). Moreover, Powell noted that “for 450 years 
under the powerful reign of Arab princes in Spain, the Jews experienced the hap-
piest and most prosperous era of their racial existence” (16). Here Powell suggests 
that the orient, and the Arab world in general, had not created the sort of racial 
horrors one could claim were central to the occident. Embracing Zionism con-
verged, for Powell, with his commitment to illuminating the acts of racial terror 
underpinning occidental modernity. For example, Palestine’s conclusion firmly 
establishes Powell’s political project of describing Palestine as a means critique 
antiblack racism in the United States: “As I stood there [in the Holy Land], I could 
not help but recall that both Moses and I represented an enslaved, persecuted and 
despised race. Moses was born a slave; he tramped and traveled and sacrificed for 
forty years to reach Canaan, but died without attaining the overmastering ambi-
tion of his life. I was born in a one-room log cabin in Virginia, twenty-six days 
after the chains of slavery were broken from the black man’s wrist and the white 
man’s conscience” (91–92). T o a black American writer struggling with the daily


--- PAGE 37 ---
Black Routes to Islam30
abuse to black subjects, Zionism seemed an intervention into Western notions of 
progress and modernity; in fact, what Powell sought was a new form of modern-
ism, one distinct from “the orient” but also distinct from the West.
There is a relationship between African Americans and Palestine that is at once 
orientalist and internationalist. Prior to 1948, African American travel writers 
represented Palestine as an exotic destination in need of colonial intervention, yet 
they were also attached to the region as geography of liberation. For these writers, 
Zionism, orientalism, and even Islamic humanism were narrative tropes as well 
as political movements that spoke to the needs for African Americans to engage 
antiblack politics globally. Palestine was an ambivalent space in African American 
travel writing because it was at once non-Western yet was also the scene of exodus 
and, for some, an extension of Northern Africa.
The pre-1948 travel narratives not only help give nuance to Richard Wright’s 
ambivalent writing about the region, but they also reveal some of the complexi-
ties of African American engagement with the Arab/Israeli conflict after 1948. 
African Americans who embraced the creation of the state of Israel in the wake of 
World War II—W . E. B. Du Bois and Paul Robeson among them—were likely 
enthusiastic supporters of the promise of diasporic politics culminating in the 
formation of a homeland. In order to understand why most African American 
radicals embraced the creation of the state of Israel, one must consider how Afri-
can American political struggles have been rooted within and against notions of 
the national and international. As Nikihl Singh shows in Black is a Country, black 
Americans have waged struggles that have been shaped by the desire for interna-
tional and diasporic movements and by the desire for redress within the frame-
work of the nation-state. When the modern state of Israel was created in 1948, 
African American radicals were committed to a civil rights strategy in the United 
States that looked to the nation-state’s logic of inclusion as a rubric for the move-
ment; this may have led some African Americans to see the formation of a Jew-
ish state as the most appropriate means to challenge anti-Jewish anti-Semitism. 
Ralph Bunche, for example, a communist internationalist during the 1930s, was 
the United Nation’s representative in charge of administering the partition of Pal-
estine and the creation of Israel. Bunche’s role in the creation of Israel illustrates 
the complexities of African American anticolonial politics that were themselves 
operating against and within the logic of empire.
24
As scholars contemplate what Earl Lewis has called “overlapping discourses of 
Diaspora,” they will need to attend to the complexities of Palestine in the African 
American global imaginary.
25 A complex alchemy of orientalism, Zionism and 
Pan-Africanism structured African American internationalist politics centered in 
Palestine. The Middle East is therefore a generative region for examining the pos-
sibilities and limits of black internationalism. Moreover, these complexities speak 
to the critical need to locating the Arab/Islamic world and the question of Pales-
tine in African American political and intellectual thought.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Locating Palestine in Pre-1948 31
Notes
 1. Richard Wright, The Color Curtain: A Report on the Bandung Conference (Cleveland: 
World Publishing Company, 1956).
 2. Wright’s trip to Bandung was partially funded by the American Congress for Cultural 
Freedom, an organization later shown to be a front for the CIA and State Department. See 
Bill Mullen, Afro-Orientalism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995), 66.
 3. W . E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (New York: Dover, 1994).
 4. Edward Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage, 1979).
 5. See, for example, Robert Weisbord and Richard Kazarian, Israel in the Black American
Imagination (New York: Greenwood Press, 1985). Also see Michael Lerner and Cornel 
West, Jews and Blacks: A Dialogue on Race, Religion and Culture in America  (New York: 
Plume, 1996).
 6. But for a couple notable examples, such as Cedric Robinson’s classic, Black Marxism: The 
Making of the Black Radical Tradition (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
2000); parts of Melanie McAlister’s wonderful Epic Encounters: Culture Media, and U.S. 
Interests in the Middle East, 1945–2000 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001); 
and Scott T rafton’s recent Egypt Land: Race and Nineteenth Century Egyptomania (Dur-
ham, NC: Duke University Press, 2004), there remains very little consideration of the 
Middle East in African American political and intellectual thought.
 7. These categories are somewhat arbitrary, and they are in no way exclusive. Pan-Africanists, 
for example, could also be Christian Zionists (as in the case of William Sampson Brooks). 
I use the category in order to show how the travel writing was shaped by a particular set of 
political and religious motives.
 8. David Dorr, A Colored Man ’Round the World , ed. Malini Johar Schueller (1858; Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1999).
 9. For an excellent essay on Blyden’s fascination with Palestine, see Hilton Obenzinger, 
American Palestine: Melville, Twain, and the Holy Land Mania (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1999).
 10. Edward Wilmot Blyden, From West Africa to Palestine (London: T . J. Sawyer, 1873), 136, 
141.
 11. T eage was one of the founding fathers of Liberian independence that penned that coun-
try’s declaration of independence.
 12. Blyden, The Jewish Question (Liverpool: Lionel Hart, 1898).
 13. Ibid. For a discussion of postnationalist and internationalist African American politics, see 
Nikihl Singh, Black Is a Country: Race and the Unfinished Struggle for Democracy (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 2005). Also see Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity 
and Double Consciousness (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993).
 14. Blyden, The Jewish Question.
 15. Edward Wilmot Blyden, “Mohammedism and the Negro Race,” Methodist Quarterly
Review (January 1877): 111.
 16. Daniel P . Seaton, The Land of Promise: Or, the Bible Land and its Revelation (Philadelphia, 
African Methodist Episcopalean Church, 1895), 15.
 17. W . L. Jones, The Travel in Egypt and Scenes of Jerusalem  (Atlanta: Converse and Wing, 
1908).
 18. William Sampson Brooks, Footprints of a Black Man (St. Louis: Eden, 1915).
 19. Israeli Pro-Con.org, “What are the solutions to the Israeli-Palestine conflict,” http://www
.israelipalestinianprocon.org/populationpalestine.html#sources1.
 20. See Ilan Pappe, A History of Modern Palestine: One Land, Two Peoples  (Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004).


--- PAGE 39 ---
Black Routes to Islam32
 21. See, for example, Nikihl Singh, Black is a Country. For a story of the Negritude movement, 
see Brent Hayes Edwards, The Practice of Diaspora (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
2003). Also see Penny Von Eschen, Race Against Empire: Black Americans and Anti-Colo-
nialism, 1937–1957 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997) and Brenda Gayle Plummer, 
Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign Affairs, 1935–1960 (Chapel Hill: Univer-
sity of North Carolina Press, 1996).
 22. Carolyn Bagley, My Trip Through Egypt and the Holy Land  (New York: Grafton, 1928), 
187.
 23. Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. Palestine and Saints in Caesar’s Household  (New York: R. R. 
Smith, 1939), vii.
 24. See Nikihl Singh’s Black is a Country. For a more general discussion of how the Cold War 
changed African American internationalist politics, see Von Eschen’s Race Against Empire
and Plummer’s A Rising Wind; Gerald Horne’s Black and Red: W . E. B. Du Bois and the 
Afro-American Response to the Cold War, 1944–1963  (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1986). 
Although the Cold War changed the context of black internationalism, it is also important 
to note that many African Americans continued to embrace anticolonial politics during 
the 1950s and 1960s.
 25. Earl Lewis, “T o T urn as on a Pivot: Writing African Americans into a History of Overlap-
ping Diasporas,” American Historical Review 100, no. 3 (1995): 765–87.


--- PAGE 40 ---
C HAPTER  2
Black Orientalism
Its Genesis, Aims, and 
Significance for 
American Islam
Sherman A. Jackson
In 1978, Edward Said published his now-famous ORIENTALISM.1 A Christian
Palestinian, Said devoted Orientalism to exposing the manner in which the preju-
dices and power of Europe, and later, the United States, created both a geographi-
cal entity called “the Orient” and a scholarly tradition of speaking and writing 
about it. This was not the Orient of Japan or China; this was the “Near East” and 
“Middle East.” While Jews, Christians, and others contributed to the cultures 
and history of this region, Islam and Muslims were the primary, if not exclusive, 
targets of this new discourse. As the incubator and projector of Western fears, 
repressions, and prejudices, occidental discourse about the Orient normalized a 
whole series of self-serving, condescending stereotypes about Arab and Muslim 
“Orientals.” These, in turn, justified the propriety and explained the inevitability 
of Western domination and privilege. This self-referencing, power-driven psycho-
logical predisposition, deeply rooted and often consciously indulged, constituted 
what Said meant by Orientalism.
Said noted that Orientalism was not a purely political affair, something that 
only Western governments and armies used against Oriental despots and their 
cowering subjects. Western intellectuals and academicians also played a role in 
this enterprise. Even when British, French, or American scholars approached the 
Orient with no conscious political aims, they could neither transcend nor disen-
gage themselves from the social, historical, and institutional forces that shaped 
their mental schemas. Indeed, the Western scholar, wrote Said, “c[a]me up against 
the Orient as a European or American first, as an individual second.”
2 As an indi-
vidual, she or he might look across the Atlantic or Mediterranean to the Orient; 
but as a Westerner, she or he could only look down from a self-described superior


--- PAGE 41 ---
Black Routes to Islam34
civilization, a perspective destined to shape the Orient into a projection of the 
most deeply ingrained Western fears, prejudices, and obsessions.
If white Westerners approached the Orient as white Europeans and Americans, 
one would only expect Blackamerican thinkers and scholars to approach it as 
Blackamericans.
3 The meaning and implications of this would depend, of course, 
first, on where Blackamericans were in their own existential struggle and, second, 
on what influence the Orient was perceived as exerting on their lives. Prior to 
the 1970s, what little role the Orient played in Blackamerican consciousness was 
almost invariably positive. From the 1970s on, however, a palpable change begins 
to emerge. This change coincided with the coming of large numbers of Muslims 
from the Middle East and Asia to the United States, a development that produced 
major shifts in the priorities, sensibilities, and image of Islam in America.
Prior to the 1970s, Islam in the United States—and I include here the “proto-
Islamic movements such as the Nation of Islam—had been dominated by a black 
presence and thus a black, American agenda. From the 1970s on, however, “real” 
Islam increasingly came to be perceived as the religion of Arabs and foreigners, 
who were neither knowledgeable about nor genuinely interested in the realities 
of Blackamericans. With this development, Blackamericans who identified with 
Islam, especially Sunnis, came under increasing criticism as “cultural apostates,” 
“racial heretics” and self-hating “wannabee A-rabs” who had simply moved from 
the back of the bus to the back of the camel. Given that Blackamerican converts 
to Islam had all defected either from the Black Church or some other Blacka-
merican movement, certain elements within the Blackamerican community had 
always perceived Islam’s gains as their own loss. The synergy between their nega-
tive predisposition and the cultural and ideological dislocations now dogging 
Blackamerican Islam would ultimately contribute to the rise of the phenomenon 
of Black Orientalism.
Unlike Said’s “White” Orientalism, the aim of Black Orientalism had nothing 
to do with a desire to control or dominate the Orient. Like Said’s Orientalism, 
however, its target was emphatically Islam. At bottom, Black Orientalism is a 
reaction to the newly developed relationship between Islam, Blackamericans, and 
the Muslim world. It comes in the aftermath of the shift in the basis of religious 
authority in Blackamerican Islam, from Black Religion to the intellectual tradi-
tion of historical Islam. Its ultimate aim is to challenge, if not undermine, the 
esteem enjoyed by Islam in the Blackamerican community by projecting onto the 
Muslim world a set of images, perceptions, resentments, and stereotypes that are 
far more the product of the black experience in the United States than they are of 
any direct relationship with or knowledge of Islam or the Muslim world. By high-
lighting, in other words, the purported historical race-prejudice of the Muslim 
world and, in some instances, alleged responses to it, Black Orientalism seeks to 
impugn the propriety of the new relationship between Islam, Blackamericans and 
the Muslim world and ultimately to call into question Blackamerican Muslims’ 
status as “authentic,” “orthodox” Blackamericans.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Black Orientalism 35
In this chapter, I shall trace the rise, nature, and significance of Black Oriental-
ism. This will include a brief examination of the development of Islam among 
Blackamericans in order to place Black Orientalism in a more meaningful histori-
cal context. It will be followed by a more detailed look at the shifts and disloca-
tions in Blackamerican Islam engendered by the influx of Muslim immigrants to 
the United States following the changes in immigration quotas in 1965. I will 
then sharpen my definition of Black Orientalism, highlighting the distinction 
between it and valid criticisms of Arabs and/or Muslims. That will be followed by 
a brief, synecdochic response to one particular expression of Black Orientalism, 
what I refer to as nationalist Black Orientalism. I will conclude with a word about 
the significance of Black Orientalism for the present and future of Islam in the 
United States.
Religion, Identity, and the Spread 
of Islam among Blackamericans
In tracing the history of Islam among Blackamericans, it is important to begin 
with the fact that the United States is unique among the Western democracies in 
that a significant proportion of its Muslim population was born in this country. 
The spread of Islam among Blackamericans did not follow any of the patterns 
familiar to Islam in other parts of the world: it was not the result of immigra-
tion, conquest, or the efforts of traveling Sufis. The rise of Islam among Blacka-
mericans owes its impetus to a masterful feat of appropriation via the vehicle of 
Black Religion. The early Blackamerican “Islamizers,” for example, Noble Drew 
Ali and the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, enlisted Islam not only as a strictly 
religious expression but as a basis for developing an alternative modality of Ameri-
can Blackness. Blackamericans at large came to see in this religion not only a 
path to spiritual salvation but also to a more authentic Blackamerican self. Elijah 
Muhammad campaigned not only against Christianity as a theology but against 
those “finger-poppin’, chitlin’-eatin’, yes sa bossin’ Negroes” whose modality of 
blackness he perceived as aiding and abetting the enemy. Islam, in other words, 
as “the Black Man’s Religion,” was as much about identity-formation and what 
E. E. Curtis IV refers to as “cultural nationalism” as it was about religion in the 
restricted (Western) sense.
4
This very practical dimension of being enlisted as the basis of an alternative 
modality of American Blackness is crucial to understanding the rise of Islam 
among Blackamericans. It is also critical, however, to a proper understanding of 
the rise of Black Orientalism. For on the one hand, it was primarily this dimen-
sion of Blackamerican Islam that thrust it into competition with the Black Church 
and other Blackamerican movements. At the same time, it was this dimension of 
Blackamerican Islam that was neither understood nor appreciated by the masses 
of immigrant Muslims who came to monopolize the authority to define a prop-
erly constituted Islamic life in the United States post-1965. In the face of this 
new, immigrant authority, ostensibly grounded in the supertradition of historical


--- PAGE 43 ---
Black Routes to Islam36
Islam, Blackamerican Muslims found themselves unable to address their realities 
in ways that were likely to prove effective in an American context or be recognized 
as Islamic in a Muslim one. In addition, this new ideological dependency left 
them unable to insulate the positive features of their Blackamerican culture and 
legacy from the hostile reflexes of an immigrant Islam still reeling in reaction to its 
nemesis: the modern West. All of this would leave Blackamerican Muslims open 
to the charge of being followers of a religion that countenanced, where it did not 
actually endorse, the devaluation, marginalization, and subjugation of blacks.
From Black Religion to Historical Islam
The history of Islam among Blackamericans begins, for all intents and purposes, 
in the early twentieth century, with the marriage of Islam and Black Religion. 
Black Religion, however, should not be understood to constitute a distinct reli-
gion per se but rather as a religious orientation. It has no theology or orthodoxy, 
no institutionalized ecclesiastical order and no public or private liturgy; it has no 
foundational documents, like the Bible or the Baghavad Ghita, and no founding 
figures like Buddha or Zoroaster. The God of Black Religion is neither specifically 
Jesus, Yahweh, or Allah. It is, rather, an abstract category into which any and all 
of these can be fit. In a word, Black Religion might be described as the deism or 
natural religion of Blackamericans, a spontaneous folk orientation grounded in 
the belief in a supernatural power located outside human history yet uniquely 
focused on that power’s manifesting itself in the form of interventions in the cru-
cible of American race relations. Black Religion is essentially a holy protest against 
white supremacy and its material effects. As C. Eric Lincoln put it, its point of 
departure was American slavery, and had it not been for slavery, there would have 
been no Black Religion.
5
The Black Church ultimately emerged out of the marriage between Black Reli-
gion and Protestantism in the eighteenth to nineteenth century and conferred a 
palpably religious dimension upon the black struggle in America. Indeed, the 
Black Church remained the dominant host of Black Religion until the beginning 
of the twentieth century. In the closing decades of the nineteenth century and the 
opening years of the twentieth, Blackamericans began to migrate en masse from 
the South to Northern metropolises, where the relationship between the Black 
Church and Black Religion was ruptured and the latter was forced to look for 
new accommodations. Joseph R. Washington, Jr., has described this alienation 
from the Black Church as follows: “Since the 1920s, black religion, the religion 
of the folk, has been dysfunctional. From this period on the once subordinate and 
latent stream of white Protestant evangelicalism has been dominant and manifest, 
relegating the uniqueness of black religion to verbal expression from the pulpit in 
such a way that action was stifled.”
6
The early “Islamizers,” Noble Drew Ali and the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, 
emerged in the context of this ruptured relationship between the Black Church 
and Black Religion, offering asylum to Black Religion in what they presented as


--- PAGE 44 ---
Black Orientalism 37
Islam. By using Black Religion as a vehicle for appropriating Islam and making 
it meaningful and valuable to Blackamericans, these early Islamizers were able to 
popularize the religion and render it the cultural property of Blackamericans as 
a whole. This establishment of a sense of ownership was critical to the rising rate 
of Blackamerican conversion. It was also an important factor in the Islamizer’s 
ability to influence Blackamerican culture at large. One sees signs of this in the 
newly developed disdain for pork or in the spread of Arabic names, in both their 
proper and bastardized forms (i.e., those of the “a-ee-a” pattern, such as Lakeesha, 
Tamika, Shameeka). In short, this historical feat of appropriation marked the true 
beginning of the history of communal conversion to Islam among Blackameri-
cans and gave the religion itself bona fide roots in American soil. Indeed, without 
this historical achievement, it is doubtful that Islam would have come to enjoy the 
success that it has come to enjoy among Blackamericans.
If only by default, Black Religion remained the primary means by which Black-
american proto- and Sunni Islam validated itself prior to 1965. For the Islamiz-
ers, and even many Sunni Muslims, it was not primarily the Qur’an, Sunnah, or 
books of law and exegesis that authenticated a view as Islamic. It was, rather, the 
extent to which a view was perceived as contributing to the throwing off the yoke 
of white domination or to conforming to the dictates of the new black cultural 
orthodoxy. As long as this remained the case, however, Black Orientalism existed 
only as a cry on the margins of Blackamerica. With the repeal of the National 
Origins Act in 1965, however, and the subsequent massive influx of Muslims 
from the Middle East and Asia, a new basis of religious authority was introduced 
into American Islam. The primary authenticators of Islam were no longer Black 
Religion nor Black Americans. They were now immigrants and the traditional 
Islamic religious sciences in whose name they ostensibly spoke. Beyond its impact 
on Blackamerican Muslims, this shift in the basis of Islamic religious authority 
coincided with a fundamental change in the attitude of Blackamerican non-Mus-
lims toward the Arab/Muslim world.
Prior to the shift from Black Religion to historical Islam, the Arab and Mus-
lim worlds were invariably included as constituents of an idealized Third World, 
a regiment of Franz Fanon’s Wretched of the Earth , grinding out the universal 
ground offensive against white supremacy and Western imperialism.
7 After this 
shift and the establishment of critical masses of immigrant Muslims in the United 
States, there was a growing number of Blackamerican scholars who denied the 
Arab and Muslim worlds this status and began to portray it instead as a precur-
sor, partner, or imitator of the West in its denigration and subjugation of blacks. 
Several works by Blackamerican writers from the early 1970s reflected this devel-
opment: C. Williams, The Destruction of Black Civilization ; S. Maglangbayan, 
Garvey, Lumumba, and Malcolm: Black National-Separatists ; Y. Ben-Jochannan, 
African Origins of Major Western Religions; and H. Madhubati (Don L. Lee), Ene-
mies: The Clash of Races.
8 This was the beginning of Black Orientalism, a trend 
that has continued into the new millennium.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Black Routes to Islam38
Black Orientalism and What It Is Not
Not every criticism of the stereotypes, prejudices, and practices of Muslim Ori-
entals is an expression of Black Orientalism. Valid criticism, however, is distinct 
from ideologically driven projection. The former is based on direct experience or 
knowledge of verifiable facts; the latter, on imagination, ideology, and a will to 
denigrate. When Blackamericans condemn the exploitative activities of (Muslim!) 
Arab liquor store magnates in greater Detroit or Chicago, this is no more an exer-
cise in anti-Muslim Black Orientalism than earlier critiques of Jewish slumlords 
were of anti-Semitism. Similarly, if the old antimiscegenation laws prove how 
deeply ingrained antiblack racism was among American whites, de facto antimis-
cegenation sentiment among Muslim Orientals cannot be written off as a benign 
“cultural preference.” In short, if the association between Islam, Blackamericans, 
and the Muslim world should not be taken as a license for wild and unwarranted 
projections, neither should it require turning a blind eye to real offenses experi-
enced firsthand.
Nor must Blackamerican criticism of Muslim Orientals be limited to contem-
porary facts or experience. The premodern Islamic legacy remains the repository 
of the greatest authority for contemporary Muslims and it continues to inform 
the thought and sensibilities of Islam in the United States. When we turn to 
this legacy, we find that Muslim legal, historical, exegetical, and belle-lettristic 
literature are replete with antiblack sentiment. It is neither Black Orientalism nor 
a manifestation of anti-Muslim bias to criticize and analyze such works. On the 
contrary, such criticism and analysis is necessary for the establishment of a stan-
dard that can be fairly and consistently applied across the board.
Consider the following example. In his famous Prolegomenon, Ibn Khaldûn 
(808/1406) says that blacks in the southern portion of Africa “are not to be 
numbered among humans.”
9 The early Meccan jurist, Tâ’ûs, refused to attend 
weddings between a ‘black’ and ‘white’ because, given his understanding of the 
Qur’ânic verse about the Satanic impulse to “change God’s creation” (taghyîr khalq 
Allâh 4:119), he deemed such unions to be “unnatural.”
10 Numerous early Mâlikî 
jurists held, reportedly on the authority of Mâlik, that while under normal cir-
cumstances a valid marriage contract required that the woman be represented by 
a male relative (walî), this could be relaxed in instances where the woman hailed 
from lowly origins, was ugly or black.
11 This, they argued, was because Blackness 
was an affliction that automatically reduced a woman’s social standing. 12 Simi-
larly, the twelfth/eighteenth-century Mâlikî jurist, Ahmad al-Dardîr, categorically 
affirms the unbelief (kufr) of any Muslim who claims that the Prophet Muham-
mad was black.
13
Nothing would excuse the casual dismissal of such statements from white 
Americans or Europeans. Nor should their authors’ status as Muslim Orientals 
earn them any such exemption. Holding up such statements for comment, inves-
tigation and criticism is not Black Orientalism. On the contrary, it is responsible 
scholarship whose ultimate aim and effect should be to alert Muslims to the ways 
in which they have failed to live up to their religious ideals.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Black Orientalism 39
Having said this much, we should note that critical references to statements 
and actions by Muslim Orientals can approach Black Orientalism, when they 
proceed on the uncritical assumption that casual expressions of race or color 
prejudice in a society that has a history fundamentally different from that of the 
United States must have the same meaning and implications that they would have 
in America. In other words, Black Orientalism implies not only that Muslim soci-
ety produced expressions of race- or color-prejudice but that such prejudice fun-
damentally defined these societies and, in so doing, circumscribed the lives and 
possibilities of black people within them. In American constitutional law, race is 
a suspect classification precisely because of the Supreme Court’s recognition of 
the history of institutionalized racism in America. Black Orientalism extends this 
logic by projecting this history onto the Muslim world and from there imputing 
the same valence to all expressions of race or color prejudice.
Among the strongest contentions giving currency to the assumption that black 
life, qua black life, was circumscribed in Muslim society is the misleading insinu-
ation that blacks in Islam were a slave class, as they were in the United States. This 
not only adds credence to the notion that black life was circumscribed, but it also 
confers upon all racially biased statements and actions the appearance of being 
part of the ruling class’ effort to justify its domination over its subjugated wards. 
In point of fact, however, as every historian of Islam knows, most slaves in Muslim 
society were probably not black but of T urkish origin, and there is no evidence at 
all that most blacks were slaves.
14 Even, however, if we assume that blacks were a 
slave class in Muslim society, as Ira Berlin notes in Many Thousands Gone, there 
is a major distinction between “societies with slaves” (e.g., African society) and 
“slave societies,” such as the United States, where color, incidentally, and slavery 
were coterminous. According to Berlin,
In societies with slaves, no one presumed the master-slave relationship to be the 
social exemplar. In slave societies, by contrast, slavery stood at the center of eco-
nomic production, and the master-slave relationship provided the model for all 
social relations: husband and wife, parent and child, employer and employee, 
teacher and student. From the most intimate connections between men and women 
to the most public ones between ruler and ruled, all relationships mimicked those 
of slavery . . . “Nothing escaped, nothing and no one.” Whereas slaveholders were 
just one portion of a propertied elite in societies with slaves, they were the ruling 
class in slave societies; nearly everyone—free and slave—aspired to enter the slave-
holding class.
15
The presumption that blacks under Islam were a slave class in a slave society is 
a major premise of Black Orientalists and a primary means by which they impose 
a single interpretation upon every racially tinged statement or action by an Arab 
or non-Black Muslim. But if views such as Mâlik’s regarding Blackness as an afflic-
tion are to serve as proof that Arab Muslims were all Jim Crow segregationists, 
what is to be made of Martin Luther King, Jr.’s statements about dark-skinned 
women, or Frederick Douglass’s reference to the “ape-like appearance of some of


--- PAGE 47 ---
Black Routes to Islam40
the genuine Negroes,” or Alexander Crummel’s labeling of West Africans as “virile 
barbarians,” or, for that matter, comedian Chris Rock’s declaration, “I hate nig-
gers!”?
16 Clearly, Muslims south of the Sahara, who overwhelmingly adopted the 
Mâlikî school, ignored the view attributed to Mâlik and required a male relative 
to validate a marriage. Why should the prejudicial view attributed to Mâlik and 
some Mâlikîs be accepted as the final, definitive word? And are we to impute to 
the words of King, Douglass, Crummel, and other blacks the same significance as 
racist statements by southern sheriffs who were clearly committed to the official 
subjugation of blacks?
We might also ask whether the statement of Ibn Khaldûm quoted previously is 
necessarily an antecedent to such “scientific” racialist theories as those of Jensen, 
Schockley, and the authors of The Bell Curve.
17 And in making such a determi-
nation, how justified would we be in ignoring Ibn Khaldûn’s explicit statements 
to the effect that “race” is an imagined social construct, that the notion of black 
intellectual inferiority is false, that the Old T estament story about Noah cursing 
his son Ham does not refer to blackness but says only that Ham’s sons shall be 
cursed with enslavement, and that it is climate, not blood, that affects endow-
ments such as intelligence or civilization?
18 According to Ibn Khaldûn’s theory, 
the farther people are removed from the moderate climate of the Mediterranean, 
the less their intelligence and civilizing potential. Thus, he imputed the same sav-
age status to Africans farthest removed to the south that he did to white “Slavs” 
(Saqâlibah) who were farthest removed to the north.
19 In sum, one must ask why 
the history of race relations in the United States should be the only prism through 
which his (and others’) statements can be viewed.
It is true that the examples cited, as well as many others, demonstrate that Arab 
and other non-Black Muslims were afflicted with race- and color-prejudice.
20 The 
insinuation, however, that such attitudes emerged from the same place psycho-
logically and implied the same all-encompassing social and political reality as that 
created by white Americans stems more from imagination than from fact. In the 
year 659/1260, some seven centuries before the U.S. Civil Rights Movement, a 
black man appeared in Cairo after the sacking of Baghdad by the Mongols and 
claimed to be a member of the ‘Abbâsid House. The Mamlûk Sultan, himself a 
former slave, ordered the chief justice to make an official inquiry into the claim. 
After his genealogy was confirmed, this black man took the name “al-Mustansir” 
and was inaugurated amîr al-mu’minîn (Commander of the Faithful), that is, 
Caliph, temporal successor to the Prophet Muhammad.
21 Clearly, blackness was 
not an impediment to rising to the highest position not only in Cairo but also in 
Islam as a global, multiracial faith.
If the real significance of race and color prejudice in Arab/Muslim society is to 
be understood, facts such as these must be duly recognized and considered. But 
Black Orientalism deliberately ignores or suppresses such facts, in order to invest 
race prejudice in the Muslim world with the same significance it has in the United 
States. The result is that cultural bias and the deliberate, race-based monopoly 
and abuse of power become so indistinguishable that a cultural idiosyncrasy such


--- PAGE 48 ---
Black Orientalism 41
as Rapper Sir Mix-A-Lot’s contempt for the gaunt figures and flat buttocks ideal-
ized by Cosmopolitan magazine takes on the same significance as Jesse Helms’s and 
the Republican party’s traditional opposition to affirmative action.
22
Nationalist Black Orientalism: Molefi Asante
There are at least three types of Black Orientalism: Nationalist, Academic, and 
Religious. All three impugn the relationship between Blackamericans and histori-
cal Islam. Because of limitations of space, only one of these, Nationalist Black 
Orientalism, will be briefly treated here.
23
In 1980, Professor Molefi Kete Asante started a fire with the publication of his 
provocative work, Afrocentricity: The Theory of Social Change.24 This book became 
the manifesto of the “new” Afrocentric movement.25 It was followed by The Afro-
centric Idea in 1987 and by Kemet, Afrocentricity and Knowledge in 1990. 26 The 
purpose of these works was to lay out the aims, ideological underpinnings, and 
practical methodology for an approach to historical, cultural, and sociological 
studies that viewed the world, especially the African world, from the perspective 
of Africa and Africans rather than from the dominant Eurocentric perspective that 
claimed objectivity and universality. Asante criticized other approaches, including 
those of Africans and African-Americans, that he felt were biased or unduly influ-
enced by uncritically accepted assumptions. Chief among these was the negative 
assessment of the achievements of Africa and its contributions to world civiliza-
tion. Afrocentrism was a clarion call to Africans and African-Americans to free 
themselves from these negative stereotypes and return to their true African selves. 
It was also an appeal to non-Africans to consider the African, rather than the 
reigning European, perspective as an effective tool for rehumanizing the world.
As a professor at T emple University in Philadelphia, a city heavily populated 
by Blackamerican Muslims, Asante was well aware that his expression of Afrocen-
trism would face stiff competition. In this light, he argued preemptively that any 
number of lifestyles now popular among Blackamericans were simply inconsistent 
with the dictates of Afrocentricity, which alone reflected the true African self. Of 
Islam in particular, he wrote, “Adoption of Islam is as contradictory to the Dia-
sporan Afrocentricity as Christianity has been. Christianity has been dealt with 
admirably by other writers, notably Karenga; but Islam within the African-Ameri-
can community ha [sic] yet to come under Afrocentric scrutiny. Understand that 
this oversight is due more to a sympathetic audience than it is to the perfection of 
Islam for African-Americans. While the Nation of Islam under the leadership of 
Elijah Muhammad was a transitional nationalist movement, the present emphasis 
of Islam in America is more cultural and religious.”
27
Asante’s critique of Islam is neither theological nor philosophical. He does 
not attack the foundational beliefs of Islam, such as its monotheism or belief in 
an afterlife. His primary focus is rather on what he considers to be the negative, 
self-deprecating place of blacks in Islam. His appeal in this light is to certain sen-
sibilities presumed to be common among Blackamericans as a result of their New


--- PAGE 49 ---
Black Routes to Islam42
World experience. His message is essentially that Islam inherently promotes an 
Arab supremacy that is no less preconscious, pernicious, and injurious to blacks 
than the white supremacy of the West.
Asante insists that the Arabs have structured Islam in such a way that non-
Arabs (read, Blackamericans) are forced to accept the inherent superiority of Arab 
idiosyncrasies and presuppositions. This leads to “the overpowering submissive-
ness of Africans and other non-Arabs.”
28 The specific means of enforcing this 
submissiveness are language (i.e., the primacy of Arabic among Muslims); Hajj,
or pilgrimage to Mecca; the qiblah, or the direction in which Muslims must turn 
when offering ritual prayers; the doctrine that Muhammad was the last prophet; 
and customs such as dress that were informed by a specifically Arab culture. While 
space does not permit a full treatment of all these points, what follows should suf-
fice to demonstrate that Asante is a proponent of Black Orientalism. In assessing 
the validity of this critique, it is important to remember that the determining fac-
tor is not whether his list is factually correct but whether the meaning attributed
to it is grounded in objective analysis or ideological projection.
Asante’s first charge is connected with language. In response to the thesis that 
Arabic spread among Muslim populations because of its “prestige and useful-
ness,” Asante writes, “while this is partially true, it is more correct to say that the 
language succeeded because of force and punishment.”
29 He offers no historical 
proof from European, African, or Arabic sources. Rather, he relies on his readers’ 
tendency to utilize their Western experience as the analogue for all historical real-
ity. The Arabs, in other words, must have forced Arabic upon their vanquished 
populations because the loss of African languages among the American slave pop-
ulation proves that white Americans forced their language upon their slaves.
But if the ability to “force and punish” was the primary means by which lan-
guage spread, T urkish should have wiped out Arabic in all the areas of the Middle 
East over which the Ottomans ruled for almost half a millennium. And if prestige 
and usefulness were really marginal as incentives, what accounts for the existence 
in places as far removed from the Arabs as China, Russia, or Siriname of Muslim 
populations who continue to learn the language and who pride themselves on 
their ability to do so? Indeed, even if one concedes that Arabic spread by “force 
and punishment,” would the ultimate effect and meaning of this imposition be 
the same as the black experience in the New World?
Here we come to a critical failing that virtually compels Asante to projection. 
He essentially equates whiteness with Arabness and then goes on to assume that 
the two function identically. This is designed to give the impression that any 
Arab supremacy in the Arab world would have to have the same effect on blacks 
as white supremacy had in America, namely that of relegating blacks to a nega-
tive, inferior category made inescapable by their skin color. In fact, however, the 
attempt by the Umayyads (the first Muslim dynasty) in the first/seventh century 
to perpetuate a system that reduced non-Arabs to second-class citizenship failed. 
After that, once a people was Arabized, it became equal in its Arabness to its 
conquerors, as was the case, for example, with the Egyptians, Syrians, and North 
Africans. This was true whether the adoption occurred through force, choice,


--- PAGE 50 ---
Black Orientalism 43
or osmosis. In fact, Arabized peoples often eventually superseded the “original” 
Arabs in intellectual, artistic, and other pursuits, including the acquisition of 
power, as occurred, for example, with Abû Nawâs in Arab poetry, al-Ghazalî in 
Muslim theology, Abû Hanifa in Islamic law, and the famous Barmakid family of 
politicians.
30 By contrast, when the language, religion, and culture of New World 
Africans were destroyed and replaced by English and Protestantism, these blacks 
were rendered neither English nor American. The naturalization law passed by 
the United States Congress in 1790 defined American-ness in terms of whiteness, 
and whiteness was a boundary that black people could not cross.
31 It is thus mis-
leading to imply, as Asante does, that the experience of subject populations, even 
under a regime of presumed Arab supremacy, would have to be the same as the 
experience of New World blacks under a regime of white supremacy. I have often 
been asked by Arabs who hear me speak Arabic if I am an Arab. I have never been 
asked by a white person who heard me speak English if I was white. If Arabiza-
tion, forced or voluntary, expressed a commitment to the principle of e pluribus
unum (from the many, one), American whiteness emphatically excluded blacks on 
the principle of e pluribus duo (from the many, two).
32
The remainder of Asante’s list implies that black conversion to Islam entails 
Blackamerican submissiveness to Arabs. We might note, however, that white 
American Muslims change their names, perform the pilgrimage, offer the daily 
prayers, modify their customs, and often replace their dress, either based on their 
understanding of their duty as Muslims or as a preference for traditions deemed 
to be more identifiably Muslim. But Asante does not speak of white American 
submissiveness to the culture and religion of the Arabs. And the reason for this 
is that, in his experience (and that of Blackamericans generally), white people 
simply do not have culture and religion imposed upon them. Being forced into 
the role of passive recipient is an exclusively black reality. In the end, it is, again, 
the force of this projection of the Blackamerican experience that both leads 
Asante to his submissiveness thesis and sustains its currency among his Black-
american readership.
Asante’s critique reflects a desire to delegitimize Islam in the Blackamerican 
community. His criticisms, however, are based more on projections from the 
Blackamerican experience than on an objective assessment of Islam itself. In 
describing “White” Orientalism, Edward Said noted that it was grounded in the 
fears, desires, repressions, and prejudices of the West. Asante’s Black Orientalism, 
like that of all Black Orientalists, attempts to cast Islam and the Muslim world 
in a mold that accommodates Blackamerican imaginings, resentments, preju-
dices, and difficulties in confronting the intractable problem of American race 
relations.
The Significance of Black Orientalism 
for Islam in the United States
From the decades following the Civil War, black America has maintained a cul-
tural/political orthodoxy dedicated to policing the boundaries between blacks and


--- PAGE 51 ---
Black Routes to Islam44
“pseudo-blacks.” Pseudo-blacks have traditionally been identified as those whose 
cultural authenticity and/or political loyalty to the Blackamerican community 
are suspect. This cultural/political orthodoxy has always been part of the mores 
and sentiments of the folk, and paying homage to it has been the sine qua non of 
success for any serious movement among Blackamericans—even those, such as 
Elijah Muhammad’s, that sought to alter the substance of Blackamerican culture. 
The early Blackamerican Islamizers’ understanding and respect for this tradition 
facilitated the popularity and growth of their movements. Immigrant Islam, how-
ever, arrived in the United States oblivious to this reality and passed on much of 
this myopia to those Blackamerican Muslims who came under its influence. The 
result has been a cognitive dissonance in which fossilized doctrines and practices 
from the Muslim world are imagined to be viable substitutes for effectively engag-
ing American, and particularly urban American, reality. At the same time, the 
power and status that Islam once enjoyed within the Blackamerican community 
has been displaced in many quarters by a sense of disappointment and betrayal 
and a feeling that Islam and Muslims are irrelevant, if not detrimental, to the 
black cause.
In this context, the rise of Black Orientalism must be viewed not only as a 
reflection of attempts by Blackamerican Christians and other non-Muslims to 
regain lost ground. The perspective of immigrant Islam must also be recognized 
as threatening the status and future of Islam in Black America. Blackamerican 
Muslims must confront and take concrete steps to overcome their ideological 
dependency. For they will cease to exist at the mercy of others’ definitions only 
when they acquire the authority to define a properly constituted Islamic life for 
themselves.
Black Orientalism, however, is not a problem for Blackamerican Muslims 
alone. Immigrant Muslims are equally affected by the phenomenon, especially 
in the context of the United States after September 11, 2001. In earlier times, 
the criticism black leaders and thinkers leveled at Blackamerican Muslims never 
reached the point of threatening Islam’s place in the collective psyche of Blacka-
mericans. In the present atmosphere, however, given the diminished relationship 
between Islam and Black Religion, on the one hand, and the nationwide rise in 
anti-Muslim mania, on the other, this danger is far more imminent. Any perma-
nent estrangement between Islam and Blackamericans would be nothing short of 
disastrous for Muslims of all backgrounds. For it is primarily through Blackameri-
can conversion that Islam enjoys whatever status it does as a bona fide American 
religion. Indeed, to date, Blackamericans remain the only indigenous Americans 
whose conversion to Islam connotes neither cultural nor ethnic apostasy. Without 
Blackamerican Muslims, Islam would be orphaned in the United States, with 
virtually nothing to save it from being relegated to the status of an alien, hostile 
threat. This has obvious implications for anyone associated with Islam.
The threat of Black Orientalism nonetheless lies far more in the refusal of Mus-
lims—Blackamerican and immigrant—to recognize and address the causes that 
brought it into being than it does in the efforts of Black Orientalists themselves.


--- PAGE 52 ---
Black Orientalism 45
Muslims must confront, honestly and energetically, the question of whether the 
shift in the basis of Islamic religious authority had to result in the kinds of disloca-
tions that contributed to the rise of Black Orientalism. This question is critically 
important for Blackamerican Sunnis. For they cannot return to classical Black 
Religion in a manner that privileges it over the historical Sunni tradition. The 
question for them is ultimately whether they can master and supplement Sunni 
tradition to the point of being able to speak effectively to their realities as Blacks, 
as Americans and as Muslims.
As for immigrant Muslims, it may be time for them to recognize that their 
greatest interest as Muslim Americans lies not in the situation in Palestine or 
Kashmir but in establishing a sense of belongingness, however problematic, in the 
collective psyche of Americans as a whole. This may mean devoting more energy 
to attaching themselves to an already existing tradition of Islamic belongingness 
in the United States. In such a context, Black Orientalism should reveal itself to 
be as great a threat to them as it is to Blackamerican Muslims. It is a threat, how-
ever, that will only be defeated through practical and attitudinal changes, not the 
same old rhetorical blue smoke and mirrors.
Notes
 1. Edward Said, Orientalism (New York: Pantheon Books, 1978).
 2. Said, Orientalism, 11.
 3. I use the term “Blackamerican” as an alternative to both the “African” and the hyphen-
ation in “African-American.” My contention is that blacks in the United States, certainly 
religiously speaking, are no longer fully or perhaps even primarily African. Politically, the 
hyphen in “African-American” does not have anything like the efficiency that it does in 
the case of Jewish American or Italian Americans, the latter’s Jewishness and Italianness 
being essentially protected by their Americanness.
 4. Edward E. Curtis, IV , Islam in Black America: Identity, Liberation, and Difference in Afri-
can-American Islamic Thought (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002).
 5. C. Eric Lincoln, Race, Religion and the Continuing American Dilemma (New York: Hill 
and Wang, 1999), 31.
 6. Joseph R. Washington, Jr., Black Religion: The Negro and Christianity in the United States
(Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1984), 37.
 7. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth, trans. Constance Farrington (New York: Grove 
Press, 1965).
 8. Chancellor Williams, The Destruction of Black Civilization (Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 
1971); Shawna Maglangbayan, Garvey, Lumumba, and Malcolm: Black National-Separat-
ists (Chicago: Third World Press, 1972); Yosef Ben-Johnson, African Origins of Major
Western Regions (New York: Alkebu-Ian Books, 1970); Haki Madhubuti, Enemies: The 
Clash of Races (Chicago: Third World Press, 1978). On these and other works, see the 
informative article by Y. Hurridin, “African-American Muslims and the Question of Iden-
tity Between T raditional Islam, African Heritage, and the American Way,” in Yvonne Yaz-
beck Haddad and John Esposito, Muslims on the Americanization Path (Atlanta: Scholars 
Press, 1993), 282–87.
 9. Ibn Khaldûn, ‘Abd al-Rahmân b. Khaldûn, al-Muqaddimah (Beirut: Dâr wa Maktabat al-
Hilâl, 1986), 45. Throughout this chapter, dates are given according to both the Muslim 
and the Christian calendars.


--- PAGE 53 ---
Black Routes to Islam46
 10. See Muhammad al-Amîn al-Shanqîtî, Adwâ’ al-bayân fi’ îdâh al-qur’ân bi al-qur’ân (Bei-
rut: Dâr al-Kutub al-‘Ilmîyah, 1421/2000), 1:330. Al-Shanqîtî refutes the position of 
Tâ’ûs by referring to several marriages conducted by the Prophet between a black and a 
white, for example, Zayd b. Hâritha (white) with Barakah, the mother of Usâmah (black); 
Usâmah b. Zayd (black) with Fâtima bt. Qays (white, from the “royal” tribe of Quraysh); 
and Bilâl (black) with the sister of ‘Abd al-Rahmân b. ‘Awf (white).
 11. Malîk ibn Anas (c. 713–c. 795), a legal expert in the city of Medina, founded a school of 
Islamic jurisprudence.
 12. Adwâ’, 1:33. Al-Shanqîtî, himself a Mâlikî, refutes this view and cites several poems in 
praise of the beauty of black women.
 13. Al-Dardir, Al-Sharh al-Kabîr (Beirut: Dâr al-Fikr, n.d.), 4:309 (on the margin of Muham-
mad al-Dasûqî, Hâshîyat al-dasûqî ‘alâ al-sharh al-kabîr).
 14. This is obviously not the place for a full treatment of slavery in Muslim history, though 
the subject certainly deserves a full study, especially given the tendency on the part of 
Blackamericans to assume that American slavery is the norm that all other systems of slav-
ery followed. They thereby make no distinction between slavery in a capitalist society and 
slavery in a noncapitalist order, slavery that is race-based and slavery that is race-neutral, 
slavery that draws slaves under the full orbit of law and slavery that denies slaves any legal 
rights at all. This makes objective discussions of Muslim or African or Polynesian slavery 
virtually impossible. It also obscures the fact that it was not slavery but white supremacy 
that was, and remains, the cause of black subjugation in the United States.
 15. Ira Berlin, Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery in North America
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), 8.
 16. See M. E. Dyson, I May Not Get There With You: The True Martin Luther King, Jr. (New 
York: Free Press, 2000), 193–94; Frederick Douglass, quoted in W . J. Moses, Afrotopia: 
The Roots of African American Popular History (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993), 80; Alexander Crummel, quoted in Moses, Afrotopia, 69. Chris Rock, come-
dian, used the line, “I love black people . . . but I hate niggers,” in one of his comic 
routines.
 17. Richard Hernstein and Charles Murray, The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in 
American Life (New York: Free Press, 1994).
 18. Ibn Khaldûn’, al-Muqaddimah, 89, 63, 61. Ibn Khaldûn states that al-Mas‘ûdî took the 
fallacious notion of black intellectual inferiority from the Arab philosopher al-Kindî, as 
cited by Galen.
 19. Ibid., 60. But see the entire discussion for a full exposé of the theory of climate, 44ff. 
This is confirmed by St. Clair Drake in his Black Folks Here and There: An Essay in History 
and Anthropology (Berkeley: University of California, 1987), 2:157–59. Drake relies on 
the French translation of Ibn Khaldûn. In my view, Drake was not a Black Orientalist. 
Indeed, the fact that he relies exclusively on Orientalist writings but is still able to avoid 
Black Orientalism shows the extent to which this phenomenon is far more conscious than 
unconscious. Black Orientalists, in other words, tend to find only what they are looking 
for.
 20. See, for example, St. Clair Drake, Black Folks Here and There, 2:77–184.
 21. See Shâfî’ b. ‘Alî, Husn al-manâqib al-sirrîyah al-muntaza’ah min al-sîrah al-zâhirîyah, 2nd 
ed., ed. ‘A. Khowaytar (Riyadh, 1410/1989), 79. There are numerous other instances of 
black rulers in the central Arab Islamic lands.
 22. See Sir Mix-A-Lot’s hit single “Baby Got Back” on the album Mack Daddy (Universal, 
1992).
 23. All three forms of Black Orientalism are discussed in Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the
Blackamerican: The Third Resurrection (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).


--- PAGE 54 ---
Black Orientalism 47
 24. Molefi Kete Asante, Afrocentricity: The Theory of Social Change (T renton, NJ: Africa World 
Press, 1988).
 25. As Wilson Jeremiah Moses points out, Afrocentric thought dates back at least to the nine-
teenth century and was even championed in the twentieth century by a number of white 
scholars, most notably Melville Herskovitz in Myth of the Negro Past (Boston: Beacon, 
1958) and Martin Bernal in Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization
(Camden, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1987). The term “Afrocentrism” was used by W . 
E. B. Du Bois as early as 1962. See Moses, Afrotopia: The Roots of African American Popular 
History (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 1–2, 11–12.
 26. Molefi Kete Asante, The Afrocentric Idea  (Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1987); 
Molefi Kete Asante, Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge  (T renton, NJ: Africa World 
Press, 1990).
 27. Molefi Kete Asante, Afrocentricity (T renton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1996), 2. This was 
the eighth printing of the work that originally appeared in 1988.
 28. Asante, Afrocentricity, 3.
 29. Molefi Kete Asante, Kemet, Afrocentricity and Knowledge (T renton, NJ: Africa World Press, 
1998), 131. This is a reprint of the work first published in 1990.
 30. Though born of a Persian mother, Abû Nawâs (130/747–c. 195/8100) was, and is con-
sidered to be, among the greatest of all Arab poets. See The Encyclopedia of Islam , ed. 
E. J. Brill (Leiden: 1913), 1:102. Al-Ghazalî (450–505/1058–1111), also of Persian lin-
eage, is thought by many to be the most famous Muslim after the Prophet Muhammad 
himself. His most influential works were written in Arabic. The Encyclopedia of Islam,
2:146–49. Abû Hanifa, again of Persian ancestry, was the eponym of the Hanafi school of 
law, numerically the largest in all of classical Islam. He died in 150/767, and even today, 
many, if not most, Muslims believe he was a pure Arab. The Encyclopedia of Islam, 1:90. 
The Barmakid family, originally a Buddhist priestly family from Balkh, rose to power as 
government ministers under the Abbasid Caliph. The Encyclopedia of Islam, 1:663–66.
 31. In the Act of March 26, 1790, Congress authorized naturalization for “free white persons” 
who had resided in the United States for at least two years and swore loyalty to the U.S. 
Constitution. The racial requirement remained on the federal books until 1952, though 
naturalization was opened to members of some Asian nationalities in the 1940s.
 32. For more on this theme, see Matthew F . Jacobson’s important Whiteness of a Different
Color: European Immigrants and the Alchemy of Race (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1998), 109–35.


--- PAGE 55 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 56 ---
C HAPTER  3
Islamism and Its 
African American 
Muslim Critics
Black Muslims in the Era of 
the Arab Cold War
Edward E. Curtis IV
Rather than treating African American Muslims as marginal Muslims, a
species of Muslim largely separate from immigrant Muslims, this chapter adopts 
black Muslim perspectives on the history of Islamism, the twentieth-century 
transnational ideology that sees Islam as both a political system and a religion. I 
argue that the contours of Islamic identity and practice among African Americans 
after the World War II developed partly in response to nascent Islamist mission-
ary efforts led by ideological participants in the so-called Arab Cold War. Dur-
ing this era, Islamic missionary activity became a well-funded and well-organized 
component of Saudi Arabia’s foreign policy. Several international organizations, 
local Islamic centers, and tract societies targeted U.S. blacks as potential allies 
in the struggle to construct Islamic religion as a response to Arab socialism and 
nationalism. As foreign and immigrant Muslim missionaries reached out to Afri-
can American Muslims in the 1960s, they claimed the authority to interpret what 
constituted legitimate Islamic practice, encouraged African American Muslims 
to join their missionary organizations, and, in some cases, challenged the Islamic 
authenticity of indigenous African American Muslim groups and leaders.
This contact and competition with the missionaries had far-reaching implica-
tions and important repercussions for African American Muslim religious practice 
and political identity. In one sense, African American Muslim reactions to the 
Islamist call reflected the ideological and cultural diversity of the thousands of


--- PAGE 57 ---
Black Routes to Islam50
African Americans who called themselves “Muslim.” It is no surprise—given that 
there were more than a dozen different African American Muslim networks and 
groups by 1960
1—that African American Muslim responses would differ. Rather 
than attempting to describe all of these groups’ reactions to the new missionary 
activity, however, I will limit my discussion to three strains of African Ameri-
can Muslim hermeneutics, exemplified respectively by Malcolm X, the Nation of 
Islam, and Shaikh Daoud Ahmed Faisal, the founder of the State Street Mosque. 
I show how Shaikh Daoud Ahmed Faisal aligned his community of believers with 
Islamist ideology; how Malcolm X became the student and ally of these new 
foreign and immigrant missionaries, though he resisted their politicized inter-
pretation of Islam; and finally, how members of Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of 
Islam rejected the missionaries’ claims to ultimate religious authority and instead 
defended Elijah Muhammad’s prophetic voice.
While pointing out the different reactions of African American Muslims to 
Islamism, this account also argues for some shared repercussions. As a result of 
the increased immigrant and foreign Muslim presence in the United States, many 
more African American Muslims began to use canonical Islamic texts, including 
the Qur’an and, in some cases, the hadith (the sayings and deeds of the Prophet 
Muhammad and his companions) to articulate ethical, theological, political, and 
socioeconomic visions for themselves and other U.S. blacks. This adoption of 
sacred texts altered not only the aesthetics of African American Muslim religious 
practices but also the communal identity of persons who now thrust themselves 
into an age-old, transnational conversation about the meaning of these texts. 
Increasing African American Muslim identification with the rest of the Muslim 
world also became manifest in African American Muslim visual art and poetry. 
Many African American Muslims literally drew and rhymed themselves closer to 
the imagined worldwide community of Muslim believers. Finally, I discuss how 
this shift in African American Muslim consciousness had significant but diverse 
political implications, as African American Muslims came to hold differing inter-
pretations of their obligations to the worldwide community of Muslims and the 
heritage of Islam.
Twentieth-century African American 
Islam in Transnational Context
During the late nineteenth century, Islam became linked in black international 
English-language discourse with the politics of anticolonialism. In the first decades 
of the twentieth century, African American Islam in the United States developed 
partly as an international discourse shaped by actual contact and exchange with 
persons from Muslim-majority lands, including Muslims from Asia. After the 
World War II, such religious and cultural exchange between indigenous Afri-
can American Muslims and foreign Muslims, especially from the Middle East, 
expanded dramatically. During the era of decolonization and the “rising tide of 
color,” African American interests in the link between black nationalism and


--- PAGE 58 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 51
Islam became even more prominent. More and more persons in the African 
American diaspora identified Islam and Muslims as potential allies in the struggle 
against European neocolonialism and white supremacy, often framing the domes-
tic struggle for civil rights as part of a global struggle for the self-determination of 
all persons of color.
2 Malcolm X, for example, famously spoke of the 1955 Afro-
Asian Conference of nonaligned countries in Bandung, Indonesia, as a turning 
point in the affairs of the world, as people of color everywhere vowed not only 
to reject the yoke of neocolonial political control but also to eschew a colonized 
consciousness.
After the 1956 Suez Crisis, Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser emerged 
as a powerful symbol of victory in this third-world struggle against imperialism 
and inspired admiration among many African Americans, especially those associ-
ated with Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam. When Nasser hosted the 
Afro-Asian conference in 1958, Elijah Muhammad telegrammed the Egyptian 
president to assure him that “freedom, justice and equality for all Africans and 
Asians is of far-reaching importance, not only to you of the East, but also to 
over 17,000,000 of your long-lost brothers of African-Asian descent here in the 
West.”
3 Some members of the Nation of Islam hung Nasser’s picture in their 
homes. Nasser was received enthusiastically by Muslims and non-Muslims alike 
when he visited Harlem in 1960.
4
In turn, Nasser cultivated at least symbolic ties with African American Mus-
lims, responding to Elijah Muhammad’s 1958 telegram with his “best wishes to 
our brothers of Africa and Asia living in the West.” Elijah Muhammad visited 
Egypt in 1959, and one of his sons, Akbar Muhammad, studied there during the 
1960s.
5 These contacts between Egypt and the NOI begin to indicate the extent 
to which African American Muslims became potential foreign policy allies and 
symbols of political struggle, not only in the grand struggle for the freedom of 
all formerly colonized peoples but also in the more local and regional struggles 
waged by differing interest groups in the Middle East.
T o understand foreign and immigrant Muslim engagement, especially Arab 
Muslim engagement with African American Muslims, it is necessary to explore 
more deeply how the financial, diplomatic, and cultural outreach of Arab Mus-
lims was often colored by these local and regional interests. In the postwar era, the 
neocolonial elites and newly empowered military juntas who had seized author-
ity within political boundaries initially drawn to serve European and U.S. inter-
ests were forced to negotiate the interference of superpowers, the pull of regional 
desires for Pan-Arab unity, and the challenge of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
6
Part of their struggle was ideological, and although various national elites may 
have celebrated the solidarity of all formerly colonized peoples and touted both 
Pan-Arabism and Pan-Islamic unity, such rhetoric was often deployed to buoy 
their own national legitimacy and manage popular opinion.
7
One seldom mentioned, but pivotal, crucible of African American Muslim 
and foreign Muslim interaction was what Malcolm Kerr famously referred to as 
the “Arab Cold War.” The Arab Cold War was a conflict waged primarily between


--- PAGE 59 ---
Black Routes to Islam52
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Nasser’s Egypt, which were locked in both 
ideological and military struggles from 1958 through the 1960s. The battle of 
ideas commenced shortly after Nasser successfully entered into a political union 
with Syria in the winter of 1958. The United Arab Republic (UAR), as the two 
states became known, signaled the growth of both revolutionary socialism and 
Pan-Arabism, the movement to unite all Arab peoples into one political entity 
expressing their shared historical and linguistic roots. A few months later, when 
revolution overturned the Iraqi monarchy and an uprising occurred against Presi-
dent Sham‘un in Lebanon, monarchs throughout the Middle East feared that 
Nasserism might actually succeed. The Arab Cold War continued into the 1960s, 
perhaps reaching its apex in 1962, when Egypt sent troops to support the leftist 
revolution in Yemen. Saudi Arabia threw its financial and political clout behind 
the Yemeni monarchy.
8
But Saudi Arabia and its allies also forged a secondary front in this war, an 
ideological effort designed to bolster its legitimacy in the West and among Mus-
lim states and persons. This was a battle for hearts and minds, and it was joined 
through Saudi Arabia’s generous support and careful organization of global mis-
sionary activities. Up to this point, missionary societies such as the Muslim Broth-
ers in Egypt and the Society of the Call and Guidance in South Asia aspired mostly 
to change Islamic practices within historically Islamic lands.
9 By the 1960s, how-
ever, Saudi Arabia’s aid allowed these groups’ ideas to be broadcast, printed, and 
distributed around the world, including in the United States. In 1961, Saudi Ara-
bia established a new university in Medina committed to the training of Muslim 
missionaries. The following year, as tension over Yemen escalated, the government 
also supported the founding of the Muslim World League, whose statement of 
purpose included a commitment to global missionary work. Not surprisingly, the 
conference was strongly anti-Nasser, promoting a vision of Pan-Islam that hoped 
to counter the powerful Arab populist.
10 An impressive array of Muslim person-
ages attended the organization’s inaugural meeting, including Mawlana Mawdudi 
of Pakistan and Said Ramadan of Egypt. One of the most influential intellectu-
als of Islamic reform and revival in the twentieth century, Pakistani ideologue 
and Jama‘at-i Islami (Islamic party) founder Mawdudi argued that the shari‘a, or 
Islamic law and ethics, provides God’s blueprint for all human societies, which 
should be organized into an Islamic state.
11 Egyptian representative Said Rama-
dan was the son-in-law of Hasan al-Banna, the founder of the Muslim Brothers, 
an Islamist organization that Nasser came to oppose as he consolidated power in 
postrevolutionary Egypt. Seeking refuge from Nasser’s repression in 1958, Said 
Ramadan immigrated to Switzerland, where he established, with Saudi assistance, 
the Centre Islamique des Eaux-Vives, an institution that became one of the nodes 
in a transnational Islamist intellectual network.
12 Like other Muslim Brothers, 
Ramadan insisted that Islam was a total way of life, applicable as much to public 
affairs as to private morality.
13
Students, visitors, and refugees from the Middle East brought these Islamist ideas 
with them to the United States during the late 1950s and early 1960s. Confronting


--- PAGE 60 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 53
what they considered to be overly assimilated American Muslims, some Arab stu-
dents immediately challenged the “liberal” and “Westernized” practices of vari-
ous Muslim persons and organizations.
14 At the Islamic Center of New England, 
which had been built partly with a 1962 donation from King Saud, students 
made available various pieces of Islamic literature not previously translated into 
English.
15 In 1963, students from a variety of Muslim-majority countries gath-
ered at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, to establish the Muslim 
Students Association (MSA). Among the founding members were three Muslim 
Brothers from Egypt. Using their positions on college campuses, these activists 
helped to make the MSA one of the most successful immigrant-led organiza-
tions in propagating Islamist ideas throughout North America.
16 In some cases, 
student advocates met African American Muslims who were already proponents 
of Islamist ideologies; in other cases, they confronted African American Muslims 
who had never heard the Islamist message.
African American Islamism 
in the Era of the Arab Cold War
One African American pioneer who had already articulated Islamist ideas in print 
by 1950 was Caribbean immigrant Shaikh Daoud Ahmed Faisal (d. 1980), report-
edly the son of a Moroccan father and a Jamaican mother. Echoing the Islamist 
call that all societies must be governed by the Islamic shari‘a, his book, Islam the
True Faith: The Religion of Humanity, proclaimed that human beings should sub-
mit their societies to the authority of God, the Prophet, and the shari‘a.
17 Shaikh 
Daoud was a pioneer who successfully converted hundreds, if not thousands, of 
African Americans to a Sunni interpretation of Islam at his Brooklyn-based State 
Street Mosque. His adventuresome spirit led him to establish a short-lived Mus-
lim village in rural New York State, but he achieved his greatest success as leader 
of the mosque in Brooklyn. In 1939, he leased a brownstone at 143 State Street 
in Brooklyn Heights, just a block away from the heart of the Arab American 
community on Atlantic Avenue. He called his congregation the Islamic Mission 
of America in New York.
18 Shaikh Daoud welcomed both indigenous and immi-
grant Muslims to his mosque, where he warned them not to let the allure of the 
material world take them away from their Islamic practice.
19
Before most Saudi-funded Muslim missionaries arrived in America, Shaikh 
Daoud’s intellectual life bore the influence of Islamic reform and renewal move-
ments. His publications, which often borrowed from other Muslim missionary 
tracts, sought to inform the American public on the basics of Islamic religion. 
They described the holy cities of Mecca and Medina, reproduced large excerpts 
from the Qur’an, taught believers how to make the salat, or daily prayers, and 
detailed and praised contemporary Muslim heads of state. As a New Yorker, 
Shaikh Daoud came to know Muslims who traveled to the city from various 
countries, especially diplomats who worked at the United Nations.
20 In the 1950 
edition of Islam the True Path, he acknowledged the assistance not only of his wife,


--- PAGE 61 ---
Black Routes to Islam54
Khadijah, but also M. A. Faridi of Iran, Bashir Ahmed Khan of Pakistan, and 
others from Afro-Eurasia.21 The sheikh was also pictured in this volume wearing 
light-colored Arab robes, sitting cross-legged on a prayer rug or oriental carpet. In 
his hands he held the Qur’an, deeply contemplating its contents in the manner of 
an Old World Islamic scholar.
His mission was devoted to converting everyone in the United States to what 
he considered to be the only true religion of humankind. The profession of Islamic 
faith, he said, was a prerequisite to peace and security, as was Islam’s implementa-
tion as a form of government and law based on the Qur’an. The holy book, he 
argued, “contains the complete Revelations of ‘Allah,’ the ‘Almighty God,’ the 
Lord of the worlds with the complete Laws for the government and guidance of 
humanity and as a protection for us from evil. The Criterion of all Laws is enclosed 
in the Holy Quran.”
22 Shaikh Daoud’s old-time missionary techniques, evangeli-
cal in tone, were harshly critical of Jews and Christians who ignored the truth that 
would set them free. He practically begged them to convert to Islam, warning 
that no one would be saved, no one would have “true religion” unless, and until, 
they became Muslims. Attacking the growing ecumenism among some American 
monotheists after World War II, Shaikh Daoud explicitly rejected the idea that 
all Abrahamic faiths were equally valid paths to salvation. 
23 His criticism of Jews 
and Christians was grounded both in an Islamic critique of Jewish and Christian 
religious claims and in his experience as an African American New Yorker who 
had faced discrimination at the hands of some Jews and Christians. “The Jews 
of America are the proudest of all the people,” he claimed. “If by chance a man 
of colour would move into their neighborhood they would raise such a rumpus 
which would give one cause to believe that that one person had committed mur-
der.”
24 He also criticized Christianity as a form of white supremacy. “Christian-
ity,” he claimed, is but a “social order, a philosophy, based on certain principles of 
White Supremacy, that White people are superior to their human brethren who 
are not White.” Like other twentieth-century African American converts to Islam, 
he viewed Christianity as “an instrument of conquest” 
25
On the one hand, Shaikh Daoud’s comments about Jews and Christians sound 
similar to other Islamic traditions of anti-Jewish and anti-Christian polemic 
grounded in a sense of religious superiority and particularity—a rhetorical mode 
hardly unique to Islam.
26 On the other hand, Faisal’s critique also reflects a reading 
of history shaped by the racist contexts in which he was living—in 1950 and after, 
white Jews and Christians, from this black man’s point of view, did indeed seem 
like godless creatures when they discriminated against people of color in their 
own neighborhoods and in foreign lands.
27 In asserting that Islam was the solu-
tion to such problems, Shaikh Daoud was participating in multiple discourses, 
international and local in scope. He did not resort to violence to achieve his end; 
instead, he relied on quintessentially American missionary techniques—he wrote 
missionary tracts, preached of divine justice and the chance of salvation, and 
established a successful congregation devoted to his teachings.
28 According to one


--- PAGE 62 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 55
scholar, he assiduously avoided any politically subversive activities and instructed 
his followers to follow all U.S. laws.29
In fact, some of his followers left the Islamic Mission of America precisely 
because they believed Shaikh Daoud to be overly supportive of the political status 
quo.
30 Many of them found their fellow congregants at the State Street Mosque 
to be morally lax and insufficiently pious. In the 1960s, some of Faisal’s followers 
broke away to form the Ya-Sin (pronounced “yah-seen”) mosque, which sought 
to separate from mainstream society so that believers could adhere as strictly as 
possible to shari‘a. They were influenced in part by Hafis Mahbub, a Pakistani 
member of the Tablighi Jama‘at, a Muslim reform group known mainly for its 
emphasis on spiritual purification and world renunciation over political entangle-
ments. In 1960, Faisal reportedly hired Mahbub as a religious teacher. African 
American followers Rijab Mahmud and Yahya Abdul-Karim adopted Mahbub’s 
call for “personal transformation” by living a life in strict adherence with the 
ethical example of the Prophet Muhammad of Arabia.
31 Women at Ya-Sin often 
covered themselves with both a head scarf and a face veil. Some men practiced 
polygamy.
32 Their movement would become known as Darul Islam, or the abode 
of Islam. By the 1970s, leader Yahya Abdul-Karim would declare that Muslims 
should avoid participation in U.S. politics and eschew friendships with all Ameri-
cans, non-Muslim and Muslim alike, if they did not practice the “correct” form 
of Islam. Eventually, the movement spawned other African American Muslim 
groups, including the network of twenty mosques led by Jamil al-Amin, the for-
mer H. Rap Brown, who became known for his urban revitalization work in 
Atlanta.
33 All of these African American Islamist groups dreamed of a morally 
revived Islamic society, but they sought to realize that goal largely by personal 
example and the organization of utopian communities, not through violent jihad.
Though many of these African American Muslims shared the same basic Islamist 
ideas, they were fractured into different groups with different leaders and they 
often translated Islamism into an American idiom.
Malcolm X in the Missionary Maelstrom
Despite the growing power of Islamist ideas, many African American Muslims in 
the age of the Arab Cold War rejected the arguments and authority of the Mus-
lim missionaries and the ideology of Islamism. This was especially true in Elijah 
Muhammad’s Nation of Islam (NOI), which was harshly criticized by Sunni Mus-
lims of all stripes for its black separatist version of Islam. The rise of the NOI’s 
profile as the most popular African American Muslim movement in the United 
States coincided with the increased presence and impact of foreign and immigrant 
Muslim missionaries. Most Americans, including immigrant Muslims, knew little 
about the NOI until the late 1950s. Then, in 1959, New York’s WNTA-TV aired 
a five-part series about the movement, hosted by Mike Wallace, titled “The Hate 
That Hate Produced.”
34 Following that program, stories about the NOI appeared 
in national magazines such as Time and U.S. News and World Report. This coverage


--- PAGE 63 ---
Black Routes to Islam56
was generally negative, criticizing the movement as an anti-American or black 
supremacist organization. African American civil rights leaders, including Roy 
Wilkins of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
(NAACP), denounced the NOI as a hate group.
35
As negative portrayals in the mainstream press and criticism from black leaders 
increased, more and more Muslims in the United States joined to condemn, dis-
pute, and reject the teachings of Elijah Muhammad and the NOI. Their criticism 
of the NOI was a public performance of Muslim identity that expressed the grow-
ing cultural power of foreign and immigrant Muslims. By making such public 
pronouncements, whether they had been formally trained in the Islamic religious 
sciences or not, these self-appointed spokesmen for Islam attempted to define the 
doctrinal boundaries of Islamic religion. As Malcolm X, the chief spokesperson 
for Elijah Muhammad, made his way around the college lecture circuit, he was 
constantly hounded by Muslim students and others who considered themselves 
the guardians of “true” Islam. He mustered Qur’anic verses and his best exegeti-
cal rhetoric to defend Elijah Muhammad’s unique Islamic mythos but to little 
avail among his critics. Malcolm’s inability to bring them over to his side seemed 
to bother him or at least to intrigue the famous debater. In 1962, for example, 
one Muslim student at Dartmouth College, Ahmed Osman, traveled to NOI 
Mosque No. 7 to question Malcolm about Islam. After grilling Malcolm in the 
question-and-answer section of his talk, Osman came away “unsatisfied.” When 
Osman began to send Malcolm literature from the Centre Islamique des Eaux-
Vives in Geneva, Malcolm read it and asked for more. In another incident, Arab 
students from the University of California, Los Angeles, surrounded Malcolm 
after a March 1963 appearance on the Ben Hunter Show in Los Angeles. After 
hearing the students argue that his belief in white devils was un-Islamic, Malcolm 
became quite disturbed, according to journalist Louis Lomax, who was accompa-
nying Malcolm at the time.
36
These students, and the larger trend of which they were a part, had a profound 
influence on Malcolm’s religious life.37 Perhaps their criticism of Elijah Muham-
mad’s Islamic legitimacy was one contributing factor in Malcolm’s defection from 
the NOI in 1964. But even if Malcolm left for other reasons—such as Elijah 
Muhammad’s moral failings and the NOI’s lack of direct political action
38—his
subsequent understanding of Islam certainly adopted the ideas and symbols of the 
new Muslim missionaries. After Malcolm X broke away, he turned to Dr. Mah-
moud Youssef Shawarbi, a University of Cairo professor and Fulbright Fellow in 
the United States who was teaching at Fordham University.
39 Malcolm knew of 
Shawarbi through the numerous immigrant Muslims, especially students, who 
had been confronting him after his various lectures and appearances. “Those 
orthodox Muslims whom I had met, one after another, had urged me to meet 
and talk with a Dr. Mahmoud Youssef Shawarbi,” he said in his Autobiography.
40
Shawarbi encouraged Malcolm to make the hajj, the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, 
and instructed him in the fundamental elements of Sunni Islam.
41 After training 
Malcolm in the rudiments of Sunni Islamic thought and practice, Shawarbi gave


--- PAGE 64 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 57
Malcolm a letter of recommendation, a copy of The Eternal Message of Muham-
mad by the renowned Pan-Islamist Abd al-Rahman Azzam, and the phone num-
ber of Azzam’s son, who happened to be married to the daughter of Saudi Prince 
Faysal.
42 The elder Azzam was one of Pan-Islam’s most important figures. A father 
of Arab nationalism and a distinguished Egyptian diplomat, Azzam was a chief 
architect of the Arab League and served as its first secretary general from 1945 to 
1952. But like so many others, he lost favor after Nasser came to power, finding 
refuge in Saudi Arabia, where he became a leading polemicist and author.
43 His 
Eternal Message of Muhammad, available in a 1993 edition, was a prime example 
of a popular modern Islamic polemic that both defended Islam against West-
ern critics and advocated a vision of the ideal Islamic nation-state. Islam, Azzam 
said, was a “faith, a law, a way of life, a nation, and state.” Contrary to Western 
assumptions, Azzam implied, Islam was a highly modern religious tradition that 
promoted tolerance, removed superstition, and encouraged mercy, charity, indus-
triousness, fairness, and brotherhood in the hearts and minds of its adherents.
44
Malcolm read the book while flying over the Atlantic Ocean on his way to 
Mecca, and then met Azzam himself during the pilgrimage. On April 13, 1964, 
Malcolm departed JFK International Airport with a one-way plane ticket to 
Jidda, Saudi Arabia.
45 When Malcolm arrived on the Arabian Peninsula, Saudi 
authorities detained him for special int errogation. After fretting for some time, 
Malcolm telephoned Azzam’s son, Dr. Omar Azzam. The Azzams immediately 
interceded with the proper authorities, vouching for Malcolm when he faced 
an examination by the hajj court, the legal entity that decides whether one is a 
legitimate Muslim able to participate in the pilgrimage. In addition, the elder 
Azzam insisted that Malcolm stay in his suite at the Jedda Palace Hotel. Later, the 
Saudi government officially extended its welcome when the deputy chief of pro-
tocol, Muhammad Abdul Azziz Maged, gave Malcolm a private car for his travels 
around the kingdom.
46
Because of the Saudis’ hospitality, and because of what he witnessed during the 
pilgrimage rites, Malcolm issued a strong endorsement of Sunni Islam. He argued, 
famously, that Islam was a religion of racial equality and brotherhood—which is 
what his Saudi hosts hoped to hear. After Malcolm completed the pilgrimage, 
Prince Faysal invited him for an audience. The prince quizzed Malcolm about the 
Nation of Islam, carefully suggesting that if what he had read in Egyptian papers 
were true, they did not practice the real Islam. Further, the prince reminded Mal-
colm that due to the abundance of English literature on Islam, “there was no 
excuse for ignorance, and no reason for sincere people to allow themselves to be 
misled.”
47 Prince Faysal, constructing himself as an authority on proper Islamic 
practice, apparently wanted to make sure that Malcolm understood the meaning 
of his royal hospitality.
Malcolm sustained these relationships with various Saudi-financed missionary 
groups until his untimely death. During September 1964, Malcolm left for another 
pilgrimage to Mecca.
48 During this ‘umra, or “lesser” pilgrimage, Malcolm under-
went training as an evangelist by the Muslim World League, the organization that


--- PAGE 65 ---
Black Routes to Islam58
had been established in 1962 to propagate an Islamist interpretation of Islam 
around the world. Shaykh Muhammad Sarur al-Sabban, secretary general of the 
organization and a descendant of black slaves, supervised his education. The Uni-
versity of Medina granted Malcolm several scholarships for U.S. students who 
wanted to study there. According to Richard W . Murphy, then second secretary at 
the U.S. embassy in Jidda, Malcolm granted an interview to a Jiddan newspaper, 
al-Bilad, in which he “took pains . . . to deprecate his reputation as a political 
activist and dwelt mainly on his interest in bringing sounder appreciation of Islam 
to American Negroes.”
49
Though these missionaries had a profound effect on Malcolm, he had a serious 
disagreement with some of them about the question of black political liberation in 
the United States. One of Malcolm X’s last press interviews was given to Al-Mus-
limoon, a journal published by Said Ramadan’s Centre Islamique des Eaux-Vives 
in Geneva. Malcolm had visited the Islamic center’s director, Said Ramadan, in 
1964. Ramadan was one of several persons who helped to establish the league 
with the support of Saudi Arabia. Like Dr. Omar Azzam, Ramadan strongly 
asserted the view that Islam was both a religion and a state, the solution to all of 
humanity’s economic, cultural, and political problems, including the oppression 
of black persons in the United States. In his written questionnaire, Ramadan 
challenged Malcolm about his continued focus on racial identity and the need 
for black liberation, asserting that the conversion of Americans to Islam would 
solve such problems. Malcolm X completed his answers to Ramadan’s questions 
on February 20, 1965, one day before his assassination. Malcolm disagreed with 
Ramadan’s view and insisted that while he would always be a devout Muslim, 
his first duty in life was to work for the political liberation of all black persons 
around the globe.
50 While Malcolm was no less committed to Islam as a religious 
and spiritual path, he rejected the view that Islam could offer a specific solution to 
every political problem. “My fight is two-fold, my burden is double, my respon-
sibilities multiple . . . material as well as spiritual, political as well as religious, 
racial as well as non-racial,” he told a crowd in Cairo. “I will never hesitate to let 
the entire world know the hell my people suffer from America’s deceit and her 
hypocrisy, as well as her oppression.”
51 Malcolm remained as committed as ever 
to a program of political liberation that remained outside the purview of his com-
mitments as a Sunni Muslim. Though he had received Arab Muslims’ financial 
support, their religious imprimatur, and their friendship, Malcolm resisted the 
Islamist view of his allies and sponsors.
Instead, Malcolm’s break with the Nation of Islam freed him to articulate a 
powerful Pan-Africanist politics.
52 By the time he had declared his independence 
from Elijah Muhammad in 1964, Malcolm had already cultivated ties to other 
black nationalists in New York and had met several leaders of the nonaligned 
movement, including President Sukarno of Indonesia, President Castro of Cuba, 
and President Nasser of Egypt.
53 He furthered such connections throughout his 
travels in 1964, much of which he spent in Africa. During his May visit to Nige-
ria, he proudly acquired a new title, “Omowale,” or, the son who had come home.


--- PAGE 66 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 59
That year, Malcolm also met with Kwame Nkrumah, president of Ghana; Milton 
Obote, president of Uganda; and Jomo Kenyatta, president of Kenya. He also 
attended two Africa Summit Conferences, where he represented his own Organi-
zation of Afro-American Unity, a group he had modeled on the Organization of 
African Unity.
54 Until his death in February 1965, Malcolm also sharply criticized 
U.S. foreign policy toward Africa, especially U.S. support for Moise Tshombe’s 
regime in the Congo. He stated—correctly, it turns out—that the United States 
had supported the overthrow of Patrice Lumumba, who had helped to expel Bel-
gian forces, and he wondered aloud whether he should recruit African American 
freedom fighters to fight Tshombe’s regime.
55 In a similar way, his domestic poli-
tics focused on finding black solutions to black problems, and his rearticulations 
of black nationalist themes included calls for racial solidarity in the face of white 
supremacy. His politics may have been radical, but they were not Islamist. Mal-
colm X did not believe Islamism was the solution to the problems of black people. 
Only black people, reaching across continents and across confessional lines, could 
solve black problems.
Transnational Reverberations in the Nation of Islam
The rejection of the Islamists’ authority was even more profound in the NOI, 
which would not permit other Muslims to define what it meant to be an authen-
tic Muslim, as Elijah Muhammad himself made clear: “Neither Jeddah or Mecca 
have sent me! I am sent from Allah and not from the Secretary General of the Mus-
lim League,” he said, referring to the Muslim World League, created in 1962.
56
The NOI had its own system of rituals and code of ethics, which relied more on 
the prophecies of Elijah Muhammad than on the shari‘a. But intellectuals in the 
NOI were not indifferent to the criticisms of other Muslims. Elijah Muhammad 
and his lieutenants were extremely sensitive to public opinion and vulnerable 
to attacks from other Muslims, as outlined in the examination of Malcolm X’s 
efforts to defend Elijah Muhammad. Like Malcolm X, they were also influenced 
by the new ideas, texts, pamphlets, translations, stories, and symbols circulated by 
the Muslim missionaries in the United States. The NOI’s reactions show just how 
important the missionaries and their ideas were to the development of African 
American Islam and American Islam as a whole.
For example, Muhammad Speaks, the NOI’s newspaper of record from 1961 
until the middle 1970s, frequently published endorsements of Elijah Muham-
mad and the NOI by mainstream Asian Muslim leaders. Like other so-called 
new religious movements, the NOI used appeals to traditional religious authorities 
in an effort to legitimate their movement.
57 In addition to citing foreign authorities 
to counter charges of illegitimacy, a whole cadre of intellectuals inside the organiza-
tion, including NOI ministers and newspaper columnists, responded to Muslim criti-
cisms of Elijah Muhammad’s Islamic bona fides by constructing him as a qur’anically 
sanctioned prophet. For example, the prominent Nation of Islam cartoonist Eugene 
XXX, or Eugene Majied, frequently incorporated images and passages from the


--- PAGE 67 ---
Black Routes to Islam60
Qur’an into his drawings of Elijah Muhammad, who was variously depicted as a 
doctor healing the “deaf and dumb Negro,” as a Daniel fighting off critics, or as 
a Moses plaguing Pharaoh Lyndon Johnson.
58 Others, including Minister Abdul 
Salaam and columnist Tynnetta Deanar, fiercely defended their prophet by citing 
the Qur’an.
59 A few NOI intellectuals sought ideological rapprochement with the 
critics by reinterpreting the mission of Elijah Muhammad in terms more suitable 
to Sunni orthodoxy or by asking the critics to adopt a more sympathetic, theo-
logically pluralistic view of Elijah Muhammad’s claims.
60
This engagement with Elijah Muhammad’s critics represented a remarkable 
moment of contact and confrontation. As a result, NOI intellectuals increasingly 
read Islamic texts, especially the Qur’an. In some cases, this deeper engagement 
with Islamic texts and traditions led to dissension and outright rebellion among 
NOI intellectuals, as was the case with Elijah Muhammad’s son, Wallace D. 
Muhammad.
61 However they answered the question of Elijah Muhammad’s legit-
imacy, all of these intellectuals, card-carrying members of the NOI and defectors 
alike, had something in common. They had become part of an old Islamic tradi-
tion—a transnational conversation about the meaning of the Holy Qur’an.
62
This moment of contact and confrontation also led to a shift in the mental 
geography of many African American Muslims in the NOI, as artists and poets 
incorporated new Islamic names, places, dates, figures, and ideas in their his-
torical imaginings of black identity. This deployment of Islamic signs was part 
of a larger trend in black American culture that represented a reorientation of 
African American politics and religion toward the Middle East more generally, 
as Melani McAlister has argued.
63 But for African American Muslim members 
of the NOI, this was a collective reorientation not only toward the Middle East 
but also toward other places and times in which blacks and Muslims had lived. 
African American Muslims in the NOI located the story of black/Muslim people 
in many epochs and locales, including ancient Egypt, Muslim West Africa, Asia, 
a mythical Arabia, and the classical period of Islam during and immediately after 
the time of Prophet Muhammad of Arabia. These black Muslims “moved across” 
time and space, constructing their contemporary identities by imagining who 
they had been in the past.
64
In 1967 William E. X published a poem titled “Black Man” in Muhammad
Speaks, which references Egypt, Persia, Central Africa, and the Himalayas, show-
ing how black/Muslim geography came to include Asia, which had been con-
structed as a racial home by African American Muslims at least since the 1927 
publication of Noble Drew Ali’s Holy Koran of the Moorish Science T emple. Brother 
William’s poem recognized the diverse linguistic, phenotypical, and geographic 
roots of blacks/Muslims but insisted that, on the whole, blacks are still one and 
the same. In his poetic romp around Asia and Africa, Brother William sees the 
Muslim “black man” as possessing a common god, language, and character—all 
of which are viewed as Islamic. Whether the black man lives in the Middle East, 
China, or even Tibet, he is, at heart, a Muslim.


--- PAGE 68 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 61
This reorienting of African American mental geography toward the Muslim 
world had important implications for NOI members’ sense of religious commu-
nity. Though some of their symbols, texts, and narratives had been adopted from 
foreign and immigrant missionaries, members of the NOI reappropriated such 
raw materials in their own understandings of what it meant to be a Muslim. Black 
Muslims in the NOI looked beyond the black Atlantic world to form their com-
munal identities and created narratives that linked the history of black people to 
this history of Islam. They felt allegiance not only to the black nation but also to 
a community of Muslims who might be members of several different nations. Eli-
jah Muhammad and many of his followers did not define the collective identity of 
blacks exclusively in terms of a desire for a separate nation or polity. Many in the 
NOI constructed black identity in terms of a shared history that was defined by 
its Islamic character. Of course, members offered differing understandings of their 
shared black/Islamic heritage, and they sited Islam in multiple times and places. 
Refusing to locate the history of blacks in one country or even on one continent, 
these stories adopted a transnational perspective toward black identity that rested 
upon its common Islamic roots. The radical implications of such identity mak-
ing would become clear in the 1970s and beyond, when some black intellectuals, 
especially Chancellor Williams, Molefi Asante, and later, Henry Louis Gates, Jr., 
came to depict Islam as an enemy to, or at least a foreign element within, African 
cultures and civilizations.
65 Such reactions, dubbed “black orientalism” by Sher-
man Jackson, are difficult to imagine in the absence of a culturally influential 
and institutionally successful African American Islam. At the least, it is clear that 
Islam, however constituted, had become a potent signifier of black identity for 
some African Americans and that other African Americans resisted this remaking 
of black identity in Islamic terms.
Conclusion: Political Refractions 
of Transnational Encounters
The political implications of African American reorientations toward Islam were 
more ambiguous. Several scholars of the NOI have insisted, for decades now, 
that the insular, “cultic” qualities of Elijah Muhammad’s NOI, in addition to the 
organization’s millennialism and Victorian gender relations as well as its Puritan-
ism and embrace of the Protestant work ethic, rendered the group an unwitting, 
decidedly conservative agent of the political status quo.
66 Such approaches seem 
to reflect the view, stated famously by Sacvan Berkovitch, that groups like the 
Nation of Islam, though appearing, at first, to look like manifestations of dissent, 
have actually functioned in U.S. history as vehicles of social control, since their 
teachings have not attacked the root causes of oppression.
67
This argument, that the absence of a direct and organized assault on the politi-
cal economy and patriarchy of the United States effectively sustains the status 
quo, reflects only a partial view of political action and resistance. Rebellion, as 
Robin D. G. Kelley argues, also includes cultural acts of resistance that reject the


--- PAGE 69 ---
Black Routes to Islam62
values and expectations of the powerful. 68 In this sense, the NOI’s activities, and 
the growth of Islam more generally among black Americans, were extremely rebel-
lious in the 1960s. During the 1950s, as Penny Von Eschen has pointed out, “the 
Nation of Islam permitted a space—for the most part unthinkable in the Cold 
War era—for an anti-American critique of the Cold War.”
69 During the Vietnam 
era, in the middle of a civil rights movement that was an important component 
of U.S. foreign policy, many in the Nation of Islam and other African American 
Muslims rejected American nationalism, refused to serve in Vietnam, criticized 
the Civil Rights Movement as hollow, and challenged the legitimacy of the nonof-
ficial state religion, Christianity. The way these Muslims dressed and talked—in 
addition to the pictures they drew and the poems they wrote—questioned the 
cultural foundations of the state and its legitimacy to rule. The fact that U.S. 
government officials associated members of the NOI with violent revolution, 
despite the lack of any organized effort in the movement to confront authorities 
with violence, indicates the extent of the ideological challenge.
70 According to 
one observer, the NOI was among the most watched organizations in the govern-
ment’s Counter-Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO).
71 Surely, this evidence 
indicates that the message of the Nation of Islam and its members was politically 
dangerous in some way.
The political implications of this Islamist flowering were also multivalent. 
The radical call for God’s sovereignty over all the earth and the establishment of 
the United States as an Islamic nation was reflected and refracted in an array of 
community programs and political platforms. Shaikh Daoud, as we have seen, 
preached the necessity of establishing God’s rule over all the earth but relied on 
nonviolent missionary work as his means to accomplish this end. The younger 
critics of Daoud’s supposed passivity cried even more loudly about the moral 
bankruptcy of the West and its evil ways, but in most cases, they sought separa-
tion from mainstream society, not violent revolution. For example, Sheik Tawfiq 
(d. 1988), an African American from Florida, founded the Mosque of the Islamic 
Brotherhood in Harlem, New York. Stressing the call of Islamic universalism—the 
idea that Islam crossed all racial barriers—African Americans, Hispanics, and oth-
ers prayed together, established housing and education programs, and ran small 
businesses in the heart of the largest U.S. city. In 1971, Yusuf Muzaffaruddin 
Hamid, who was a student of Pakistan’s Jama‘at-i Islami, established the Islamic 
Party of North America, which advocated the creation of an Islamic state in North 
America through a mass religious revival.
72 These African American Sunni Mus-
lim leaders regularly mingled with foreign and immigrant imams, who were now 
entering the United States in larger numbers due to 1965 reforms in immigra-
tion policy and financial support from Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries. 
After the 1973 and 1974 OPEC oil embargo, the price of oil skyrocketed, and 
at least some of those petrodollars were used to support the missionary efforts 
created during the Arab Cold War. By the early 1980s, according to one scholar, 
twenty-six communities “were receiving the services of leaders provided by the 
Muslim World League.”
73 While infused with a powerful jeremiad and the call


--- PAGE 70 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 63
for an Islamic revolution, however, their rhetoric led mainly to a moral revival, 
not violent jihad. Even when African American Muslims engaged in violent jihad
during this era, it was directed toward other African American Muslim groups, 
not the government or larger society.
74 There is simply no hard evidence indicat-
ing that their radical rhetoric led to organized terrorism or violent revolution on 
a mass scale.
As in the case of the Nation of Islam, it might be tempting to conclude that 
the political impact of these utopian groups was conservative, but such argu-
ments would once again ignore the ideological and cultural resistance that the 
groups offered. Some African American Islamists became effective spokesper-
sons in the United States for foreign Muslim causes, including those in Palestine, 
Afghanistan, Bosnia, and Chechnya, and while some funds were raised for these 
causes, American Muslim support was mainly moral in nature, as supporters gave 
fiery speeches from the pulpit on Fridays and discussed the issues in conferences 
and study groups.
75 Author Daniel Pipes is right that some American Muslims, 
including African American Muslims, would eventually become entangled in vio-
lent jihadist networks. A few African American Muslims have been convicted of 
aiding al-Qa‘ida or other terrorist groups, but these are rare, if dramatic, cases.
76
In some ways, the culture of African American Islam from the 1970s until 
today has borne the imprint of the contact and confrontation with foreign and 
immigrant Muslims during the 1960s. In the 1970s, W . D. Muhammad, the son 
of Elijah Muhammad, would change the name of the Nation of Islam to the 
World Community of al-Islam in the West and ask his followers to observe the 
ethical, theological, and ritual directives of Sunni Islam.
77 He also reached out to 
foreign Muslims, accepted Egyptian president Anwar Sadat’s offer of scholarships 
to attend Egyptian universities, and placed a Sudanese shaykh educated at the 
University of Medina as the prayer leader of the Chicago temple.
78 Despite these 
ties, he would tailor Sunni Islamic teachings to the African American experi-
ence, advocating a platform of political, economic, and social reforms that were 
transnational in style but local and national in their content.
79 In a sense, he had 
truly internalized the reformist attitudes of the Muslim missionaries by focusing 
so intently on the scriptures of Islam; but his close readings did not always agree 
with theirs. The same was true for other African Americans who sought to apply 
the texts of Islam to their own circumstances. By the 1990s, some of these efforts 
produced progressive political positions on a variety of issues, especially on gen-
der. Islamic studies professor Amina Wadud issued an academic manifesto called 
Qur’an and Woman.
80 Eventually, she would challenge the taboo of a woman lead-
ing a mixed-gender prayer.81 Similarly, African American women at the grass roots 
interpreted the Qur’an and hadith as documents of womanist liberation. 82 More 
and more African American Muslims would travel abroad to study the classical 
Islamic sciences in the aftermath of the Arab Cold War, but when they came back 
from foreign madrasas and Muslim universities, their interpretations of Islam were 
still infused with an African American sensibility focused on the problems facing 
Muslims in the United States.
83


--- PAGE 71 ---
Black Routes to Islam64
The interaction of African American Muslims with ideological players in the 
Arab Cold War may have changed the contours of African American Islamic cul-
ture, but it did not undermine African American Muslim religious or political 
agency. On the contrary, African American Muslims often appropriated the cul-
tural and intellectual resources of the missionaries into an Islam that reflected their 
own interests. Greater transnational ties between African American Muslims and 
Muslims abroad have led to an ever-larger variety of Islamic religious expression 
in black America. Some African American Muslims have joined both new and 
traditional Sufi orders, the mystical groups of Islam, including the West African-
based Tijaniyya, and the Philadelphia-based fellowship of Shaykh M. R. Bawa 
Muhaiyaddeen.
84 There is an important, if small, number of black Shi‘a Muslims 
as well—the result of Shi‘i outreach from the 1970s until today.85 Minister Louis 
Farrakhan, who reconstituted the Nation of Islam in 1978, has incorporated more 
and more Sunni Islamic texts and traditions into his religious practice and sought 
strong ties to foreign Muslim leaders, but he has also continued to claim a special 
place for black nationalism, Pan-Africanism, and his own interpretations of Elijah 
Muhammad’s teachings within the Nation of Islam.
86 All of these groups, and 
their differing religious and political outlooks, reflect the vitality of an African 
American Islam both transnational and local.
Notes
 1. See Aminah Beverly McCloud, African American Islam (New York: Routledge, 1995), 
9–40.
 2. See Melani McAlister, Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle 
East since 1945, updated ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005).
 3. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America , 3rd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. 
Eerdmans, 1994), 225.
 4. See Brenda Gayle Plummer, Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign Policy, 1935–
1960 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996), 257–66, 285.
 5. Lincoln, Black Muslims, 226, 227; Claude Andrew Clegg III, An Original Man: The Life 
and Times of Elijah Muhammad (New York: St. Martin’s, 1997), 135–136, 189.
 6. See Fawaz A. Gerges, The Superpowers and the Middle East: Regional and International 
Politics, 1955–1967 (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1984).
 7. See Malik Mufti, Sovereign Creations: Pan-Arabism and Political Order in Syria and Iraq
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996).
 8. Malcolm H. Kerr, The Arab Cold War, 1958–1964: A Study of Ideology in Politics, 2nd ed. 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1965), 21–22, 53. See also Michael C. Hudson, Arab
Politics: The Search for Legitimacy (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1977).
 9. Reinhard Schulze, “Institutionalization [of da‘wa],” in Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern
Islamic World, ed. John L. Esposito (New York: Oxford University Press), 1:346–50; James 
P . Piscatori, Islam in a World of Nation-States (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1986).
 10. Reinhard Schulze, “Muslim World League,” in Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic
World, 3:208–10.
 11. See Charles J. Adams, “The Ideology of Mawlana Mawdudi,” in South Asian Politics and
Religion, ed. Donald E. Smith (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1966), 371–97; 
Hamid Enayat, Modern Islamic Political Thought (Austin: University of T exas Press, 1988),


--- PAGE 72 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 65
101–10; and John L. Esposito, The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality, 3rd ed. (New York: 
Oxford University Press), 129–35.
 12. Hans Mahnig, “Islam in Switzerland: Fragmented Accommodation in a Federal Country,” 
in Muslims in the West: From Sojourner to Citizens , ed. Yvonne Y. Haddad (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2001), 75–76. And, for a contrast, see Said Ramadan’s son, Tariq 
Ramadan, Western Muslims and the Future of Islam  (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005).
 13. See Geneive Abdo, No God but God: Egypt and the Triumph of Islam  (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2000); Nazih N. Ayubi, Political Islam: Religion and Politics in the Arab 
World (London: Routledge, 1991); and Gilles Kepel, Muslim Extremism in Egypt: The 
Prophet and the Pharaoh (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985).
 14. Yvonne Y. Haddad and Jane I. Smith, eds., Muslim Communities in North America (Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1994), xxi.
 15. Mary Lahaj, “The Islamic Center of New England,” in Haddad and Smith, Muslim Com-
munities, 299–300.
 16. Larry Poston, Islamic Da‘wah in the West (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), 79.
 17. See Shaikh Daoud Ahmed Faisal, Islam the True Faith: The Religion of Humanity  (Brook-
lyn, NY: Islamic Mission of America, 1965), n.p.
 18. Marc Ferris, “T o ‘Achieve the Pleasure of Allah’: Immigrant Muslims in New York City, 
1893–1991,” in Haddad and Smith, Muslim Communities, 212.
 19. See McCloud, African American Islam, 21–24; and Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 63–67.
 20. Ferris, “T o ‘Achieve the Pleasure of Allah,’” 214.
 21. Shaikh Daoud Ahmed Faisal, “Author’s Note,” in Al-Islam: The Religion of Humanity
(Brooklyn, NY: Islamic Mission of America, 1950), 7–8.
 22. Ibid., 51.
 23. Ibid., 15–16. Compare Will Herberg, Protestant, Catholic, and Jew: An Essay in American 
Religious Sociology (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1955).
 24. Ibid., 49–50.
 25. Ibid., 60.
 26. See, for example, Regina M. Schwartz, The Curse of Cain: The Violent Legacy of Monothe-
ism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997).
 27. For accounts of the relationships between blacks and Jews in the United States, see V . 
P . Franklin et al., eds., African Americans and Jews in the Twentieth Century: Studies in 
Convergence and Conflict (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1998); Cheryl Lynn 
Greenberg, Troubling the Waters: Black-Jewish Relations in the American Century  (Princ-
eton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006); and Eric J. Sundquist, Strangers in the Land:
Blacks, Jews, Post-Holocaust America (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005).
 28. For classic accounts of these “American” missionary strategies, see, for example, William 
R. Hutchison, Errand to the World: American Protestant Thought and Foreign Missions (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1987); William G. McLoughlin, Jr., Revivals, Awak-
enings, and Reform (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978); and Edith Blumhofer 
and Randall Balmer, eds., Modern Christian Revivals (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
1993).
 29. Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam, 64.
 30. R. M. Mukhtar Curtis, “The Formation of the Dar ul-Islam Movement,” in Haddad and 
Smith, Muslim Communities in North America, 54.
 31. Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam, 66–68.
 32. McCloud, African American Islam, 71.


--- PAGE 73 ---
Black Routes to Islam66
 33. See Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican: Looking T oward the Third Resurrec-
tion (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005), 48–49.
 34. Louis E. Lomax et al., “The Hate That Hate Produced,” on Newsbeat, WNTA-TV , July 
23, 1959, a transcript of which is available in a declassified FBI report. See Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, “SAC, New York, office memorandum to director, FBI, July 16, 1959,” 
in Malcolm X: The FBI Files, http://wonderwheel.net/work/foia/ (accessed May 1, 2007).
 35. E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1962), 73–74.
 36. Louis A. DeCaro, Jr., On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X (New York: 
New York University Press, 1996), 159–60, 201–2.
 37. See DeCaro, On the Side of My People , esp. 159–293. And compare T urner, Islam in the
African-American Experience, 174–237, and Curtis, Islam in Black America, 85–105.
 38. See Malcolm X and Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine, 
1965), 266–317.
 39. Ferris, “T o ‘Achieve the Pleasure of Allah,’” 215.
 40. Malcolm X and Haley, Autobiography of Malcolm X, 318.
 41. Bruce Perry, Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America  (Barrytown, NY: 
Station Hill, 1991), 261–64; DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 202–3.
 42. Malcolm X and Haley, Autobiography of Malcolm X, 320.
 43. Yaacov Shimoni, Political Dictionary of the Arab World  (New York: Macmillan, 1987), 
105–6.
 44. Abd al-Rahman ‘Azzam, The Eternal Message of Muhammad, trans. Caeser E. Farah (Cam-
bridge: Islamic T exts Society, 1993).
 45. DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 206.
 46. Malcolm X and Haley, Autobiography of Malcolm X, 331–33.
 47. Ibid., 348.
 48. Perry, Malcolm, 322.
 49. DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 336.
 50. The interview is reproduced in Steve Clark, ed., February 1965: The Final Speeches (New 
York: Pathfinder, 1992), 252–55, and on the Web at Malcolm-X.Org: http://www
.malcolm-x.org/docs/int_almus.htm (accessed August 28, 2006).
 51. DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 233, 238–39.
 52. See “Notes on the Invention of Malcolm X” and “Malcolm X and the Failure of Afrocen-
trism” in Gerald Early, The Culture of Bruising (Hopewell, NJ: Ecco, 1994), 233–58.
 53. See George M. Fredrickson, Black Liberation: A Comparative History of Black Ideologies in 
the United States and South Africa (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 277–97; 
and Gomez, Black Crescent (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 348–55.
 54. Malcolm X and Haley, Autobiography of Malcolm X, 323–72; Gomez, Black Crescent, 372; 
Curtis, Islam in Black America, 96–99.
 55. See Clark, ed. February 1965: The Final Speeches, 20–21, and Clayborne Carson, Malcolm
X: The FBI File (New York: Carroll and Graf, 1991), 79–80.
 56. “Mr. Muhammad Answers Critics: Authority from Allah, None Other,” Muhammad
Speaks, August 2, 1962, 3.
 57. James R. Lewis, Legitimating New Religions (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press, 2003), 13–14. For an NOI example, see Sylvester Leaks, “The Messenger of Allah 
as Seen by an Islamic Leader from Pakistan,” Muhammad Speaks, May 8, 1964, 3.
 58. See “Our Great Physician,” Muhammad Speaks, June 1962, 14; “As It Was in the Days of 
Daniel, So It Is T oday,” Muhammad Speaks, June 19, 1964, 9; and “As It Was with Pha-
raoh So It Is T oday,” Muhammad Speaks, July 17, 1964, 9.


--- PAGE 74 ---
Islamism and Its African American Muslim Critics 67
 59. See “First Printing of Holy Qur’an in U.S.,” Muhammad Speaks, August 17, 1973, 23, 
and “Women in Islam: Is the Honorable Elijah Muhammad the Last Messenger of Allah?” 
Muhammad Speaks, September 16, 1965, 19.
 60. See “Allah and His Messenger,” Muhammad Speaks, January 1, 1965, 1; and “Where Oth-
ers Fail, Our Messenger Succeeds,” Muhammad Speaks, May 14, 1965, 3.
 61. See Zafar Ishaq Ansari, “W . D. Muhammad: The Making of a ‘Black Muslim’ Leader 
(1933–1961),” American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 2, no. 2 (1985): 248–62.
 62. See further Curtis, Black Muslim Religion, 65.
 63. McAlister, Epic Encounters, 86.
 64. See Thomas A. T weed, Crossing and Dwelling: A Theory of Religion (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2006); Jonathan Z. Smith, Map Is Not T erritory: Studies in the 
History of Religions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978).
 65. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 99–129.
 66. One argument for the movement’s gender conservatism can be found in E. Frances White, 
Dark Continent of Our Bodies: Black Feminism and the Politics of Respectability  (Philadel-
phia, PA: T emple University Press, 2001), 43. For counterarguments and qualifications, 
see Cynthia S’thembile West, “Nation Builders: Female Activism in the Nation of Islam, 
1960–1970” (PhD diss., T emple University, 1994); and Curtis, Black Muslim Religion,
95–130. For critiques of the NOI on other scores, see Essien-Udom, Black National-
ism, 286–87, 339; and Hans A. Baer and Merrill Singer, African-American Religion in the 
Twentieth Century: Varieties of Protest and Accommodation (Knoxville: University of T en-
nessee Press, 1992), 143.
 67. See further Sacvan Bercovitch, The American Jeremiad (Madison: University of Wisconsin 
Press, 1978).
 68. Bercovitch, The American Jeremiad.
 69. Penny M. Von Eschen, Race against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism, 1937–
1957 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997), 174.
 70. See “Nation of Islam: Cult of the Black Muslims,” May 1965, available through the FBI’s 
Web site at http://foia.fbi.gov/nation_of_islam/nation_of_islam_part02.pdf (last accessed 
May 1, 2007).
 71. In 1967, the FBI included “black nationalist hate groups” in COINTELPRO. See Frank 
T . Donner, The Age of Surveillance: The Aims and Methods of America’s Political Intelligence 
System (New York: Knopf, 1980), 178, 212–13.
 72. See McCloud, African-American Islam, 64–72; and Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam,
66–71.
 73. Poston, Islamic Da‘wah in the West, 39.
 74. See Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam.
 75. See Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 73.
 76. See, for example, United States District Court, Western District of Washington at Seattle, 
United States of America v. Earnest James Ujaama, at http://fl1.findlaw.com/news.findlaw
.com/hdocs/docs/terrorism/usujaama82802ind.pdf (accessed February 18, 2009).
 77. For background, see Clifton E. Marsh, The Lost-Found Nation of Islam in America (Lan-
ham, MD: Scarecrow, 2000), 67–78, 101–28.
 78. Curtis, Islam in Black America, 115, 120–21.
 79. See, for example, W . Deen Mohammed, Focus onAl-Islam (Chicago: Zakat, 1988).
 80. Amina Wadud, Qur’an and Woman (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).
 81. See Amina Wadud, Inside the Gender Jihad: Women’s Reform in Islam (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2006).
 82. See Carolyn Rouse, Engaged Surrender: African American Women and Islam  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2004).


--- PAGE 75 ---
Black Routes to Islam68
 83. See Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, and Imam Zaid Shakir, Scattered Pictures: Reflec-
tions of an American Muslim (Haywood, CA: Zaytuna Institute, 2005).
 84. See McCloud, African American Islam, 88–94, 248; Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam ,
248, 255–56; and Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 50–51, 191–98. For one example 
of the influence of the Bawa Muhaiyaddeen Fellowship on an African American Muslim, 
see Gwendolyn Zoharah Simmons, “Are We Up to the Challenge? The Need for a Radi-
cal Re-ordering of the Islamic Discourse on Women,” in Progressive Muslims: On Justice, 
Gender, and Pluralism, ed. Omid Safi (Oxford: Oneworld, 2003), esp. 235–39.
 85. Poston, Islamic Da‘wah in the West, 108–9.
 86. See further Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the 
Nation of Islam (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996).


--- PAGE 76 ---
C HAPTER  4
East of the Sun 
(West of the Moon)
Islam, the Ahmadis, and 
African America
Moustafa Bayoumi
Sepia Tones
T raveling somewhere between living in a racialized state and stating 
the life of a race lies the story of African American Islam. Found in narratives of 
struggle and spirit, of edification and propagation, of incarceration, incarnation, 
and ideology, and of blacks, Asians, and Middle Easterners, this is a tale seldom 
told and even less often heard. When it does get some play, the way is in a single 
key. Separation is sounded brassily as the dominant chord, modulating being 
minor into a major ideology. The dissonances of dissidence. From Moorish Sci-
ence to Garveyism, from Elijah’s honor to Malcolm’s rage, Islam is understood as 
a tool of politics, pliant to complaint and made to speak a language of plain truth 
against the tricknology of white folk. The soul almost disappears, replaced with 
an iconography of militarized Islam, boots and bowties battling white supremacy, 
dividing One Nation Under God with the Nation of Islam.
The fate of Malcolm concludes this narrative by necessity. Epiphanies of a uni-
versal spirit clash with narrow-minded parochialisms in a death match of blood 
and assassination. Malcolm is lionized and history, tragically, marches on. But did 
this battle between the particular and the universal, between Islam as a unique 
expression of African American political aspirations for separation, and Islam as a 
universal religion of belonging first find its articulation with Malcolm’s rupture 
with Elijah Muhammad, or has the customary story we have, up until now, 
been unable to comprehend the complexity of Islam in the African American


--- PAGE 77 ---
Black Routes to Islam70
experience? Is the divide between the universal and the particular so easily drawn 
as a picture in black and white, or are there sepia tones of black, brown, and beige 
that call out to be seen? This chapter is an examination of the browns and beiges, 
a look at the notes and tones of the Muslim experience.
I would like to start with three tableaus, one involving an Asian immigrant, 
another looking at Brother Malcolm, and the third, a study in sound. All three are 
signifying the idea of Islam in the United States, finding a context in which to belong 
along with a place to disagree, and providing me a text with which to continue.
The Mufti
Islam in African America has a history as long as memory, when Muslim slaves 
from Africa wrapped their faith tightly around them as invisible armor against 
daily degradation. But the practice does not seem to continue. Religious revival-
ists in the early part of the twentieth century, mostly in the North, where large 
numbers of new migrants sought the strength of a community, found popula-
tions willing to listen and eager to believe. In 1913, Timothy Drew donned a 
fez and claimed Moroccan heritage for his people in the Moorish Science T em-
ple. For all its imaginative reconstruction, the Moorish Science T emple has little 
under the surface to connect it to worldwide Islam. But its spirit of displacing 
the term “Negro” from blacks, of thinking of darker-skinned peoples as Asiatics 
and Moroccans, of allying Drew Ali with “Jesus, Mohamed, Buddha, and Confu-
cius,”
1 is part of the productive tension between separatism and universalism that 
will follow all African American Islam throughout the rest of the century. But it 
would be in the next decade, with the growth of the Ahmadiyya community, that 
the Asian connection forges ahead.
One night in January 1920, a gentle and bespectacled Muslim by the name of 
Mufti Muhammad Sadiq left London for New York to become one of the first 
“Pioneers in the spiritual Colonization of the Western world.”
2 This phrase, con-
veyed by the then leader of the Ahmadiyya movement in India, Mirza Mahmud 
Ahmad, to the Mufti’s work, interestingly linked Ahmadiyya missionary activity 
with British rule and with its own missionary activity, along with the pioneer 
mythology of the New World. The Ahmadis had objected to the manner in which 
British missionaries were defaming Islam by reviling the Prophet Muhammad and 
set out not just to correct this error but also to illustrate how Jesus was a prophet 
of Islam. They had observed how missionaries in the East had succeeded in mis-
representing Islam and felt that a proactive agenda of missionizing was needed 
to counteract this damage. Recent Hindu-only movements in India also fueled 
the drive to survive in a world of plural faiths. “Reason itself revolts against this 
exclusiveness,” wrote Ahmadi founder Ghulam Ahmad.
3
The Ahmadiyya community began in late nineteenth-century India with the 
figure of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, a charismatic reformer who believed he had 
received divine revelations, starting in 1876, requiring him to promote the unity 
of all religions as manifest through Islam, whose chief object is “to establish the


--- PAGE 78 ---
East of the Sun (West of the Moon) 71
unity and majesty of God on earth, to extirpate idolatry and to weld all nations 
into one by collecting all of them around one faith.”4 It is a particular universalism.
In seeking this unity, Ahmad would call himself “the Mahdi of Islam . . . the Prom-
ised Messiah of Christianity and Islam, and an avatar of Krishna for the Hindus,”
5
a claim that would ultimately oust him and his movement from the mainstream 
Muslim establishment. We should note how Ahmad’s ideas are an attempt to 
confront communal feelings in India of his day and how this relationship between 
faith and nation would resonate in the American Ahmadiyya movement.
We can note, then, the links between the putative universalism of colonialism, 
which saw the spread of Western values as a mission manifest in direct and indirect 
colonial rule (la mission civilisatrice), to the missionary activities of the Ahmadis. 
Ahmadi missionizing, particularly in its pioneering New World aspects, thus 
borrows heavily from the script of European expansion and accepts modernity’s 
commonplace division between the spiritual and secular worlds (“the spiritual 
colonization”) where the East is spiritual and the West, material. A significant 
difference, however, divides the methodologies of Western expansionism and 
Ahmadi missionary activity, for the Ahmadis were addressing the rest of the 
world as a colonized people and the religious foundation of their work is thus 
by definition a minority religion, unencumbered by state apparatuses or ide-
ology. Its universalism percolates from below rather than being dusted from 
above, thus achieving a kind of dissident political flavor separate from the tastes 
of dominant rule.
In 1920, the movement, fresh from its missionary successes around the world 
(including England and West Africa) and full of the optimism that the new world 
is supposed to hold, sent its first missionary to the United States. Mufti Muham-
mad Sadiq boarded his ship in London and, each day, entertained his fellow pas-
sengers with his erudition. “Say, if you love Allah, follow me; then will Allah love 
you,” he is reported to have intoned. Before the end of the trip, Sadiq is said to 
have “converted four Chinese men, one American, one Syrian, and one Yugosla-
vian to Islam.”
6
The American authorities were hardly as sanguine with Sadiq’s sagacity. They 
seized him before he could leave the ship, accusing him of coming to the United 
States to practice polygamy, and placed him in a Philadelphia detention 
house. So began a dark hour for the gentle Sadiq. Seven weeks later, he was 
eventually released but not before making nineteen other converts in jail, 
from Jamaica, British Guyana, Azores, Poland, Russia, Germany, Belgium, 
Portugal, Italy, and France.
What Sadiq found when he reached the welcoming shores of the United States 
was a history of institutional racism and Asian exclusion laws for which he was 
unprepared. White nationalism would already be working against the Mufti’s 
message. Later he would write that “if Jesus Christ comes to America and applies 
for admission to the United States under the immigration laws, [he] would not be 
allowed to enter this country because:


--- PAGE 79 ---
Black Routes to Islam72
 1. He comes from a land which is out of the permitted zone.
 2. He has no money with him.
 3. He is not decently dressed.
 4. His hands have holes in the palms.
 5. He remains bare-footed, which is a disorderly act.
 6. He is against fighting for the country.
 7. He believes in making wine when he thinks necessary.
 8. He has no credential to show that he is an authorized preacher.
 9. He believes in practicing the Law of Moses [polygamy].
7
Originally conceiving of his work as broad-based, ecumenical, multiracial 
missionary activity, Sadiq soon realized that whites were bitter and fearful of his 
message and African Americans interested and open. Early reports indicate that 
several Garveyites attended his lectures and were among his first converts, and the 
white press seemed generally baffled and lost in its own prejudices when consider-
ing the movement. One account tells us that “all the audience has adopted Arabic 
names . . . There is the very dark Mr. Augustus, who used to belong to St. Marks 
church in this city [Chicago], but who now sings a pretty Arabic prayer and acts 
rather sphinx-like. Half a dozen Garvey cohorts are counted, one in his resplen-
dent uniform. There is one pretty yellow girl and another not so pretty.”
8
The fact is that the Ahmadiyya movement attracted women and men. It formed 
a community made up of black, brown, and white people in a scattering of cit-
ies across the eastern half of the country (and St. Louis). But it mostly attracted 
African Americans, who were also given early leadership roles.
9 Participating in 
Islam vitally meant discovering the history of black contributions to Islam, a topic 
generating some interest broadly in the black press at the time. In these years, 
articles appeared in The Crisis (1913), The Messenger (1927), and Opportunity
(1930) about Islam, notably about Bilal, the Abyssinian slave freed by Prophet 
Muhammad and Islam’s first muezzin, illustrating Islam’s historic connection 
with Africa.
10 It is important to underline that Islam within the Ahmadiyya com-
munity was not considered a religion just for blacks but a religion in which blacks 
had an alternative universal history to which to pledge allegiance. Christianity and 
narrow nationalisms allowed no such thing, as The Moslem Sunrise, the Ahmadi 
journal, argued. In 1923, it printed a half-page exhortation on “the real solu-
tion of the Negro Question,” calling on African Americans to see that “Christian 
profiteers brought you out of your native lands of Africa and in Christianizing 
you made you forget the religion and language of your forefathers–which were 
Islam and Arabic. You have experienced Christianity for so many years and it has 
proved to be no good. It is a failure. Christianity cannot bring real brotherhood 
to the nations. So, now leave it alone. And join Islam, the real faith of Universal 
Brotherhood.”
11
Universal brotherhood, of course, sounds similar to Universal Negro, as in the 
Improvement Association, and links should be made between the philosophy of 
Garveyism and the Ahmadis, but, again, not simply through the lens of separatism


--- PAGE 80 ---
East of the Sun (West of the Moon) 73
but a reconfigured universalism. Considering the racial and religious divisions in 
the world, the Ahmadis reinterpreted the Islamic concept of tawheed, the one-ness 
of God, as unifying the world, people, and faith around Islam (as Ghulam Ahmad 
wanted for India). In the American context, then, Ahmadi thought opened a 
critical space for race in the realm of the sacred. In this way, African Ameri-
cans could metaphorically travel beyond the confines of national identities. They 
could become “Asiatics” and remain black, could be proud of their African heri-
tage and feel a sense of belonging to, and participation with, Asia. Being plural 
in this scheme meant not having to feel the psychic tear of double consciousness 
but a way of living wholly in the holy. This ecumenicalism could be very power-
ful, both spiritually and politically. By being opened-palmed about life when the 
secular world is clenching fists at you meant that your pluralist unity viewed the 
divisions of the world as contemptibly parochial.
By 1940, the movement could claim around ten thousand converts. Its 
impact would be wider still, and, in his early years, it would reach the ears of 
Malcolm X.
Brother Malcolm
Malcolm X, the eloquent minister of information for Elijah Muhammad, is com-
monly seen as speaking the fire of separatism and black pride until his fateful hajj
in 1964 tamed his message, as he discovered the true universal spirit of Islam. 
Conventional as this story is, with its Augustinian turns of the will, it fails when 
confronted with history. The rise and development of Malcolm’s message is a 
story of the conflict between the particular universalism of Ahmadi-type Islam 
against the more narrow confines of Nation of Islam creed.
12 When we under-
stand this, we can view the intellectual development of Malcolm as a way of 
thinking through the role of faith in determining consciousness and that that 
activity itself for Malcolm was hardly a settled issue.
Consider, for example, the fact that, early in his life and while considering 
the value of Islam while in prison, Malcolm was visited by an Ahmadi, Adbul 
Hameed, who was on his outreach to local populations. Abdul Hameed even 
sent Malcolm a book of Arabic Muslim prayers, which Malcolm memorized 
phonetically.
13 This contact may help to explain why, after being released from 
Charlestown prison on parole, Malcolm, too, identifies himself at least once as an 
“Asiatic,” which I have been arguing is not false consciousness of African Ameri-
can history or self-hatred but a strategic belief in the particular universal of Islam. 
The incident was as follows.
In 1953, Malcolm, who was now a fully fledged Muslim and member of Elijah 
Muhammad’s flock, was pulled aside one day at his work at the Gar Wood factory 
in Wayne, Michigan, by the FBI. He had failed to register for the Korean War 
draft, the agent needled him, and was thereby jeopardizing his parole. Malcolm 
heeded the warning and registered but how he registered is noteworthy. Under 
the section on citizenship, which read, “I am a citizen of . . . ,” Malcolm inscribed


--- PAGE 81 ---
Black Routes to Islam74
“Asia.” In his form on being a conscientious objector, he stated his belief that 
“Allah is God, not of one particular people or race, but of All the Worlds, thus 
forming All Peoples into One Universal Brotherhood.” Asked to identify his reli-
gious guide, Malcolm wrote “Allah the Divine Supreme Being, who resides at the 
Holy City of Mecca, in Arabia.”
14
Unlike orthodox Nation of Islam creed, which would connect Allah with W . 
D. Fard and the religious guide as Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm identifies Allah 
with the God of Islam and, like the Ahmadis, stresses the universal character of 
God. We could perhaps cynically see this move as a means to defeat the draft 
by identifying with a more orthodox religion than the Nation of Islam, but to 
do so is to miss the manner in which Malcolm would later repeatedly seek to 
integrate the Nation of Islam into the fold of worldwide Islam. In 1960, after the 
scholar C. Eric Lincoln coined the term “Black Muslims” for Nation followers, 
Malcolm objected vehemently. “I tried for at least two years to kill off that ‘Black 
Muslims,’” he said. “Every newspaper and magazine writer and microphone I got 
close to [I would say] ‘No! We are black people here in America. Our religion is 
Islam. We are properly called “Muslims”!’ But that ‘Black Muslims’ name never 
got dislodged.”
15
This tension, between the Ahmadi vision of a particular universal vision of 
Islam and the Nation’s notion of an Islam for black people, underscores the conflict 
between two very different roles for religion in the political sphere. Admittedly, 
the Ahmadi spirit is less confrontational, less public, less typical of the struggle we 
have come to recognize as identity politics, and yet it is still revolutionary in its 
own way by providing a radical ontology of self. T o reorient one’s body toward the 
Orient means a refusal to engage with the first principles of white America’s defi-
nitions of blackness and instead to cut to the heart of an old American principle, 
the freedom of worship. Yet unlike the primary demand placed upon American 
religion—that religion be relegated solely to the private sphere—Islamic faith is 
seen as enveloping and thereby surpassing national belonging.
Reverberating through the African American community, this notion that a 
reconfigured universal faith can free your mind and body gained ground. While 
the Nation used the media (and the media used the Nation) to promote its belief, 
this other vision of Islam was quietly seeping into the pores of African American 
communities around the country, giving them a spiritual place to repudiate the 
nation of America not with the Nation of Islam but with a new universalism. 
Genealogically, this idea should be seen as descending from the Ahmadiyya move-
ment, and, musically, it had a soundtrack that large segments of the American 
public were listening to. Many of the major figures of mid-century jazz were 
themselves directly influenced by the Ahmadiyya movement, and the yearning for 
a universal and spiritual sound was in large part a result of Ahmadiyya labor.


--- PAGE 82 ---
East of the Sun (West of the Moon) 75
A Love Supreme
In 1953, Ebony magazine felt that the rise of Islam among the jazz musicians 
of the era was sufficiently important to publish its article on “Moslem Musi-
cians.” “Ancient Religion Attracts Moderns,” spoke its headline, and it centered 
on the importance of jazz among musicians. Drummer Art Blakey, we are told, 
“started looking for a new philosophy after having been beaten almost to death in 
a police station in Albany Ga., because he had not addressed a white policeman 
as ‘sir.’”
16 Talib Dawood, a former jazz player and Ahmadi, introduced Blakey to 
Islam. Blakey’s house was a known center for Islamic learning, and in an impor-
tant engagement at Small’s Paradise in Harlem, he organized a seventeen-member 
band, all Muslim, as the Messengers. Later, the band’s personnel would change, 
as would the name (to the Jazz Messengers), but the Islamic influence in jazz 
would continue.
17
Other important figures of the period also converted to Islam. Yusef Lateef, 
Sahib Shihab, Ahmed Jamal, and McCoy Tyner would all convert, and Dizzy 
Gillespie, Miles Davis, and John Coltrane would all be significantly influenced by 
its spirit. It is with John Coltrane that I want to conclude this chapter, since his 
influence has been so remarkable in the jazz sound and because his debt to other 
Eastern philosophies is relatively well known. But his relationship to Islam has 
not, to my knowledge, been sufficiently acknowledged despite the fact that it can 
be heard in his most famous work.
T o have a soundtrack to a movement does not mean to play an anthem. Rather 
than indicating a representational scheme of signifying a specific community, I 
am interested in listening for the ways in which the yearning for a new kind of 
community, one based on a new universalism that has a (but not, by necessity, the 
only) base in Islam, can be heard in the ways in which the music is pushing itself. 
Coltrane’s search for a tone that could extend the saxophone is well known, as is 
the critics’ initial bewilderment to his pitch. He himself talked about his desire 
to incorporate the fullness of expression in his music. “I want to cover as many 
forms of music that I can put into a jazz context and play on my instruments,” 
he wrote in his notebooks. “I like Eastern music; Yusef Lateef has been using this 
in his playing for some time. And Ornette Coleman sometimes plays music with 
a Spanish content.”
18 In an unreleased session from his Village Vanguard record-
ings, Coltrane is also playing with Ahmed Abdul Malik, a Sudanese bass and oud 
player who was part of Monk’s band, a regular partner to Randy Weston, and an 
innovator in incorporating Middle Eastern modal organization in jazz improvisa-
tion. Coltrane’s sidemen regularly included Muslim musicians from Philadelphia, 
and he himself, married to Naima (a Muslim) and, after 1957, increasingly inter-
ested in all things spiritual, regularly engaged his friend, piano player Hassan 
Abdullah, in discussions about Islam.
Space prevents me from etching in detail the milieu in which Coltrane repeat-
edly encountered and considered Islam. Instead, I want to move toward a conclu-
sion in a musical note by considering the ecumenical sound of Islam found in 
Coltrane’s most commercially successful recording, A Love Supreme. Significantly,


--- PAGE 83 ---
Black Routes to Islam76
Coltrane was often portrayed by the media of his day as blowing the sounds of 
black rage. The Angry Young T enor was the musical equivalent of the angry Mal-
colm X. But Coltrane never saw his music this way. Responding to his critics, he 
said, “If [my music] is interpreted as angry, it is taken wrong. The only one I’m 
angry at is myself when I don’t make what I’m trying to play.”
19 Later he would 
be quoted as saying this about the philosophy of his music: “I think the main 
thing a musician would like to do is to give a picture to the listener of the many 
wonderful things he knows of and senses in the universe. That’s what music is 
to me—it’s just another way of saying this is a big, beautiful universe we live 
in, that’s been given to us, and here’s an example of just how magnificent and 
encompassing it is.”
20
If there is a tendency to view this wisdom as apolitical, liberal claptrap, it is, I 
think, misplaced. Searching for the universal in a minor key is less about escape 
or about colonizing the spiritual experiences of the dark world to rejuvenate an 
exhausted Western sensibility, in the mode of Richard Burton through George 
Harrison. Coltrane’s universal is a search for a big philosophy of sound, which 
repudiates the thin, reedy existence of American racial politics, and it does so, 
often, by an invocation of Islam.
“During the year of 1957, I experienced, by the grace of God, a spiritual awak-
ening which was to lead me to a richer, fuller, more productive life.” So wrote 
Coltrane in the famous liner notes for A Love Supreme. The notes continue in this 
tenor, and anyone with an ear attuned to Islamic language will hear its echoes: 
“NO MATTER WHAT . . . IT IS WITH GOD. HE IS GRACIOUS AND 
MERCIFUL. HIS WAY IS IN LOVE, THROUGH WHICH WE ALL ARE. 
IT IS TRULY—A LOVE SUPREME. Al-rahman, al-raheem. The Gracious, the 
Merciful.” The two qualities which follow God everywhere in the Muslim tradi-
tion are invoked by Coltrane, who ends his text with “ALL PRAISE TO GOD.” 
Alhamdulillah. Consider the first track, “Acknowledgement.” Built around a sim-
ple, four-note structure, this piece is an attempt to unify and capture the rapture 
of the divine. Listen how, two-thirds of the way through, Coltrane meanders 
around the simple theme in every key, as if to suggest the manner in which God’s 
greatness truly is found everywhere, and then the ways in which the band begins 
to sing the phrase “A Love Supreme,” like a roving band of Sufi mendicants sing-
ing their dhikr. The words could change. As the love is extolled, the phrase begins 
to include the sounds of “Allah Supreme,” another Arabic expression, Allahu 
Akbar. Coltrane makes the connection from “A Love Supreme” to Allah Supreme 
for his entire listening audience, forever delivering a sound of Islam to the world 
of American music.
T o appreciate the depth of mutual involvement between blacks and Asians 
means acknowledging not just how histories of faith exist to be excavated, which 
illustrates a level of shared struggle toward an acceptable ontology for living in the 
racialized United States, but it also means investing the sacred with the possibili-
ties for radical thought, even if its effects are less visible to us than the legacy of 
political activism through ideologies of separatism. Ahmadi Islam was the space


--- PAGE 84 ---
East of the Sun (West of the Moon) 77
where this place was opened up for many African Americans. It defines certain 
aesthetics of living, where the text to life is in a language white America cannot 
read and the sounds of existence flutter beyond white America’s ears. This is not 
about being “Omni-American,” to use a phrase associated with Albert Murray, 
but it is about assimilating into the omnipresence of a just universal order. It is 
where blacks become Asians and Asians, black, under color of divine law.
Notes
 1. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims of America (Grand Rapids, MI: Erdmanns, 1994), 
49.
 2. The Moslem Sunrise (July 1921), 3.
 3. Quoted in Yvonne Haddad and Jane Smith, Mission to America: Five Islamic Sectarian 
Communities in North America (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1993), 55.
 4. Hazrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, Message of Peace (1908; Columbus, OH: Ahmadiyya 
Anjuman Isha’at Islam Lahore, 1993), 23.
 5. Quoted in Richard Brent T urner, Islam in the African American Experience (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1997), 112.
 6. Richard Brent T urner, Islam in the African American Experience  (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1997), 115.
 7. “If Jesus Comes to America,” The Moslem Sunrise (April 1922), 55–56.
 8. Roger Didier, “Those Who’re Missionaries to Christians: Prophet Sadiq Brings Allah’s 
Message Into Chicago and Makes Proselytes,” reprinted in The Moslem Sunrise (October 
1922), 139.
 9. Aminah McCloud reports that eventually, dissension arose among Ahmadis over the 
fact that more African Americans were not appointed to leadership positions and that 
the Indian customs of the missionaries and the immigrant Muslims eventually clashed 
with the African American desires to apply the faith to domestic situations. See Aminah 
McCloud, African American Islam  (New York: Routledge, 1995), 21. However, in the 
early years, the community was certainly highly multiracial in many ways, including in 
its leadership roles. The Moslem Sunrise contains many such photographs and examples, 
including highlighting the role of one early “zealous worker for Islam, appointed a Sheikh 
to work among his people in the district of St. Louis and vicinity,” named Sheikh Ahmad 
Din (formerly P . Nathaniel Jonson). See, for example, The Moslem Sunrise (July 1922), 
119.
 10. J. A. Rogers, “Bilal Ibn Rahab—Warrior Priest,” The Messenger 9 (July 1927): 213–14. 
Rogers states, “When the Christian Negro points with pride to St. Augustine, the Numid-
ian Negro, and tells what he did to advance Christianity, the Mohammedan one can point 
to Bilal, and tell what he did for Christianity’s greatest rival. The Mohammedan Negro is, 
however, hardly likely to do as Islam not only in theory, but in actuality, knows no color 
line. This probably accounts for its success in Africa.” See also A. T . Hoffert, “Moslem 
Propaganda: The Hand of Islam stretches out to Aframerica,” The Messenger (May 1927), 
141, 160. Hoffert describes “a woman convert who had belonged to various churches 
spoke of her previous life like that of a dog or cat before its eyes are opened; they are going 
to have their share of good things and stand on their own feet. She spoke of the universal-
ity of Islam, its way of life, one God, one aim, one destiny.” Blanche Watson, “The First 
Muezzin,” Opportunity (September 1930), 275.
 11. “T rue Salvation of the American Negroes: The Real Solution to the Negro Question,” The
Moslem Sunrise (April–July 1923), 184.


--- PAGE 85 ---
Black Routes to Islam78
 12. It should be stressed that the dichotomy I am establishing here, between the particular-
ism of the Nation and the ecumenicalism of the Ahmadis, is obviously more complicated 
in many circumstances, and that the Nation has, at its heart, the ability to see itself as a 
universal theology in certain respects, just as Ahmadi creed can be (and is often, by the 
mainstream Muslim community) understood as a narrower and more particular vision, 
especially since the Ahmadis themselves are marginalized by the mainstream Muslim 
establishment. The Nation also often employed Sunni Muslims as advisors and teachers, 
such as Abdul Basit Naeem, editor of a couple of small publications (Moslem World & the 
USA and The African-Asian World) and author of the introduction to Elijah Muhammad’s 
The Supreme Wisdom (Atlanta: Messenger Elijah Muhammad Propagation Society, n.d.), 
2:3. These advisors and, later, Elijah Muhammad himself recognized the radical differ-
ences between the Nation of Islam creed and mainstream Sunni beliefs yet justified the 
Nation’s theology as being the best way to bring African Americans to Islam. At the very 
end of his life, it appears that even Elijah Muhammad believed in mainstream Islam. 
Similarly, Louis Farrakhan, now facing his mortality as he battles cancer, has made sig-
nificant gestures towards reforming Nation of Islam creeds towards an acceptable form of 
mainstream Islam.
 13. Louis DeCaro, On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X  (New York: New 
York University Press, 1996), 136.
 14. DeCaro, On the Side of My People, 97–98.
 15. Malcolm X and Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York: Grove Press, 
1964), 247.
 16. “Moslem Musicians Take Firm Stand Against Racism,” Ebony (April 1953): 111.
 17. Charley Gerard, Jazz in Black and White: Race, Culture, and Identity in the Jazz Commu-
nity (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998), 75
 18. C. O. Simpkins, Coltrane: A Biography (Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1975), 118.
 19. Simpkins, Coltrane, 84.
 20. Ibid., 151.


--- PAGE 86 ---
C HAPTER  5
Representing
Permanent War
Black Power’s Palestine and 
the End(s) of Civil Rights
Keith P. Feldman
In the past few weeks, the Arab-Israeli conflict exploded once again into all-out war as 
it did in 1956 and as it had done in 1948, when the State of Israel was created. What 
are the reasons for this prolonged conflict and permanent state of war which has existed 
between Arab nations and Israel? . . . Since we know that the white American press 
seldom, if ever, gives the true story about world events in which America is involved, 
then we are taking this opportunity to present the following documented facts on this 
problem. These facts not only affect the lives of our brothers in the Middle-East, Africa 
and Asia, but also pertain to our struggle here. We hope they will shed some light on 
the problem.
—Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
Thus opens what quickly became an infamous article published in the
summer of 1967 by the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC).1
SNCC’s “Third World Round Up: The Palestine Problem: T est Your Knowledge” 
does groundbreaking rhetorical and imaginative work to remap the relationship 
between domestic movements for racial justice in the United States and transna-
tional struggles for liberation in Israel-Palestine. This chapter sketches a genealogy 
of this remapping project. The social, imaginative, and rhetorical spaces of what 
we might call “Black Power’s Palestine” clarify and contest the shifting imperial 
formation emerging in the confluence of the end of the U.S. Civil Rights Move-
ment and the beginning of Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and Gaza.
While SNCC’s article has been routinely condemned for contributing to the 
tragic fracture of the so-called black-Jewish civil rights alliance, in the spaces it


--- PAGE 87 ---
Black Routes to Islam80
opened up in the months and years that followed its publication, a critique of the 
occupation could be lodged in discussions about the future of New Left racial 
politics; members of the Black Panther Party could cultivate durable allegiances 
with the Palestine Liberation Organization from Oakland to Algiers; Andrew 
Young, the first African American ambassador to the United Nations, could sac-
rifice his vaunted position by entering discussions with the PLO; organizations 
like Freedomways could pair with the Association of Arab American University 
Graduates to expose the 1982 massacres in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps; 
and poets like June Jordan could bear witness to these massacres, imagining being 
“born a Black woman” and in the presence of Sabra and Shatila having “become 
Palestinian.” Indeed, some of the most durable critiques of the colonial occupa-
tion of Palestine have emerged through the embattled post–civil rights spaces 
imagined by SNCC in 1967. That is the article’s oft-forgotten future. But what 
of its past?
Let us first consider the analytical purchase SNCC captures in the phrase “per-
manent state of war.” How does this phrase operate? One finds this figure in a 
range of literary and polemical works in the post-World War II black freedom 
movement. In the preface to the 1953 edition of The Souls of Black Folk , for 
instance, W . E. B. Du Bois revises his famous thesis about the “world problem of 
the color line.” “Back of the problem of race and color,” writes Du Bois, “lies a 
greater problem that both obscures and implements it.” This is a problem articu-
lated through the functional register of permanent war as, he claims, it maintains 
through violence the material privileges of “so many civilized persons” so that 
“war tends to become universal and continuous, and the excuse for this war con-
tinues largely to be color and race.”
2 More than a decade later, picking up on the 
Maoist conception of a people’s war, Huey P . Newton turns to the figure in his 
famous June 1967 essay “In Defense of Self-Defense.” “The laws and rules which 
officials inflict upon poor people prevent them from functioning harmoniously 
in society . . . We are advocates of the abolition of war,” Newton argues, echoing 
Mao. “We do not want war, but war can only be abolished through war. In order 
to get rid of the gun it is necessary to pick up the gun.”
3
From a seemingly distant remove, almost ten years later, Michel Foucault out-
lines this figure’s analytical function, tracing its relation to race struggle, class 
struggle, and the horizon of law. In his quest to rethink history as a project 
delinked from the historiographical and juridical constraints of the state, Foucault 
inverts German military theorist Claude Von Clausewitz’s famous aphorism that 
“war is the continuation of politics conducted by other means.” Instead, Fou-
cault asks, “If we look beneath peace, order, wealth, and authority, beneath the 
calm order of subordinations, beneath the State and State apparatuses, beneath 
the laws, and so on, will we hear and discover a sort of primitive and permanent 
war?”
4 The answer, Foucault suggests, lies in understanding the emergence of the 
modern state. It was Clausewitz, he argues, who inverted a historical principle 
whose longue durée shows how modern state sovereignty was conceived and main-
tained through the violence of battle, the drawing of sides, and through vicious


--- PAGE 88 ---
Representing Permanent War 81
and protracted struggle. While the forces of order, the state, the law—and the 
discursive practices of history that such forces produce—claim supremacy, cohe-
siveness, even abstract and universal form, in actuality, they are always in the 
process of formation. These struggles, Foucault continues, obfuscate their neces-
sary production of racism, the “biological-type caesura within a population” that 
demarcates “what must live and what must die.”
5
The task Foucault sets out is an inquiry into strategies of “counterhistory” 
that make legible this far messier narrative. He does so not simply to refine an 
abstract theory of the origins of modern politics or historiography; nor is it a 
theory that emerges in a vacuum. Rather, Foucault was attuned to the social and 
political transformations of the late 1960s in France as in many other parts of the 
globe, from anticolonial movements to the “rights revolution.” He found modern 
political theory—with its analytical grounding in the state—unable to capture 
adequately the radically imaginative performances, portrayals, and projections of 
power produced by so-called nonstate actors in these day-to-day battles. Dur-
ing these years, not only had Foucault begun reading Clausewitz, alongside Leo 
T rotsky, Che Guevara, and Rosa Luxemburg; he was also paying close attention 
to the Black Panthers in the United States, remarking that “they are developing 
a strategic analysis that has emancipated itself from Marxist theory.”
6 And in the 
months surrounding the June War, it is worth recalling that Foucault was in T unis 
and witnessed, first hand, the extraordinary anti-Jewish show of Pan-Arab solidar-
ity by an anticolonial student movement confronting its own government’s sup-
port of U.S. war policy in Vietnam and, more quietly, its détente with Israel.
7 In 
reflecting on the route of his own scholarship, Foucault locates 1968 as a crucial 
turning point:
The way power was exercised—concretely and in detail—with its specificity, its 
techniques and tactics, was something that no one attempted to ascertain . . . This 
task could only begin after 1968, that is to say on the basis of daily struggles at [a] 
grass roots level, among those whose fight was located in the fine meshes of the web 
of power. This is where the concrete nature of power became visible, along with the 
prospect that these analyses of power would prove fruitful in accounting for all that 
had hitherto remained outside the field of political analysis.
8
We should note Foucault is referring at least as much to March 1968 in the T uni-
sian postcolony, in the midst of a resurgence of student activism around the June 
War, as he is that far more famous May in the metropole.
Given this theorization, SNCC’s act of framing an article on the origins of the 
Arab-Israeli conflict as a genealogy of the “documented facts” of permanent war 
asks us to take seriously the counterhistorical strategies used by artists, scholars, 
and activists to articulate substantive forms of freedom, equality, and self-deter-
mination “located in the fine meshes of the web of power.” This should come 
as no surprise; culture workers within the black freedom movement have long 
attempted to ascertain power’s specificities and develop strategies that pushed 
against the forms of “rights”-based discourse that had gained hegemony in the


--- PAGE 89 ---
Black Routes to Islam82
“short” civil rights era.9 How, then, in the immediate wake of the June 1967 War, 
did SNCC expose the permanent war being waged through and against a Zionist 
ideology steeped in the settler colonial logic it shared with the United States? How 
did this work reveal both the formal limitations of the Civil Rights Movement 
and the deep entrenchment of U.S. popular, ideological, and material support for 
Palestine’s colonial occupation?
Accurately depicting this terrain requires moving beyond the borders of the 
nation-state and into the colonial world in ways SNCC, Du Bois, Newton, and 
many others in the black freedom movement routinely elucidated. As historians, 
political theorists, and literary critics alike are increasingly excavating, the long 
trajectory of the black freedom movement advanced a wide-ranging global lens, 
committed to representing the linkages between antiracist domestic decolonizing 
struggles and those taking place across the globe. From Du Bois, C. L. R. James, 
and Aimé Césaire to Claude McKay, Richard Wright, Langston Hughes, and 
James Baldwin to Stokely Carmichael, Jack O’Dell, Eldridge Cleaver, and David 
Graham Du Bois, this global lens enabled a critical purchase on forms of history 
writing predicated on the disembodied abstractions of rights, order, and the law 
could. These abstract concepts could from this vantage point be seen for what 
they were: if not flat-out ruse, then part of a complex set of contextually specific 
relations of power relying upon and producing colonized and racialized subjects.
The concept “imperial formation” captures the mobile terrain on which these 
battles for historical legibility have been waged. Imperial formations, writes Ann 
Laura Stoler, are “macropolities whose technologies of rule thrive on the produc-
tion of exceptions and their uneven and changing proliferation.” They “produce 
shadow populations and ever-improved coercive measures to protect the com-
mon good against those deemed threats to it . . . giv[ing] rise both to new zones 
of exclusion and new sites of—and social groups with—privileged exemption.”
10
This theory of the shifting cartography of empire as one built on differential 
forms of exclusion operating through racist social structures begins to help us 
see how SNCC and, increasingly, many others involved in the black freedom 
movement began to see in Palestine “facts . . . that pertain to our struggle here.” 
A critique of the widespread discourse of U.S. support for Palestine’s occupation 
could challenge the staid exceptionalist arguments that the United States and 
Israel were somehow unique in achieving their philosophical commitments and 
political practices of freedom and democracy.
The recently hard-fought struggles of activists, artists, and scholars in many 
locations around the world have revealed where and how these sites of exception 
in Palestine have been produced: in the “permanent state of war” that operates 
through the military and administrative occupation begun in 1967; the limited 
forms of sovereignty for Palestine’s local and “state” governments; the Israeli state’s 
fluid and flexibly produced borders, which Palestinians have no guaranteed sub-
stantive rights to cross; Palestinians’ widespread encampment in military prisons, 
refugee camps, and recently behind the so-called apartheid wall; and the epidemic 
underdevelopment of the Palestinian economy.
11


--- PAGE 90 ---
Representing Permanent War 83
But such sites of exception have routinely been exempt from scrutiny; indeed, 
their form and meaning are still hotly contested in the U.S. public sphere. Even 
within the black freedom movement’s intellectual tradition, with its origins in 
an internationalist Pan-Africanism that had, for over a century, confronted U.S. 
exceptionalism, seeing this kind of imperial formation in Palestine had hardly been 
predetermined. For the most influential thinkers in this tradition, from Blyden 
to Garvey to Makonnen, Du Bois to Robeson to Nkrumah, Palestine was legible 
only through the lens of Jewish Zionism. Jewish Zionism provided an analogy to 
think diasporic black political consciousness rooted in an imaginative articulation 
of ancient scriptural reference and modern nationalist ideology. For Du Bois and 
Robeson, as for a young Stokely Carmichael, Zionism also offered a set of leftist 
economic and political commitments that could be deployed in a shared black-
Jewish struggle against U.S. capitalist hegemony and white supremacy.
With the revelation of genocide conducted in Nazi concentration camps, the 
enmeshing of an internationalist black imaginary and Jewish nationalism became 
even tighter. Jewish settlement in Palestine became the touchstone for Afro-Zion-
ist responses to Auschwitz, even when it ran against the impulses of an anti-
imperialist black imaginary. The National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, for instance, passed a resolution stating that “the valiant struggle 
of the people of Israel for independence serves as an inspiration for all persecuted 
people throughout the world.”
12 Du Bois would pen the impassioned “Case for 
the Jews,” deploying conventional rhetoric in support of a Jewish national home 
that fused a sense of Western civilizational progress with a pointed redress for 
Nazi genocide. Robeson regarded the violent struggles of the Haganah against 
British mandate rule as the culmination of a centuries-old Jewish national libera-
tion movement.
If seeing an imperial formation in Palestine was blocked by this linkage of 
Zionism with Pan-Africanism and the impassioned humanitarian response to 
Nazi genocide, it was further complicated by an emergent “racial liberalism” in 
the United States.
10 For many, World War II effectively laid bare the racial vio-
lence that had structured Western imperial projects in the Americas, Africa, and 
Asia. Auschwitz provided concrete evidence for wide-ranging critiques of moder-
nity, including those offered by Du Bois, Césaire, and Hannah Arendt, who saw 
in the death camps the crude doppelganger of Jim Crow lurking at the inter-
section of racial science, fascism, and industrial capitalism. The publication, in 
1944, of Gunnar Myrdal’s American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern 
Democracy, a mammoth study of U.S. race relations, significantly subsumed these 
antiracist analyses in a U.S. exceptionalist framework. Myrdal’s definitive theory 
of what became known as racial liberalism shaped how race was understood in the 
United States from the end of World War II through the mid-1960s. “At racial 
liberalism’s core was a geopolitical race narrative,” writes Jodi Melamed. “Afri-
can American integration within U.S. society and advancement toward equal-
ity defined through a liberal framework of legal rights and inclusive nationalism 
would establish the moral legitimacy of U.S. global leadership.”
13 In other words,


--- PAGE 91 ---
Black Routes to Islam84
the state could internalize, legislate, and manage antiracism as a means of codify-
ing a singular nationalism in which race purportedly no longer mattered. This 
process was meant to elevate the moral status of the United States above the Euro-
pean colonial powers and, at the same time, formally erase the residues of racial 
violence—made manifest in Auschwitz—that these powers shared.
Under the racial liberal regime, U.S. discourse shaped interpretations of settle-
ment in Palestine as Jewish immigrants “integrated into democracy” under the 
rubric of rights at last guaranteed by an internationally recognized sovereign state. 
Just as “America” could erase the ethnic and national difference of its immigrant 
populations, so, too, could the state of Israel with the possibility of an “open” 
immigration policy—albeit one applied to only a very particular population. The 
revelation of Israel’s “ethnocracy,” that is, its stark refusal of democratic integra-
tion for all Palestine’s residents, including its long-time Arab residents and its sig-
nificant non-European Jewish population, would only gain legibility in the U.S. 
public sphere as the racial liberal regime came under widespread scrutiny.
14
The 1950s offered glimpses of a reconceptualized relationship between the 
black freedom movement and Israel-Palestine, though these possibilities were 
largely underelaborated. The 1955 Asian-African Conference in Bandung, Indo-
nesia, and the 1956 Suez Crisis began to reveal the shared concerns of an Afro-
Arab movement for culture- and class-based forms of international solidarity, with 
Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser instrumental in shaping a broad under-
standing of an anticolonial Pan-Arabism. In a poetic response to the European 
support of Israel against the Egyptian nationalization of the Suez Canal in 1956, 
Du Bois saw Israel’s actions as a hallmark example of the “West,” which “betrays 
its murdered, mocked, and damned.” Nasser, by contrast, waves “that great black 
hand,” which “grasps hard the concentrated hate / of myriad million slaves.”
15
Earlier in the decade, Du Bois had attempted to add an entire paragraph meant to 
add complexity to a chapter in Souls of Black Folk on the forms of exploitation by 
Jewish landowners of black labor that emerged in the post-Reconstruction rural 
South. The paragraph was meant to clarify his “inner sympathy with the Jewish 
people” and “illustrates how easily one slips into unconscious condemnation of a 
whole group.” Du Bois’ editors did not include the paragraph because they saw 
it as a belated “response to changes in the political climate.”
16 Such a paragraph, 
though, might well have opened up an inquiry into the distinction between anti-
Semitism and a critique of Zionism, not to mention the continuities across the 
historical landscape of practices of racialized exploitation operative in Palestine 
and their manifestation in forms of “universal and continuous” war.
Given these multiple blockages, then, we might think of the imperial coor-
dinates in Palestine prior to the late 1960s as an image never substantively cap-
tured by the black freedom movement. If, as Michael Williams has argued, “the 
harmony of interests between Zionism and world imperialism did not become 
apparent until the era of decolonization,” what was the imaginative and rhetorical 
frame that enabled the slow process of bringing Palestine’s sites of exception into 
view in the United States?
17 T o what ends?


--- PAGE 92 ---
Representing Permanent War 85
Ghettos, Prisons, Colonies, and Analogical Force
In April 1967, after having spent nearly two decades writing on the forms of psy-
chic, sexual, and economic violence brought to bear on African Americans, James 
Baldwin published “Negroes Are Anti-Semitic Because They’re Anti-White” in 
the New York Times Magazine. The Times essay, like his first major essay, “The 
Harlem Ghetto,” published nineteen years earlier, maps the relationship between 
racism and ghettoization at a time of heightened tension in Israel-Palestine. “It is 
bitter to watch the Jewish storekeeper locking up his store for the night, and going 
home,” Baldwin writes. “Going, with your money in his pocket, to a clean neigh-
borhood, miles from you, which you will not be allowed to enter.” If, in 1948, Bald-
win saw Jews living in the midst of Harlem’s ghetto, by 1967, Baldwin suggests 
that anti-Semitism emerged because not only had American Jews become assimi-
lated into a national ideology of exclusion predicated on race—the “American 
pattern”—but, in doing so, they had embraced a spatially stratified whiteness.
“The Jew is a white man,” writes Baldwin. Against the backdrop of the urban 
unrest of the 1960s, Baldwin clarifies the differential racialized practice of imagin-
ing social struggle, one that heroifies, the other that criminalizes: “When white 
men rise up against oppression they are heroes: when black men rise they have 
reverted to their native savagery. The uprising in the Warsaw ghetto was not 
described as a riot, nor were the participants maligned as hoodlums: the boys 
and girls in Watts and Harlem are thoroughly aware of this, and it certainly con-
tributes to their attitudes toward the Jews.” The Holocaust-era analogy of Jewish 
resistance, replete with its implications of creeping fascism and genocide in the 
United States, is incommensurable with the differential forms of exclusion that 
distinguish Jews and blacks. “[I]f one is a Negro in Watts or Harlem,” Baldwin 
continues, “and knows why one is there, and knows that one has been sentenced 
to remain there for life, one can’t but look on the American state and the Ameri-
can people as one’s oppressors. For that, after all, is exactly what they are. They 
have corralled you where you are for their ease and their profit, and are doing all 
in their power to prevent you from finding out enough about yourself to be able 
to rejoice in the only life you have.”
18 Just as the ability to identify with the Jew-
ish diaspora through scriptural reference was severely curtailed by the material 
realities of black existence (as Baldwin described in 1948), the spatial logic of the 
ghetto as a corral for a criminalized underclass was made illegible in the context 
of racial liberalism.
A widely mimeographed 1968 statement authored by New York Black Panther 
Zayd Shakur, titled “America is the Prison,” echoes Baldwin’s sentiments: “prisons 
are really an extension of our communities.”
19 Scholarship on criminality, space, 
and political economy has, in recent years, documented the broader trends of the 
process Baldwin and Shakur are capturing. Sociologist Loïc Wacquant has argued 
persuasively that by the end of the 1960s, there emerged a “peculiar institution,” 
which “operated to define, confine, and control African Americans.” Shaped by 
the residues of institutionalized racial slavery, Jim Crow segregation, and ghet-
toized urban space, the late 1960s saw the emergence of a “novel institutional


--- PAGE 93 ---
Black Routes to Islam86
complex formed by the remnants of the dark ghetto and the carceral apparatus”—
what Wacquant terms the “deadly symbiosis” of a “single carceral continuum.”
Wacquant describes the ghetto as a “relation of ethnoracial control and closure 
[which] . . . operates as an ethnoracial prison: it encages a dishonoured category 
and severely curtails the life chances of its members.” Shifts from an urban indus-
try-based economy to one that was decentered and service-based, buttressed by 
a post-1965 boom in laboring-class immigration, made black workers living in 
urban settings functionally obsolete. With the federal passage of civil rights legis-
lation—and the corresponding revelation that such juridical reforms substantively 
did little to alter a landscape built on centuries of institutionalized racism—many 
African Americans saw fit to take to the streets, often sparking violent contesta-
tions with law enforcement and property owners. But “as the walls of the ghetto 
shook and threatened to crumble,” Wacquant writes, “the walls of the prison were 
correspondingly extended, enlarged and fortified, and ‘confinement of differen-
tiation,’ aimed at keeping a group apart . . . gained primacy over ‘confinement of 
safety’ and ‘confinement of authority.’” De jure segregation was outlawed, but de
facto segregation became entrenched: the ghetto became more like a prison and 
the prison became more like a ghetto.
20
At the time, this race-making transformation of space became understood in 
terms of the “colonial analogy,” a rhetoric meant to contest the racial liberal dis-
course that had previously rendered these processes invisible or exceptional. This 
rhetoric drew in part on the Comintern theorization of the “Negro problem” in 
the 1920s, which itself had been attuned to the Pan-Africanist organizing of Mar-
cus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association. As early as 1962, Harold 
Cruse argued that “the revolutionary initiative passed to the colonial world and 
in the United States is passing to the Negro.” In much of his work in the 1960s, 
Cruse saw in African American cultural politics the potential to translate into 
the U.S. context the organizational, philosophical, and rhetorical effectivity of 
decolonization and anticolonial nationalism gleaned from Third World liberation 
struggles. In 1972’s Racial Oppression in America, sociologist Robert Blauner con-
fronted the facile liberal multiculturalist arguments for pluralism and assimilation 
offered by the likes of Nathan Glazer by framing his scholarly inquiry into U.S. 
racial formation with a theory of internal colonialism. Jack O’Dell, the longtime 
coeditor of the magazine Freedomways, who would lead delegations of black lead-
ers in solidarity with Palestine to the West Bank, Egypt, and Lebanon in the late 
1970s and early 1980s, stressed that black proletarian life was shaped by a “special 
variety of colonialism.” In mid-1968, Eldridge Cleaver began his discussion of 
the “land question” by asserting, “The first thing that has to be realized is that 
it is a reality when people say that there’s a ‘black colony’ and a ‘white mother 
country.’” In an evocative analogy, Cleaver then draws on the “parallel situation of 
the Jews at the time of the coming of Theodore Herzl”: “The Jewish people were 
prepared psychologically to take desperate and unprecedented action. They saw 
themselves faced with an immediate disastrous situation. Genocide was staring 
them in the face and this common threat galvanized them into common action.


--- PAGE 94 ---
Representing Permanent War 87
Psychologically, black people in America have precisely the same outlook as the 
Jews had then.”21
Of those works elaborating the “colonial analogy,” perhaps the most widely 
read and regarded was Stokely Carmichael and Charles Hamilton’s book Black
Power: The Politics of Liberation in America. Black Power was published in Sep-
tember 1967 in the midst of Carmichael’s wide-ranging tour of London, Cuba, 
Moscow, Beijing, Vietnam, Algeria, and Guinea, where Carmichael would meet 
the likes of Shirley Graham Du Bois, Sekou T oure, Kwame Nkrumah, and his 
future partner, the exiled South African singer, Miriam Makeba. The book took 
up Fanon’s argument in Wretched of the Earth to assert that institutional racism 
in the United States “has another name”: colonialism. Black people formed an 
internal colony in the United States, and the first step toward black liberation was 
to emulate the decolonizing struggles under way across the Third World. Coun-
tering Myrdal’s thesis, Carmichael and Hamilton “put it another way”: “There is 
no ‘American dilemma’ because black people in this country form a colony, and it 
is not in the interest of the colonial power to liberate them.”
Carmichael and Hamilton continue: “Obviously, the analogy is not perfect.” 
After all, there is no geographically distant “Mother Country” from which colonial 
sovereignty emanates; nor are raw materials produced in the colony and exported 
to the “Mother Country.” What concerns Carmichael and Hamilton, though, 
and what preoccupies Cruse, Blaune, O’Dell, and Cleaver is “not rhetoric . . . 
or geography” but the “objective relationship” of blacks to racist rule.
22 Such ana-
lytical limitations of the colonial analogy appear throughout discussions of the 
relationship between U.S. race-making and the structures of global capital, limita-
tions that rightly focus attention on the contextually specific forms of colonizing 
dominance and subjection, anticolonial resistance and struggle in “actually exist-
ing colonialisms.” T o elide these material specificities is itself to perform a certain 
epistemological colonizing violence.
And yet analogies have extraordinary rhetorical force precisely because their 
form keeps these limitations in full view. An analogy can never be “perfect” in any 
simple sense. The “likeness” or “parallel” of Zionism to Pan-Africanism, Warsaw 
to Watts, the Jewish Holocaust to racial slavery, the wandering Jew to the black 
diaspora: these analogies juxtapose unique historical formations, ideological con-
cepts, or geographies, which are then linked together via the radically unstable 
“like” or “as.” With an analogy, one cannot escape difference. That is both its 
danger and its force. As a rhetorical figure it is at its core a difference always on the
verge of collapse into an identity, one always socially produced under contextually 
specific conditions always on the verge of erasure. These indelible conditions hold 
an analogy together and produce its effectivity as an articulation.
In this way, the colonial analogy builds on the many analogical constructions 
already discussed, operating as a rhetorical and geographic figure to reveal the 
contradictions of post–civil rights U.S. imperial formation. Edward Said persua-
sively argued that dominant forms of colonial discourse perform an imaginative 
geography that maps a coherent, rational, liberal, modern West “by dramatizing


--- PAGE 95 ---
Black Routes to Islam88
the distance and difference between what is close to it and what is far away.” 
The colonial analogy, by contrast, has provided scholars, artists, and activists 
of the black freedom movement an imaginative terrain to perform a radically 
contestatory remapping of geography. The rhetoric of colonialism gave a name 
to the actually existing inequalities the civil rights legislative process was seem-
ingly meant to ameliorate. For many in the black freedom movement, the uneven 
development of deindustrialized urban space had its representational correlates in 
other colonized sites in the Third World including, significantly, Israel-Palestine 
after the June War.
“Test Your Knowledge”
Published in mid-August, 1967, “Third World Round Up: The Palestine Prob-
lem: T est Your Knowledge” initiated a long process of reframing the question of 
Palestine as one of black liberation. Its publication—and widespread condem-
nation—emerged during the tumultuous months of an extraordinary historical 
transformation in movements for liberation. In a very short period of time, a con-
fluence of events and their discursive residues renewed and revised an imaginative 
geography first broached in the interwar years—by the likes of Robeson, Bunche, 
Du Bois, and others on the Left—that connected struggles for black freedom in 
the United States with decolonizing movements around the world. In April, Mar-
tin Luther King, Jr., delivered his “Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break the Silence” 
speech at New York City’s Riverside Church, for the first time depicting the “very 
obvious and almost facile connection” between struggles for racial equality at 
home and struggles against the unjust war being conducted by the United States 
in Vietnam. Several days later, the New York Times Magazine published Baldwin’s 
“Negroes are Anti-Semitic Because They’re Anti-White.” On May 2, Bobby Seale 
and thirty members of the Black Panther Party sported guns and uniforms and 
staged a major protest at the California State Capitol in Sacramento. Later that 
month, SNCC elected a new chairman, H. Rap Brown, declared itself a human 
rights organization, and redirected its purpose to “encourage and support the lib-
eration struggles against colonialism, racism, and economic exploitation” around 
the world. The months of June, July, and August saw the widespread mimeo-
graphed circulation of Huey P . Newton’s theory of permanent war “In Defense 
of Self Defense.” At the end of August, the National Conference for New Poli-
tics in Chicago inadvertently continued the process of disarticulating interracial 
coalitions for social change. Harold Cruse released Crisis of the Negro Intellectual.
Some 164 “civil disorders” in twenty-eigth U.S. cities transformed U.S. urban 
and suburban landscapes. And FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover received approval 
to redirect the bureau’s Counter Intelligence Program to operate against “black 
nationalist, hate-type organizations,” launching a “secret war against Black Power 
activists . . . that featured the systematic, illegal harassment, imprisonment, and, 
at times, death, of black militants.”
23


--- PAGE 96 ---
Representing Permanent War 89
SNCC’s “Third World Round Up: The Palestine Problem: T est Your Knowl-
edge” is clearly informed by all this. However, most responses to “The Palestine 
Problem” have focused narrowly on whether the text was deploying anti-Semitic 
tropes as well as its political ill advisability. The Times devoted an entire front-page 
article to “The Palestine Problem,” titled “S.N.C.C. Charges Israel Atrocities: 
Black Power Group Attacks Zionism as Conquering Arabs by ‘Massacre.’” T racing 
the legacy of the shift in SNCC activism from domestic broad coalition-building 
to Black Power internationalism as routed through Fanon and Malcolm X, the 
article does not take up whether such charges were indeed warranted or accurate. 
Instead, it eulogizes a prior time of solidarity as it chastises SNCC for its “hate-
filled” rhetoric. “It is a tragedy that the civil rights movement is being degraded 
by the injection of hatred and racism in reverse,” noted the general counsel of the 
Anti-Defamation League. The next day, the Times printed a story dedicated to 
recounting a series of “angry statements” by “civil rights leaders” against SNCC’s 
“Israel Stand,” running the gamut of representatives of the fracturing black-Jewish 
coalition. Martin Luther King, Jr., declined to comment specifically on SNCC’s 
article, saying only that he was “strongly opposed to anti-Semitism and ‘anything 
that does not signify my concern for humanity for the Jewish people.’”
The secondary literature discussing “The Palestine Problem” is likewise preoc-
cupied by charges of anti-Semitism and the ostensibly fraught political efficacy 
of publishing such a polemic. Rarely is the article treated with a substantive read-
ing. The fullest has been in Kwame T uré, né Stokely Carmichael’s recently pub-
lished autobiography, Ready for Revolution. According to T uré, who had just been 
replaced by H. Rap Brown as SNCC chairman when the newsletter appeared, the 
document originated in a reading group organized by “one courageous activist 
sister.” (The origin story of the article is considerably more complex than T uré 
describes here, as will be discussed below.) T uré refuses to refer to this organizer 
by name, though other accounts suggest her name was Ethel Minor, an activist 
involved in Latin American liberationist organizing and the Nation of Islam. The 
reading group convened first in the wake of Malcolm X’s assassination in 1965 
and proceeded to read and discuss one book a month over the course of two 
years. The reading list, according to T uré, included “not just pro-Palestinian or 
anti-Zionist materials” but “Jewish writers who, from the perspective of the moral 
traditions of Jewish thought, opposed the militaristic expansionism of Zionist 
policies.” They also read writings from “Herzl, Ben-Gurion, Begin, documents 
from the Stern Gang, etc., etc.” The turning point for the reading group was 
realizing “the close military, economic, and political alliance between the Israeli 
government and the racist apartheid regime in South Africa.” “I have to say,” T uré 
avers, “discovering that the government of Israel was maintaining such a long, 
cozy, and warm relationship with the worst enemies of black people came as a 
real shock. A kind of betrayal. And, hey, we weren’t supposed to even talk about 
this? C’mon.”
27 T uré claims that drafting “The Palestine Problem” with Minor 
was his last act as chairman, meant primarily to take the pulse of SNCC’s leader-
ship through “the form of sharp questions against a background of incontestable


--- PAGE 97 ---
Black Routes to Islam90
historical facts.” The systematic study was “short-circuited,” though, when the 
newsletter was handed over to mainstream journalists. T uré concludes that “had 
the process not been short-circuited, I’m sure the overwhelming sentiment would 
have been to make a statement, a moral statement, on justice for the Palestinian 
people while trying hard not to offend or alienate our Jewish friends on a per-
sonal level. Such a statement, one intended for public distribution, would almost 
certainly have been more nuanced. In properly diplomatic language, which the 
talking paper definitely was not. But you crazy if you think the language would 
have made any difference politically. This was an orchestrated declaration of war, 
Jack.”
24
The “talking paper” was comprised of thirty-two “documented facts,” two 
archival photographs, and two cartoons. It is clear from the headnote that the 
piece serves as a knowledge project meant to “shed some light” on the conditions 
of the decolonizing world in ways that “pertain to our struggle here.” Its “docu-
mented facts” suggest that such knowledge is based in objective historical reality, 
and, when phrased in terms of a “test,” complete with interspersed headers repeat-
ing the phrase “Do you know,” these facts do complex rhetorical work. The arti-
cle’s readership, directly addressed through the second person “you,” is presumed 
unaware of these facts as it condemns the “white American press” for obfuscating 
the “true story about world events in which America is involved.” Each fact is 
phrased in terms of a question. With the present-tense “do you know”; however, 
each fact demands that not only are these “documented facts” crucial for framing 
an understanding of the post-June War conjuncture but one either “knows” or 
one does not.
While the questions are generally organized chronologically, by breaking each 
“fact” into its own distinct number and juxtaposing these questions with pho-
tographs and cartoons, this formulation captures the synchrony of historical 
knowledge. The post-June War occupation is represented as the culmination of 
a trajectory begun in 1897, when “Zionism, a world-wide nationalistic Jewish 
movement,” formulated a program to “create for the Jewish People a home in Pal-
estine according to Public law.” This program, according to the article, received 
“maximum help, support, and encouragement from Great Britain, the United 
States, and other white Western colonial governments.” With 1917’s Balfour 
Declaration, Britain subsequently “took control of Palestine,” creating a “world 
problem.” But, according to the article, there were very few “native” Palestine 
Jews, and only 56,000 Jews in total, most of who had recently immigrated to the 
British colony. By 1947, when “Britain passed the Palestine problem on to the 
United Nations,” “Zionists owned no more than 6 per-cent of the total land area 
in Palestine” and had a population roughly half the size of the Arab Palestinians. 
The “formal beginning of the Arab-Israeli War” commenced after the “formal 
end of British rule” on May 15, 1948, when “Arab States had to send in their 
poorly trained and ill equipped armies against the superior western trained and 
supported Israeli forces, in a vain effort to protect Arab lives, property and Arab 
rights to the land of Palestine.”


--- PAGE 98 ---
Representing Permanent War 91
Question 16 of “The Palestine Problem” accuses “Zionist terror gangs . . . 
[of having] deliberately slaughtered and mutilated women, children and men, 
thereby causing the unarmed Arabs to panic, flee and leave their homes.” Ques-
tion 20 illustrates the polarizing vote in the UN for the 1947 Partition Plan, 
asserting, in all capital letters, that “ISRAEL WAS PLANTED AT THE CROSS-
ROADS OF ASIA AND AFRICA WITHOUT THE FREE APPROVAL OF 
ANY MIDDLE-EASTERN, ASIAN OR AFRICAN COUNTRY!” Questions 
25 and 26 provide evidence of racist practices within the post-1948 state of Israel, 
where Arabs are “segregate[d] . . . , live in ‘Security Zones,’ under Martial Law, 
are not allowed to travel freely within Israel, and are the victims of discrimina-
tion in education, jobs etc.” Further, “dark skinned Jews from the Middle-East 
and North Africa are also second-class citizens in Israel, that the color line puts 
them in inferior position to the white, European Jews.” The last two questions 
bring to the fore the perceived relationship between Israel and African neocolo-
nialism. Question 31 asserts that not only were “the famous European Jews, the 
Rothschilds” involved “in the original conspiracy with the British” to found Israel 
but they “ALSO CONTROL MUCH OF AFRICA’S MINERAL WEALTH.” 
Question 32 contends that Israel has “gone into African countries, tried to exploit 
and control their economies, and sabotaged African liberation movements, along 
with any other African movements or projects opposed by the United States and 
other white western powers.”
Many of these “documented facts” have been corroborated by subsequent rep-
utable scholarly research, often located within the Israeli academy; others stretch 
the historical archive, while others are built on unsubstantiated myth. That the 
article is silent on the documents from which these facts were drawn—do they 
emerge from the systematic course of comparative reading led by Ethel Minor, 
as suggested by T uré, were they hastily cobbled together at the last minute, or do 
they come from another source?—leaves open the question of what constitutes 
“proper” knowledge of Israel-Palestine in the United States.
In fact, the article is strikingly similar to a pamphlet prepared in the immedi-
ate aftermath of the June War at Kuwaiti professor Fayez Sayegh’s newly founded 
PLO Research Center in Beirut. Sayegh was particularly instrumental in passing 
the 1975 UN resolution condemning Zionism as a “form of racism and racial 
discrimination.” His post–June War pamphlet, titled “Do You Know? T wenty 
Basic Facts About the Palestine Problem” takes identical form as “The Palestine 
Problem,” complete with the repeated question “Do You Know?” Fully sixteen 
of the pamphlet’s facts appear verbatim (or nearly so) in the SNCC article. And 
near-identical repetitions of SNCC’s “Palestine Problem” (or Sayegh’s “Do You 
Know”) were produced in the immediate aftermath of the October 1973 War in 
the Black Panther Intercommunal News Service (under the editorial eyes of David 
Graham Du Bois, W . E. B. Du Bois ’ stepson) and are said to be drawn from 
the Middle East Coordinating Committee’s “Did You Know? . . . Facts about the 
Middle East.”


--- PAGE 99 ---
Black Routes to Islam92
The textual affinities of “The Palestine Problem” to Sayegh’s pamphlet (and the 
Panthers’ repetitions with a difference) are obscured in tales of its origin. But since 
circulation of something like Sayegh’s pamphlet had little access to a broad U.S. 
public sphere, we can see how SNCC’s article transformed the rhetorical landscape 
in its ability to transpose and supplement a Palestinian counterhistory through its 
connection to the U.S. Third World Left. It likewise relentlessly asserts that what 
is being depicted is knowable at all, should be known, is required knowledge for 
apprehending the present, and, even more, that it is in fact knowledge at all. The 
effect was to present knowledge of occupation and confinement across which the 
black freedom movement could begin to draw analogies, alliances, and allegiances 
that were deepened in the years to come.
The visual elements of the textual affinities of “The Palestine Problem” make 
these imaginative linkages clear. One such linkage is the structural one between 
the genocidal violence of the Nazi Holocaust and the foundation of the State 
of Israel. The typical portrayal of this relationship has considered the latter the 
ethical and just solution to the former. An archival photograph of a dozen men 
kneeling with their hands on their heads and guns blazing behind them cautions 
otherwise. The photograph’s caption reads, “Gaza Massacres, 1956,” a reference 
most likely to the massacre at Khan Yunis during the opening moments of Israel’s 
1956 incursion into the Sinai peninsula. “Zionists lined up Arab victims and shot 
them in the back in cold blood,” the caption continues. “This is the Gaza Strip, 
Palestine, not Dachau, Germany.” Juxtaposing these two frames makes legible a 
counterhistorical structural linkage, one that sees the genocidal violence of World 
War II echoed by the Israeli state. Just as Baldwin’s citation of the Warsaw Ghetto 
was a lever to distinguish how one understands rebellion, Dachau’s metonymic 
status condenses the racial violence practiced across the Nazi concentration camps 
and intimates that the conditions under Israeli rule are, at times, some of its most 
pernicious effects.
Another structural linkage is captured in SNCC artist Kofi Bailey’s cartoon 
portrait of Israeli minister of defense Moshe Dayan. Dayan had achieved heroic 
status in the U.S. for orchestrating much of the June War and bringing the West-
ern Wall under Israeli sovereignty by “uniting” Jerusalem; one comedian joked, 
for instance, that “Dayan should be hired to put a quick end to the fighting in 
Vietnam.” For example, an image circulated that depicted Dayan with U.S. dol-
lar signs on his epaulets. Some have accurately interpreted this caricature as anti-
Semitic, suggesting it plays on the stereotype of Jewish financial dominance; but 
it also condenses the close material linkages between the U.S. and Israeli militaries 
described elsewhere in the article.
“The Palestine Problem’s” most complex visual image is another image by Kofi 
Bailey that juxtaposes three forms of articulation, linking a history of U.S. racial 
violence, imperial military engagements in Vietnam and the Arab world, and a 
broad Afro-Arab struggle for freedom. At the top of the image is a disembodied 
hand with a six-pointed Jewish Star of David overlaying a dollar sign. Charges 
of anti-Semitism have been brought against this image as well, though given the


--- PAGE 100 ---
Representing Permanent War 93
Dayan cartoon, one might understand this juxtaposition to also signify U.S. finan-
cial support for the Israeli military. The hand grasps the middle of a rope dangling 
downward on both sides. At one end is the likeness of Egyptian president Gamal 
Abdel Nasser drawn from the chest up, donning a dark suit jacket, white shirt, 
and tie. During the high point of Third World nonalignment, manifesting itself 
in the 1955 Bandung Conference, Nasser consistently advocated for Palestin-
ian freedom from imperial rule as part of a larger Pan-Arab nationalism. His 
likeness thus condensed “an emotionally explosive convergence of anti-colonial 
defiance and global racial consciousness.” At the rope’s other end, also depicted 
from the chest up in similar garb, is Muhammad Ali, the U.S. heavyweight box-
ing champion, whose embrace of the Nation of Islam and concomitant antiwar 
stance had brought his boxing career under fire. In 1966, Ali had refused induc-
tion into the U.S. Army. On June 20, 1967, Ali was convicted of draft evasion, 
sentenced to prison pending numerous appeals (including to the U.S. Supreme 
Court, which unanimously overruled the conviction), and was barred from box-
ing. This illustration of a double lynching imaginatively links the fates of Nasser 
and Ali, cast as they are as twinned victims of a common racially coded form of 
Jim Crow–style extralegal violence. In the background of the lynching is a disem-
bodied dark-skinned arm bent at the elbow, labeled “THIRD WORLD,” wield-
ing a scimitar—itself commonly perceived as rooted in Persian history—labeled 
“LIBERATION MOVEMENT .” The force of Third World struggle emanates 
from the Middle East, the image suggests, with transnational repercussions; its 
horizon sees the liberation of the Arab world, African Americans, and practicing 
Muslims from the intertwined violence of the U.S. and Israeli states.
Understood in this way, “The Palestine Problem” deploys a variety of strate-
gies, transpositions, and reproductions in its attempt to represent the material, 
ideological, and epistemological linkages between struggles for black liberation in 
the United States and the historically embedded colonial conditions in Palestine. 
As a Black Power intervention, it reveals such linkages on the terrain of a much 
larger decolonizing knowledge project. Its reception reveals the fault lines of a 
dawning post–civil rights public sphere that continues to haunt contemporary 
U.S. engagements with Israel-Palestine, one still structured by “prolonged conflict 
and permanent state of war.”
Given our contemporary moment’s resurgence of discourses of permanent war, 
SNCC’s article leaves us with a series of pressing questions about historiography, 
representation, and racial justice movements. How might we begin to articulate 
and disrupt contemporary modes of race-making that link, for instance, mass 
incarceration in the United States and Gaza’s open-air prison, the militarizing 
of the U.S.-Mexico border and Israel’s “separation barrier,” or the production 
of a constellation of shared racialized figures organized under the instrumental 
category “Islamofascism”? What would such performances of imaginative geog-
raphy look like and how and to whom would they be legible? How would these 
reconfigure the political? SNCC’s article does extraordinary work to open up 
these questions for us but it hardly answers them. The coordinates have clearly


--- PAGE 101 ---
Black Routes to Islam94
changed, and we presume otherwise at our peril. Perhaps, then, the notion of 
“tragedy” used in 1967 to describe SNCC’s article is apt but in a much different 
sense. Perhaps the narrative logic of tragedy, as explored by anthropologist David 
Scott in conceiving of the global terrain and broad historical sweep of movements 
for black freedom, helps us “reorient our understanding of the politics and ethics 
of the postcolonial present.” The tragic narrative of colonial enlightenment is in 
this sense not “a flaw to be erased or overcome . . . [but] a permanent legacy that 
has set the conditions in which we make of ourselves what we make and which 
therefore demands constant renegotiation and readjustment.”
25 The emergence 
of “Black Power’s Palestine” at the end of the civil rights era clearly makes such 
demands on us in the present.
Notes
 1. Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, “Third World Round-up: The Palestine 
Problem: T est Your Knowledge,” SNCC Newsletter 1, no. 2 (July–August 1967): 5–6.
 2. Quoted in Brent Hayes Edwards, “Late Romance,” in Next to the Color Line: Gender, 
Sexuality, and W . E. B. Du Bois, ed. Susan Gillman and Alys Eve Weinbaum (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2007), 124–49, 130.
 3. “In Defense of Self-Defense.” The Black Panther, June 20, 1967.
 4. Michel Foucault, Society Must Be Defended”: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1975–1976,
trans. David Macey (New York: Picador, 2003), 46–47.
 5. Ibid.
 6. Ibid., 282.
 7. Randall E. Auxier, “Foucault, Dewey, and the History of the Present,” The Journal of
Speculative Philosophy 16, no 2 (200): 75–102.
 8. Michel Foucault, “T ruth and Power,” in Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other 
Writings, 1972–1977 (New York: Pantheon, 1980), 109–33.
 9. Nikhil Pal Singh distinguishes the “long civil rights era” from what he calls the dominant 
national narrative of the “short civil rights era,” 1955–1965. The short civil rights nar-
rative narrowly focuses on a liberal capitalist, domestic, and integrationist struggle, con-
tained in the U.S. South, and uncritically celebrates the federal passage of Civil Rights and 
Voting Rights legislation. The narrative of the long civil rights era, by contrast, emerges 
as early as the 1930s and continues into the 1970s, has an internationalist lens shaped 
by anticolonial, liberationist, and anticapitalist movements, and views struggles for black 
freedom in the United States as part of a broader global struggle. Nikhil Pal Singh, Black
is a Country: Race and the Unfinished Struggle for Democracy (Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 2004).
 10. Ann Laura Stoler, “On Degrees of Imperial Sovereignty” Public Culture 18, no. 1 (2006): 
125–47.
 11. The literature on Palestine’s sites of exception is vast. Achille Mbembe’s reworking of Fou-
cault performs the extraordinary intellectual labor of theorizing these sites of exception as 
“the most accomplished form” of late modern colonial occupation, with antecedents in 
racial slavery and Nazi genocide. Mbembe draws directly from ethnographic accounts of 
conditions in the Gaza Strip. See Achille Mbembe, “Necropolitics,” Public Culture 15, no. 
1 (2003): 11–40.
 12. Quoted in Melani McAlister, Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the 
Middle East, 1945–2000 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 89.


--- PAGE 102 ---
Representing Permanent War 95
 13. Jodi Melamed, “The Spirit of Neoliberalism: From Racial Liberalism to Neoliberal Mul-
ticulturalism,” Social T ext 24, no. 4 (2006): 1–24.
 14. See Oren Yiftachel, Ethnocracy: Land and Identity Politics in Israel/Palestine (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2006).
 15. Melani McAlister, Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East, 
1945–2000 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 85.
 16. Qtd. in “Note on the T ext,” W . E. B. Du Bois, The Soulds of Black Folk (New York: Vin-
tage, 1990), 220.
 17. Michael W . Williams, “Pan-Africanism and Zionism: The Delusion of Comparability,” 
Journal of Black Studies 21, no. 3 (1991), 348–71.
 18. James Baldwin, “Negroes are Anti-Semitic Because They’re Anti-White,” New York Times
Magazine (April 9, 1967) 27, 93–96.
 19. Zayd Shakur, “America is the Prison,” in Off the Pigs!: The History and Literature of the 
Black Panther Party, ed. G. Louis Heath (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow, 1976).
 20. Loïc Wacquant, “From Slavery to Mass Incarceration: Rethinking the ‘Race’ Question in 
the U.S.,” New Left Review 13 (2001): 41–60.
 21. Eldridge Cleaver, “The Land Question and Black Liberation,” in Eldridge Cleaver: Post-
Prison Writings and Speeches, ed. Robert Scheer (New York: Random House, 1969).
 22. Stokely Carmichael and Charles V . Hamilton, Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in 
America (New York: Vintage, 1967).
 23. See Peniel E. Joseph, Waiting ‘Til the Midnight Hour: A Narrative History of Black Power
(New York: Henry Holt, 2006).
 24. Stokely Carmichael, with Ekwueme Michael Thelwell Ready for Revolution: The Life and 
Struggles of Stokely Carmichael (Kwame Ture) (New York: Scribner, 2003).
 25. David Scott, Conscripts of Modernity: The Tragedy of Colonial Enlightenment  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2004).


--- PAGE 103 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 104 ---
P ART  II
Solidarity and 
Resistance


--- PAGE 105 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 106 ---
C HAPTER  6
From Harlem to Algiers
Transnational Solidarities 
between the African American 
Freedom Movement and 
Algeria, 1962–1978
Samir Meghelli
Consciousness of Africa mounted again as more and more African nations regained their 
independence. The inhuman atrocities of the French colonialists against the Algerian 
people, who were struggling valiantly for their independence, aroused widespread 
sympathy and fraternal support among the people of Harlem.
1
—Richard B. Moore, “Africa Conscious Harlem”
We saw Algeria in terms of our pasts and what our futures might be. I saw, see, and am 
feeling it that way now. And what I write is an attempt to make that experience more 
available to me, to you, to us.
2
—Michele Russell, one of the many young African Americans 
who attended the 1969 Pan-African Cultural Festival in Algeria
In 1959, African American intellectual and activist Hoyt Fuller made 
a brief stopover in Algeria on his way to visit the newly independent African 
republic of Guinea. In an excerpt from a journal of his experiences, he recounts, 
“Algeria was an armed camp, with the French colonial masters firmly in control. 
Soldiers and gendarmes were everywhere, arms at the ready, and many of the pub-
lic buildings were ‘protected’ from guerilla assault by layers of barbed wire.” He 
continues, “I had entered the city from the liner, Foch, with two young Africans, 
one from Abidjan, the other from Brazzaville, and we had moved about with 
relative freedom until we reached the famed Casbah, the incredible labyrinthine 
quarter made famous over the world by Hollywood’s film, Algiers, starring Charles 
Boyer and Hedy Lamarr. The armed guard at the entrance to the Casbah politely


--- PAGE 107 ---
Black Routes to Islam100
but firmly turned the three black visitors away, offering no explanation beyond 
the simple statement that entrance was forbidden.” After his two African compan-
ions decided to return to the passenger ship, Fuller again attempted to enter the 
Casbah by himself, this time successfully so. As he explains, “In Paris, an Algerian 
friend had given me the name of a young freedom fighter in the Casbah and I set 
out to locate him.” Fuller eventually found this young freedom fighter and his 
comrades, with whom he “drank coffee and talked of African liberation. After-
wards,” he relays, “they walked with me down a twisting ‘street’ to the entrance 
above the great plaza. We said goodby. As I strolled out, a guard stopped me. He 
asked me for my papers and I showed him my American passport. What was I 
doing in the Casbah? he asked. Didn’t I know that it was closed to tourists and 
that it was dangerous? ‘But, M’sieur,’ I said to him, mustering my best French, 
‘I am a black man. The Algerians have no need to harm me. We are fighting the 
same war.’”
3
Exactly ten years later, Hoyt Fuller, who, by that time, was editor of the impor-
tant Negro Digest (which he renamed Black World shortly thereafter), returned 
to Algeria for the historic First Pan-African Cultural Festival, alongside more 
than 10,000 official delegates and visitors from more than thirty African nations, 
North and South America, the Caribbean, Asia, and Europe, including politi-
cians, musicians, writers, scholars, filmmakers, actors, visual artists, and libera-
tion movement leaders, as well as many others who held personal, professional, 
or political interests in the realization of a liberated and united Africa.
4 And, as 
many attendees noted, there were few others places that would have seemed as 
appropriate for such an event as Algeria. Making this point rather explicitly, Afri-
can American poet T ed Joans wrote, “Algeria, the largest country in North Africa. 
Algeria, the country that fought the enslaver and won. Algeria, the revolutionary 
stronghold of African nationalists. With these and many other black references, 
Algeria was ‘the place’ to stage the First Pan African Cultural Festival.”
5
Indeed, in the decade leading up to the 1969 festival, Algeria became a pow-
erful symbol of revolutionary struggle and was looked to as a model of revo-
lutionary success for radicals around the world. Through widespread favorable 
coverage of its revolution and independence in the African American press, the 
many local screenings of the popular film The Battle of Algiers, and Frantz Fanon’s 
writings, Algeria came to hold a critical place in the iconography, rhetoric, and 
ideology of key branches of the African American freedom movement. By 1959, 
when Hoyt Fuller noted that the African American freedom movement and the 
Algerian independence movement were fighting “the same war,” African Ameri-
cans had, for a long time, been identifying closely with Africa and African anti-
colonial movements. As historian James Meriwether notes, this trend “can [at 
least] be traced back to black America’s responses to the Italo-Ethiopian War, 
which had energized widespread African American interest in the continent and 
had broadened many black Americans’ notions of ethnicity to include contem-
porary Africans.”
6 Beginning during this period, greater numbers of African 
Americans sought to frame transnational identities for themselves, coming to 
an understanding of the connectedness of their struggle for civil rights and the


--- PAGE 108 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 101
struggles of African nations for independence. Meriwether explains, “to advance 
their objectives, African Americans protested, lobbied, and worked with national 
governments and international organizations, thereby internationally politicizing 
their expanded constructions of identity.”
7
The recent body of works on the international and transnational dimensions 
of African American radicalism during the Long Civil Rights Movement and 
Black Power era has had such an impact that one historian has suggested that it 
“forms by itself a new canon and direction in the history of African Americans.”
8
The First Pan-African Cultural Festival of 1969, held in Algeria, represents an 
important moment in the history of African and African American political link-
ages but also begs larger historical questions about Algeria’s role as a site and 
symbol of revolutionary significance. And yet, Algeria is curiously absent from the 
secondary historical literature—when discussed, it has only been cursorily so.
Thus, the aim of this chapter is to trace the emergence of transnational soli-
darities between the African American freedom movement and Algeria during 
the Civil Rights and Black Power eras and to examine the place of Algeria in the 
African American political imaginary, using the 1969 Pan-African Festival as a 
moment through which to understand how these linkages were forged, tested, 
and contested. The story opens in the late 1950s and early 1960s when African 
Americans began drawing parallels between Algeria’s revolution for independence 
from France and their own freedom movement in the United States. African 
Americans strengthened their critique of a racist American society in their com-
parisons between French colonialism in Algeria and American segregation, and 
between the necessity for Algerian and African American armed resistance. But 
these linkages took on new meaning as African American radicals began traveling 
to and, in some cases, living in, Algeria, collaborating officially and unofficially 
with the Algerian government and the many revolutionary movements housed 
there. By the mid-1970s, however, Algeria had fallen from its position as a site 
and symbol of Third World solidarity. As Algeria found itself facing an increas-
ingly dire economic situation, and as the African American freedom movement 
struggled to maintain momentum in the face of ever more severe repression by 
American authorities, transnational solidarity became less and less plausible. Ulti-
mately, symbolic and practical ties between African America and Algeria were 
severed on account of Cold War geopolitics and economic interests, coupled with 
a mutual lack of understanding between African Americans and Algerians of the 
concrete challenges each other faced.
“Every Brother on a Rooftop Can Quote Fanon”: 
Algeria in the African American Imaginary
In October of 1962, shortly after Algeria had emerged victorious from a long and 
brutal revolution for independence, Ahmed Ben Bella, one of the leaders of the 
revolutionary National Liberation Front (FLN) and the newly appointed presi-
dent of Algeria, made his way to New York City where he attended the United 
Nations’ induction ceremony for his young nation. During his stay at the Barclay


--- PAGE 109 ---
Black Routes to Islam102
Hotel in midtown Manhattan, Ben Bella granted an exclusive, one-hour interview 
to Charles P . Howard, an accredited United Nations correspondent who played 
an important role in raising awareness about the connections between the situ-
ation of African Americans and that of oppressed people throughout the world 
through his informative articles in Muhammad Speaks, the nationally distributed 
weekly paper of the Nation of Islam.
Ben Bella, the subject of Howard’s interview, received front-page coverage in 
Muhammad Speaks—his picture was accompanied by the headline: “Drive On T o 
Free All Africa!” This is significant and symbolic in that, in part as a result of the 
relatively widespread coverage of the Algerian revolution and its leaders (like Ben 
Bella) in the Black press, Algeria became firmly linked to the discourse around 
the African American freedom movement. This kind of coverage placed Algeria 
alongside the Mau Mau rebellion and Ghanaian independence as helping keep 
issues of armed struggle and transnational political linkages in the minds and 
hearts of the African American masses, intellectuals, and activists.
9 As Muham-
mad Speaks was the most widely circulating African American paper for much of 
the 1960s,
10 it became an important appendage to the African American freedom 
movement, and especially the effort to internationalize that struggle and forge 
solidarities with African independence movements. Nearly every issue carried 
news and information on the state of African affairs and the Muslim world. And, 
as one historian has noted, the Black press often had greater reach than the strict 
circulation numbers reveal, for papers “passed from family to family and could be 
found in barbershops, churches, lodges, and pool parlors,” just as “their contents 
passed by word of mouth among those who could not read.”
11
Ben Bella’s visit to the United States received coverage in the mainstream 
American press as well, as the New York Times ran, among other articles on Ben 
Bella’s visit, one on his historic meeting with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Meeting 
at the Barclay Hotel, Dr. King and Ben Bella spoke with one another, with the 
aid of a translator, for nearly two hours. The New York Times headline read, “Ben 
Bella Links T wo ‘Injustices,’” along with the subheading, “T ells Dr. King Segre-
gation Is Related to Colonialism.” Thus, chief among the issues they discussed 
was the nature of the relationship between the segregation that African Ameri-
cans were facing, the colonialism that the Algerian people faced under French 
rule, and Europe’s continuing colonial and neocolonial domination of much of 
Africa and of the so-called Third World.
12 Arriving at a press conference follow-
ing their meeting, Dr. King was described as having “emerged sounding more 
like Malcolm X than the civil rights leader reporters knew.”
13 King explained 
that “Ben Bella had made it ‘very clear’ that . . . he believed there was a direct 
relationship between the injustices of colonialism and the injustices of segrega-
tion here [in the U.S].”
14 King went on to say that he agreed with Ben Bella and 
that “the struggle for integration here was ‘a part of a larger worldwide struggle 
to gain human freedom and dignity.’”
15 Ben Bella followed King by noting that 
the African American struggle was “widely publicized in Algeria, and in Africa 
more generally,”
16 and concluded by declaring that “the United States could lose


--- PAGE 110 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 103
its ‘moral and political voice’ in the world if it did not grapple with segregation 
problems here in a forthright manner.”17
After his meeting with Ben Bella, King wrote an article himself for the widely 
read Black newspaper New York Amsterdam News titled “My Talk With Ben Bella” 
in which he detailed the nature of their conversation. He described Ben Bella and 
Algeria in these terms: “A few days ago I had the good fortune of talking with 
Premier Ben Bella of the New Algerian Republic. Algeria is one of the most recent 
African nations to remove the last sanction of colonialism. For almost two hours 
Mr. Ben Bella and I discussed issues ranging from the efficacy of non violence to 
the Cuban crisis. However, it was on the question of racial injustice that we spent 
most of our time.”
18 King continued, apparently surprised and encouraged, “the 
significance of our conversation was Ben Bella’s complete familiarity with the 
progression of events in the Negro struggle for full citizenship. Our nation needs 
to note this well. All through our talks he repeated or inferred, ‘We are brothers.’ 
For Ben Bella, it was unmistakably clear that there is a close relationship between 
colonialism and segregation. He perceived that both are immoral systems aimed 
at the degradation of human personality. The battle of the Algerians against colo-
nialism and the battle of the Negro against segregation is a common struggle.”
19
Before returning to Algeria to assume his role as president, Ben Bella went on 
to meet with Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., as well as Malcolm X—both significant 
figures in the emerging Black Power movement—at the well-known Absynnian 
Baptist Church in Harlem.
20 As Malcolm X embarked on a trip to the Middle 
East and Africa some two years later, he would again meet with Ben Bella dur-
ing his stop in Algeria. The impact that his experience there had on him became 
evident when, just after returning from his trip, he spoke at the Militant Labor 
Forum in May 1964. In responding to the allegations that there existed some sort 
of “hate-gang” called the “Blood Brothers” that was based in Harlem and calcula-
tedly committed crimes against whites, Malcolm declared,
I visited the Casbah . . . in Algiers, with some of the brothers—blood brothers. 
They took me all down into it and showed me the suffering, showed me the con-
ditions they had to live under while they were being occupied by the French . . . 
They showed me the conditions that they lived under while they were colonized 
by these people from Europe. And they also showed me what they had to do to get 
these people off their back. The first thing they had to realize was that all of them 
were brothers; oppression made them brothers; exploitation made them brothers; 
degradation made them brothers; discrimination made them brothers; segregation 
made them brothers; humiliation made them brothers . . . The same conditions 
that prevailed in Algeria that forced the people, the noble people of Algeria, to 
resort eventually to the terrorist-type tactics that were necessary to get the monkey 
off their backs, those same conditions prevail today in America in every Negro 
community.
21
In this speech, and in others that he made after this time, Malcolm X drew impor-
tant parallels between the Algerian revolution and the African American freedom 
movement. As a result, he helped spread awareness of the Algerian struggle but


--- PAGE 111 ---
Black Routes to Islam104
simultaneously advocated for a global perspective on the situation and conditions 
of African Americans in America. In particular, his comparison of the Casbah in 
Algiers to Harlem in New York City was to become a familiar one, especially with 
the release of the film The Battle of Algiers in 1966.
Francee Covington, a student in political science at Harlem University in the 
late 1960s, penned an essay titled “Are the Revolutionary T echniques Employed 
in The Battle of Algiers Applicable to Harlem?” that appeared in the anthology The
Black Woman, an important product of the Black Arts Movement edited by T oni 
Cade Bambara. Covington noted, “The Chinese Revolution, the Russian Revolu-
tion, and even the Kenyan Revolution labeled ‘Mau Mau’ have not been given 
the attention that the Algerian Revolution has. This is primarily because of the 
great extent to which the public has been made aware of this specific revolution-
ary instance through the writings of Fanon and the more graphic motion-picture 
illustration, The Battle of Algiers.”
22 She also made the following point: “In the 
past few years the works of Frantz Fanon have become widely read and quoted by 
those involved in the ‘Revolution’ that has begun to take place in the communi-
ties of Black America. If The Wretched of the Earth is the ‘handbook for the Black 
Revolution,’ then The Battle of Algiers is its movie counterpart.” 
23 As the title of 
the piece makes clear, Covington’s essay evaluated the relevancy of the strategies 
and techniques used in the film by the Algerian revolutionaries against the French 
colonizers to the situation of African Americans in urban communities through-
out the United States.
After drawing parallels and then pointing out important differences, Coving-
ton concluded that “the idea of importing the techniques of revolution that were 
successful in one place may prove disastrous in another place,”
24 implying that 
it would be misleading to assume that because the Algerians were successful, the 
same approach could succeed in Harlem and urban Black America more broadly. 
Despite her rejection of the possibility of the relevancy of The Battle of Algiers, the 
fact of her meditation upon that possibility is in itself a testament to the degree 
to which the Algerian revolution became an important point of reference and to 
which there was an understood relationship between the African independence 
movements and the African American freedom movement.
Frantz Fanon, the Martiniquan psychiatrist and intellectual who joined the 
Algerian struggle for independence, also became a revolutionary point of ref-
erence and his writings helped cultivate a generation of Black liberation theo-
rists and activists in America: “Fanon’s ideas were unleashed at a moment truly 
coincidental with the phenomenal impact of the Black Power Movement in the 
United States which transformed the Civil Rights Movement into the Black Lib-
eration Movement, subdued more moderate black organizations and leaders by 
transforming some into Black Power organizations and spawning new ones.”
25
The publication of Fanon’s The Wretched of the Earth  in America in 1965 was 
hailed by Eldridge Cleaver, Minister of Information for the Black Panther Party, 
as “itself a historical event,”
26 and he referred to the book from then on as “the 
Black Bible.”27 The Black Panther Party was known for conducting teach-ins for


--- PAGE 112 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 105
The Wretched of the Earth at chapter meetings throughout the country.28 And, at 
moments, Stokely Carmichael, famous for popularizing the term Black Power 
and for acting as the honorary prime minister of the Black Panther Party, saluted 
Frantz Fanon as his own personal “patron saint.”
29
Although Fanon’s writings may have first been popular only among a select 
few, by 1970, The Wretched of the Earth alone had sold 750,000 copies. 30 As 
anecdotal evidence of the significance of Fanon to the everyday African American 
Black Power proponent, when in conversation with Jimmy Breslin of the Chicago
Sun-Times, and in what is now an oft-quoted testimonial by Dan Watts, the edi-
tor of Liberator magazine, Watts told Breslin that, “You’re going along thinking 
all the brothers in these riots are old winos . . . Nothing could be further from 
the truth. These cats are ready to die for something. And they know why. They 
all read. Read a lot. Not one of them hasn’t read the Bible.” Breslin questioned, 
“The Bible?” And Watts responded, “Fanon . . . you’d better get this book. Every 
brother on a rooftop can quote Fanon.”
31
Fanon’s place in the African American freedom struggle cannot be overstated, 
for although he did not write much himself about the African American situation, 
his words and ideas were adopted and adapted and generally were thought to be of 
great relevance to revolutionary struggles around the world. Through his writings, 
as well as through the popular film The Battle of Algiers  and the ever-influential 
African American press, Algeria and Algerian leaders like Ben Bella were crystal-
lized as symbols of revolutionary significance. They came to hold great mean-
ing for many who were themselves engaged in a protracted struggle for freedom. 
However, Algeria’s significance was not simply to be found in its being a symbol; 
Algeria also became a very real supporter of many African American radicals who 
had the opportunity to travel to Africa and visit the nation.
“There Was a Battle in Algiers . . . ”: 
The First Pan-African Cultural Festival of 1969
There was a battle in Algiers in late July . . . The troops came together, African generals 
and footsoldiers in the war of words and politics that splashed against the calm waters of 
the Mediterranean Sea—in the First Pan-African Cultural Festival—from everywhere 
in greater numbers than ever before; from San Francisco to Senegal, from Dakar to the 
District of Columbia.
32
—Nathan Hare, “Algiers 1969: A Report on the Pan-African Cultural Festival”
Upon hearing of the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., Eldridge Cleaver, 
the Minister of Information for the Black Panther Party, proclaimed,
That there is a holocaust coming I have no doubt at all. I have been talking to 
people around the country by telephone—people intimately involved in the black 
liberation struggle—and their reaction to Dr. King’s murder has been unanimous: 
the war has begun. The violent phase of the black liberation struggle is here, 
and it will spread. From that shot, from that blood. America will be painted 
red. Dead bodies will litter the streets and the scenes will be reminiscent of


--- PAGE 113 ---
Black Routes to Islam106
the disgusting, terrifying, and nightmarish news reports coming out of Algeria 
during the height of the general violence right before the final breakdown of the 
French colonial regime.
33
Cleaver’s words capture the profound anger and disillusionment as well as new-
found determination for liberation that was birthed by King’s death. The days fol-
lowing the tragic event were met head-on by violent uprisings in cities throughout 
United States, including a series of incidents which resulted in Cleaver’s appre-
hension by the police.
Although the First Pan-African Cultural Festival could not be said to have any 
direct relationship to King’s death, the festival certainly occurred while the stench 
of King’s death and all that it brought in its aftermath still lingered in the air. And 
Cleaver’s words were prophetic both in his call to arms for African Americans (evi-
dent in the riots that occurred around the country in the ensuing days and weeks) 
and in his evocation of Algeria, for he would find himself in the very city of The
Battle of Algiers only one year later. After clandestinely leaving the United States 
to evade being sent back to prison for a charge of parole violation, Cleaver headed 
to Cuba where he hoped to receive “backing to establish a base for Black Pan-
ther political and military action against the United States.”
34 He soon found out 
that the Cuban authorities were not going to provide such support, and he was 
eventually transported to Algeria, where he initially received a more sympathetic 
welcome. Amidst the preparations for the festival, Algerian authorities offered 
Cleaver and his fellow Panther members official invitations to the forthcoming 
festivities. Cleaver did not formally announce the fact of his residence in Algeria 
until some time later, at the opening of the festival, when he held a press confer-
ence specifically for that purpose.
The idea for the Pan-African Cultural Festival originally came about in Sep-
tember 1967 at an Organization of African Unity (OAU) Council of Ministers 
meeting held in Kinshasa, Congo, where the decision was made that “there is an 
urgent need to undertake common measures that would assist in the popular-
izing, development and refinement of the various cultures obtaining in Africa.”
35
As a result, the OAU passed a resolution to “sponsor an All-African Festival of 
African Drama, Folk Song, and Instrumental Music.”
36 Not long afterward, the 
Algerian government, with aid from the OAU, went about publicizing the July-
August 1969 gathering. Anticipation was quick to build, as the African press—as 
varied as Fraternité Matin of the Ivory Coast, L ’Effort Camerounais of Cameroon, 
Jeune Afrique, a French language Pan-African magazine published out of Paris, La
Semaine of Congo-Brazzaville, El-Ayam of Sudan—and many more periodicals 
throughout the continent, Europe, America, and the Caribbean announced the 
coming of and significance of the First Pan-African Cultural Festival.
37
In America, the African American press played an important role in publiciz-
ing the festival. The Nation of Islam’s Muhammad Speaks ran several articles in 
anticipation of the festival. One article in particular, titled “Algerian Festival 
to Spotlight Africa’s Vast Cultural Heritage,” reported, “Massive preparations 
are under way for the First Pan-African Cultural F estival . . . Black artists from


--- PAGE 114 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 107
America and 15 African nations will attend and museums throughout the con-
tinent are sending works of art—some hundreds of years old—to the cultural 
festival, which promises to be the greatest event in the history of Africa, if not the 
entire world.”
38 Alongside print publicity, travel agencies began organizing and 
advertising group tours of Africa, which centered around the Pan-African Festival 
in Algiers. The Africa T ourist and Travel Agency, based in New York City, printed 
brochures for a tour they organized specifically for the festival, which they called 
the “Organization for African Unity Cultural Festival T our.”
39 The tour, to be 
hosted by the “tour personality,” renowned jazz pianist Ahmad Jamal, was to last 
a total of twenty-one days, from July 21 through August 11, 1969, and would 
include travel through Morocco and Algeria. It is likely that travel agencies similar 
to the Africa T ourist and Travel Agency—which most likely catered to a largely 
middle-class, African American clientele as well as social and political organiza-
tions whose focus was the African American and African freedom movement(s)—
would have organized comparable group trips to the Pan-African Festival.
The eagerness of the participants and attendees of the festival mirrored the 
triumphant language of the newspaper and magazine announcements of the 
approaching event. Dave Burrell, a young jazz pianist who was invited to play at 
the festival, described he and his bandmates’ preparations for their departure:
Before we went, we got as African as we could get in New York . . . the dashikis had 
just come into vogue, and we were sort of very much in the vanguard of the move-
ment in New York . . . [we had] to run around New York and get African material 
and make the dashikis and the different skull caps and to have the Black Power 
sign . . . I remember [fellow musician] Sunny Murray saying to me, “Hey, I joined 
the Panthers.” I said, “What?” He said, “Yeah, don’t tell anybody.” He showed me 
a little membership card. I said “Oh, where did you do this?” He said, “I did it in 
Philadelphia.”
40
Sunny Murray most likely joined the Panthers knowing full well that Cleaver 
had surfaced in Algiers. The anticipation was felt among all who were planning 
to attend. Henri Lopes, at the time a budding writer and the Minister of Educa-
tion for Congo-Brazzaville who was helping lead the country’s delegation to the 
festival, was also quite eager, as he recounted:
My arrival in Algeria was met with great emotion, in large part because our political 
consciousness . . . was cultivated as a result of our knowledge of the Algerian war 
for independence. And so, for us, it was the country that had obtained genuine 
independence, more so than most African countries, and to arrive there, it was like 
going to a Rome or a Mecca . . . Secondly, the artists, the creators in Africa, each 
one of us was isolated in our countries . . . And, the Festival gave us all the oppor-
tunity to meet one another, to exchange ideas with one another, and try to get to 
know one another . . . Thus, the Festival represented a tangible image of what could 
one day be a united Africa.
41


--- PAGE 115 ---
Black Routes to Islam108
The Festival opened on July 21, 1969, with a speech from Algerian president 
Houari Boumedienne, which began,
Algeria is happy to welcome the First Pan-African Cultural Festival on behalf of our 
entire continent. The importance of this event and the joy and enthusiasm which it 
has aroused and is still arousing, the diversity and quality of the manifestations to 
which it will give rise, should not make us forget to what an extent this first Pan-
African Cultural Festival is concerned, not only with our values and sensitivities, 
but also with our very existence as Africans and our common future. This Festival, 
far from being an occasion for general festivities which might momentarily distract 
us from our daily tasks and problems, should rather be related to them and make a 
direct connection to our vast effort of construction. It constitutes an intrinsic part 
of the struggle we are all pursuing in Africa—whether that of development, of the 
struggle against racialism, or of national liberation.
42
El Moudjahid was quick to find peoples’ first impressions of the Pan African 
Festival as they questioned people on the street and published the responses in 
an article titled “Le Coeur d’Alger Bat Au Rythme Du Festival” (“The Heart of 
Algiers Beats to the Rhythm of the Festival”). On the very same page in that issue 
of the newspaper, there appeared an article titled “Quand Le Jazz Se Veut Arme 
De Combat” (“When Jazz Becomes A Weapon of Combat”), which reprinted a 
poem by the African American poet T ed Joans called “Behind the Smile of Black 
Jazz.” Every day over the period of two weeks, El Moudjahid  covered, in great 
detail, the events and happenings in Algiers. There were daily symposia around 
issues of critical importance to the social, political, cultural, and economic devel-
opment of Africa as well as musical, theatrical, and dance performances through-
out the city.
One of the more popular attractions of the festival was the Afro-American 
Center, located in the heart of downtown Algiers, a space lent to Cleaver and 
the Black Panthers by the Algerians. It was part of the support that the Algerian 
government granted the Panthers, which also included a hilltop villa in which to 
reside, monthly salaries, and access to telecommunications, among other such 
amenities. Young Algerians flocked to the center in large numbers and out of 
great curiosity. The Black Panthers—including Emory Douglas, David Hilliard, 
and Kathleen and Eldridge Cleaver—staged informational lectures and discus-
sions and handed out plenty of party material and memorabilia, including pam-
phlets, posters, and pins. With Algeria’s support, the Black Panthers were able to 
publicize their platform, their ideology, and their perspective on the condition of 
African Americans to a global audience, including revolutionary movements from 
around the world that were sympathetic to their cause.
American expatriate William Klein was commissioned by the Algerian gov-
ernment to film the festival, but while in the country, he was also able to com-
plete another documentary, titled Eldridge Cleaver, Black Panther. In the film, 
Cleaver expressed what a gathering such as the festival meant for he and the Black 
Panthers:


--- PAGE 116 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 109
When I left the United States, I had no idea that I would end up in Algeria, but I 
think that I was very fortunate coming to Algeria at the time of the festival and to 
receive an invitation to participate in the festival, to have the opportunity to estab-
lish the Afro-American Center which we opened for the festival, which gave us an 
opportunity to make ourselves known to the other liberation movements who were 
brought together by the festival. The stage was set. People came here specifically to 
check each other out, to see what was going on, and to get some idea as to which 
movements they could relate to.
43
At another moment in the film, for which Klein “organized a meeting between 
Black Panthers and African revolutionary movement leaders at a restaurant” 44
with the intention of them having a substantive exchange of ideas and opinions, a 
representative of the Zimbabwe African People’s Union articulated rather remark-
ably the degree to which there was understood to be a common struggle between 
African Americans and Africans. The Zimbabwean declared, “We are following 
the struggle of our Afro-American brothers in the United States and I am sure 
they are also following our struggles. The people of Zimbabwe have taken up 
arms and we are facing a common enemy, and it is this common enemy which we 
must all crush. If our Afro-American brothers score success in the United States, 
that success is not only theirs, it is ours too.”
45
The First Pan-African Cultural Festival of 1969 was a moment that embodied 
both the hopes and desires of the many African and African American radicals 
gathered there but also demonstrated the great depths of an understood connec-
tion between their respective struggles. Host to an incredible array of artists and 
activists, including for example, Nina Simone, Stokely Carmichael and then-wife 
Miriam Makeba, Archie Shepp, Maya Angelou, and Ed Bullins, the festival was 
not without its own contradictions and tensions, but not at the complete expense 
of progress toward Pan-African unity, strengthened transnational solidarities, sub-
stantive exchanges of ideas, and practical political gains. Its impact reverberated 
out beyond the two weeks of festivities, as those that attended carried their expe-
riences at the festival back with them to their various communities, just as their 
were a series of practical institutional developments in the domain of the arts and 
culture for the continent of Africa.
46
“The Struggle Was Not Yet Over . . . ”: The Legacy and 
Significance of the Pan-African Festival
It is evident that since its staging in July 1969 in Algiers, the First Pan-African Cultural 
Festival has not yet, one the hand, been the subject of as much interest as it would 
normally merit, and on the other, been subjected to critical and profound analysis. 
Outside of publicity articles, brief informational articles, or violent oral responses, no 
sort of collective or individual position has been taken on the continental or international 
implications of the Festival or even the problems that were debated there.
47
—Souffles: Revue Culturelle Arabe Du Maghreb


--- PAGE 117 ---
Black Routes to Islam110
The above excerpt from an editorial in the Moroccan-published journal Souffles,
which appeared at the beginning of 1970, quite strikingly captured the critical 
reception of the Pan-African Festival, or lack thereof. In the immediate aftermath 
of the festival, one could not find a great deal of evidence of meaningful reflec-
tion on the festival’s significance, just as evidence of its significance cannot be 
easily found in the secondary historical literature now. And yet it is clear that the 
First Pan-African Cultural Festival held in Algiers, Algeria, in 1969 represents a 
watershed moment in the history of linkages between the African American and 
African freedom movements. The festival gave voice to these important ideas 
and provided the context for a broad range of African and African diasporic 
intellectuals, artists, activists, and students come into conversation with one 
another, in some cases literally, and in others, symbolically. Reflections offered by 
attendees of the festival provide insight into the unique impact that it had on all 
who were present.
Dennis Brutus, the South African poet, was in London, England, when he first 
heard of the Festival. He wrote the Algerian government to notify them of his 
interest in the event and was subsequently invited as a delegate of South Africa. 
When asked to reflect on the festival, despite mentioning the elation the moment 
evoked, Brutus was struck by the degree to which the Algeria he had come to 
know through hearing of the courageous struggle for independence was very 
much in crisis even only seven years after its triumph:
We had this great festival. But, I had a sense that the resistance movement in Alge-
ria, which had been very important for the whole continent—it inspired people 
from all over the continent—I had a sense that in the society, already there was 
beginning to develop a division between your middle-class, really affluent Algerians, 
and the people in the Casbah . . . 
When I went into the Casbah, you know, I had that sense of on the one hand 
you have an elite and on the other hand, people are struggling. So, although Algeria 
was important for South Africa—many South Africans in the resistance trained 
with the Algerian army—one had the sense that while there had been a struggle, the 
struggle was not yet over. And, in fact, the French were returning because their need 
for Algerian oil . . . Even while they were hating the Algerians, they still wanted the 
Algerian oil and this conflict developed as a division in this society.
48
Michele Russell, an African American woman from Washington, D.C., was struck 
by the apparent failures of the Algerian revolution and the failure of the nation to 
live up to its image as the country that expelled the colonizer by force, much in 
the same way Brutus had been disappointed. However, she left the festival while 
it was still at its “height,” allowing her to carry with her a sense of admiration for 
her ancestral homeland, just as it seems her experience there was a rite of passage 
of sorts, as it was her first trip to Africa:
We had seen the film “Battle of Algiers” in the States. Now, wandering the city, 
each street came upon us with the shock of a double exposure. Neon signs became the 
flames of bombed cafes. Women in veils became saboteurs. Taxi drivers, the incarnation


--- PAGE 118 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 111
of dedicated cadres careening around corners to unknown rendezvous . . . Now, 
seven years after victory, the liberation struggle has just begun. It goes on in their 
faces. In almost imperceptible hesitation when they are addressed in Arabic and 
respond in French. Now, seven years later. The resistance . . . 
I left Algeria at the height of the festival. I left her at the point where I would 
have the most to come back to. And I felt I would come back, if not this land, then 
to some other part of the Continent that was helping me to return to myself as 
well. I left for home. I left at the moment I knew that wherever I was I would be, 
forever, home.
49
For Barbara Chase-Riboud, the world-renowned African American writer and 
sculptor, her attendance at the festival helped bring about an artistic breakthrough, 
for although she was not exhibiting any of her own work there, she had something 
of an epiphany while amidst the festivities. She explains the very specific develop-
ments in her artwork that grew directly out of her experiences in Algiers:
[The festival] was wonderful. It was stupendous. And, at that time, I made a big 
change in my own work, in my own sculpture . . . I had been, sort of, in a kind 
of surrealistic mood, with elongated figures and so on. But, they had been getting 
more and more abstract and I couldn’t figure out a way to get them off the legs 
and off the pedestal. And suddenly, like a light bulb over my head—and it was in 
Algiers—I realized that I all I had to do was to make them into objects that could 
be moved by something. And, that something turned out to be silk. That’s when I 
began to do those Malcolm X [sculptures].
50
Chase-Riboud’s series of sculptures in memory of Malcolm X were indelibly 
shaped by the addition of silk to her artistic repertoire—an idea that came to her 
in the midst of the fervor of the festival.
Henri Lopes, the prize-winning Congolese novelist and present-day Congolese 
ambassador to France, also attaches artistic significance to the Pan-African Festi-
val. Prior to the festival, he had only published a couple of poems, but not long 
after, he began publishing what would become prize-winning novels. Here, he 
describes the festival’s personal and artistic significance:
The importance that the festival had for me, personally, was that after my presenta-
tion [at the symposium], a lot of people began thinking of me as a writer. Oh, I had 
barely written. I had published a few poems in the journal Présence Africaine, but 
no novels. And, I had the impression of being—how does one say it—an impostor 
with that title [of “writer”]. And, when I returned home, that’s when I began writ-
ing my first work, my collection of short stories, Tribaliques. That was after Algiers. 
I did two things. I quit smoking and I wrote my first book.
51
For another writer, Haki Madhubuti, or Don Lee as he was known at the time, 
the festival held very different meaning. A poet and essayist of the Black Arts 
Movement, Madhubuti was struck by the sights and sounds of the historic event 
but it only made him more aware of the work that had yet to be done in Black 
communities in the United States. He explains,


--- PAGE 119 ---
Black Routes to Islam112
The level of conversation, the level of dialogue, and the level of interaction was 
very political, highly charged, and most certainly, our conversations were struggle-
driven . . . But, this is a very difficult time because COINTELPRO is coming on 
strong, the red squads in Chicago, and the Panthers had been driven all out of the 
country, I mean, Algiers, as well as Cuba and so forth . . . I knew Kwame T ure and 
Eldridge Cleaver and people like that. So, to go and see them in other spaces and 
being received royally was very good. But, also, it just spoke to me loudly that the 
work that we needed to do here [in the U.S.] was just not being done, because if 
we were doing the proper work here they wouldn’t have to leave, they would have 
protection. And so . . . to my heart, it said, “Go back to Chicago, go back to the 
States, and just move the work up another volume.” And, for me, the volume was, 
essentially, developing independent Black institutions.
52
Lastly, for Hoyt Fuller, who had traveled widely on the African continent, the 
First Pan-African Cultural Festival of 1969 represented the coming into fruition 
of meaningful transnational solidarities between Africans and African Americans 
and the advent of a new moment, full of new possibilities and new struggles: 
“Pan-Africanism is an idea whose time has come. That fact is, for me, the central 
meaning of Algiers 1969 . . . That was what it meant to me to have Africans 
from all over the world assembling on the soil of Frantz Fanon’s adopted country 
to consider the direction the peoples of the African continent should take . . . 
Algiers was the Black World coming of Age.”
53 It seems that for Fuller the “com-
ing of age” of the “Black World” meant the collaboration of African peoples across 
borders of nation and language, just as it meant coming to terms with the com-
plexity inherent in such transnational solidarities. Long had African and African 
diasporic peoples understood the political and cultural connections they shared, 
and yet it meant something different to confront one another and learn more 
intimately the details of the struggles of dispersed revolutionary movements. And 
therein lies a deeply significant aspect of the presence and official recognition of 
African American activists in Algeria. The possibility (and reality) of sustained 
dialogue was transformatory—Barbara Easley, one of the Black Panthers that 
lived in Algeria, has recounted, “I met women from other liberation movements, 
and that’s where my knowledge of the world became more focused, because when 
people say, ‘I’m from so and so,’ you start looking at the world map, whether 
it’s Asia, Africa, South America, and then you start listening to other people’s 
historical battles, and then you realize that you’re not the only group of little 
black people, this select group of African Americans in America that are fighting 
for that freedom.”
54 And, in a 1971 New York Times Magazine article, journalist 
Sanche de Gramont described the status in Algeria of Eldridge Cleaver and his fel-
low Black Panthers in exile, writing, “in Algiers, the Panthers are respected as one 
of approximately a dozen liberation movements accredited by the Algerian Gov-
ernment and provided with assistance and support in their task of overthrowing 
the governments in power in their respective countries . . . They plan to maintain 
close contact with other liberation movements.”
55 He quoted Cleaver as having 
explained, “This . . . is the first time in the struggle of the black people in America 
that they have established representation abroad.”
56


--- PAGE 120 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 113
Hijacking Freedom, Hijacking Hope: 
The “Fleury Four” and the End of an Era
Writing from their prison cells in Fleury-Mérogis, France, in 1978, George Brown, 
Joyce Tillerson, and Melvin and Jean McNair hoped to successfully make a case 
for their release. As their lawyers explained, their four narratives, published col-
lectively as Nous, Noirs Americains évadés Du Ghetto [We, Black American Escapees 
From the Ghetto], were “essentially their defense”
57 against both extradition to 
the United States and to a prison sentence in France. George, Joyce, Melvin, and 
Jean did not deny having committed the hijacking of a commercial airplane from 
Detroit to Algeria in July of 1972 (along with successfully procuring a million-dol-
lar ransom from Delta Air Lines), but they insisted that their actions represented 
a desperate attempt to escape the oppressive American racism under which they 
had too long suffered. It was no small accident, however, that they chose Algeria 
as their destination. They knew full well of the existence of the International Sec-
tion of the Black Panther Party there as well as the presence of numerous Black 
Panther members, including Minister of Information Eldridge Cleaver, Com-
munications Secretary Kathleen Cleaver, Field Marshal Don Cox, and, at various 
other times, fellow Party members Larry Mack, Sekou Odinga, James and Gwen 
Patterson, and Barbara Easley, among others.
58 In fact, the hijackers intended for 
the million-dollar ransom to be of aid to the community of exiled Black Panthers 
that had been living in Algeria since as early as 1969.
In what was the seventeenth American hijacking of 1972, Melvin McNair, 
George Brown, and George Wright commanded the pilots to land the Delta Air 
Lines plane in Miami, call in for a million-dollar ransom to be delivered by federal 
agents wearing only swimsuits (so that they could be sure the agents were not car-
rying any concealed weapons), and unload the passengers, while their accomplices, 
Joyce Tillerson and Jean McNair, waited anxiously in their seats with their three 
children.
59 The hijackers demanded that Delta also provide an international navi-
gator, and since none was available in Miami, the plane took off for Boston, where 
their last demand was met. Commanding the international navigator to take off 
without instructions about where to head, it was only after some time in the air 
that the hijackers informed the pilot that he was to take them to Algeria.
60
Landing at the airport in Algiers, the capital city of Algeria, the five hijack-
ers and their three children had made it safely to their destination. The United 
States, responding to what was the most expensive hijacking in American history 
up until that time,
61 sought the return of the ransom money and “the extradition 
of the hijackers to the United States, or prosecution of them on air piracy charges 
in Algeria.”
62 But the hijackers were aware that only several months prior, a male 
and female couple had hijacked a plane from the United States to Algeria (and 
temporarily made away with a $500,000 ransom from Western Airlines). The 
couple received conditional asylum in Algeria and ample coverage in the Ameri-
can media.
However, Algeria was becoming less and less patient with such incidents. Hav-
ing attempted to strengthen economic ties to the United States since the late


--- PAGE 121 ---
Black Routes to Islam114
1960s, Algeria understood that its ability to do so depended on its standing in 
the eyes of the U.S. government. An August 19, 1972, a New York Times article 
reported, “[Black] panther officers [in the U.S.] say the government has been put-
ting pressure on Algeria by threatening to cancel a proposed $1-billion plan to 
import Algerian natural gas to this country. The State Department denied this.”
63
The evidence suggests that the Panthers were, in fact, not far from the truth. One 
memorandum of a conversation between the U.S. Secretary of State under Nixon, 
William Rogers, and the Algerian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Abdelaziz Boutef-
lika, held only a couple months after the Detroit-to-Algiers hijacking, contained 
the following summary of remarks from Secretary of State Rogers: “USG [U.S. 
Government] appreciates return of planes, crew and money [in the Western and 
Delta cases], and hopes that if GOA [Government of Algeria] cannot extradite 
it can at least prosecute the hijackers . . . Algeria has a moderate and reasonable 
government and is attractive to American investment, but hijacking incidents 
have damaged Algeria’s image.”
64 A portion of Bouteflika’s remarks were sum-
marized as follows: “GOA [Government of Algeria] would jealously guard its 
own national independence and would support national liberation movements of 
peoples deprived of their right by colonial powers. This includes support of libera-
tion movements in Portuguese Africa, South Africa and Rhodesia . . . Bouteflika 
said GOA is interest in developing its relations with U.S. and added that Black 
Panthers do not make any effective contribution to Algeria from revolutionary, 
ideological or moral standpoint.”
65 So, as fate would have it, the arrival of the 
newest contingent of exiled Panthers—George Brown, George Wright, Joyce Til-
lerson, and Melvin and Jean McNair—although it represented an extraordinary 
feat, also spelled the beginning of the end of a symbolic and strategic solidarity 
between African American freedom movements and the country of Algeria. Alge-
ria’s economic dependence on American investment and the Algerian administra-
tion’s pursuit of better diplomatic relations between the two nations essentially 
required that Algeria cease supporting the exiled Black Panthers. Algeria had not 
had formal diplomatic relations with the United States since 1967, when the two 
countries broke ties. But by December 1973, when Secretary of State Kissinger 
met with Algerian president Boumedienne, “senior American officials said that 
they expected a rapid intensification of contacts between the two governments 
and the probable exchange of ambassadors within a couple of months.”
66
Nearly all the exiled Black Panthers left Algeria for Europe around the same 
time, citing deteriorating relations with the government. While some eventually 
negotiated deals with the American government to return to the United States, 
some made lives for themselves in other countries, while still others were caught 
by the authorities and had to face the possibility of prison time. Black Power activ-
ists in the United States were increasingly facing similar fates as local, state, and 
federal authorities aggressively worked to stamp out movements seen as threats to 
order and national security. This was the case for the last group of Panther hijack-
ers to arrive in Algiers. On May 26, 1976, four of the five hijackers were arrested 
in Paris by the French police who were investigating an American request for their


--- PAGE 122 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 115
extradition.67 Concerned parties in France quickly formed a committee to pub-
licize the case and generate support for the defendants. The committee was able 
to get Nous, Noirs Américains évadés Du Ghetto  published on behalf of the four 
hijackers. Separated into four parts, each containing the autobiographical narra-
tive of one of the defendants, the book was meant as a testimony to the ugliness 
and tyranny of racism in America.
Although not exactly acquitted of their crimes, the hijackers escaped extradi-
tion to the United States and were sentenced to a few years in French prison. One 
of their defense attorneys, Louis Labadie, proclaimed, “This is a success . . . It is 
a condemnation of American racism.”
68 The case presented in court “asserted . . . 
that the hijacking was a ‘political act’ motivated by racial oppression,” and the 
defense team “produced witnesses to describe instances of police brutality, job 
discrimination, school segregation, poverty, hunger, and ‘armed terrorism’ in the 
United States.”
69 And since the defendants had already served about two years of 
jail time in France as they awaited the completion of the trial, “the women were 
expected to be released within days and the men in about six months.”
70 It was 
noted that “before a United States court, they would have faced minimum jail 
terms of 20 years.”
71 The hijackers—often called the “Fleury Four” after the well-
known prison in the town of the same name—had put American racism on trial 
and had won. And yet, it was a bittersweet victory. Even as they had hijacked their 
freedom from American oppression, hope had been hijacked from the possibility 
for a renewed solidarity between Algeria and African American activists, at least 
on the same scale as had once been.
In the decade or so following its independence from France, Algeria became a 
critical node in the constellation of transnational solidarities being forged among 
revolutionary movements around the world. At the height of the Civil Rights 
and Black Power eras, just as Algeria looked to Black America as “that part of 
the Third World situated in the belly of the beast,”
72 so, too, did much of Black 
America look to Algeria as “the country that fought the enslaver and won.”73 Key 
figures and factions in the African American freedom movement, often otherwise 
thought to represent different ideological positions, from King to Malcolm, from 
the Nation of Islam to the Black Panther Party, as only a few examples among 
many, took up Algeria and Algeria’s revolution in an attempt to imagine and bring 
into being transnational collaboration. In each case, the implicated parties were 
looking to leverage the position and resources gained vis-à-vis the other, but that 
was part and parcel of the work of imagining and creating these transnational 
connections and also of understanding how they were formed, strengthened, and 
eventually disintegrated.
Although American Cold War and oil geopolitics ultimately disrupted the 
transnational linkages between African America and Algeria, the legacy of these 
connections endure in unique ways in the culture and politics of the twenty-first 
century. One only has to look to Algerian national life for proof of this fact. At 
the time of negotiations with American officials for large oil contracts in the 
mid-1970s (which led, in part, to the demise of the Black Panther community


--- PAGE 123 ---
Black Routes to Islam116
in Algeria), then-Algerian Foreign Affairs Minister Abdelaziz Bouteflika played 
an important diplomatic role. Three-and-a-half decades later, Bouteflika became 
president, and oil politics continue to be a defining issue in Algerian national and 
international affairs. And, although the era of substantive transnational solidari-
ties between African America and Algeria remains a distant memory, few attend-
ees of the festival could probably have imagined that the same downtown streets 
of Algiers where jazz saxophonist Archie Shepp once collaborated with traditional 
Algerian musicians are now brimming with Algerian youth who define their cul-
tural lives through the African American cultural form known as hip-hop, in 
some cases using it to speak out powerfully against the pervasive injustice that 
plagues their country and the world at large.
74 Looking to seize on this kind of 
cultural vibrancy and to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the festival, Algeria is 
in the midst of planning for the 2nd Pan-African Cultural Festival, scheduled to 
take place in July 2009.
75 What will be of great interest to historians is how this 
new festival attempts to make sense of the legacy of the 1969 gathering in Algiers, 
and of the dynamic fusion of culture and politics that defined that bygone era.
Notes
 1. Richard B. Moore, “Africa Conscious Harlem,” Americans from Africa: Old Memories, New 
Moods, ed. Peter I. Rose (Chicago: Atherton, 1970), 399.
 2. Michele Russell, “Algerian Journey,” Freedomways (4th quarter, 1969), 357.
 3. Hoyt W . Fuller, “First Pan-African Cultural Festival: Algiers Journal,” Negro Digest (Octo-
ber 1969), 74.
 4. Boutkhil Alla, “Festival Culturel Panafricain,” Jeune Afrique 444 (July 7–13, 1969): 58.
 5. T ed Joans, “The Pan African Pow Wow,” Journal of Black Poetry 1, no. 13 (Winter/Spring 
1970): 4.
 6. James Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans: Black Americans and Africa, 1935–1961
(Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2002), 242.
 7. Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans, 242.
 8. Jonathan Scott Holloway, “What America Means to Me? Defining Black Life Through the 
Motherland,” Reviews in American History 31 (2003): 93–100.
 9. James Meriwether, “African Americans and the Mau Mau Rebellion: Militancy, Violence, 
and the Struggle for Freedom,” Journal of American Ethnic History  17, no. 4 (Summer 
1998): 63–86.
 10. Roland Wolseley, The Black Press, U.S.A. (Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1990), 90.
 11. Meriwether, Proudly We Can Be Africans, 8.
 12. Thomas Ronan, “Ben Bella Links T wo ‘Injustices,’” New York Times, October 14, 1962, 
20.
 13. Karl Evanzz, The Judas Factor: The Plot to Kill Malcolm X (New York: Thunder’s Mouth 
Press, 1992), 128.
 14. Ronan, “Ben Bella Links T wo ‘Injustices,’” 20.
 15. Ibid.
 16. Ibid.
 17. Ibid.
 18. Martin Luther King, Jr., “My Talk With Ben Bella,” New York Amsterdam News, October 
27, 1962, 12.
 19. King, Jr., “My Talk With Ben Bella,” 12.


--- PAGE 124 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 117
 20. Evanzz, The Judas Factor, 128.
 21. George Breitman, ed., Malcolm X Speaks (New York: Grove Press, 1965), 66.
 22. Francee Covington, “Are the Revolutionary T echniques Employed in The Battle of Algiers
Applicable to Harlem?” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, ed. T oni Cade Bambara (New 
York: Penguin, 1970), 245.
 23. Covington, “Revolutionary T echniques,” 244.
 24. Ibid., 251.
 25. Ronald Walters, “The Impact of Frantz Fanon on the Black Liberation Movement in the 
United States,” in Mémorial International Frantz Fanon: Interventions et Communications 
Prononcées à l’Occasion du Mémorial International Frantz Fanon de Fort-de-France (Marti-
nique) du 31 mars–3 avril 1982 (Paris and Dakar: Présence Africaine, 1984), 210.
 26. Walters, “The Impact of Frantz Fanon,” 210.
 27. Robert Scheer, ed., Eldridge Cleaver: Post-Prison Writings and Speeches  (New York: Ram-
parts/Random House, 1969), 18.
 28. Black Panther Party: Part 1, Hearings Before The Committee on Internal Security, House of 
Representatives, Ninety-First Congress, Second Session (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1970–71), 2807.
 29. Stokely Carmichael, Black Power: An Address by Stokely Carmichael at the Dialectics of 
Liberation Congress, London, England, 1967. LP record. Liberation, 1967.
 30. William Van Deburg, New Day In Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American 
Culture, 1965–1975 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 61.
 31. Aristide Zolberg and Vera Zolberg, “The Americanization of Frantz Fanon,” in Americans
From Africa: Old Memories, New Moods , ed. Peter I. Rose (Chicago: Atherton, 1970), 
198.
 32. Nathan Hare, “Algiers 1969: A Report on the Pan-African Cultural Festival,” Black Scholar
1, no. 1 (November 1969): 3.
 33. Robert Scheer, Eldridge Cleaver, 74–75.
 34. Kathleen Cleaver, “Back to Africa: The Evolution of the International Section of the Black 
Panther Party (1969–1972),” in The Black Panther Party Reconsidered, ed. Charles E. Jones 
(Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1998), 217.
 35. All-African Cultural Festival Handbook (Algiers, Algeria: Organization of African Unity 
General Secretariat, 1969), 1.
 36. All-African Cultural Festival Handbook, 1.
 37. “La Presse Africaine et Le Festival,” Alger 1969: Bulletin D’Information du 1er Festival 
Culturel Panafricain 4 (May 15, 1969): 40–43.
 38. Kenneth C. Landry, “Algerian Festival to Spotlight Africa’s Vast Cultural Heritage,” 
Muhammad Speaks, July 13, 1969, 31.
 39. Copy of original in author’s possession.
 40. Dave Burrell, interview by James G. Spady, date unknown. Unpublished manuscript in 
possession of James G. Spady.
 41. Henri Lopes, interview by author, Paris, France, June 13, 2003. Unpublished manuscript 
in author’s possession. T ranslated from French by the author.
 42. Houari Boumedienne, “The Algerian Festival: Inaugural Address,” in New African Litera-
ture and the Arts: Vol. 3, ed. Joseph Okpaku (New York: The Third Press, 1973), 1.
 43. Eldridge Cleaver, Black Panther, 35mm film, directed and filmed by William Klein 
(Algiers, Algeria: ONCIC (Algerian National Film Board), 1970).
 44. Eldridge Cleaver, Black Panther.
 45. Ibid.


--- PAGE 125 ---
Black Routes to Islam118
 46. Manifeste Culturel Panafricain: Premier Festival Culturel Panafricain, Alger, 21 Juillet 1 
Août 1969, microfilm (Addis Abeba: Service de Presse & d’Information du Secrétariat 
Général de l’O.U.A., 1969).
 47. “Le Festival Culturel Panafricain D’Alger 1969,” Souffles (4th trimester 1969/January–
February 1970).
 48. Dennis Brutus, interview by author, Philadelphia, PA, February 14, 2004. Unpublished 
manuscript in author’s possession.
 49. Russell, “Algerian Journey,” 355–64.
 50. Barbara Chase-Riboud, interview by James G. Spady, Philadelphia, November 14, 2003. 
Unpublished manuscript in possession of James G. Spady.
 51. Lopes, interview by author.
 52. Haki Madhubuti, interview by author, Philadelphia, February 14, 2004. Unpublished 
manuscript in author’s possession.
 53. Hoyt Fuller, Journey to Africa (Chicago: Third World Press, 1971), 94–95.
 54. Barbara Easley, quoted in Robin J. Hayes, “‘A Free Black Mind is a Concealed Weapon’: 
Institutions and Social Movements in the African Diaspora,” Souls 9, no. 3 (July 2007): 
231.
 55. Sanche de Gramont, “Our Other Man In Algiers,” New York Times Magazine, November 
1, 1970, 30.
 56. de Gramont, “Our Other Man In Algiers,” 30.
 57. Melvin McNair, Joyce Tillerson, George Brown, and Jean McNair, Nous, Noirs Américains 
évadés Du Ghetto (Paris: éditions Du Seuil, 1978), 314.
 58. Cleaver, “Back to Africa”; McNair et al., Nous, Noirs Américains.
 59. McNair et al., Nous, Noirs Américains; Richard Witkin, “3 Hijack Jet, Collect $1-Million 
and Fly to Algeria,” New York Times, August 1, 1972, 1, 69; Robert Lindsey, “Once More 
Into The Breach . . . ” New York Times, August 6, 1972, E2; “No-Profit Hijack,” New York
Times, August 3, 1972, 32.
 60. McNair et al., Nous, Noirs Américains.
 61. “The ransom impounded in Algiers was the largest ever paid to hijackers in this country,” 
reported Robert Lindsey, “Algerians Seize 1-Million Ransom,” New York Times, August 2, 
1972, 1.
 62. Lindsey, “Algerians Seize 1-Million Ransom,” 1.
 63. “Natural Gas Deal Strengthens U.S. Economic Ties to Algeria,” New York Times, July 26, 
1969, 2.
 64. Memorandum of conversation between Algerian Minister of Foreign Affairs Bouteflika 
and Secretary of State Rogers. T elegram 188030 From the Department of State to the 
Mission to the United Nations and the Interests Section in Algeria, October 14, 1972, 
1933Z. National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, POL 7 ALG.
 65. Memorandum of conversation between Algerian Minister of Foreign Affairs Bouteflika 
and Secretary of State Rogers.
 66. Bernard Gwertzman, “Kissinger Arrives in Cairo After 2-Hour Algeria Talk,” New York
Times, December 14, 1973, 14.
 67. McNair et al., Nous, Noirs Américains évadés Du Ghetto, 22.
 68. “France Sentences 4 Americans Convicted in Hijacking of Airliner,” New York Times ,
November 25, 1978, 8.
 69. “France Sentences 4 Americans,” 8.
 70. Ibid.
 71. Ibid.
 72. Larry Neal, “The Black Writer’s Role,” Liberator 6, no. 6 (June 1966): 8.


--- PAGE 126 ---
From Harlem to Algiers 119
 73. Joans, “The Pan-African Pow-Wow,” 4.
 74. See James G. Spady, H. Samy Alim, and Samir Meghelli, Tha Global Cipha: Hip Hop 
Culture and Consciousness (Philadelphia: Black History Museum Press, 2006).
 75. As of the time of submission of this chapter for publication, the 2nd Pan-African Festival 
(July 2009) had not yet occurred.


--- PAGE 127 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 128 ---
C HAPTER  7
Let Us Be Moors
Race, Islam, and 
“Connected Histories”
Hishaam D. Aidi
“¡Seamos moros!” wrote the Cuban poet and nationalist Jose Marti in
1893, in support of the Berber uprising against Spanish rule in northern Morocco. 
“Let us be Moors . . . the revolt in the Rif is not an isolated incident, but an 
outbreak of the change and realignment that have entered the world. Let us be 
Moors . . . we [Cubans] who will probably die by the hand of Spain.”
1 Writing at 
a time when the scramble for Africa and Asia was at full throttle, Marti was accen-
tuating connections between those great power forays and Spanish depredations 
in Cuba, even as the rebellion of 1895 germinated on his island.
Throughout the past century, particularly during the Cold War Latin Ameri-
can leaders from Cuba’s Fidel Castro to Argentina’s Juan Perón would express 
support for Arab political causes and call for Arab-Latin solidarity in the face of 
imperial domination, often highlighting cultural links to the Arab world through 
Moorish Spain. Castro, in particular, made a philo-Arab Pan-Africanism central 
to his regime’s ideology and policy initiatives. In his famous 1959 speech on race, 
the jefe maximo underlined Cuba‘s African and Moorish origins: “We all have 
lighter or darker skin. Lighter skin implies descent from Spaniards who them-
selves were colonized by the Moors that came from Africa. Those who are more 
or less dark-skinned came directly from Africa. Moreover, nobody can consider 
himself as being of pure, much less superior, race.”
2
With the launching of the “war on terror,” and particularly with the invasion 
of Iraq, political leaders and activists in Latin America have been warning of a new 
imperial age and again declaring solidarity with the Arab world. Some refer rather 
This chapter originally appeared in Middle East Report, Issue 229, Winter 2003.


--- PAGE 129 ---
Black Routes to Islam122
quixotically to a Moorish past. Linking the war on Iraq to Plan Colombia and to 
the Bush administration’s alleged support for a coup against him, the erratic Ven-
ezuelan strongman Hugo Chavez has repeatedly urged his countrymen to “return 
to their Arab roots” and has attempted to mobilize the country’s mestizo and black 
majority against white supremacy. “They call me the monkey or Black,” Chavez 
says of his domestic and international opponents. “They can’t stand that someone 
like me was elected.”
3
In less contentious terms, Brazil’s left-leaning President Lula da Silva visited 
the Middle East in early December 2003 to seek “more objective” relations with 
the Arab world, to call for an “independent, democratic Palestinian state,” and 
to launch a common market with the Arab world as an alternative to the North 
American market (particularly with many in Arab countries boycotting American 
products).
4 Brazil’s largest trade union federation strongly denounced post-Sep-
tember 11 U.S. intervention in Colombia, Venezuela, and the Middle East, 
praising the protest movements that have appeared against U.S. and Israeli 
“militarism” and calling on Brazilian workers to join in the struggle “against 
Sharon’s Nazi-Zionist aggression against the Palestinian people” and in support 
of the intifada.
5
The Other September 11 Effect
In the age of the “war on terror,” such expressions from the Western world of 
affinity with the Arab world are not confined to statements of political solidarity. 
In Latin America, Europe, and the United States, for example, there has been 
a sharp increase in conversion to Islam. At the first world congress of Spanish-
speaking Muslims held in Seville in April 2003, the scholar Mansur Escudero, 
citing “globalization,” said that there were 10 to 12 million Spanish speakers 
among the world’s 1.2 billion Muslims.
6 In the United States, researchers note 
that usually 25,000 people a year become Muslim but, by several accounts, that 
number has quadrupled since September 11.
7 In Europe, an Islamic center in 
Holland reported a tenfold increase and the New Muslims Project in England 
reported a “steady stream” of new converts.
8 Several analysts have noted that in 
the United Kingdom, many converts are coming from middle-class and profes-
sional backgrounds, not simply through the prison system or ghetto mosques, as 
is commonly believed.
9 The Muslim population in Spain is also growing due to 
conversion as well as immigration and intermarriage.10
Different explanations have been advanced to account for this intriguing phe-
nomenon, known as “the other September 11 effect,” the primary effects being 
anti-Muslim and anti-immigrant backlash and infringements upon civil liber-
ties. Commenting on how the accused “dirty bomber” Jose Padilla and the shoe 
bomber Richard Reid converted to Islam, French scholar Olivier Roy observes, 
“T wenty years ago such individuals would have joined radical leftist movements, 
which have now disappeared or become ‘bourgeois’ . . . Now only two Western 
movements of radical protest claim to be ‘internationalist’: the anti-globalization


--- PAGE 130 ---
Let Us Be Moors 123
movement and radical Islamists. T o convert to Islam today is a way for a European 
rebel to find a cause; it has little to do with theology.”11 This portrayal of Islam as 
an outlet for the West’s political malcontents ignores the powerful allure of certain 
aspects of Islamic theology and begs the question of why, for at least a century, 
even when communism was still in vogue, minorities in the West have seen Islam 
as a particularly attractive alternative. Roy’s formulation also neglects the critical 
elements of racism and racialization. At least since Malcolm X, internationalist 
Islam has been seen as a response to Western racism and imperialism.
Though Westerners of different social and ethnic backgrounds are gravitat-
ing toward Islam, it is mostly the ethnically marginalized of the West histori-
cally, mostly black but, nowadays, also Latino, Native American, Arab, and South 
Asian minorities who, often attracted by the purported universalism and color-
blindness of Islamic history and theology, are asserting membership in a trans-
national umma and thereby challenging or “exiting” the white West. Even for 
white converts like John Walker Lindh, becoming Muslim involves a process of 
racialization renouncing their whiteness because while the West stands for rac-
ism and white supremacy on a global scale, Islam is seen to represent tolerance 
and anti-imperialism. This process of racialization is also occurring in diasporic 
Muslim communities in the West, which are growing increasingly race-conscious 
and “black” as anti-Muslim racism increases. T o cope, Muslims in the diaspora are 
absorbing lessons from the African American freedom movement, including from 
strains of African American Islam.
Over the past two years, Islam has provided an anti-imperial idiom and 
imaginary community of belonging for many subordinate groups in the West, as 
Islamic culture and art stream into the West through minority and diaspora com-
munities and, often in fusion with African American art forms, slowly seep into 
the cultural mainstream. Subsequently, many of the cultural and protest move-
ments—antiglobalization, anti-imperialist, antiracist—in the West today have 
Islamic or African-American undercurrents. At a time of military conflict and 
extreme ideological polarization between the West and the Muslim world, Islamic 
culture is permeating political and cultural currents, remaking identities and cre-
ating cultural linkages between Westerners and the Muslim world.
Latino Back Channels
Recent journalistic accounts have noted the growing rate of conversion to Islam 
in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas and the often violent clashes between 
Christian and Spanish Muslim missionaries proselytizing among the indigenous 
Mayan community. The Muslim campaign in Chiapas is led by a Spaniard 
from Granada, Aureliano Perez, member of an international Sufi order called 
al-Murabitun, though he is contending with a rival missionary, Omar Weston, 
the Nation of Islam’s local representative. Particularly interesting about the several 
hundred Mayan Muslims is the view of some of the converts that although some 
of the missionaries are Spanish like the conquistadors, their embrace of Islam is


--- PAGE 131 ---
Black Routes to Islam124
a historic remedy for the Spanish conquest and the consequent oppression. “Five 
hundred years ago, they came to destroy us,” said Anastasio Gomez Gomez, age 
twenty-one, who now goes by Ibrahim. “Five hundred years later, other Spaniards 
came to return a knowledge that was taken away from us.”
12
The view of 1492 as a tragic date signaling the end of a glorious era and the 
related idea that conversion to Islam entails a reclaiming of that past is common 
among the Latino Muslim community in the United States. That community, 
estimated in 2000 at 30,000 to 40,000 members, has grown in the past two years, 
with Latino Muslim centers and da’wa (proselytizing) organizations in New York, 
Los Angeles, Miami, Fresno, and Houston.
13 The banner hanging at the Alianza 
Islamica center in the South Bronx celebrates the African and Islamic roots of 
Latin America: against a red, white, and blue backdrop stands a sword-wielding 
Moor, flanked by a Taino Indian and a black African. The Spanish conquistador 
is conspicuously absent. Imam (Omar Abduraheem) Ocasio of the Alianza Isl-
amica speaks passionately about the continuity between Moorish Spain and Latin 
America: “Most of the people who came to Latin America and the Spanish Carib-
bean were from southern Spain, Andalusia; they were Moriscos, Moors forcefully 
converted to Christianity. The leaders, army generals, curas [priests] were white 
men from northern Spain . . . sangre azul, as they were called. The southerners, 
who did the menial jobs . . . servants, artisans, foot soldiers . . . were of mixed 
Arab and African descent. They were stripped of their religion, culture, brought 
to the so-called New World where they were enslaved with African slaves . . . 
But the Moriscos never lost their culture . . . we are the cultural descendants of 
the Moors.”
14 The Puerto Rican imam writes, “Islamically inspired values were 
conveyed ever so subtly in the T rojan horse of Spanish heritage throughout the 
centuries and, after 500 years, Latinos were now ready to return.”
15
In the past two years, Islam and the Arab-Muslim world seem to have entered 
even more poignantly into the Latin American imagination, gaining a presence in 
political discourse and strongly influencing Hispanic popular culture. This Arab 
cultural invasion of Latin America, which has reverberated in mainstream Ameri-
can culture, is often attributed to the Brazilian telenovela El Clon and Lebanese-
Colombian pop icon Shakira.
El Clon, the highest-rated soap opera ever shown on T elemundo, a U.S. Span-
ish-language channel, reportedly reaches 2.8 million Hispanic households in the 
United States as well as 85 million people in Brazil and tens of millions across 
Latin America. The series, which began broadcasting shortly after September 
11, 2001, tells the story of Jade, a young Brazilian Muslim who returns to her 
mother’s homeland of Morocco after her mother’s death in Brazil. There she falls 
in love and settles down with Lucas, a Christian Brazilian, and adapts to life in an 
extended family setting in the old city of Fez. Filmed in Rio de Janeiro and Fez, 
the telenovela offers a profusion of Orientalist imagery from veiled belly dancers 
swaying seductively behind ornate latticework to dazzling shots of Marrakesh and 
Fez spliced with footage of scantily clad women on Rio’s beaches and, of course, 
incessant supplications of “Ay, por favor, Allah!” from Jade’s neighbors in the


--- PAGE 132 ---
Let Us Be Moors 125
medina. The Moroccan ambassador to Brazil, in a letter to a Sao Paolo newspaper, 
criticized the series for its egregious “cultural errors,” “gross falsification,” and 
“mediocre images” promoting stereotypes of Muslim women as submissive and 
men as polygamists leading lives of “luxury and indolence.”
Despite the kitsch, El Clon has triggered what Latin Trade called “Mideast 
fever” across Latin America. Belly dancing and “Middle Eastern-style jewelry” 
became “the rage in Rio and Sao Paolo,” Brazilians began throwing “A Thousand 
and One Nights” parties, “Talk to a Sheikh” chat rooms cropped up online, and 
two new agencies opened up to offer package tours to North Africa. (In his letter, 
the Moroccan ambassador acknowledged that Brazilian tourism to Morocco had 
increased by 300 percent thanks to El Clon.) A journalist visiting Quito, Ecuador, 
found viewers of the series “wide-eyed and drop-jawed for all things Arab.”
16 Even 
in the United States, where El Clon’s broadcast was almost blocked due to alleged 
potential controversy, it has exerted cultural influence upon the Latino commu-
nity and others. In New York, observers note the El Clon–triggered fashion for 
Arab jewelry and hip scarves, the overflowing belly dancing classes, and a recently 
opened beauty parlor called El Clon in Queens.
17
Through the Latino back channel, the impact of Shakira in bringing Arab cul-
ture to the MTV audience has also been considerable. The Lebanese-Colombian 
singer was bombarded with questions by the media about her views “as an Arab” 
on the September 11 attacks and advised to drop the belly dancing and the Ara-
bic riffs from her music because it could hurt her album sales, but she refused. “I 
would have to rip out my heart or my insides in order to be able to please them,” 
said the songstress, and expressed horror at hate crimes against “everything that’s 
Arab, or seems Arab.”
18 During the run-up to the Iraq war, Shakira’s performances 
took on an explicitly political tone, with her dancers wearing masks of T ony Blair, 
George W . Bush, and Fidel Castro. Backdrop screens flashed images of Bush and 
Saddam Hussein as two puppets playing a sinister game of chess, with the Grim 
Reaper as the puppeteer. She also undertook a highly publicized tour of the Mid-
dle East (though her concerts in Casablanca, T unis, and Beirut were postponed), 
during which she visited her father’s ancestral village in the Bekaa Valley. Viewers 
across the region were delighted when Shakira appeared on Egyptian television 
singing the tunes of Fairuz. In Europe, the United States, South America, and 
even the Middle East, the belly-dancing star has fostered a reported mania for hip 
scarves with coins and tassels. In a random check of Cairo nightclubs, Egyptian 
government officials confiscated twenty-six Shakira outfits “weighing no more 
than 150 grams [5 ounces]” and deemed “scandalous,”
19 but local filmmakers 
are currently negotiating with government officials over rights to a film project 
called Shakira fi al-Munira, about a young E gyptian girl infatuated with the 
Colombian chanteuse.
While the craze for Arab culture has occurred in the wake of September 11 
and the ensuing war on terrorism, it is not necessarily political. Commenting on 
the popularity of shawarma and hookahs in Quito, one journalist observes that 
“the new fascination with Arabia comes at a time when there are new reasons for


--- PAGE 133 ---
Black Routes to Islam126
anti-American sentiment”—the recent policy of currency dollarization—but adds 
reassuringly that “El Clon’s following surely won’t produce a new sect of Islamic 
fundamentalist terrorists in Latin America.” It is also not clear that conversion 
to Islam necessarily constitutes political or cultural resistance. Referring to the 
vogue for Islam and Arabic among Spanish youth, one Catalan journalist wryly 
observes, “It will take more than teenagers converting to an Islam-lite to stop 
[Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria] Aznar’s Christian nationalism and Castil-
ian imperialism. We need a civil dialogue about our relations with the Orient.”
20
Belly dancing and learning elementary Arabic may not be acts of resistance but 
such activities create important, albeit imaginary, cultural linkages that can be 
activated for political purposes. As Miles Copeland, head of the Mondo Melodia 
label, who plans to release a film on the American belly dancing craze PR News-
wire, “Belly dancing is about art, not politics, but in experiencing the art, you also 
experience the culture, and that becomes political in and of itself.”
21 Interest in 
Arab culture and conversions are bringing Islam into the imagination of Western 
youth, feeding powerful movements and cultures of protest.
From Harlem to the Casbah
In No Name in the Street, James Baldwin reflects on the “uneasy” reaction he 
would get when, while in France in 1948, he would “claim kinship” with the 
Algerians living there. “The fact that I had never seen the Algerian casbah was of 
no more relevance . . . than the fact that the Algerians had never seen Harlem. 
The Algerian and I were both, alike, victims of this history [of Europe in Africa], 
and I was still a part of Africa, even though I had been carried out of it nearly four 
hundred years before.”
22 Most French-born Arabs have never been to Harlem but 
“claim kinship” with African Americans as they draw inspiration from the black 
freedom struggle. Numerous French-Arab (Beur) intellectuals and activists have 
noted their indebtedness to African American liberation thought, and the secu-
lar prointegration Beur movement of the early 1980s organized campaigns and 
marches modeled on the U.S. civil rights struggle. But in the early 1990s, as the 
impoverished, ethnically segregated banlieues mushroomed around French cities, 
the discourse of integration began to give way to talk of self-imposed exclusion 
and warnings that the children of immigrants “had gone in a separate direction.” 
The region of Lyons, where 100,000 gathered for the famous march for integra-
tion in 1983, is today cited by commentators as evidence of the failure of assimi-
lation. Lyons, by one account, has become a “ghetto of Arabs” and has fallen to 
Islamist influence, boasting six neighborhood boys in the U.S. military detention 
center at Guantanamo Bay.
23
The generation of Black and Arab Muslim youth that came of age in crime-
ridden banlieues that periodically explode into car-burning riots, and that are 
monitored by a heavy-handed police force, is in no mood for integration. By 
some estimates, 50 to 60 percent of the French prison population is Muslim.
24
French commentators are increasingly wondering if they have developed a “race


--- PAGE 134 ---
Let Us Be Moors 127
problem” like that of the United States, with the attendant pathologies of eth-
nic ghettoes, family breakdown, drugs, violence, and, of particular concern these 
days, Islamism. As in the American ghetto, disintegrating family units have been 
replaced by new organizations: gangs, posses, and religious associations, particu-
larly Islamic groups, which provide services and patrol the cités, the housing proj-
ects where most immigrants live.
25
The confluence of Islam and urban marginality in France was displayed in a 
consummately postcolonial moment on October 6, 2001, when France and Alge-
ria met in their first soccer match since the Algerian war of independence. The 
match was stopped prematurely when thousands of French-born Arab youth, see-
ing Algeria losing, raided the field chanting “Bin Laden! Bin Laden!” and hurled 
bottles at two female French ministers.
26 The ill-fated match, coming on the 
heels of September 11, led to hysterical warnings of an intifada simmering in the 
heart of France, an Islamic fifth column, the “unassimilability” of certain immi-
grants, and, again, an American-style “race problem.” Like American pundits, 
the French are concerned about whether Islamic and Muslim organizations that 
have emerged in the banlieues will keep youths out of trouble or radicalize them. 
An American writing for the Weekly Standard notes, “It’s the Farrakhan problem. 
Mosques do rescue youths from delinquency, idleness and all sorts of other ills. 
But in so doing, they become power brokers in areas where almost all disputes 
are resolved by violence and the most tribal kind of woospeh [respect, in a French 
accent, supposedly]. And it is that mastery of a violent environment—not the 
social service record—that these groups call on when they make demands on the 
larger society.”
27
The French media has shown a keen interest in the rising conversion to Islam 
in the United States and Europe, particularly in the overlap of Islam and race, 
or, more specifically, ethnic awareness, mobilization, and self-segregation. An 
expose in an April 2003 edition of the magazine L ’Express opened with the follow-
ing statement: “Blacks, whites, Latinos, Asians . . . every year, 50,000 to 80,000 
[Americans] convert to Islam. Internal enemies, members of the ‘axis of evil’?” 
The French government’s attempts to control Islamic mobilization in the banli-
eues through elections for a national Islamic council (aimed, in the words of the 
interior minister, at taking Islam out of “cellars and garages”) backfired when the 
conservative Union of Islamic Organizations, inspired by Egypt’s banned Muslim 
Brotherhood, won 14 out of 41 seats.
Zacarias Moussaoui, the “twentieth hijacker” awaiting trial in the United 
States, in many ways embodies the story of Islam and racial exclusion in France. 
Although he did not grow up impoverished in the cities, by all accounts, the 
French-Moroccan harbored a deep racial rage. In his youth, Moussaoui was often 
ridiculed because of his dark skin and frizzy hair, and repeatedly called négre (nig-
ger), but it was after the 1991 Gulf War that he became politicized. He began to 
consider himself “black,” joining the “Kid Brothers,” a university group modeled 
after the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood, and came back from a stint in London 
deeply hostile toward whites. “He became a racist, a black racist, and he would use


--- PAGE 135 ---
Black Routes to Islam128
the pejorative African word toubab to describe white people,” said his brother. 28
Moussaoui raged against Western permissiveness and imperialism in Algeria, Pal-
estine, and Chechnya.29
Richard Reid, the “shoe bomber,” who became radicalized in the same Brixton 
mosque as Moussaoui, embodies the similarly distressing urban and racial situa-
tion in Britain. West Indian and South Asian youth live in benighted “mill and 
mosque” towns, devastated by capital flight in the late 1980s and 1990s, where 
the anti-immigrant British National Party is making inroads and race riots erupt 
frequently. Many of these youth have drifted toward radical Islamist groups. By 
all accounts, the petty thief and graffiti artist known as ENROL embraced Islam 
while in Feltham Young Offenders Institution, to seek solace from racism. His 
father Robin tried to explain Reid’s odyssey to Islam as a result of the difficulty of 
being of mixed race. “Islam accepts you for who you are,” the father told CNN 
talk show host Larry King. “Even I was a Muslim for a little bit . . . because I was 
fed up with racial discrimination.” In an interview with the Guardian, Robin 
continued, “About ten years ago, I met up with Richard after not seeing him for 
a few years. He was a little bit downhearted. I suggested to him, ‘Why don’t you 
become a Muslim? They treated me all right.’”
The mixing of Islam and racial awareness in Europe is also leading to political 
mobilization. The Arab European League (AEL), headed by the fiery Lebanese-
born Dyab Abou Jahjah, is explicitly modeled on the American civil rights move-
ment, borrowing slogans (“By Any Means Necessary!”) and protest techniques 
from the Black Panthers and the Nation of Islam and aiming to mobilize Arab 
and Muslim youth across Europe to lobby European governments to make Arabic 
one of the official languages of the European Union and to gain state funding for 
Islamic schools. Based in Brussels, but with chapters opening in France and Hol-
land, the AEL has launched a cross-border Arab pride movement and organized 
marches against the U.S. war in Iraq and in solidarity with the Palestinian inti-
fada. Known as the “Arab Malcolm X,” Abou Jahjah, who says he finds the ideas 
of integration “degrading,” admits being inspired by the slain African American 
civil rights leader, who “was also against assimilation . . . fought for civil rights 
and was also inspired by Islam.”
30 “We’re a civil rights movement, not a club of 
fundamentalist fanatics who want to blow things up,” he told the New York Times
on March 1, 2003. “In Europe, the immigrant organizations are Uncle T oms. 
We want to polarize people, to sharpen the discussion, to unmask the myth that 
the system is democratic for us.” The AEL has also organized Black Panther-style 
“Arab patrols” to “police the police.” Groups of unarmed Arab youths dressed in 
black follow the police around, carrying video cameras and flyers that read, “Bad 
cops: the AEL is watching you.” Fusing African American, Islamic, and Arab 
elements in its style and rhetoric, the AEL has become a political force to be reck-
oned with, even prompting the Belgian government to attempt to ban its patrols 
on the basis of a 1930s law that proscribes private militias.


--- PAGE 136 ---
Let Us Be Moors 129
“Le Respect” and “Les Pitbulls”
Seul le beat aujourd-hui nous lie et nous unit.
[T oday only the beat links and unites us.]
—Saliha, “Danse le Beat”
Hip-hop has emerged as the idiom for the urban activism of minority youth in 
Europe. For Muslim youth experiencing the crackdown on immigrants, as well 
as state withdrawal and welfare cuts, hip-hop offers a chance to express critiques, 
vent rage, declare solidarity with other marginalized youth (particularly African 
Americans), and display cultural pride—to show, as New York rapper DMX says, 
“who we be.”
31
If American rap has been criticized for its materialism, nihilism, and politi-
cal nonchalance, French hip-hop offers trenchant critiques of racism, globaliza-
tion, and imperialism. Numerous groups such as Yazid and La Fonky Family 
deal explicitly with the challenges of being Arab and Muslim in the West and 
relations between Islam and the West. In their hit single, “Je Suis Si T riste” (“I’m 
So Sad”), the Marseilles-based rap crew 3
eme Oeil (Third Eye), made up of the 
Comorian-born Boss One (Mohammed), Jo Popo (Mohammed), and Said, offer 
biting social commentary over an infectious, looping bass line. Decrying hate 
crimes against veiled Muslim women in France, condemning police brutality and 
mass incarceration (with a special shout out to Mumia Abu Jamal), the rappers 
focus their lyrical fire on the West’s “stranglehold” (la main-mise) on the East.
In addition to verbal release, hip-hop is also used to combat racism and to pro-
mote black-white-Arab relations, as in the Urban Peace Festivals and spoken-word 
poetry events (les slameurs) organized by SOS Racisme. Hip-hop, interestingly, is 
also being used to counter Islamist influence in the banlieues. The Beurette leader 
Fadela Amara, who organized the march “Ni putes ni soumises” (“Neither whores 
nor submissive”), a march that has now developed into a women’s rights organiza-
tion affiliated with SOS Racisme, often invites Muslim female rappers to spread 
a feminist message. “Ni putes, ni soumises” aims to mobilize youth against ghet-
toes and for equality, but also to counter the Islamist organizations such as the 
powerful Union of Islamic Organizations, which delivers services in the cites in 
exchange for veiling. Amara says discrimination and unemployment make many 
young men feel “excluded from the French project.” These youths, she says, often 
return to Islamic traditions, opposing gender mixing and women’s education and 
sometimes assaulting women who do not dress according to their idea of mod-
esty.
32 French Muslim rappers and R&B singers publicly and collectively con-
demned the September 11 attacks, saying the terrorists were, in the words of Ideal 
J, a Franco-Haitian convert to Islam, “dishonoring the faith.” Abd Al Malik of the 
New African Poets, a Congolose convert to Islam, noted the importance of rap 
and Islam to young ghetto dwellers: “Rap has opened a world to us, empowering 
us young men, and Islam has allowed us to flourish by teaching us respect for ‘the 
other.’ [But] the Taliban are instrumentalizing the religion.”
33


--- PAGE 137 ---
Black Routes to Islam130
Attempts by some French Islamists to boycott American products and market 
products like Mecca Cola are failing since banlieusards remain loyal to American 
streetwear labels like Fubu and Phat Farm, often claiming that such clothing is an 
anti-American, but pro-black, statement. More recently, local banlieue streetwear 
clothing lines have appeared with names like Bullrot (a combination of pitbull 
and rottweiler) and Adedi (an acronym for Association de differences), the latter 
founded by a Moroccan, a Gabonese, and a Senegalese to combat racism and 
extremism and to celebrate difference.
34
French commentators associate hip-hop with Islam, claiming that rap, like 
Islam, often brings rage, pathology, and dysfunction. The anti-immigrant National 
Front of Jean Le Pen and its splinter, the National Republican Movement, have 
historically denounced hip-hop. In March 2001, both Far Right parties opposed 
the use of public funds to finance the first Hip-Hop Dance World Cup in Vil-
lepinte, stating that “hip-hop is a movement belonging to immigrants of Afri-
can origin installed in France and which constitutes a call to sedition against 
our institutions.”
35 More recently, however, the National Front has begun to use 
hip-hop as a way to spread its political message, “win back” French youth, and 
counter Arab and American influence in French culture. The white supremacist 
rap crew Basic Celto, affiliated with the National Republican Movement, has as 
its objective to break “immigrants’ monopoly” over hip-hop “which diffuses the 
immigrants’ complaints.” Basic Celto aims to promote a “national revolutionary” 
rap with a “Christian identity” and to draw “francais d’origine” away from immi-
grant influence.
36
But the allure of Islam and Islam-inflected cultures like hip-hop and rai to 
French youth continues to grow, prompting much editorial pondering. Le Monde
ran a story on how Ramadan is increasingly observed in French schools, even by 
non-Muslims, and there have also been reports of many non-Muslim girls wear-
ing headscarves in solidarity with Muslim schoolgirls sent home for wearing le 
foulard. Commenting on Le Pen’s remark that hip-hop is a dangerous musical 
genre that originated in the casbahs of Algeria, rapper Boss One (Mohammed) of 
3
eme Oeil said, “For Le Pen, everything bad—rap, crime, AID—comes from Alge-
ria or Islam . . . The more Bush and Chirac attack Islam and say it’s bad, the more 
young people will think it’s good, and the more the oppressed will go to Islam and 
radical preachers. Especially here in America. Because life is hard in France, but 
we have a social safety net.”
37
Commentators have also blamed hip-hop for bringing social ills associated 
with the American ghetto to France. “[French-Arab youth] intentionally imitate 
belligerent Afro-American lifestyles, down to ‘in-your-face’ lyrics for booming rap 
music,” moaned one observer.
38 Some have pointed to the “African-Americaniza-
tion” of the speech patterns of French youth, noting that their verbal jousting is 
similar to that of “American rappers from black ghettoes.”
39 Indeed, the culture 
of France’s suburban ghettoes is heavily influenced by the trends of the Ameri-
can inner city—the urban argot, street codes of conduct, and “honor system” 
are strikingly similar.
40 In January 2000, a law was passed creating a police unit


--- PAGE 138 ---
Let Us Be Moors 131
to monitor the behavior of pit bulls and Rottweilers in housing projects where, 
as in the United States, such dogs had become very popular during the 1990s 
among urban youth.
41 The slurs used against blacks (negres) and Arabs (in France, 
bougnoles, in Spain, Moros , and in Belgium, makkak, which means white ape) 
have become commonly used terms of endearment among Muslim youth, as with 
the term “nigger” in the United States. But clearly, Muslim European youth have 
not learned misogyny and rage from hip-hop or from African Americans. The fact 
that hip-hop is being used by secular urban movements to counter Islamism and 
racism is an illustration of the growing racial consciousness of Muslim youth in 
Europe, the deep resonance of the African American experience, and how imagi-
nation can help construct a cultural world to resist state oppression and religious 
fanaticism.
Keepin’ It Halal
The hip-hop movement has a powerful oppositional streak that makes it both 
attractive and troubling to political actors. Hip-hop’s ability to jangle the hege-
monic discourse was recently seen with Jay-Z’s “Leave Iraq Alone” verse and Out-
kast’s antiwar hit “Bombs Over Baghdad,” denouncing the first Gulf War, which 
was yanked off the air by MTV and Clear Channel when bombs began raining on 
Baghdad in March 2003.
42 Hip-hop artists have strongly opposed the war with-
out fear of the social opprobrium visited upon the Dixie Chicks and other white 
pop stars. As hip-hop mogul Russell Simmons put it, “Rappers don’t have to 
worry about anything. No one likes what they have to say anyway, so they’re not 
afraid to speak up.” But when hip-hop is infused with Islamic themes and politi-
cal allusions, the establishment press has found it particularly unsettling. Hence, 
the outrage over rapper Paris’s recently released and rapidly selling Sonic Jihad,
the cover of which features an airplane flying toward the White House, and the 
alleged purging of Arabic terms and references to Hussein from T upac Shakur’s 
recently released Better Dayz (though the slain rapper was referring not to the late 
Iraqi dictator, but to Hussein Fatal, a member of his Outlawz posse, which also 
includes Khadafi, Kastro, Komani, and Idi Amin).
43
In the fall of 2002, accused sniper John Muhammad, formerly of the Nation 
of Islam, sent notes to the police that referenced lyrics from rappers who are “Five 
Percenters,” a heterodox Black Muslim sect. The subsequent media frenzy trig-
gered a soul-searching conversation within the Islamic hip-hop community that 
was rendered particularly urgent when Muslim hip-hoppers found themselves 
linked to the war on terror by Niger Innis, chairman of the conservative Congress 
of Racial Equality. Shortly after the arrest of John Muhammad, Innis met with 
Department of Justice officials to express concern over “domestic Black Muslims 
as a national security issue” and launched a campaign to counter Islamic recruit-
ment efforts in the nation’s prisons and colleges.
44 (A similar uproar occurred 
more recently in the United Kingdom when a hip-hop group named Shaikh T erra 
and the Soul Salah crew released a video “Dirty Kuffar” [“Dirty Unbelievers”], in


--- PAGE 139 ---
Black Routes to Islam132
which they salute Hamas and Hizbullah and praise Osama bin Laden. The “hate 
video” drew the attention of Labor MP Andrew Dismore, who described the 
video as “disgust[ing]” and “inexcusable” and launched a police investigation into 
the radical Muslim group.
45) Muslim rappers are asking themselves, should we be 
expected to “represent” Islam positively and avoid the misogynist and material-
istic excesses of mainstream hip-hop artists? Or should the aim be to “get paid” 
and gain wide success even if it means “playing with the haram (illicit)”? Of the 
U.S.-based Muslim hip-hop crews, Native Deen and Sons of Hagar have been 
praised for their positive political and religious messages. Native Deen, made up 
of three African American rappers who will not perform in venues that allow 
mixed dancing or serve alcohol, have been profiled in the New Yorker and even 
received praise from the State Department, but the group has yet to garner airtime 
on mainstream radio stations. The Des Moines–based Sons of Hagar, made up of 
Allahz Sword (Ahmad) and Ramadan Conchus (Abdul), both Arab Americans, 
and Keen Intellect (Kareem) and Musa, Irish American and Korean American 
converts to Islam, respectively, have also been praised for socially conscious lyrics. 
Their poignant single “Insurrection” (“It’s the Arab hunting season, and I ain’t 
leavin’ / I’m pushin’ the conscience button on you people / Where is the reason?”), 
and their track “Sisterssss,” in support of polygamy,
46 are popular in the under-
ground Muslim-Arab hip-hop scene. But Sons of Hagar has also not achieved 
mainstream exposure.
The Muslim rap crew that is gaining worldwide notoriety for its lyrical dex-
terity, stylistic appeal, and explicitly positive portrayal of Islam is the Denmark-
based trio Outlandish. Made up of a Moroccan, a Pakistani, and a Honduran, 
Outlandish has topped the charts with hits including “Guantanamo” (the chorus: 
“And I got all my Moros here, Guantanamo”) 
47 and “Aicha,” a remake of Cheb 
Khaled’s 1995 hit. The latter track, which saw heavy rotation on MTV Europe 
and climbed to fourth on the charts in Germany, has been hailed as the most 
positive depiction of Muslim women in a music video, with shots of preprayer 
ablution and veiled and unveiled Arab, South Asian, and African women. Rather 
than playing with the haram, Outlandish is about “keepin’ it halal” (licit).
American hip-hop commentators note that political, cerebral rap may be 
popular in Europe but if it cannot be “bling-blinged,” or sexed up, it will not 
sell in the United States. A recent dispute between Simmons and a segment of 
the African American Sunni community is illustrative. Though not a Muslim, 
Simmons has frequently declared his respect for Islam and the Nation of Islam 
(NOI) in particular. “I grew up on Farrakhan,” he said in one interview. “Where 
I grew up, there were dope fiends and black Muslims. If Muslims came by, you 
stood up straight.”
48 He also tried to broker talks between the NOI and American 
Jewish organizations, denounced the invasion of Iraq, helped organize Musicians 
United to Win Without War, and is currently planning a Middle East youth 
peace summit. But when a recent issue of his OneWorld magazine ran a cover with 
female rapper Li’l Kim wearing a “burka-like garment over her face” and “lingerie 
from the neck down” and in the same issue said, “Fuck Afghanistan,” Najee Ali,


--- PAGE 140 ---
Let Us Be Moors 133
director of the civil rights group Project Islamic Hope, demanded an apology to 
America’s Muslims. As someone active in brokering truces in the hip-hop world, 
Ali cited his Islamic duty “to the people of hip-hop and humanity” and called on 
Simmons to apologize for the magazine cover and for the “pornographic female 
rapper” Foxy Brown, who, in her song “Hot Spot,” produced by the Simmons-
founded Def Jam, says “MCs wanna eat me but it’s Ramadan.”
The Li’l Kim incident instigated a discussion over other not-so-halal trends in 
Islamic hip-hop. The cover of XXL magazine showing rapper Nas holding a glass 
of cognac and wearing prayer beads around his neck outraged many Muslims. 
“Why he imitatin’ the kufar (unbelievers, in Arabic) with the Hail Mary beads?!” 
fumed one blogger. Many Sunni Muslims have also criticized the style of some 
female Muslim hip-hoppers of wearing a headscarf (hijab) with midriff tops and 
the low-riding jeans popularized by Jennifer Lopez. These sartorially adventurous 
young Muslim women, known variously as “noochies” (Nubian hoochies), “halal 
honies,” and “bodacious bints” (“girls,” in Arabic) have provoked heated cyber 
debates about freedom of expression, female modesty, and the future of Islam in 
America. “Our deen (“religion,” in Arabic) is not meant to be rocked!” says hip-
hop journalist Adisa Banjoko, author of the forthcoming book The Light From the
East on Islamic influence in hip-hop. “I see these so-called Muslim sistas wearing a 
hijab and then a bustier, or a hijab with their belly button sticking out. You don’t 
put on a hijab and try to rock it! Or these brothers wearing Allah tattoos, or big 
medallions with Allah’s name—Allah is not to be bling-blinged!”
49
Just as controversial are the Arabic calligraphy tattoos that women, even out-
side the hip-hop community, have taken to wearing. The words “halal,” “haram,” 
and “sharmuta” (“whore” in Arabic but a term of endearment in certain circles 
these days) are tattooed on shoulders, thighs, or lower backs, and worn with bath-
ing suit tops or hip-hugging jeans. Some of these haram trends in Islamic hip-
hop are deliberate responses to orthodox or fundamentalist Islamic dress, like 
the “high-water pants” or “total hijabs” seen in some inner-city areas. Among 
young Muslim males, equally provocative are black T-shirts worn by some Shiite 
youth, which read, in crimson, “Every Day Is Ashura, Every Day Is Karbala”—
references to Shiite rituals commemorating the death of Imam Hussein in the 
seventh century and the Iraqi plain where he died in battle. Also troubling to 
some is the growing popularity of martial arts among urban Muslim youth, who 
say self-defense skills are necessary against gangsters and violent police. If many 
Black Muslims in the 1960s were practicing syncretic forms of martial arts like 
“Kushite boxing,” many of today’s young male hip-hoppers are learning “Islamic 
wrestling.” “The Prophet was a grappler,” explains one enthusiast. “The hadith 
(saying of the Prophet) teaches us to never hit the face of our opponent and that 
[Islamic] grappling allows you to win over an opponent without punching them 
and risking brain damage.”
Russell Simmons has said that “the coolest stuff about American culture, be 
it langu age, dress, or attitude, comes from the underclass—always has and 
always will.”
50 If so, then as Islam seeps into the American underclass and as


--- PAGE 141 ---
Black Routes to Islam134
Muslims populate the underclass in Europe, Islamic cultural elements will per-
colate upward into mainstream culture and society. For many American youth, 
Islamic hip-hop is their first encounter with Islam and often leads them to strug-
gle with issues of race, identity, and Western imperialism. As Bakari Kitwana has 
noted, “If asked about a specific political issue many hip-hop generationers can 
easily recall the first time their awareness on that issue was raised by rap music.”
51
In Europe, many North African youth are rediscovering Islam and becoming race 
conscious through Five Percenter and NOI rap lyrics. For many white hip-hop-
pers in the United States, the sought-after “ghetto pass” acceptance in the hip-hop 
community comes only with conversion to Islam, which is seen as a rejection of 
being white. The white rapper Everlast, formerly Eric Schrody of House of Pain, 
claims that conversion to Islam and mosque attendance allow him to visit ghetto 
neighborhoods he could never enter as a non-Muslim white.
52 Curiously, Ever-
last’s espousal of Islam caused static with the white rapper Eminem, who accused 
him of becoming Muslim to deny that he is a “homosexual white rappin’ Irish.” 
One young white Latino youth explained the link between Islam and his street 
credibility as follows: “In the Bronx, looking like me, you don’t get much respect. 
When I took the shihada (professed Islam), the brothers gave me respect, the 
white folk got nervous, even the police paid attention.”
53
Efforts are being made to direct the energy of Islamic hip-hop. In late July 
2003, the First Annual Islamic Family Reunion and Muslims in Hip-Hop Con-
ference and Concert was held in Orlando, Florida, with prominent imams from 
across the country leading three days of workshops on Muslim youth and stress-
ing the importance of deen, family, schooling, and organizing. Activities included 
Islamic spelling bees, Islamic knowledge competitions, and performances by “pos-
itive lyricists” like Native Deen. The conference also established Hallal Entertain-
ment, Inc., and helped launch the Islamic Crisis Emergency Response System, 
a Philadelphia-based organization which provides services to needy Muslim and 
non-Muslim families.
54 Fusing Islamic themes with the preeminent global youth 
culture, Islamic hip-hop has emerged as a powerful internationalist subculture for 
disaffected youth around the world.
Roaring from the East
“The specter of a storm is haunting the Western world,” wrote the Black Power 
poet Askia Muhammad T ouré in 1965. “The Great Storm, the coming Black 
Revolution, is rolling like a tornado; roaring from the East; shaking the moorings 
of the earth as it passes through countries ruled by oppressive regimes . . . Yes, 
all over this sullen planet, the multi-colored ‘hordes’ of undernourished millions 
are on the move like never before in human history.”
55 T oure was pondering the 
appeal of “the East” to African American youth in the aftermath of the 1955 
Bandung conference. There, President Sukarno of Indonesia had told the repre-
sentatives of twenty-nine African and Asian nations that they were united “by a 
common detestation of colonialism in whatever form it appears. We are united


--- PAGE 142 ---
Let Us Be Moors 135
by a common detestation of racialism.” Those were the days when Malcolm X 
met with Fidel Castro at the famed T eresa Hotel in Harlem, and when Malcolm, 
from his perspective of “Islamic internationalism,” came to understand the civil 
rights movement as an instance of the struggle against imperialism, seeing the 
Vietnam War and the Mau Mau rebellion in Kenya as uprisings of the “darker 
races” and, like the African American struggle, part of the “tidal wave” against 
Western imperialism.
Some commentators, pointing to the current antiwar and antiglobalization 
movement, have suggested that a new era of Afro-Asian-Latin solidarity may be 
in the offing. In the United States, the past two years has seen a political ferment 
and coalition-building between progressive groups—in particular between Arab 
American and Muslim American groups and African American groups—not seen 
since the 1960s when the Black Panthers and the Student Non-Violent Coordi-
nating Committee declared solidarity with the Palestine Liberation Organization, 
which in turn declared solidarity with Native Americans. September 11 and the 
subsequent backlash has led many African American leaders to stand with Mus-
lim and Arab Americans, not least because African American Muslims are also 
targeted in the post-September 11 profiling and detention campaigns. Activists 
like Al Sharpton are mobilizing against the USA PATRIOT Act “because it is 
used to profile people of color” and is “impacting Muslims everywhere, including 
Brooklyn and Harlem.”
56
Given the centrality of Islam and the Arab world to the war on terror and 
the presence of kaffiyyas and (regrettably) bin Laden T-shirts at protests from 
Porto Alegre to Barcelona, it appears that the new Bandung may have a distinct 
Arab or Islamic cast. In the past two years, a number of Latin American leaders 
have called for “concrete action” to establish a Palestinian state. Castro has signed 
agreements of bilateral cooperation with Algeria and the United Arab Emirates 
and continues to rail against “global apartheid” in general and “Israeli apartheid” 
in particular. Castro has also been accused of building ties with Iran and selling 
biotechnology in exchange for cheap oil. When he visited Iran in 2001, Castro 
spoke of his rapport with President Mohammad Khatami and reported that he 
“had the longest sleep of his life in T ehran.” Most recently, he has been accused by 
the United States of jamming the satellite broadcasts of U.S.-based Iranian oppo-
sition groups.
57 Recent articles in right-leaning American newsmagazines claim to 
have discovered evidence that Venezuela is providing identity papers to suspicious 
numbers of people from Arab and South Asian “countries of interest” (as well as 
Colombians and Cubans). One article also features the claim of the former Ven-
ezuelan ambassador to Libya, Julio Cesar Pineda, to possess correspondence from 
Hugo Chavez, stating his desire to “solidify” ties between Latin America and the 
Middle East, including use of the oil weapon.
58 Chavez challenged the reporters 
in question to produce “one single shred of evidence” for their claims.59
These stories of C uban and Venezuelan ties to Middle Eastern radicals may 
be little more than partisan puffery, and Chavez’s repeated calls for solidarity 
with the Arab world may be nothing more than petroleum diplomacy or an


--- PAGE 143 ---
Black Routes to Islam136
embattled leader’s desperate plea for allies. Yet the Venezuelan leader’s appeal to 
“Arab roots” is indicative of a trend in the West. Among Western subordinate 
groups and opposition movements that feel victimized or neglected by globaliza-
tion, the Arabs are seen as bearing the brunt of the worldwide imperial assault in 
the era of the war on terror. As Western nationalists portray Islam as a threat to 
freedom and security, and launch wars to bring democracy to the Muslim world, 
“the multi-colored hordes” of the West are reaching for teachings and precedents 
(like Moorish Spain) in Islam that they hope will make the West more compas-
sionate and free.
Islam is leaking into the West through conversion, migration, and media-
driven cultural flows, and, to many, the Islamic world is presenting a repertoire 
of alternative identities. As marginalized Westerners are finding inspiration in 
Islam, Muslims in the diaspora are inspired by the African American experience. 
The cross-fertilization taking place between Islamic, black, and Latin cultures 
is creating fascinating trends and art forms. Many would argue that the fash-
ion for Arabic tattoos, Allah chains, Orientalist soap operas, belly dancing, and 
hip scarves is just that—fashion. But as the Arab pride movement in Europe 
and Islamic hip-hop demonstrate, the vibrant cultural intermingling can have 
significant political implications. Cultural flows can spark forceful challenges to 
state policies, state-imposed identities, and the claims of Western nationalism. 
For many of the minority convert communities and the diaspora Muslim com-
munities, Islamic Spain has emerged as an anchor for their identity. Moorish 
Spain was a place where Islam was in and of the West and inhabited a golden age 
before the rise of the genocidal, imperial West, a historical moment that disen-
chanted Westerners can share with Muslims. Neither Muslim nostalgia for nor 
Western Orientalist romanticism about Andalusia is new, but it is new for differ-
ent subordinate groups in the West to be yearning for “return” to Moorish Spain’s 
multiracialism. In this worldview, the year 1492 is a historical turning point. On 
Columbus Day in October, Chavez urged Latin Americans to boycott celebra-
tions of the “discovery,” saying that Columbus was “worse than Hitler.” That 
the longing for pre-1492 history is shared by many minorities throughout the 
West is an indication of their lasting exclusion and how the stridency of Western 
nationalism since September 11 has revived memories of centuries-old trauma. 
As one African American activist put it recently, “The profiling and brutalizing 
of African-Americans didn’t begin after September 11. It began in 1492.”
60 In a 
similar spirit, after Moussaoui was arrested in the United States and granted the 
right to represent himself in court, one of his first demands was “the return of 
Spain to the Moors.”
With African American and Latino converts speaking of the tragedy of 1492 
and with Muslim minorities in the West becoming increasingly race-conscious 
and inspired by black America, the world is witnessing a new fusion between 
Islam and Pan-Africanism. T oday, however, this racialized Islamic international-
ism contains elements of other cultures and diasporas as well. Islam is at the heart 
of an emerging global antihegemonic culture, which postcolonial critic Robert


--- PAGE 144 ---
Let Us Be Moors 137
Young would say incarnates a “tricontinental counter-modernity” that combines 
diasporic and local cultural elements, and blends Arab, Islamic, black, and His-
panic factors to generate “a revolutionary black, Asian and Hispanic globalization, 
with its own dynamic counter-modernity . . . constructed in order to fight global 
imperialism.”
61
Notes
 1. Jose Marti, “España en Melilla,” in Cuba: Letras, vol. 2 (Havana: Edicion T ropico, 1938), 
201.
 2. Quoted in Rene Depestre, “Carta de Cuba sobre el imperialismo de la mala fe,” Por la
revolucion, por la poesia (Havana: Institute del Libro, 1969), 93.
 3. El Pais, April 17, 2002.
 4. Latin American Weekly Report, October 4, 2003.
 5. CUT National Plenary, Conjuntura Internacional e Nacional, Resolution 10, “Cresce a 
polaizacao politica a social em todo o mundo.” Accessible online at http://cutnac-web.cut
.org.br/10plencut/conjtex5.htm.
 6. Deutsche Presse-Agentur, April 3, 2003.
 7. New York Times, October 22, 2001; The Economist, October 26, 2001. Imams and con-
verts also made this claim in interviews carried out by Columbia University’s Muslim 
Communities in New York Project on June 4 and June 16, 2003.
 8. Times (London), January 7, 2002.
 9. Evening Standard, March 15, 2002.
 10. Christian Science Monitor, October 2, 2002. See also Yusuf Fernandez, “Spain Returning 
to Islam,” Islamic Horizons (July-August 2002).
 11. Olivier Roy, “Euro-Islam: The Jihad Within?” The National Interest (Spring 2003).
 12. Cox News Service, August 11, 2002; see also Knight-Ridder News Service, June 20, 2003.
 13. El Diario-La Prensa, October 6, 2001. See also Islamic Horizons (July–August 2002).
 14. Author’s interview with Rahim Ocasio, April 16, 1999.
 15. Rahim Ocasio, “Latinos, The Invisible: Islam’s Forgotten Multitude,” The Message, August 
1997.
 16. Kimi Eisele, “The Multicultural Power of Soap Operas,” Pacific News Service, November 
25, 2002.
 17. Interview with Rosa Margarita of El Diario-La Prensa, August 8, 2003. El Clon-inspired 
fashion can be viewed online at http://www.laoriginal.com/especiales.htm.
 18. Independent, July 19, 2002.
 19. Agence France-Presse, May 28, 2003.
 20. Interview with Fernando Casado Caneque, September 8, 2003. Casado was referring to 
the conservative Aznar’s effort to insert a reference to Europe’s Christian roots in the EU’s 
constitution, a measure that has provoked the Spanish Left and the regions of Andalusia 
and Cataluna who resent how the Aznar government has made Catholicism so central to 
the state’s identity. See El Pais, July 28, 2003.
 21. James Baldwin, No Name in the Street (New York: Dial, 1972), 41.
 22. See, for instance, the interview with Ferida Belghoul in Alec Hargreaves, Voices from the 
North American Community in France: Immigration and Identity in Beur Fiction (Provi-
dence, RI: Berg Publishers, 1991), 126.
 23. Le Monde, February 12, 2003.
 24. Jerusalem Report, May 6, 2002.


--- PAGE 145 ---
Black Routes to Islam138
 25. See Loic Wacquant, “Red Belt, Black Belt: Racial Division, Class Inequality and the State 
in the French Urban Periphery and the American Ghetto,” in Urban Poverty and the
Underclass, ed. Enzo Mingione (London: Blackwell, 1996).
 26. New York Times, October 16, 2001.
 27. Weekly Standard, July 15, 2002.
 28. Times (London), September 29, 2001.
 29. Abd al-Samad Moussaoui, Zacarias, My Brother: The Making of a T errorist (New York: 
Seven Stories Press, 2003), 129.
 30. Independent, April 3, 2003.
 31. See Paul Silverstein, “Why Are We Waiting to Start the Fire? French Gangsta Rap and the 
Critique of State Capitalism,” in Black, Blanc, Beur: Rap Music and Hip-Hop Culture in 
the Francophone World, ed. Alain-Philippe Durand (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow, 2002).
 32. Le Figaro, June 17, 2003; Le Monde, March 11, 2003.
 33. Le Monde, September 27, 2001.
 34. L ’Expansion, June 11, 2003.
 35. Independent Race and Refugee News Network, April 1, 2001.
 36. The group’s manifesto is online at http://infosuds.free.fr/082001/enquete_bc.htm. I am 
grateful to Paul Silverstein for this point.
 37. Interview with 3 eme Oeil and DJ Rebel, Bronx, New York, July 24, 2003.
 38. Jerusalem Report, May 6, 2002.
 39. L ’Express, March 27, 2003.
 40. David Lepoutre, Coeur de banlieue: Codes, rites et languages (Paris: O. Jacob, 1997).
 41. Le Figaro, June 3, 2000.
 42. I am grateful to Zaheer Ali for this point.
 43. Interview with Napoleon, March 22, 2004, New York. T upac Shakur’s former companion, 
Napoleon, a Muslim convert who will be releasing a CD titled “Have Mercy,” featuring 
a collaboration with the Pakistani-American crew The Aman Brothers, speaks about this 
allegation in an interview with the T upac fan site HitEmUp.com, published on April 
16, 2003. Accessible online at http://www.hitemup.com/interviews/napoleon-part1
.html#Bush.
 44. Washington Times, November 13, 2002.
 45. “Islamic rappers’ message of terror,” The Observer, February 8, 2004.
 46. When told that polygamy is illegal in the United States, Allahz Sword responded, “A lot 
of rappers out there talk about pimpin’—is that good? I’m just talking about part of my 
religion.” Seattle Post-Intelligencer, February 17, 2003.
 47. The Spanish slur Moro has long been a term of endearment in Morocco and in the Moroc-
can diaspora the Arabic adaptation is moro khal al-ras (black-headed Moor).
 48. Hishaam Aidi, “‘Building A New America’: A Conversation with Russell Simmons,” Afri-
cana.com, February 5, 2002.
 49. Personal communication with author, August 4, 2003.
 50. Quoted in John McWhorter, “How Hip-Hop Holds Blacks Back,” City Journal, Summer 
2003.
 51. Interview with Adisa Banjoko, “Everlast: Taking Islam One Day at a Time,” July 12, 1999. 
The interview is accessible online at http://thetruereligion.org/everlast.htm.
 52. Interview with Adisa Banjoko.
 53. Interview with Columbia University’s Muslim Communities of New York Project, June 
16, 2003 (Converts Focus Group).
 54. Sister Kalima A-Quddus, “Verily This Is a Single Ummah,” MuslimsInHipHop Newsletter,
August 7, 2003.


--- PAGE 146 ---
Let Us Be Moors 139
 55. Quoted in Robin Kelley, Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination (Boston: Bea-
con, 2002), 60.
 56. Village Voice, December 24, 2002.
 57. Financial Times, July 21, 2003.
 58. See Martin Arostegui, “From Venezuela, a Counterplot,” Insight on the News , March 4, 
2003 and “T error Close to Home,” US News and World Report, October 6, 2003.
 59. Agence France-Presse, October 2, 2003.
 60. Interview with Columbia’s Muslim Communities of New York Project, July 21, 2003 
(focus group for Muslims in NYPD and Fire Department).
 61. Robert Young, Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction (London: Blackwell, 2001), 2.


--- PAGE 147 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 148 ---
C HAPTER  8
Constructing 
Masculinity
Interactions between Islam 
and African American Youth 
Since C. Eric Lincoln’s 
The
Black Muslims in America
Richard Brent Turner
THE BLACK MUSLIMS IN AMERICA was a groundbreaking work—the first
monograph that presented a detailed sociological study of a twentieth-century 
African American Muslim community. C. Eric Lincoln demonstrated a profound 
understanding of the dynamic changes in black American identity that developed 
from the convergence of the civil rights movement, Black nationalism, and the 
independence of African nations from colonialism after World War II; simultane-
ously, he provided evidence of African American Islam’s success in redefining black 
manhood in America’s inner-city communities and how the Nation of Islam’s 
“emphasis on youth and masculinity . . . generated a strong appeal” to converts.
1
One of his book’s major themes is that the Nation of Islam in the 1960s was a 
black nationalist “united front of Black men . . . predominantly lower class . . . 
trying to reach all Black men . . . in the colleges . . . [and]in the jails.”
2
In retrospect, contemporary scholars might criticize the above characterization 
of African American Islam for its almost single-minded focus on a proto-Islamic 
community and the theme of black manhood. My article shifts the discourse of 
black masculinity in African American Islam away from the patriarchal models 
of racial uplift that may have influenced the work of scholars in Lincoln’s time.
3
Instead, I examine how young African American male converts and second-
generation Sunni Muslims in a university community have critically constructed


--- PAGE 149 ---
Black Routes to Islam142
an understanding of manhood through the interaction between Islam and hip-
hop culture in their daily lives. The young men interviewed for this study chose to 
dedicate themselves to mainstream Islam, and various aspects of hip-hop culture 
reflect the social justice values and political consciousness of African American 
Muslim communities. Their orientation to Islam and hip-hop culture also reflects 
a new contemporary discourse in academic and popular culture on black mas-
culinity that encourages African American men “to rethink who and what we 
are”
4 and to deconstruct the “ideological traps” that prevent “a progressive engage-
ment” with social justice in the United States and the world.5
Notwithstanding the above critique of “male-centered” 6 studies of African 
American Islam, The Mosque Study Project 2000 , which is the “most compre-
hensive survey of American mosques,” confirms the contemporary numerical 
significance of Black Muslim men in mainstream Islam. In that survey, African 
Americans comprised 63 percent of the converts to Sunni Islam in 2000 and 68 
percent of those African American converts were male.
7 Presently, the religious 
identities of African American Muslim men remain one of the central themes in 
the contemporary story of Islam in the United States.
This study is one small step using qualitative research that attempts to answer 
the question of how the religious, political, and demographic dynamics for Afri-
can American male converts have changed since the publication of Lincoln’s book. 
Using oral history interviews conducted at the University of Iowa after September 
11, 2001,
8 black autobiographies, and recent social-scientific and cultural stud-
ies of African American masculinity, I have evaluated, from contemporary and 
historical perspectives, identity formation among Sunni Muslim converts and a 
second generation Muslim involved in hip-hop culture. I also discuss visual repre-
sentations in television and cinema that frame youth conversion experiences.
Hip-hop Culture, Islam, and Black Masculinity
Rap has always been here in history. They say when God talked to the prophets, he was 
rappin’ to them.
—Afrika Bambaataa, 
Yes Yes Y’all—the Experience Music Project Oral History of Hip-Hop’s First Decade
Grandmaster Flash defined hip-hop as “the only genre of music that allows us to 
talk about almost anything. Musically, it allows us to sample and play and cre-
ate poetry to the beat of the music. It’s highly controversial, but that’s the way 
the game is.”
9 Hip-hop culture began in the 1970s in the Bronx among African 
American, Latino, and Caribbean youth who created intercultural crews (“new 
kinds of families”) of MCs, DJs, break dancers, and graffiti artists whose art and 
style expressed resistance to “postindustrial conditions” and the destruction 
of jobs, affordable housing, and support systems in working class black and 
Latino neighborhoods in New York City at the beginning of the Reagan-
Bush era.
10 These conditions became the norm for black America in the 
1980s and 1990s. The rise of a new prison-industrial complex eventually jailed


--- PAGE 150 ---
Constructing Masculinity 143
nearly one-third of all African American men in their twenties. Drawing on sub-
jects such as racial profiling, a new underground economy generated by wide-
spread drug addiction in America, youth deaths from police brutality and torture, 
AIDS, and new assaults on affirmative action, rap music became the primary 
medium for documenting and protesting the hardness of life for black youth 
in the “hood”
11 and beyond. The music, poetry, style, clothing, language, and 
life experiences of hip-hop artists reflected black people’s encounters with Islam, 
Christianity, prison life, death, violence, drugs, love, sex, hope, and despair in 
their urban communities. Soon, rap poetry was being composed by young people 
across the globe even though they did not live in the same conditions.
In the 1980s, hip-hop culture became an important signifier of black mascu-
linity at the very same time that the mainstream print and visual media began to 
explore the “endangered” status of black men in the United States. Kobena Mer-
cer writes, “Overrepresented in statistics on homicide and suicide, misrepresented 
in the media as the personification of drugs, disease and crime, such invisible 
men . . . suggest that Black masculinity is not merely a social identity in crisis. It 
is also a key site upon which the nation’s crisis comes to be dramatized, demon-
ized and dealt with.”
12
The music industry decided to focus on the sensationalist lifestyles and rhymes 
of gangsta rap in the 1990s, first popularized by Ice Cube, Snoop Doggy Dog, 
and Dr. Dre and the rap group N.W .A., which highlighted black-on-black vio-
lence, police brutality, drug dealing, homophobia, and sexism in southern Cali-
fornia hip-hop culture. Of course, these themes validated the stereotype of black 
men that have dominated the music and film industry since the early twentieth 
century and provided yet another rationale for a criminal justice system that now 
imprisons more people per capita than any other nation in the world. Nonethe-
less, the music and poetry of hip-hop culture contains, in T ricia Rose’s useful 
phrase, complex “hidden transcripts.” Rap music presents serious social, political, 
and spiritual critiques of systematic racism and classism.
13
Charise L. Cheney analyzes the transformation of gangsta rap from the 
oppositional culture of the “underground street” 14 reporting in the inner city to 
“contemporary minstrelsy”15 in which “caricatures became the norm,” 16 and she 
emphasizes “that many observers mistakenly assume that this genre represents all 
rap music.”
17 However, the young Muslim men in this study are inspired by the 
genre of rap music that attained its greatest commercial popularity in the “golden 
age of rap nationalism”
18 in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with groups such as 
Public Enemy that reflected new expressions of Pan-African, Black Nationalist, 
and Black Atlantic identities in their music, politics, and spirituality.
19 As we shall 
see, the culture of this “golden age” of hip-hop continues to influence select con-
temporary rap artists and their African American Muslim fans.
If one of the important functions of rap music, according to Anthony B. Pinn, 
is to answer “the ultimate questions of life,” certainly Islam has significantly influ-
enced the construction of black masculinity in hip-hop culture since its beginning 
as a local New York City phenomenon in the 1970s.
20 Afrika Bambaataa, one of


--- PAGE 151 ---
Black Routes to Islam144
the most important originators of rap music, put African American Islam at the 
center of the political and religious influences that created hip-hop in the Bronx, 
New York:
I grew up in the southeast Bronx . . . an area where back in the . . . early ’70s there 
was broken glass everywhere . . . But it was also an area where there was a lot of 
unity and a lot of social awareness going on . . . Seeing all the violence that was 
going on with the Vietnam War . . . in Attica and Kent State and being aware of . . . 
the late ’60s, with Woodstock and the Flower Power, the Love Power movement . . . 
put a lot of consciousness in my mind to get up and do something . . . to say “we’ve 
got to stop the violence with the street gangs . . . Hearing the teachings of the Nation
of Islam made a lot of people get up and try to get the drugs out of their community ;
and seeing a lot of the struggles that was going on all around the world through 
television gave a lot of hope to this area to do something for itself . . . and when we 
started this music called hip hop, which didn’t have a name at the time, it brought 
a lot of the elements of these different movements together.
21
Afrika Islam and Richard Sisco, two of Bambaataa’s associates in their rap group, 
called the Zulu Nation, contemplated the significance of this early political and 
religious message of hip-hop for young African American men, “Bam always used 
to talk about positive things for the Black race . . . It was good for those wild kids 
that didn’t have no direction. Bam gave them . . . some self-respect . . . something 
to keep their head up—self esteem—because in this world we’re living in, there’s 
not too much for a Black man out here to have self-esteem about.”
22
As rap music developed its commercial and cultural power in the post–civil 
rights era, hip-hop culture began to explicitly engage aspects of the religious tra-
dition of Islam in important discourses about black masculinity and how young 
people could redefine blackness and its place in American popular culture. 
Thus, in the poetry of many of the early message rappers such as Public Enemy, 
Paris, Poor Righteous T eachers, Eric B. and Rakim, KRS-One, Ice Cube, Brand 
Nubian, Big Daddy Kane, Super Jay, Stetasonic, Defiant Giants, Q-Tip, Sister 
Souljah, Prince Akeem, Flavor Flav, and others, Malcolm X, Elijah Muhammad, 
Louis Farrakhan, and Muhammad Ali were highlighted as the masculine heroes 
of a new political musical vibe that reflected a dramatic shift in Islam’s place in 
American society and culture.
23
In the 1960s, the numbers of Sunni Muslims in Western Europe and North 
America began to expand because of the U.S. Immigration Act of 1965 and global 
Muslim immigration to Great Britain, France, and the United States. Eventually, 
African Americans became “the largest convert community to [Sunni Islam] in 
the West.”
24 This new black American vanguard in mainstream Islam was influ-
enced by Malcolm X’s departure from the Nation of Islam and his hajj to Mecca 
in 1964. As a result of these factors, in the late 1980s, Islam became the second 
largest religious tradition after Christianity in the United States. Thus, the “reli-
gious sensibilities” of hip-hop culture reflected the new life experiences of African 
American youth who were born in the aftermath of the black power era and saw 
the growing influence of Islam in their local urban communities.
25


--- PAGE 152 ---
Constructing Masculinity 145
Perhaps the most useful way to see the religion’s influence on black youth in 
hip-hop culture may be as the counterconception to the hegemonic discourse of 
oppressive majority media and music industry images that have demonized and 
exoticized urban life, rap music, and young black people in the late twentieth 
century. In this context, Islam identifies an ideological fulcrum that has enabled 
politically and spiritually conscious youth in the hip-hop community to achieve 
independence from the race, gender, and class stereotypes disseminated by the 
music industry and select political groups in the dominant culture.
In the late 1990s, numerous rappers with Islamic messages started impor-
tant conversations about mainstream Islam in the hip-hop community that were 
influential in the conversion of African American youth to Islam. These mes-
sages ranged from a simple awareness of Sunni Muslims in the black community, 
expressed in Jay Z’s rhyme about body tattoos: “I never read the Quran or Islamic 
scriptures, the only psalms I read were on the arms of my niggas”
26 to the more 
complex poetry about the construction of black American identity from the Mus-
lim hip-hop artists Mos Def and Talib Kweli in their album masterpiece Black
Star, which is sampled below, “We feel we have a responsibility to shine a light 
into the darkness . . . Black like the veil the Muslim Aminah wears . . . Black like 
the slave ships that brought us here . . . Black like the Creator loves all creatures 
who are knowledge and truth seekers.”
27
Hip-hop culture’s significant impact on the production of black cinema and 
television in the 1990s also influenced youth conversions to Sunni Islam. Prison 
conversions and the positive influence of Islam among African American inmates 
were the themes in several high-profile television series and films that appeared in 
this era in which there was an alarming increase in black men’s involvement with 
the criminal justice system. Obie Clayton and Joan Moore’s analysis of a 1997 
Urban Institute report estimated
that six more African-Americans are incarcerated than their White counterparts. 
If we disaggregate the figures we would find that one third of African-American 
men between the ages of twenty and twenty-nine are either in prison or in jail . . . 
Many legal and extralegal factors have been cited for the high incarceration rates of 
African-Americans. Racial profiling, mandatory minimum sentences, and especially 
the disparities in drug laws have had a dramatic effect on the incarceration rates of 
young males especially in urban inner-city neighborhoods.
28
These unfortunate statistics helped to create a critical hip-hop youth audience 
for television such as the HBO prison drama Oz  (in which Minister Said is the 
inspiring inmate leader of a large community of African American Sunni Muslim 
men who have reconstructed their masculinity in prison through conversion to 
Islam) and films such as Spike Lee’s 1992 Malcolm X (with Denzel Washing-
ton as the young Malcolm who converts to the Nation of Islam in prison)
29 and 
the 1992 South Central (in which Carl Lumbly as Ali, the Muslim mentor who 
teaches a black inmate, Glenn Plummer as Bobby Johnson, how to reclaim his


--- PAGE 153 ---
Black Routes to Islam146
manhood by renouncing his gang affiliation and assuming his responsibility as a 
strong father to his young son).
Ali’s advice to Bobby Johnson in the following prison scene from South Central
echoes the psychological and social reality of many young African American men 
in the hip-hop community:
Ali: “Black man is in prison or dodging prison and his kids suffer. It’s the anger in the 
Black man the cycle of hate; you’re in that cycle little brother, did you grow up with 
your daddy?”
Bobby Johnson: “No.”
Ali: “I see inside you man, you still got time before it eats you up. But you got to break 
your cycle, hate is broken by giving, I give to you and I break my own hate cycle . . . 
me and you, we brothers and we got to be here for our children. For me it’s too 
late, not for you. [Ali reaches and picks up a book] You owe me fifteen boxes of 
cigarettes, you repay me by reading [Ali hands Bobby Johnson a book] two hours 
every day.”
30
Certainly, the above film and television productions continue to resonate with 
the lives of many young black men who desperately need to reconstruct their 
masculinity during and after incarceration. Some of these youth have been influ-
enced by scholars’ stories about the dedicated work of Muslim chaplains in state 
and federal penitentiaries and have been inspired by hip-hop era autobiographies 
like Nathan McCall’s Makes Me Wanna Holler , Sanyika Shakur’s Monster: The 
Autobiography of a L.A. Gang Member, and the classic Alex Haley and Malcolm 
X’s Autobiography of Malcolm X, which also underline the significance of Islam 
for black men in prison.
31 Finally, all of the above information suggests that the 
future of African American Muslim communities in the twenty-first century may 
be significantly influenced by the conversion experiences and social-political per-
spectives of young hip-hop artists and their fans.
Hip-hop Culture and African American 
Muslim Men on Campus
One of the main things about Islam is the establishment of African American 
manhood.
—Khalid, interview, October 8, 2004
Hishaam Aidi believes that the Islamic renaissance in contemporary Black Amer-
ica is related to some of the conditions that initially produced hip-hop culture: 
the withdrawal of state support, capital, social institutions, and welfare agencies 
from inner cities and the expansion of a powerful race-based system that left gaps 
of support for youth in black neighborhoods. Muslim organizations filled these 
gaps during the Reagan-Bush era. Aidi traces black youth conversion experi-
ences to the breakdown of traditional family values, searches for identity and 
spirituality, and rejection of “permissive consumerist culture”—issues for which 
the faith of Islam provides answers. Overall, his study provides some provoca-
tive reasons for Islamic conversions among African American youth who are


--- PAGE 154 ---
Constructing Masculinity 147
leading “nihilistic and chaotic lives” in the urban ghettoes. In this respect, Aidi’s 
work resonates with most of the previous research on the interaction between 
Islam and hip-hop youth culture which focuses on the influence of the Nation of 
Islam and the Five Percenters (a splinter group of the Nation of Islam) on African 
Americans in large cities.
32
However, the interviews that I conducted with African American Sunni Mus-
lim men at the University of Iowa suggest a broader range of attraction to Islam 
among black youth in suburbs and college campuses and from middle- and 
upper-class households. In these diverse contexts, perhaps the attraction of and 
access to hip-hop’s “consumerist culture” also has a lot to do with the acquisition 
of information about Islam that is central to their spiritual quests.
I first met the five young Muslim men who constitute the African American 
nucleus of the University of Iowa Muslim community as students in my course, 
“African American Islam in International Perspective” in September 2002.
33 As I 
taught my course, the American government was advancing its plans to invade 
Iraq despite worldwide grassroots opposition to war in the Middle East. The 
excitement and contemporary relevance of the discussions, the combination 
of graduate and advanced undergraduate students, and their excellent research 
papers fostered an environment that proved to be one of the most rewarding 
teaching experiences in my academic career. Our subject matter took us outside 
the classroom to the Iowa City Mosque and to an evening meal sponsored by the 
Muslim Student Association in which our class broke the fast with the Muslim 
community during Ramadan.
34
In class and in the oral history interviews conducted in my office, it became 
clear that the African American Muslim men are a distinct community within the 
Muslim Student Association (with an estimated 130 members), which is domi-
nated numerically by Sunni Muslim immigrants and Muslim Americans of South 
Asian and Arab descent. My interviewees are primarily recent converts to Islam 
who influenced each other’s conversion experiences on the campus, with the 
exception of one second-generation Muslim who is affiliated with Imam Warith 
Deen Muhammad’s American Society of Muslims. They are African American 
men in their twenties from middle-class households, and their understanding 
of race reflects the multiracial ethos of Islam—one member of their group is a 
white American convert who is married to an African American Muslim woman. 
Although their faith is based on striving to adherence to the general beliefs, prac-
tices, and legal and social issues of Islam,
35 their “masculine identity,” that is, 
their religious and political consciousness, is mediated through the interaction 
between Islam and hip-hop culture. Hip-hop as an interpretive prism for these 
young men’s spirituality is an important theme in the excerpts from their narra-
tives that follow.
One of the Muslim converts on campus was spiritually inspired by “Islam’s 
long intricate history in hip hop.” He said that
when the DJ culture first started to explode in the South Bronx, the Islamic iden-
tity was already part of the culture . . . Afrika Bambaataa . . . was known for his


--- PAGE 155 ---
Black Routes to Islam148
Afrocentric style of dress. He wore Muslim prayer caps, kufis, and prayer beads 
around his neck . . . Artists like Rakim, Public Enemy, Queen Latifah, Stetasonic, 
Big Daddy Kane, and De La Soul [brought] their Islamic identity to the center of 
the music. While not all of these artists presented a Sunni version of Islam in their 
music, the images and words used in their music conveyed an Islamic theme . . . 
Beginning with the Afrocentric revolution in hip hop . . . The music has been a 
forum for Muslims to gain exposure and recognition of their beliefs in the public 
eye.
36
For another young Muslim man, there was a direct connection between hip-
hop culture and the conversions to Sunni Islam among his friends on campus, 
“Probably for a lot of us hip hop was an entry way to Islam . . . We gravitated 
toward the message of not only social consciousness but also of God conscious-
ness . . . Me and Musa had a hip hop group . . . I ended up joining Musa’s group 
because his message was [spiritually] conscious. We openly rapped about Islam 
before I accepted Islam.”
37
Also, Muslim rappers such as “common, Talib Kweli, and Hitek, the Roots, 
and Wu Tang Clan” are strong role models for politically and religiously conscious 
black men, according to one of my Muslim interviewees on campus.
38 He empha-
sized the influence of Mos Def, an orthodox Muslim MC, who, like Malcolm X, 
made the pilgrimage to Mecca. Mos Def’s CD Black on Both Sides begins with the 
liner notes “Allah, the Lord of the worlds,”
39 dedicates his creative work to politi-
cal prisoners such as Assata and Fred Hampton, Jr., and says “Free the Land!” 40
Nas’s poetry about racism as a manifestation of “domestic terrorism”41 in Stillmatic
is also a significant influence for the aforementioned interviewee. Nas raps, “Been 
blessed with Allah’s vision, strength, and beauty”
42 but the domestic terrorism of 
racism makes him “feel foreign”43 although he is a citizen of the United States.
The reconstruction of black masculinity was a central theme in Khalid’s con-
version to Islam:
I believe that the common thread for all of us was that we were at the university 
trying to find our places as Black men in Iowa . . . I received racially motivated 
e-mails . . . so I started getting political because in Chicago, being Black was not 
a big thing, I was one of a million Blacks. Here, I came to understand how I was 
different as a Black man. From the Black Panthers to Malcolm X, I read. It was an 
evolution . . . I was searching for my own personal identity. Who am I, what do I 
believe in? Until that time I was a Christian because that’s what I was born in. I was 
searching to see what was true.
44
Many young African American men reportedly have not found in some black 
churches a critical mass of youth programs that relate to the social and political 
issues that are important to them. 45 Instead, some black youth are seeking out 
Islam. Khalid’s search for answers to the ultimate questions in his life first took him 
to a Protestant church near campus, a church that did not allow its members to 
question the African American pastor’s interpretation of the Bible. Eventually, he


--- PAGE 156 ---
Constructing Masculinity 149
found his manhood and spiritual answers in Islam, a religion that he first encoun-
tered in his rap group:
This friend of mine, Amir, used to hang out with Musa who is a Muslim. Then 
Amir accepted Islam . . . He was also a rapper . . . Musa had a [rap] group . . . One 
day he invited me to mosque . . . I started going to Jumah. Then Ramadan came 
around. I was reading Malcolm X’s autobiography—the part where he went on 
hajj . . . There was that point where I was real radical and had that hate going on 
for what my environment was. But then when Malcolm got to hajj, he eventually 
shed that hatred and I was seeing the same thing in front of my eyes. Seeing these 
different brothers greeting each other, asking for God’s peace to be on you, feeding 
each other, doing acts of humility to each other, I could relate to Malcolm X’s sin-
cerity . . . Everything just seemed like this is it. This is internally what I was looking 
for . . . I eventually accepted Islam at the end of 2000.
46
The above narrative provides evidence that the biography, the spirituality, and 
the political insights and courage of Malcolm X continue to inspire young people 
in hip-hop culture and to influence new converts to mainstream Islam. For some 
youth, Malcolm X is a powerful model that black men “who accept Islam in 
prison are not condemned but praised for accepting the religion . . . [and he is] 
the essence of Black manhood,”
47 according to an African American Muslim man 
on campus. Moreover, the current revival of serious research on Malcolm X in 
the academy and his numerous images in popular culture underline the fact that 
young black Americans in the hip-hop community currently receive more critical 
information about Islam through written and visual media and technology than 
any previous generation in American history.
48
For one second-generation African American Muslim man on campus, the 
definitive experience in the construction of his masculinity was his participation 
in a Muslim funeral ritual in Boston with his father:
When we went to the beginning of the Jinazah service, my father said . . . We have 
to clean his body from head to toe. We will be real delicate with the body . . . We 
used a bucket of soap and warm water. After we got finished cleaning him up he 
had a smile on his face. As we were doing it we said short prayers in Arabic, then 
we put some sandalwood musk oil on his head. We had incense burning in the 
background. There was no maliciousness, everyone’s intentions were clean. Then 
we had three white sheets. In the end, we wrapped him in the sheets . . . then we 
placed him in his coffin. We bury him in his grave so his head faces east toward 
Mecca . . . Everyday I have no taqwa-God consciousness since I got back to Iowa 
City, I think about this.
49
Although the brunt of the 9/11 backlash was borne by America’s Middle East-
ern population, the entire Islamic community felt some of the sting. With much 
of the post-September 11 media coverage focusing on the immigrant commu-
nities, the social and political perspectives of African American Muslims, who 
constitute roughly 30 percent of regular mosque participants,
50 have largely been


--- PAGE 157 ---
Black Routes to Islam150
ignored. That is unfortunate because the ethnic identity of this group is shaped by 
its long history of contributions to the American experience.
The African American Muslim students on Iowa’s campus were inspired by the 
poetry of Muslim and politically conscious rappers who offer critical analysis of 
September 11. Nas, in Stillmatic, raps about the “domestic terrorism” of racism 
and the external terrorism of 9/11 and war. He sees 9/11 as a global wake-up call 
to end senseless hatred and killing.
51 The DPZ view the current state of affairs as 
a domestic war on African American citizens, which is as serious as the interna-
tional war on terrorism, a view expressed in their CD Turn Off the Radio. Their 
repetitive chant—“That’s war”—suggests ongoing terrorism against blacks that 
has many sinister manifestations in the American system.
52 Chuck D., the MC of 
Public Enemy, presents an argument against war in the CD Revolverlution, which 
echoed the global antiwar protests against the American government’s plans to 
invade Iraq: “Seen four planes kill ever yday folks, I guess 9/11 ain’t no joke.” 
Chuck D then urges the rulers of the world and the terrorists to stop murdering 
innocent people and to give the power to ordinary people to avo id a “sequel” 
to war.
53
The following excerpts from my interviews with African American Muslim 
students reflect hip-hop’s emphasis on the “hood”—the black urban landscape as 
a site for political and social discourse and the tensions between young African 
American Muslims and new Arab and Asian immigrants in the country, especially 
in the wake of 9/11.
54
A college student saw the difference between African American and Arab Mus-
lim immigrants as a matter of devotion. “I’ve met a lot of Muslims in the U.S. 
from Muslim countries ruled by the sharia who do not practice Islam, but their 
parents do,” he said. “Among immigrant Muslims, enthusiasm for Islam is at an 
all-time low.” Nevertheless, he felt that “it is a major priority and duty for the 
African American Muslims to sustain and build the foundations for a strong com-
munity in America; not to separate from the Arabs but unite with them. Imam W . 
D. Muhammad is trying to implement that now . . . The Muslim community in 
America can be a stronger community when Arab and African-American Muslims 
start to respect each other.”
55
The cultural differences between the two groups can be deep. “I think I have a 
better picture of the political and cultural landscape of America than immigrant 
Muslims,” one young man said. “Most immigrants who come here don’t go in the 
hood. They don’t see the inequalities between the races.”
56 “I am not anti-Arab,” 
said another. “I am just letting you know the divisions we have as a Muslim com-
munity.” Then he added, “But there are also divisions between African-American 
Muslim communities.”
57
Paradoxically, there may be something dark in American culture that could 
help bind these communities together. “The reaction by the American public to 
September 11 did not surprise me at all,” said one respondent. “I don’t know if 
Muslim immigrants realized that they are looked down upon in America but they 
are. America is the most racist country in the world.”
58


--- PAGE 158 ---
Constructing Masculinity 151
Finally, many young African American Muslims felt that the best response 
to the 9/11 backlash was to proclaim their faith. “I saw more African-Ameri-
cans trying to physically express their religion by wearing hijab in the roughest 
neighborhoods such as the West Side of Chicago,” said a young student whose 
introduction to Islam came from two hip-hop musicians. “African-Americans 
stood on Islam. I took a hard stance on how I felt about Islam; my father and his 
girlfriend were offended. They thought I had flipped [but] I never felt like I was 
going to be attacked. I wasn’t afraid to proclaim Islam. I am a Muslim; it made 
me stronger.”
59
Conclusion
The information presented in this article suggests that the space and place of 
Islam’s messages to African American youth has expanded from inner-city urban 
black communities in C. Eric Lincoln’s time in the 1960s to America’s urban and 
suburban university campuses in the twenty-first century. Hip-hop, North Amer-
ica’s most important youth culture, is utilized as an interpretive prism through 
which some young Muslims construct meaning as African American men and 
believers. The insights of this research provide evidence that for some black youth 
on college campuses, rap music is more than just an “oppositional subcultural 
music” of resistance and pleasure.
60 Hip-hop culture is also a powerful medium 
through which students search for the answers to the ultimate spiritual and politi-
cal concerns in their lives and their identities are paradigms for global Muslim 
youth.
61
Notes
 1. C. Eric Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America, 3rd ed. (T renton, NJ: Africa World Press, 
1994), 25. An earlier version of this article was presented in the Afro-American History 
Group at the American Academy of Religion Annual Meeting in San Antonio, T exas, 
November 22, 2004.
 2. Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America, 79–80.
 3. Carolyn Moxley Rouse, Engaged Surrender: African-American Women and Islam  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2004), 5; Paula Giddings, When and Where I Enter (New 
York: Bantam Books, 1984), 317–18; Kevin K. Gaines, Uplifting the Race (Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1996).
 4. Ellis Cose, The Envy of the World: On Being a Black Man in America  (New York: Wash-
ington Square Press, 2002), 15. There is a blossoming literature on twentieth-century and 
contemporary African American men. See the following select works: Alfred A. Young, 
Jr., The Minds of Marginalized Black Men (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004); 
Steven Estes, I Am A Man: Race, Manhood, and the Civil Rights Movement  (Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 2005); Maurice O. Wallace, Constructing the Black
Masculine (Durham: Duke University Press, 2002); Marlon Ross, Manning the Race (New 
York: New York University Press, 2004); Phillip Brian Harper, Are We Not Men (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1996); and Herb Boyd and Robert Allen, eds., Brotherman
(New York: One World, Ballantine Books, 1995).


--- PAGE 159 ---
Black Routes to Islam152
 5. Rudolph P . Byrd and Beverly Guy-Steftall, eds., Traps: African-American Men on Gender 
and Sexuality (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2001), xiii and xv.
 6. Rouse, Engaged Surrender, 5.
 7. Ishan Bagby, Paul M. Perl, and Bryan T . Froehle, The Mosque in America: A National 
Portrait: A Report from the Mosque Study Project (Washington, DC: Council on American 
Islamic Relations, 2001), 21. This report does not count African American participation 
in proto-Islamic communities such as the Nation of Islam.
 8. The information in this article is part of a larger oral history project of interviews that I 
have conducted with African American Muslim men in California, New Orleans, Chi-
cago, Boston, and Iowa since the early 1990s.
 9. Grandmaster Flash, “Foreword,” The Vibe History of Hip Hop , ed. Allan Light (New York: 
Three Rivers, 1999), viii.
 10. T ricia Rose, Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary America (Hanover, 
CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1994), 34–35.
 11. Marc Mauer, Race to Incarcerate (New York: The New Press, 1999); David Cole, No Equal
Justice (New York: The New Press, 1999). Also see the articles in Souls: A Critical Journal 
of Black Politics, Culture and Society  2, no. 1 (Winter 2002), which focus on the theme 
“Race-ing Justice: Black America vs. the Prison Industrial Complex.”
 12. Kobena Mercer, “Endangered Species: Danny Tisdale and Keith Piper,” Artforum 30 
(Summer 1992): 75, and Thelma Golden, Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in 
Contemporary American Art (New York: Harry N. Abrams and the Whitney Museum 
of American Art, 1994), 19. See also Haki R. Madhubuti, Black Men: Obsolete, Single, 
Dangerous? (Chicago: Third World Press, 1990); Richard Majors and Janet Mancini Bill-
son, Cool Pose: The Dilemmas of Black Manhood in America (New York: Lexington Books, 
1992), and Michelle Wallace, Black Macho and the Myth of Superwoman (New York: Dial, 
1979).
 13. Eithne Quinn, Nuthin’ but a “G” Thang: The Culture and Commence of Gangsta Rap
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2005); T ricia Rose, Black Noise, 100; Michael 
Eric Dyson, Holler if You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur (New York: Basic Civitas 
Books, 2001); Nelson George, Hip Hop America (New York: Penguin, 1998); Imani Perry, 
Prophets of the Hood: Politics and Poetics in Hip Hop (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2004); Cheryl L. Keyes, Rap Music and Street Consciousness (Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press, 2002).
 14. Charise L. Cheney, Brothers Gonna Work It Out: Sexual Politics in the Golden Age of Rap 
Nationalism (New York: New York University Press, 2005), 6.
 15. Ibid.
 16. Ibid.
 17. Ibid
 18. Ibid., 21.
 19. Ibid., 19.
 20. Anthony B. Pinn, ed., Noise and Sprit: The Religious and Spiritual Sensibilities of Rap Music
(New York: New York University Press, 2003), 14.
 21. Fricke and Ahearn, Yes Yes Y’all, 44; emphasis added.
 22. Ibid., 55.
 23. Joseph D. Eure and James G. Spady, eds., Nation Conscious Rap (New York: PC Inter-
national Press, 1991); T odd Boyd, The New H.N.I.C. The Death of Civil Rights and the 
Reign of Hip Hop (New York: New York University Press, 2002), 150–51; Juan M. Floyd-
Thomas, “A Jihad of Words: The Evolution of African American Islam and Contemporary 
Hip Hop,” in Noise and Spirit, ed. Pinn, ed., 51–61; Ernest Allen, Jr., “Making the Strong 
Survive: The Contours and Contradictions of Message Rap,” in Droppin’ Science: Critical


--- PAGE 160 ---
Constructing Masculinity 153
Essays on Rap and Hip Hop Culture, ed. William Eric Perkins (Philadelphia: T emple Uni-
versity Press, 1996).
 24. See Richard Brent T urner, Islam in the African-American Experience, 2nd ed. (Blooming-
ton: Indiana University Press, 2003), 234–35 for details about U.S. immigration laws and 
Muslim immigrants in the late twentieth century. Yvonne Haddad, “Muslim Communi-
ties and the New West.” Middle East Affairs Journal 5, nos. 3–4 (Summer–Fall, 1999): 
14.
 25. Haddad, “Muslim Communities and the New West,” 17.
 26. Jay Z’s CDs include Reasonable Doubt (Roc-A-Fella, 1996), In My Lifetime, Vol. 1  (Roc-
A-Fella, 1997), Hard Knock Life, Vol. 2 (Roc-A-Fella, 1998), The Dynasty: Roc La Familia
(Roc-A-Fella, 2000), The Life and Times of Sean Carter, Vol. 3 (Roc-A-Fella, 2001), MTV
Unplugged (Roc-A-Fella, 2001), and The Blueprint 2 (Roc-A-Fella, 2003).
 27. Mos Def and T alib Kweli are Black Star (Rawkus Records, 1998, 2002).
 28. Obie Clayton and Joan W . Moore, “The Effects of Crime and Imprisonment on Family 
Formation,” in Black Fathers in Contemporary American Society, ed. Obie Clayton, Ronald 
B. Mincy, and David Blankenhorn (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2003), 85–86; 
S. Craig Watkins, Representing: Hip Hop Culture and the Production of Black Cinema (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
 29. Spike Lee with Ralph Wiley, By Any Means Necessary (New York: Hyperion, 1992); “The 
Inmates of ‘Oz’ Move into a New Emerald City,” New York Times, July 15, 2001, pp. 24, 
33.
 30. South Central (Warner Brothers, 1992).
 31. Nathan McCall, Makes Me Wanna Holler: A Young Black Man in America (New York: Ran-
dom House, 1994); Sonyika Shakur, Monster: The Autobiography of an L.A. Gang Member
(New York: Atlantic Monthly, 1993); Alex Haley and Malcolm X, The Autobiography of
Malcolm X (New York: Ballantine Books, 1965); Robert Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Aminah McCloud and Frederick Thaufeer 
al-Deen, A Question of Faith for Muslim Inmates  (Chicago: ABC International Group, 
1999).
 32. Hishaam Aidi, “Jihadis in the Hood: Race, Urban Islam, and the War on T error,” Middle
East Report 224 (Fall 2002): 38–40; Floyd-Thomas, “A Jihad of Words” 49–70; Yusuf 
Nuriddin, “The Five Percenters: A T eenage Nation of Gods and Earths,” in Muslim
Communities in North America, ed. Yvonne Y. Haddad and Jane I. Smith (Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1994), 109–32; Brett Johnson and Malik Russell, “Time 
to Build,” Source: The Magazine of Hip Hop Music, culture, and Politics 158 (November 
2002): 118–22. The Five Percent Nation (The Nation of Gods and Earths) was founded 
in Harlem by Clarence 13X in 1964. They focus on the esoteric literature of W . D. Fard 
and believe that all black men are gods. They see themselves in the 5 percent of African 
Americans who are the “poor righteous teachers” of their race. In their beliefs, Harlem is 
Mecca and Brooklyn is Medina. Felicia M. Miyakawa, Five Percent Rap: God’s Hop’s Music, 
Message, and Black Muslim Mission (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005).
 33. See Garbi Schmidt, Islam in Urban America: Sunni Muslims in Chicago (Philadelphia: 
T emple University Press, 2004), chap. 4 on the Muslin Student Associations. Currently, 
there are an estimated 15–20 African-descended Muslims on the University of Iowa 
campus.
 34. See Marcus K. Hermansen, “T eaching About Muslims in America,” in T eaching Islam, ed. 
Brannon M. Wheeler (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003).
 35. McCloud and Thaufeer al-Deen, A Question of Faith for Muslim Inmates, iii.
 36. Interview with Musa. “Islamic Influence and Identities in Hip Hop,” Musa’s research 
paper, December 2002, n.p.


--- PAGE 161 ---
Black Routes to Islam154
 37. Interview with Khalid, October 8, 2004.
 38. Interview with A.J., February 26, 2002.
 39. Mos Def, Black On Both Sides (Rawkus, 1999).
 40. Ibid.
 41. Nas, Stillmatic (Ill Will Records, 2001).
 42. Ibid.
 43. Ibid.
 44. Interview with Khalid, October 8, 2004.
 45. For studies of the African American Church in the post–civil rights era, see Anthony B. 
Pinn, The Black Church in the Post-Civil Rights Era (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2003); 
R. Drew Smith, ed., New Day Begun: African-American Churches and Civic Culture in Post 
Civil Rights America (Durham: Duke University Press, 2003); and Smith, Long March
Ahead: African-American Churches and Public Policy in Post Civil Rights America (Durham: 
Duke University Press, 2004).
 46. Interview with Khalid, October 8, 2004.
 47. Ibid.
 48. Edward Rothstein, “The Personal Evolution of a Civil Rights Giant,” The New York Times,
May 19, 2005, B1, B7; Gerald Fraser, “Manning Marable’s Project to Restore the Legacy 
of Malcolm X,” Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (Summer 2001); Lewis V . Baldwin 
and Amiri YaSin Al-Hadid, Between Cross and Crescent: Christian and Muslim Perspectives 
on Malcolm and Martin (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2002).
 49. Interview with Dirul, October 7, 2002.
 50. Bagby, Perl, and Froehle, The Mosque in America, 17, 21.
 51. Nas, Stillmatic (Ill Will Records, 2001).
 52. DPZ, Turn Off the Radio, the Mix Tape, Vol. 1 (Holla Black, 2002).
 53. Public Enemy, Revolverlution (Koch Records, 2002).
 54. See Jamillah Karim, “Between Immigrant Islam and Black Liberation: Young Muslims 
Inherit Global Muslim and African-American Legacies,” The Muslim World 95, no. 4 
(October 2005): 497–513.
 55. Interview with Dirul, October 7, 2002.
 56. Interview with A. J., April 2 and 9, 2002.
 57. Interview with Dirul, October 7, 2002.
 58. Interview with A. J., April 2 and 9, 2002.
 59. Interview with Khalid, October 3, 2002.
 60. Yasue Kuwahara, “Power to the People Y’All: Rap Music, Resistance, and Black College 
Students,” Humanity and Society 16, no. 1 (1992): 56.
 61. See Manning Marable, The Great Wells of Democracy: The Meaning of Race in American 
Life (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2002), chap. 10; Cornel West, Democracy Matters: 
Winning the Fight Against Imperialism (New York: Penguin, 2004), chap. 6; Hishaam Aidi, 
“Let Us Be Moors: Islam, Race and ‘Connected Histories,’” Souls: A Critical Journal of 
Black Politics, Culture, and Society, 7, no. 1 (Winter 2005): 36–51.


--- PAGE 162 ---
C HAPTER  9
Through Sunni 
Women’s Eyes
Black Feminism and the Nation 
of Islam
Jamillah Karim
“Islam helps men a great deal because it teaches them how to treat their
women,” stated Sister Levinia X. 1 E. U. Essien-Udom cited Sister Levinia in his 
book published in 1962, Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America .
Over forty years later, Sunni African American Muslim women continue to make 
this claim about Islam—that it demands the fair treatment of women—despite 
the fact that a large percentage of Americans see Islam as a religion that oppresses 
women. Not only do African American Muslim women assert this positive claim 
about Islam but also a growing number call themselves feminists. Most Muslim 
women, however, find the label unnecessary because they believe that identifying 
themselves as Muslim inherently assumes a commitment to gender justice. As 
Carolyn Rouse writes in her study of Sunni African American Muslim women, 
“Muslim women recognize Islam to be the first ‘feminist’ monotheistic religion,” 
that is, they see it as the first religion to bring systematic social reform and rights 
to women in a patriarchal society.
2
Rouse effectively argues that black feminists should see African American 
Muslim women converts as feminists. This article seeks to do the same through a 
method absent in most studies on the Nation of Islam (hereafter, “the Nation”). 
Historical accounts and analyses of the Nation, including Sherman Jackson’s 
Islam and the Blackamerican  and Michael A. Gomez’s Black Crescent, construct 
how we should remember the Honorable Elijah Muhammad’s Nation of Islam. 
Few studies, however, tell us how Sunni African American Muslims who are for-
mer followers of Elijah Muhammad remember the Nation’s legacy. How do Elijah 
Muhammad’s past followers, now followers of his son Imam W .D. Mohammed,


--- PAGE 163 ---
Black Routes to Islam156
remember and teach their children how to remember the Nation? This is possibly 
the most important way that the Nation is remembered, that is, by the commu-
nity of people who experienced it firsthand and who pass down their Nation sto-
ries to later generations. These ex-member accounts are likely to have the greatest 
impact on how third-, fourth-, and fifth-generation Muslims will imagine their 
American Muslim past, which includes how African American Muslim women 
will imagine their long legacy of feminism. I argue that their feminist conscious-
ness as Sunni Muslim women manifests in compelling ways as they reconstruct 
their Nation past. How Sunni African American Muslim women remember the 
Nation reveals not only their place within black feminist tradition but also the 
enduring contribution that they bring to this tradition.
I was raised in a Sunni African American Muslim community in Atlanta, 
Georgia, under the leadership of Imam W . D. Mohammed. My parents joined 
the Nation of Islam in 1971 but turned toward Sunni Islam in 1975 under the 
direction of Imam W . D. Mohammed. I grew up hearing Nation stories not only 
at home but also at the mosque. Sometimes they were mentioned in religious lec-
tures during the Friday congregational prayer. Although my parents and the other 
ex-Nation members rejected the race theology of the Nation, they recalled and 
celebrated their Nation history because they saw it as an important step to Islam 
as they practice it now. As my mother described, “I had been a Christian, then I 
joined the Nation, and now came Islam. And it was beautiful. It was like another 
shackle was being lifted from my mind and soul. This was it,” she said. “I loved 
the idea that there was this One God. It was wonderful. Whatever the prayers of 
our ancestors were when they were taken from their homes and lands, I believe 
Allah has answered their prayers through us.”
Feminist Narratives of the Nation
Many scholars, including Gomez, have described how the Nation reduced women 
to their biological capacities. In the Nation, “the black woman’s body,” Gomez 
writes, “is seen primarily as a tool of procreation and reproduction.” Elijah 
Muhammad called black men to protect black women “not really” for the benefit 
of women but to preserve black men’s “proprietary rights” over black women’s 
bodies.
3 While this analysis cannot be ignored, it does not represent how most 
Sunni African American Muslim women talk about their Nation experiences. 
Since Muslim women often recall Nation stories to honor it as their doorway 
to Islam, they tend to highlight positive aspects of the Nation more than they 
do negative ones. This does not mean that they never identify the problems that 
they experienced. Indeed, describing the Nation’s problems helps to shed light on 
why they ultimately chose Sunni Islam over the Nation. Similarly, the favorable 
memories that they share of the Nation usually indicate Nation practices or ideas 
that are compatible with Sunni Islam.
In this article, I analyze the Nation stories of two middle-aged Sunni women, 
Lynda and Marjorie. Both joined the Nation in 1971 but now follow the Sunni


--- PAGE 164 ---
Through Sunni Women’s Eyes 157
leadership of Imam W . D. Mohammed. Lynda was raised in Woburn, Massachu-
setts. Now married with four children, she currently lives in Marlton, New Jersey. 
She owns her own day care in Lawnside, New Jersey. Marjorie was born and raised 
in Washington, D.C. Divorced with four children, she works as a project manager 
in an internationally renowned consulting firm. She currently lives in Atlanta, 
Georgia. Both women are exceptionally active in their mosque communities. 
Marjorie is one of the founding members of the Muslim women’s organization, 
Sisters United in Human Service (founded in 1998). In 1999, Lynda and her 
family spearheaded the building of a mosque in Lawnside that they named Masjid 
Freehaven to commemorate the Underground Railroad. I conducted interviews 
with both Marjorie and Lynda in March and April of 1999. Neither of the two 
women identified herself to me as a feminist; however, I analyze their conscious-
ness and acts of agency as feminist.
As Gomez indicates, protecting the black woman’s body is an important part 
of Nation discourse. In Sunni Islam, the most emphasized reference to the female 
body is the duty for women to protect it through self-covering. Covering includes 
not only the hair but also the chest, legs, and arms. Some people find Muslim 
women’s covering oppressive; however, the covering transfers the obligation to 
protect women’s bodies from men to women themselves. In other words, Muslim 
women take it upon themselves to protect their bodies from the male gaze. I call 
this a feminist move since agency is transferred to women, on the condition, of 
course, that Muslim women are covering what they wish as a personal choice, 
which is the case for most Muslim women in the United States. Certainly, the 
covering, specifically the headscarf, can and does function as a symbol of oppres-
sion when women are forced to cover. In contrast, however, the headscarf func-
tions as a symbol of piety and Muslim identity when it reflects women’s choice. 
For Muslim women, dress highlights “the role the body plays in the making of the 
self, one in which the outward behavior of the body constitutes both the poten-
tiality and the means through which” one cultivates her inner spirituality and/or 
projects her religious and cultural loyalties.
4 Still, it is possible that some women 
who choose to cover do so out of subtle, or not so subtle, community or family 
pressures to conform to traditional gender expectations. Notions of male control 
may inform some of these expectations but even in such cases, Muslim women 
discover and articulate benefits of covering. As anthropologist Saba Mahmood 
and others have argued, it is possible for women to practice agency within accom-
modation to established gender expectations. In the Nation narratives below, the 
women describe how the requirement to cover attracted them to the Nation. I 
propose that their current Sunni position, that is, to cover their bodies, explains 
why covering is a constant theme celebrated in their Nation narratives. Other 
practices consistent between the Nation and Sunni Islam also emerge.
Lynda highlights woman’s covering when she tells her Nation stories. Instead 
of protection, she describes another benefit of covering: “Coming into the Nation 
where you cover up the hair and everything else, take off any makeup, it was all
right. I didn’t have a problem with it because that wasn’t really me anyway.” The


--- PAGE 165 ---
Black Routes to Islam158
requirement to cover her hair in the Nation relieved Lynda of the notion that 
physical appearance determined her worth and value. “Short hair, dark skin, that 
was me. Skinny, skinny legs.” As a little girl, Lynda felt less beautiful than the 
white girls at her school in Woburn, Massachusetts. When she was older, she took 
up modeling because “I had to feel that I looked just as good as them.” Lynda 
gained confidence from her modeling because she learned how to wear makeup 
and fix her hair. But when the Nation taught her to cover her hair and remove the 
makeup, Lynda embraced this as what was naturally and truly her. For Lynda, the 
Nation signified honoring one’s natural beauty as a black woman.
In addition to covering, another Sunni practice that Muslim women experi-
enced in the Nation before coming to Sunni Islam is separation between men 
and women for some activities. In Sunni Islam, men and women separate during 
the prayer to prevent physical contact, and depending on how conservative the 
mosque community, men and women separate during social events as well. Lynda 
remembers this separation in the Nation and speaks favorably of it as helping to 
create sisterhood. The separation of men and women in temple activities and ser-
vices gave the women “our own situation,” Lynda described. “I saw a lot of women 
that were in here and they were like welfare people, struggling sisters, uneducated. 
I enjoyed that we were able to force them to read and all kinds of things to do to 
make them better.” Lynda feels that coed activities would have served as a distrac-
tion at the expense of progress. “You are competing for the opposite gender to 
notice you, whereas if you are separate, you are able to progress a lot better [and] 
become a more well-rounded, self-fulfilled person. And then you enter into the 
arena” to deal and compete with both men and women.
Lynda’s representation of the Nation not only teaches us about her past but 
also her present. As Sarah Lawrence-Lightfoot asserts, our reflection and perspec-
tive in the present render a “deliberate and imaginative” reconstruction of our 
past.
5 In other words, the past becomes colored by the present. Therefore, Lyn-
da’s Nation narrative reflects her current Sunni Muslim perspective that women 
should have autonomy over their bodies through dress and some level of separa-
tion from men. This perspective certainly represents a feminist position when it 
functions to empower women.
From both a Sunni and Nation perspective, however, this autonomy does not 
refer to women’s interactions with their husbands. Sunni Islam instructs both 
women and men to be sexually intimate only with their spouses. Islamic law gives 
husbands the right to their wives’ bodies upon marriage and expects for women 
to be intimate with their husbands except when menstruating or ill. This expec-
tation generally does not create controversy. The marital expectation that does, 
however, is the Qur’anic statement that “husbands should take full care of their 
wives, with [the bounties] God has given to some more than others and with what 
they spend out of their own money” (4:34 Abdel Haleem translation). The more 
popular translation of this verse is Yusuf ‘Ali’s translation, “men are the protectors 
and maintainers of women, because Allah has given the one more (strength) than 
the other, and because they support them from their means.” Sunni Muslims


--- PAGE 166 ---
Through Sunni Women’s Eyes 159
debate both how this verse should be translated and how it should be interpreted. 
Does it mean that men are providers and women are not? Does it mean that 
women are inherently inferior to men and therefore unable to adequately take 
care of themselves? Or is it simply a recommendation for men to take care of their 
wives? If so, why does the Qur’an make this recommendation?
Both Amina Wadud and Carolyn Rouse argue that this verse could not pos-
sibly mean that men are the providers of women at all times, in all cases. This 
simply is not reality. On the contrary, Wadud argues in Qur’an and Woman that 
the Qur’an is reminding men of their responsibility to take care of women in the 
context of “the responsibility and right of women to bear children.” The Qur’an 
specifies the man’s responsibility to provide “material maintenance” to see “to it 
that the woman is not burdened with additional responsibilities which jeopardize 
that primary demanding responsibility that only she can fulfil.”
6 African Ameri-
can Sunni women tend to interpret this verse in ways that converge and diverge 
with Wadud’s. Unlike Wadud, many Sunni women do essentialize men as natural 
providers (even though they may not live up to their nature). But, like Wadud, 
they do not take the verse to mean that women are naturally unable to provide for 
themselves. Instead, they see this verse as a challenge for men to live up to their 
God-given role and act as responsible men who take care of their families. “The 
rhetoric of patriarchy,” that is, that men are the maintainers of women, “may be 
deployed [by Sunni African American women] not to make women submissive,” 
Rouse writes, “but to instill in men a sense of responsibility.”
7 It is this emphasis 
on responsibility that comes across in Marjorie’s reconstruction of the Nation. 
Here I tell her story with her words in quotations.
Until the age of five, Marjorie had a father in the home. He provided for 
his family of seven as a chauffeur, with another job on the side. This livelihood 
landed them in the projects of Washington, D.C. After her parents separated, 
Marjorie’s mother “had to go on welfare because she believed in staying home 
with her five children.” Due to her mother’s example, Marjorie envisioned the 
ideal woman as one having “a husband to take care of her.” Hence, her ideal man 
was one who could provide.
With the separation of her parents, however, Marjorie did not see this ideal 
fulfilled in her childhood. Instead, she witnessed her mother’s live-in boyfriend 
abuse her mother after many evenings of drinking. Marjorie explained, “I didn’t 
like the boyfriend-girlfriend thing, especially in that class of folks. A lot of them 
would escape from their lifestyles and would indulge in drinking.” Although her 
mother participated in this lifestyle, she still emerged as a positive role model 
for Marjorie. She recalls how her mother went back to school while raising her 
children, entered a profession, and moved her family off of welfare by the time 
Marjorie was a teenager. However, no positive images of men emerge in Marjorie’s 
memory. From the men in her childhood, she knew only what she did not want 
in a husband. With a bitter voice, she expressed, “I didn’t want a man that drank. 
I had an uncle that drank. I saw how he acted, and I didn’t want that.”


--- PAGE 167 ---
Black Routes to Islam160
What piqued Marjorie’s early interest in the Nation, however, relates more to 
her image of herself than to the image of the men and women in her life. Marjorie 
believed that the blacker you were, the less beautiful you were. As a little girl, she 
would spend hours in the tub after playing under the hot sun hoping to wash 
away the sun’s mark. Thus, when she first heard the phrase “black is beautiful” at 
age fifteen, she said, “it was one of the most beautiful and refreshing ideas that 
ever came to my mind. It was almost like my mind was being unshackled—[to 
know] that black was beautiful, that I’m beautiful, that brown was beautiful, that 
kinky hair could be beautiful, thick lips could be beautiful, and it was wonderful 
because this was me.” Likewise, the Nation taught Marjorie to love her blackness. 
Marjorie said, “I wanted to go into something that would make me feel good 
about myself, and in the Nation they said, ‘The black man is God.’” With a big 
hearty laugh, Marjorie remembers her response as “Wow! He is?!”
The discipline of the Nation men also appealed to Marjorie. She says, “They 
were in the forefront selling their papers, well-dressed and well-mannered . . . 
They respected you . . . If they wanted to be with you, they wanted to marry 
you. They weren’t into the drugs. If they were, they stopped.” This “very clean, 
decent, and disciplined life” appealed to Marjorie “because it was closer to being 
pious.” The Nation women’s dress appealed to her for the same reasons. Marjorie 
loved the head covering because “when I was Catholic, I wanted to be a nun. All 
the nuns that we knew were African American, and they just seemed so pious.” 
Although her childhood fantasy was to become a nun, she also wanted to have 
children. As a Black Muslim, she could have it all. As a Muslim, “you got to 
wear all the different colors . . . and still look modest like [the nuns], and then of 
course I could have babies.” The headpiece and modest uniform made Marjorie 
feel distinguished. “Not only were we black and proud . . . we were the supreme 
race of people on the earth . . . Because we dressed differently, we definitely stood 
out back then.”
For Marjorie, the Nation taught that “the best woman was a modest woman. 
A woman was someone who took care of her home and family. I wanted to do 
that. She was good to her husband, submissive to her husband. I had no problem 
with that.” Because of this ideal of strong dedication and commitment to the 
husband that a Muslim woman expected to find reciprocated in her husband’s 
treatment of her, Marjorie saw that the Nation set high, comparable standards for 
both men and women. The Nation “pumped both of us up. When they would 
pump up one, they were pumping up the other. I didn’t see any difference from 
the other.” As far as staying at home with the children, Marjorie celebrated this 
aspect of womanhood. “We were taught even then that Paradise lies at the foot 
of the mother,” Marjorie said, referring to a statement attributed to the Prophet 
Muhammad.
Analyzing Marjorie’s narrative, we can see why she found the Nation’s ideol-
ogy appealing. Foremost, it ennobled her perception of herself and her race. Also, 
the male-provider role in the Nation reflected for her the foundation on which 
to restore strong family life. This way of seeing and embracing the Nation can be


--- PAGE 168 ---
Through Sunni Women’s Eyes 161
described as a black feminist perspective. As bell hooks has argued, a black femi-
nist perspective develops from the everyday experiences of black women as they 
face race, class and other forms of discrimination.
8 Recognizing multiple forms 
of discrimination is essential to understanding black feminism. African American 
women experience gender injustices within broader struggles of racism and eco-
nomic exploitation. Their feminism does not privilege “gender over race or class,” 
which means that black feminism broadens its scope from the individual to the 
family and community.
9
In the spirit of the collective good, Nation women embraced gender roles that 
placed men as breadwinners and women as homemakers. As Sister Levinia X 
stated, the Nation “teaches women how to raise their children, how to take care 
of their husbands, how to sew and cook, and several domestic things which are 
necessary for a family.”
10 And this was empowering for women who wanted bet-
ter families. At the same time, there were aspects of the Nation that women did 
not embrace. But this did not cause them to reject the Nation. They believed that 
the economic and moral progress of African Americans depended on the progress 
of men and women; therefore, they absolutely maintained alliances with their 
men to combat racism. Like black women in the church, Nation women posi-
tioned themselves within “a tradition of protest and cooperation,” what Cheryl 
T ownsend Gilkes calls “a dialectical tradition.”
11 Evelyn Higginbotham’s fascinat-
ing book Righteous Discontent also describes how black churchwomen maintained 
alliances with black men while simultaneously challenging male hegemony in the 
church. They broadened racial uplift work beyond the confines of the church and 
formed women’s organizations to expand their reach in the broader community: 
“For women, race consciousness did not subsume or negate their empowerment 
as women but rather encouraged it.”
12 In their eyes, commitment to the race 
required that black women challenge the limits placed on them by black men.
Similarly, Nation women accommodated their roles at the same time that they 
resisted them. Marjorie remembers how the Nation’s mandate that men could not 
work for the white man left her family surviving on her husband’s sales of bean 
pies and fish. “It was like living from day to day.” Marjorie helped by making bow 
ties, sandwiches and money pouches for sale. “I told him that I was making it so 
that I could buy myself a dress, but it always had to go to pay the bills.” Marjorie 
was honoring Nation ideology by living the role of a domestic but at the same 
time challenging the idea that only men provided. Whether the extra money went 
to purchase her personal items or to pay the bills, she understood the value of her 
work to her family. By announcing to her husband how she wanted the money to 
be used, she recognized the personal rights and benefits due to her for her hard 
work in the home. She deserved at least a new dress.
Other Nation women, like Lynda, did work outside the home. Lynda worked 
partly out of necessity but also because “I just wanted to have self-worth.” Lynda 
did not receive any criticism for working because she was the lieutenant over the 
females at her temple; hence, “they listened to what I said.” Lynda resisted the fan-
cies of Nation men who “wanted you to be barefoot and pregnant” and expanded


--- PAGE 169 ---
Black Routes to Islam162
the scope of motherhood. And she did this while remaining loyal to the Nation. 
Ironically, the very structure of the Nation gave women the agency to recon-
struct defined gender roles to work in their favor. The Muslim Girls T raining and 
Civilization Class (MGT and CC), a core activity for Nation women, created an 
autonomous working space for them. Lynda described the intensity of their work: 
“We were at the temple all the time—three, four, or five days a week. Coming out 
to the classes, you were learning your lessons, you were drilling, you were learning 
how to cook. I was responsible for going over the Honorable Elijah Muhammad’s 
lecture. I would prepare tests. We would have discussions. We were just busy.”
The purpose of MGT and CC was to train Nation women to be good wives 
and mothers. In reality, however, it became the space for broadening the scope of 
motherhood to community activism. This ability to transform potentially limit-
ing roles for women into ones that empower women dates back to slavery. In the 
living quarters, enslaved women were responsible for the domestic duties such as 
cooking, sewing, cleaning, and rearing the children. While domestic work limited 
white women’s influence and power in the community, enslaved women were 
“performing the only labor of the slave community that could not be directly and 
immediately claimed by the oppressor”:
Precisely through performing the drudgery that has long been a central oppression 
of the socially conditioned inferiority of women, the black woman in chains could 
help to lay the foundation for some degree of autonomy, both for herself and her 
men. Even as she was suffering under her unique oppression as female, she was 
thrust by the force of circumstances into the center of the slave community. She 
was, therefore, essential to the survival of the community. Not all people have sur-
vived enslavement; hence her survival-oriented activities were themselves a form of 
resistance. Survival, moreover, was the prerequisite of all higher levels of struggle.
13
Similarly, Lynda interprets the Nation’s gender roles as a strategy of survival, not 
a mechanism intended to oppress women: “Really when they were saying that the 
woman should be at home, taking care of their kids, basically, they were trying to 
say, ‘Woman your role is to nurture,’ . . . though not realizing that a woman can 
nurture in all aspects of society that she’s involved in.” Hence, Lynda expands the 
significance of motherhood in the same moment that she defends the efforts of 
the Nation. She is defending her men even as she argues for women’s expanded 
social roles. Justifying the Nation’s ideology, Lynda said, “The Nation, probably 
in a more simplistic way, broke down and defined the role of male and female at 
its basic level. The Nation was like a seed and a sign of putting things back in 
its form.”
For Lynda, “putting things back in its form” means for African American men 
and women to reclaim the “different but equal roles that God gave originally” 
in order to restore stable families. During slavery, traditional gender roles were 
undermined as slave women were often expected to produce as much as men 
while still having to reproduce and endure critical phases of motherhood such 
as pregnancy and nursing. Unfortunately, the legacy of struggle that has made


--- PAGE 170 ---
Through Sunni Women’s Eyes 163
African American women capable of both providing and mothering has been 
betrayed as many African American men have left the financial and emotional 
support of children to women alone. Thus, Lynda’s notion of the Nation “putting 
things back in its form” means that the Nation worked to make both men and 
women accountable for their families. Thus, Nation women embraced gendered 
roles because they returned responsibility to men.
In this way, Nation women were engaging race, class, and women’s libera-
tion simultaneously. Mutual responsibility would mitigate the burdens of African 
American women who too often live in poverty and raise their children alone and, 
at the same time, uplift the entire race. However, Nation women were not will-
ing to surrender the valuable role outside the home that their legacy of survival 
had afforded them. Tynnetta Deanar, a regular female columnist for the Nation 
newspaper in the 1960s, showed this commitment to work outside the home 
when she stated, “The Muslim woman is able to coordinate family responsibilities 
and community obligations as she educates on a level not only local and national 
but international in scope.”
14 In one statement, Deanar has transformed herself 
from a mother, teaching children in the home, to an international activist in the 
name of education. And this statement was made not behind closed doors but 
published in the paper.
The Nation was empowering for women because it gave them the most basic 
seeds for community building—positive self-image and the ability to both take 
on and insist responsibility. Marjorie said, “Whether the Nation was liberating 
depends on what you consider liberating. The fact that we weren’t doing all kinds 
of crazy stuff out there in the street, and we were serious about taking care of our 
families and communities, yes, it liberated in that sense.” Lynda said, “The Nation 
gave me a place to develop the confidence that I needed. It was a womb that got me 
ready to come out into the world.” Marjorie’s and Lynda’s voices, though distinct, 
reflect the spectrum of voices of Sunni women, once Nation women.
Feminist Consciousness in Sunni Islam
In her study of Sunni African American Muslim women in Los Angeles, Carolyn 
Rouse demonstrates how Sunni Muslim women continue to emphasize men’s 
responsibility to support women. She places them within black feminist tradition 
because they claim gender roles to improve African American families and com-
munities. However, she sets Muslim women apart from black feminists. “Muslim 
women are unabashedly clear about the methods they use to arrive at truth.”
15
They rely on the Qur’an and the Sunnah (prophetic example) to form their 
understanding of gender roles and practices. Black feminists, on the other hand, 
are not confined to any textual sources to define their feminist theory. Instead, 
black women’s experiences of multiple forms of discrimination define their femi-
nism. While this flexibility presents an advantage, the religious foundation of 
Muslim women’s feminist strategies also indicates a unique contribution.


--- PAGE 171 ---
Black Routes to Islam164
For African American Muslim women, the need to insist men’s responsibility 
arises from everyday experiences, for example, their experiences as single mothers. 
Again, everyday struggle is what situates Muslim women within black feminist 
tradition. Marjorie’s narrative demonstrates this very clearly. As Sunni Muslims, 
however, this preexisting need becomes sanctioned by the Qur’an through the 
verse “husbands should take full care of their wives.” Now that they assume 
Qur’anic sanction, their preexisting black feminist strategies to ensure men’s 
accountability appear even more persuasive and essential. Sunni Islam further 
instills the idea of men’s responsibility through the Islamic ruling that whatever 
income a wife brings in or whatever property she owns, all of it belongs to her 
and her alone. On the other hand, a husband is expected to maintain his wife and 
children with his earnings. Of course, this comes with rights that men have over 
women, including women’s obedience to men according to most traditional and 
modern interpretations. (There are also feminist interpretations of what obedi-
ence means.)
As they did in the Nation, many Sunni women continue to work despite this 
Qur’anic expectation for men. Lynda, for example, continues to work, and she 
remains married to the same responsible man to whom she was married in the 
Nation. However, Lynda emphatically defends why the Nation idealized women’s 
work in the home and men’s work outside. Her Sunni understanding, I argue, 
explains her commitment to the fundamental position that men should be 
pushed to work. Having established this basic expectation, women’s roles can 
be interpreted in multiple ways, for example, nurturing in the home and in the 
community.
I imagine that the experiences of African American women, Muslim and non-
Muslim, will make male accountability a critical goal in black feminist agendas. 
However, one alternative to focusing on male accountability in African Ameri-
can communities is encouraging nontraditional family networks. Most nontradi-
tional families tend to be female-centered extended kin networks. They function 
without a consistent male presence. Instead of men, women, including mothers, 
grandmothers, aunts, and sisters, assume primary responsibility for themselves 
and their children. In Carol Stack’s study All Our Kin, published in 1974 when 
Lynda and Marjorie were still in the Nation, she described such networks: “Com-
monly, the mother’s personal domestic network includes the personal networks of 
her children, who are half siblings with different fathers . . . Mothers expect little 
from the father; they just hope that he will help out. But they do expect some-
thing from his kin, especially his mother and sisters.”
16
By 2000, female-centered kin networks, or female households, characterized 
many African American families. Census figures show that in 1999, 30 percent 
of black households were maintained by women without a spouse present. This is 
three times the percentage of total U.S. households maintained by women (11.8 
percent). Only 5.7 percent of black families were maintained by men without 
a wife present. If we take Central Harlem as one example, studies in the 1990s 
found that “69 percent of all families are headed by women” and “54.3 percent 
of all households headed by women that include children under eighteen have 
incomes below the poverty line.”
17 In 1999, the median household income for


--- PAGE 172 ---
Through Sunni Women’s Eyes 165
all black families was $33,300, compared to $50,000 for all American fami-
lies. Households headed by African American women significantly influenced 
this disparity. African American married-couple families had a median income 
of $50,700, whereas African American families maintained by women had an 
annual income of $20,600.
18
These numbers clearly indicate that female-centered kin networks are not a 
viable alternative. Sunni African American Muslim women know by experience 
that they are not. And because the Qur’an clearly asserts that men are expected to 
support women, they know it with a firm conviction. Muslim women’s commit-
ment to this expectation as they struggle to improve African American families 
marks their contribution to black feminist tradition. In other words, the Qur’anic 
expectation for men poses a unique set of questions that African American Mus-
lim women bring to black feminist thought: is the male-provider role an ideal for 
promoting balanced responsibility between men and women in the family unit? 
Never does the Qur’an make a general statement about women akin to its asser-
tion about men. Does the Qur’an’s greater emphasis on the role of men antici-
pate social realities that demonstrate that men are more likely to threaten mutual 
accountability? The economic consequences of racism make providing difficult 
for African American men and women. Is the Qur’an’s concern with men a divine 
acknowledgement that men are more likely to abandon their families? Childbear-
ing motivates women to provide. What motivates men? Is it healthy sexual and 
spiritual relations with women? This would mean that men’s incentive to provide 
is contingent on, and, therefore, threatened by, external challenges. Carol Stack’s 
study supports this idea as she shows that men are less likely to provide once they 
end relations with the mothers of their children.
In cases when men are committed through marriage, do men still need the 
reminder to support women? Are men likely to do their share in the family with-
out defined roles? Or are gendered roles necessary for basic community building, 
to ensure that men will do their part? What then happens when quality commu-
nity life is established? Is it still necessary to promote some form of gendered roles 
to ensure that mutual responsibility will be maintained? Or can black men ever 
be expected to adequately support women in a society in which they are demon-
ized? Does the male-provider role maintain patriarchy since it assumes women’s 
dependency? If so, is this accommodation of patriarchy worth the benefit that 
Muslim women claim, that is, restoration of the family? As African American 
Sunni women engage these complex questions, they influence the direction and 
broaden the scope of black feminist thought. Since they are included among black 
women, the experiences, ideas, and questions of Sunni African American women 
represent part of black feminist tradition. Imagining Muslim women outside this 
tradition denies their experiences as black women.
Notes
 1. Essien Udosen Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism: The Rise of the Black Muslims in the 
U.S.A (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1967), 86.


--- PAGE 173 ---
Black Routes to Islam166
 2. Carolyn Moxley Rouse, Engaged Surrender: African American Women and Islam (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2004), 150.
 3. Michael Angelo Gomez, Black Crescent: The Experience and Legacy of African Muslims in 
the Americas (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 324.
 4. Saba Mahmood, Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2005), 159.
 5. Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot, I’ve Known Rivers: Lives of Loss and Liberation  (Reading: Addi-
sion-Wesley, 1994), 11.
 6. Amina Wadud, Qur’an and Woman: Rereading the Sacred T ext from a Woman’s Perspective,
2nd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 72, 73.
 7. Rouse, Engaged Surrender, 16.
 8. bell hooks, “Black Women: Shaping Feminist Theory,” in Words of Fire: An Anthology 
of African-American Feminist Thought, ed. Beverly Guy-Sheftall (New York: New Press, 
1995), 278.
 9. Rouse, Engaged Surrender, 143.
 10. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism, 86.
 11. Cheryl T ownsend Gilkes, “‘T ogether and in Harness’: Women’s T raditions in the Sancti-
fied Church,” Signs 10, no. 4 (1985): 697.
 12. Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the Black 
Baptist Church, 1880–1920 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), 166.
 13. Angela Davis, “Reflections on the Black Woman’s Role in the Community of Slaves,” in 
Words of Fire: An Anthology of African-American Feminist Thought, ed. Beverly Guy-Sheftall 
(New York: New Press, 1985), 205.
 14. Tynnetta Deanar, “Muslim Woman Is Model Personality,” Muhammad Speaks, June 1962, 
15.
 15. Rouse, Engaged Surrender, 148.
 16. Carol B. Stack, All Our Kin: Strategies for Survival in a Black Community (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1974), 53.
 17. Leith Mullings, “Households Headed by Women: The Politics of Race, Class, and Gen-
der” in Conceiving the New World Order, ed. Faye D. Ginsburg and Rayna Rapp (Berkeley, 
Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press, 1995), 125, 126.
 18. Jesse D. McKinnon and Claudette E. Bennett, “We the People: Blacks in the United 
States,” Census 2000 Special Reports, August 2005, http://www.census.gov/prod/
2005pubs/censr-25.pdf (accessed March 30, 2006).


--- PAGE 174 ---
C HAPTER  10
Black Arabic
Some Notes on African 
American Muslims and the 
Arabic Language
Su’ad Abdul Khabeer
Despite the December cold outside, it was toasty inside the Queens
apartment. This was thanks to what some New Yorkers jokingly nickname “proj-
ect heat” that blasts from the apartment radiator whose thermostat a renter can-
not control. A group of about seven African American Muslim women had come 
together for an iftar, a meal to break the daily Ramadan fast. After dinner, they 
gathered in conversation on topics ranging from the criminal justice system to 
an upcoming fashion show. At one point Saleemah, a middle-aged woman, was 
asked to share her shahadah story, the account of how she converted to Islam. 
Although she converted in 1975, she traced the origin of her journey to Islam to 
the late 1960s and her activism within the Black Panther Party and Pan-African 
movements. She told the group:
Allah had me go up one day to a prison, I was looking for my girlfriend’s uncle who 
was um, unjustly, um, sentenced and I wanted to speak to him but his block didn’t 
come out, but this [other] block came with all these brothers with white kufis, and 
I always had an eye for nice looking men so I said [to myself]: “well, who are all 
these nice looking brothers with these white kufis on their heads?!” I knew they 
were Sunni Muslims, people tried to give me dawah in ’72 but I wasn’t ready to 
hear it ’cause I felt the Arabs put black people in slavery, so I didn’t want to hear 
nothing about Arabs.
Saleemah’s story ends with conversion, yet her initial aversion to Islam because 
of Arab participation in the enslavement of Africans is notable. It is illustrative 
of the complexity and contestation around the meaning and role of the Arabic


--- PAGE 175 ---
Black Routes to Islam168
language for African American Muslims. Arabic is the language of the Qur’an 
and daily prayers, and the Prophet Muhammad was an Arab—are these merely 
coincidences of history or do they carry a deeper significance?
African American Muslims, both converts and those raised in Muslim families, 
join the majority of the world’s Muslims (most of whom are non-Arabs) who 
habitually use the Arabic language. The prevalence of Arabic use among non-
Arab Muslims can be attributed in part to the religiously required use of Arabic in 
prayer. The language of the Qur’an and the early Muslim community, Arabic has 
also historically been the lingua franca of the Islamic intellectual tradition. Some 
Muslims argue that the relationship between Arabic and the Islamic community is 
merely coincidental: Arabic was the language of Muhammad and his community, 
which necessitated an Arabic Qur’an. However, for many Muslims, both scholars 
and laity, Arabic assumes preeminence over other languages. Arabic is not merely 
a language used by God to communicate to the world; rather, it is God’s language 
and carries all the divinity and authority of its speaker.
In African American Muslim communities, Arabic enters everyday language 
through the practice of ritual. Arabic appears in the speech of African American 
Muslims when talking about religion, in greetings and other customary expres-
sions, and in the use of words borrowed from the Arabic language that replace 
English equivalents, such as umi for mother, bayt for house, and so on. Impor-
tantly, these borrowed or loan words are of specific types: terms of endearment, 
titles to address family and community members, specific places, clothing, things 
and events, civilities, and theoretical concepts.
1 The introduction of the Arabic 
language in speech is also a conversational tool used to produce specific reactions 
in a discussion and direct the course of conversation.
2 Therefore, any analysis of 
the use of the Arabic language among African American Muslims must be under-
stood in the context of who is speaking, to whom is she or he speaking, and what 
is he or she speaking about.
Most interesting about the use of Arabic in African American Muslim speech 
is that word choice and how often words are used index competing beliefs and 
attitudes toward the use of the Arabic language among African American Mus-
lims. These beliefs and attitudes, also known as language ideologies, further index 
beliefs about what it means to be an “authentic” African American Muslim. In 
this debate, African American Muslims confront questions of identity. How does 
a community construct an identity that is distinctive yet not artificially so? What 
determines that choices are sincerely attuned to the African American Muslim’s 
cultural, religious, and racial here and now? And why is that important? In this 
chapter, I examine Arabic language use and the role of competing language ide-
ologies in authenticity debates among African American Muslim communities in 
the United States.
3
I argue that the religious significance of the Arabic language functions beyond 
ritual religious practices. The religious origin of Arabic, for African American 
Muslims, imbues the language with a power that travels with Arabic as it is used 
in everyday speech. Therefore, even outside religious events, the Arabic language


--- PAGE 176 ---
Black Arabic 169
is given a semiholy character and value among groups of African American 
Muslims. I will show how the authority imbued in Arabic allows for more than 
the simple substitution of Arabic words for English equivalents but the effec-
tive replacement of certain English words and phrases in the speech of African 
American Muslims. Despite the fact that English is the native language of African 
American Muslims, in certain contexts, English becomes inadequate—unable to 
meaningfully describe social realities. Moreover, because of the cultural frame-
works African American Muslims bring to Islamic practice, the sociolinguistic 
meanings of Arabic words can be related to both a religious (Islamic) context and 
parallel meanings found within the context of broader African American culture. 
Further, I will unpack different ideas about the Arabic language by exploring its 
role in relationships of power among African American Muslims. By examin-
ing opposing language ideologies among African American Muslims, I will seek 
to determine beliefs regarding which ideas and persons are seen as “authenti-
cally” Islamic as well as which ideas and persons are seen as “authentically” African
American Muslim.
My arguments are drawn from an analysis of the general African American 
Muslim linguistic context and specific incidences of Arabic use in interactions 
among African American Muslims. In the recorded ethnographic moments I pres-
ent, I was a participant as well as observer; an anthropologist whose position in 
these social spaces was marked by ivy league pedigree, overseas study, gender, and 
religious and racial identity. Focusing on a community that is only beginning to 
be seriously studied ethnographically is both exciting and challenging. This chap-
ter will not exhaust the possible analytical angles through which to approach this 
topic. However, what follows offers some notes—a series of questions and some 
thoughts—which will hopefully open up a conversation or stand as an invitation 
to carry out more research on African American Muslim sociality.
An African American Muslim Speech Community?
As a black woman of Caribbean and Latin American descent, a fourth-generation 
(mother’s side) and second-generation (father’s side) American, and a second-
generation Muslim who speaks Arabic fairly decently, I certainly do not describe 
African American Muslims as a speech community to ignore the diversity that is 
characteristic of this community. African American Muslims are defined in this 
chapter as Muslim Americans descended from Africans enslaved in the western 
hemisphere, and those who self-identify as such. African American Muslims—
poor, wealthy, working, and middle-class—live in America’s inner cities, suburban 
enclaves, and rural communities. African American Muslims are thus, by defini-
tion, a heterogeneous speech community.
Therefore, my argument that African American Muslims constitute a speech 
community is not related to cultural or linguistic homogeneity. As Linguis-
tic anthropological scholarship has shown, speech communities are not homo-
geneous entities where all members have the same knowledge of grammar and


--- PAGE 177 ---
Black Routes to Islam170
culture, as well as the same ability to use language. 4 Rather, African American 
Muslims constitute a speech community because they share the same context 
within which Arabic enters and functions in their linguistic worlds, although its 
manifestations, incorporations, and rejections are not strictly formulaic.
The Arabic linguistic context shared by African American Muslims is marked 
by two characteristics. Firstly, Arabic is not their first language; thus, for the over-
whelming majority of African American Muslims, the encounter with Arabic is 
one that occurs through a process of religious conversion, be it direct (personal 
conversion) or inherited (conversion of a child’s parents).
5 Religious conversion, 
as Susan Harding suggests, “is the process of acquiring a specific religious lan-
guage.”6 Yet, if we understand language to be “a complex inventory of all the 
ideas, interests and occupations that take up the attention of the community,” 
then conversion yields more than a new way to talk about and to God.
7 The inclu-
sion of religious terminology in ritual speech and, subsequently, in everyday talk, 
can be described as acquiring a means of expressing newer and rearticulating older 
worldviews and forms of sociality.
The second characteristic that shapes the shared Arabic linguistic context of 
African American Muslims is the racial politics of Islam in America. A major 
fault line in the American Muslim community is the question of who speaks 
and interprets for American Muslims—indigenous or immigrant Muslims. Within 
the American Muslim community, the term indigenous is used to describe Mus-
lims whose ancestors were enslaved in the Americas, that is, African Americans 
and Latina/os as well as Native American Muslims and Muslims whose ances-
tors are Europeans but are not recent immigrants, that is, white Americans. The 
term immigrant is used to refer to Muslims who have immigrated to the United 
States within the last century and their children. This distinction is not nuanced 
to describe, for example, the Arab American Muslim family that has resided in the 
United States since the nineteenth century. Therefore, the distinction appears to be 
connected to a particular relationship to the United States, a historic relationship 
that African American, Latina/o, white American, and Native American Muslims 
share that American Muslims of other descent are presumed not to have.
8
Outside of the American Muslim community, the term indigenous, particu-
larly in human rights discourse, is meant to refer to native peoples or the original 
inhabitants of a particular territory who, based on their identity, claim rights 
to land and sovereignty against the hegemonic power of settler peoples. At this 
point, I have been unable to determine when this term began to be used in the 
American Muslim context; however, its usage is neither coincidental nor inci-
dental but derives its power from this more common definition.
9 By claiming 
to be indigenous, the indigenous Muslim makes similar claims: to be native and 
therefore have proprietary rights that predate those of the newly arrived, yet more 
socioeconomically powerful party, the immigrant Muslim.
The indigenous-immigrant divide is one concerning symbolic power, defined by 
Bourdieu as “[the] power of constituting the given through utterances, of making


--- PAGE 178 ---
Black Arabic 171
people see and believe, of confirming or transforming the vision of the world and, 
thereby action on the world and thus the world itself.” 10 Specifically, the issue at 
hand is of legitimate religious authority within the American Muslim commu-
nity—who has the legitimate authority to interpret for the Muslim community 
in the United States.
11 This issue of legitimate religious authority is tied to the 
cultural capital of the Arabic language in the global Muslim community. The abil-
ity to wield Arabic in social spaces invokes the authority of the Divine and thereby 
increases symbolic power—the power to name and define reality.
As noted earlier, Arabic is the lingua franca of the intellectual Islamic tradition 
from which follows the reasonable expectation that a technical competency in 
the language is one criterion to be considered in determining legitimate religious 
authority. A leap taken, which indigenous Muslims object to, is that technical 
competency is necessarily the equivalent of deep religious understanding. More-
over, as the majority of immigrant Muslims are not native Arabic speakers, indig-
enous Muslims also object to a related attitude that Sherman Jackson identifies as 
Immigrant Islam.
12 The idea that immigrant Muslims are, by virtue of national 
origin, technically competent and thus endowed with the deep understanding 
that confers religious authority.
13 It is important to note that because of the cul-
tural capital of Arabic among Muslims worldwide, Arabic will always be a trump 
in negotiations of symbolic power, even in contexts that do not include Arabs, 
like those of African American Muslims whose main immigrant interlocutors are 
South Asian.
The indigenous-immigrant divide is also marked by, and reflective of, the perfor-
mance of race and racism in the United States. Particularly for African American 
Muslims, interactions between themselves and immigrant Muslims has proven that 
immigrant Muslims typically replicate and embody white supremacists attitudes 
toward African American history and culture. Indeed, the residential patterns and 
acculturation choices of the majority of the immigrant Muslim community seem 
to reflect this pursuit of whiteness and the prejudiced attitudes toward African 
American Muslims, spiritual brethren or not.
14 This immigrant performance of 
race is particularly an affront as African American claims of indigeneity are further 
buttressed by the fundamental role of the African American Muslim community 
in the establishment of Islam as a legitimate form of American religiosity.
15
With the patterns of social life within the American Muslim community 
reflective of the racial segregation that is commonplace in American society, Afri-
can American Muslims tend to have limited incidences of face-to-face interac-
tions with immigrant Muslims. Nevertheless, this tension is well known, felt to 
be shared experientially, and is the backdrop of interethnic relations within the 
American Muslim community. It is within this shared linguistic context, deter-
mined by conversion and racial politics, that language ideologies about the Arabic 
language have emerged within the African American Muslim community—ide-
ologies that respond to the questions why Arabic should be used, how Arabic 
should be used, and by whom.


--- PAGE 179 ---
Black Routes to Islam172
When English Is Not Enough
During the weekly study circle, Leticia, who has only recently released her first 
amateur rap album, informed the group that she had chosen the titles for the 
songs on her next CD: “one is gonna be called sista fitna.” Leticia then went on 
to describe an incident at a local Brooklyn mosque that inspired the title. Briefly, 
a woman brought food to the daily Ramadan break fast held at the mosque and 
refused to share the food except under certain strange conditions. The other 
members of the study circle were shocked by the woman’s action, particularly 
because it contradicts the overly generous behavior customary during the month 
of Ramadan. Upon hearing the details of this story, another participant, Jamil-
lah, exclaimed, “Oh she [the woman] must be majnoon!” The other women nod-
ded their heads and voiced their agreement to affirm Jamillah’s assessment. This 
scene concluded with a question by twelve-year-old Maisha, “What is majnoon?”
I responded, “Girl, that just means crazy.”
Leticia, Jamillah, and the other participants in this story met every Wednesday 
evening in Queens, New York. This group of African American Muslim women 
gathered for the purpose of religious education where, during each meeting, the 
informal group leader shared information and led a discussion on a religious topic. 
I frequently attended these meetings and, despite the goal of religious education, 
socializing was a major element of these gatherings. The group’s size generally 
ranged between seven and twenty women and consistently began approximately 
two hours after the scheduled start time. The youngest participant in this group 
was twelve years old and the oldest was seventy but most of the participants were 
in their early forties and fifties. Most of the women in the group converted to 
Islam and had been Muslim for an average of fifteen years. The younger women, 
mostly teenagers, had been raised Muslim since birth.
The word fitna, used by Leticia in her future CD title, sista fitna, is defined as 
temptation, trial, and discord in Arabic. In addition to the literal meanings, the 
term is also generally associated with two historic concerns in the Muslim com-
munity: communal chaos and the temptation of women in (male) society. Among 
African American Muslims, I have observed that fitna is used to describe a variety 
of disappointing experiences in private and public life. For example, fitna may be 
used to describe the occurrence of an argument, losing a job, or a marital dispute. 
Therefore, Leticia’s use of fitna impresses upon her listeners the reprehensibility 
of the woman’s behavior because it evokes not only the literal meanings of fitna
and but the sociohistorical understandings of the word as well. By evoking the 
meanings of fitna, the woman’s behavior moves from a matter of poor manners to 
a much more significant social ill.
In the light of associations between meanings of fitna and women, Leticia’s word 
choice raises the question if she created the title sista fitna because she interpreted 
the incident as another example of the fitna caused by women. Alternatively, did 
Leticia rename the woman fitna because her behavior is another example of the 
trials facing the Muslim community? The group’s conversation in reference to this 
story does not lend any evidence to support the first supposition. Moreover, fitna


--- PAGE 180 ---
Black Arabic 173
has more than a gendered meaning, which seems to support the idea that Leticia 
would have used fitna to describe similar behavior by a male. Leticia confirmed 
the latter and said that she renamed the woman fitna because she “causes trouble 
wherever she goes.”
As with any language, knowledge of the possible meanings of Arabic words 
and phrases and when to use them is not an innate ability but is learned through 
a process of socialization—a process which includes both socialization through 
language and socialization to the use of language.
16 Although she was being raised 
in a Muslim family and was a student at a local Islamic school, Maisha was not 
familiar with any of the meanings of majnoon. In Maisha’s question “what is maj-
noon?” we can trace this socialization process. Maisha, like the other adolescents at 
this study circle, attends at the behest (or perhaps command) of her mother. She 
is made to participate in the study circle as a means of introduction, clarification, 
and affirmation of what she should believe as a Muslim. She is also made to attend 
in order to be socialized to the concepts and practices that should be exhibited by 
a member of the ummah. The potential answers to her question (including my 
own) are meant to teach her what the word means, thereby building her “vocabu-
lary” and ability to function with competence in a community in which Arabic is 
a common linguistic resource and tool. The different definitions of majnoon given 
in response to her question are also exemplary of the fact that shared or dominant 
meanings of Arabic terminology within the community do not go uncontested—
they do not mean the same thing to everyone. Maisha is an adolescent but other 
African American Muslims, for example, converts, would be on the same learning 
curve and would encounter the meaning and use of Arabic words and phrases 
through a variety of spaces and practices, including study groups, Friday sermons, 
pamphlets and religious books, and other everyday events.
The discourse that emerges from these practices produces a lexicon that cir-
culates within the African American Muslim community. The words that make 
up this African American Muslim Arabic lexicon are almost all nouns. This is a 
characteristic that Jane Hill identifies as “a sign of very restricted bilingualism, 
since it has long been recognized that nouns are the earliest borrowing in an 
incipient bilingual context.”
17 Hill notes further that the category of words used 
also indicates the realms of interaction between the carriers of the loan language 
and the borrowers.
18 Due to the ethnic segregation common within the American 
Muslim community, it is doubtful that the introduction of Arabic in the everyday 
speech of African American Muslims was the result of intimate contact between 
African American Muslims and Arabic speakers. The major Islamic movements 
among African American Muslims from the early to late twentieth century—the 
Nation of Islam, the community of Imam W . D. Mohamed, the Darul Islam, and 
others—were not tied to Arab communities neither in terms of spiritual author-
ity, community leadership, nor social life. Furthermore, any relationships they did 
have were often tenuous at best.
In a separate interview with Saleemah, she noted that as a new Muslim in the 
mid 1970s, she attended a variety of Islamic meetings and conventions in which


--- PAGE 181 ---
Black Routes to Islam174
her interactions with Arabic speakers, particularly men, were limited. Where 
gender might have facilitated more intimate contact between African American 
women and Arabic-speaking women, cultural distance reigned supreme, as even 
interactions between women never seemed to transcend the weekend conference 
milieu. Therefore, it is more likely that Arabic was introduced into African Amer-
ican Muslim speech through religious study and the elementary study of the Ara-
bic language that was particularly common among African American converts in 
the mid- to late twentieth century. In the educational contexts of religious lectures 
and Arabic language classes, words and phrases drawn directly from the Qur’an, 
hadith texts and religious practice manuals, as well as simple everyday terms, 
were taught and retained by students. The ability of these students to engage 
in more advanced language study, due to financial and familial constraints, was 
often limited.
19
T wo words that exemplify this type of learning, retention, and incorporation 
are umi and khimar. It is easy to find many second-generation African American 
Muslims who were raised to call their mothers umi. Umi is an Arabic phrase that 
means “my mother,” yet in the Arabic speaking world, and among Arab Ameri-
cans, mothers are almost exclusively referred to as mama.
20 Similarly, in many 
African American Muslim communities, the headscarf that is worn by Muslim 
women is referred to as khimar, whereas among Arab Americans and in the Arab 
world, a Muslim woman’s head covering is called hijab. Both terms are Arabic 
and are featured in the Qur’an; however, khimar, in its plural form khumur, is the 
precise term used in the Qur’anic verse describing female modesty. 
21 Hijab, in 
contrast, is used in the Qur’an in several instances that have “a common seman-
tic theme of separation, albeit not primarily between the sexes.”
22 Thus, there 
is a distinctive adoption of the Arabic language in a way that is not tied to the 
norms of Arab culture, to which access is limited. These words and others, such 
as zawj (spouse) and wali (guardian), also follow this pattern of incorporation as 
a result of intensive interaction with religious and linguistic texts rather than an 
intensity of interaction with Arab Muslims. These words are subsequently used 
outside scholastic contexts and become commonplace in African American Mus-
lim speech.
In an article that traces the use of broadcast radio parlance in everyday Zam-
bian speech, Debra Spitulnik writes that “certain institutions provide common 
linguistic reference points” such that they function as the “source and reference 
point for phrases and tropes which circulate across communities.”
23 These phrases 
and tropes are public words, defined by Spitulnik as “standard phrases such as prov-
erbs, slogans, clichés, and idiomatic expressions that are remembered, repeated, 
and quoted long after their first utterance.”
24 The concept of public words is 
particularly useful when analyzing Arabic language use among African American 
Muslims. Arabic terms are used in institutions such as study circles, hip-hop, and 
dawah (invitation to Islam) pamphlets, these institutions serve as shared linguis-
tic reference points through which Arabic public words circulate among African 
American Muslims.


--- PAGE 182 ---
Black Arabic 175
In the exchange transcribed above, Jamillah interjected a public word, maj-
noon, into the conversation to further embellish Leticia’s description of fitna by 
the woman. By using majnoon she implied that the woman’s behavior is not sim-
ply an error in judgment but a fundamental problem with her psychological con-
stitution and perhaps even more than that. Majnoon is derived from the root word 
janna, which means to become crazy and to be possessed. It is not clear to what 
extent the etymology of the word is known by all members of the group, yet it is 
the act of choosing an Arabic word as opposed to a potential English equivalent 
that is key—it illustrates the power of meaning that Arabic wields in this speech 
community. In essence, the English equivalents to these words—fitna and maj-
noon and others—are inadequate because they do not express the value and mean-
ing this Islamic community has invested in Arabic terms and language. Moreover, 
although the English language may be inadequate, choosing Arabic terminology 
over English can also be an act that engages the broader contexts the African 
American Muslim performs within: American Muslim and African American.
The root word janna is also the etymological root for the word jinn, which 
describes created beings who, according to Islamic belief, have been given free 
will and live along side humanity but are unseen to the human eye. Like human 
beings, there are righteous jinn and there are jinn who are thought to work along-
side Satan in attempting to thwart believers from righteousness. These types of 
beings are similar to the spirits that are part of African American folk traditions.
25
As Braziel Robinson, a former slave who claimed to be able to see spirits described, 
“my two spirits are good spirits, and have power over evils spirits, and unless my 
mind is evil, can keep me from harm. If my mind is evil my two spirits try to win 
me, if I won’t listen to them, then they leave me and make room for evil spirits 
and then I’m lost forever.”
26
Spirits, their existence, and their potential to do harm in human life is related 
to different practices such as conjure, hoodoo, and Christian spirit possession, 
which are undergirded by a general belief that the supernatural plays an intimate 
role in human life. The existence of the concept of jinn in African American 
folk tradition is important because it is through familiarity with the supernatural 
through these traditions that African American Muslims can make an experiential 
connection between a religious concept and their profane reality. The concept 
of jinn makes sense, it is familiar, and therefore resonates culturally because it 
reflects and reaffirms a preconversion cultural belief. This is particularly impor-
tant because racial divides within the American Muslim community preclude 
African American Muslims access to an experience of the supernatural through 
the stories that circulate amongst their immigrant brethren. Thus, certain Arabic 
words, such as majnoon, should be seen as doubly meaningful because they reflect 
both a particular Islamic cosmology as well as a spiritual orientation that has roots 
in the Christian and folk belief traditions of African Americans.
One notable point in the discussion was my interjection, “girl, that [majnoon]
just means crazy.” As a participant in the conversation, I injected a definition of 
majnoon devoid of any sociohistorical meaning. This was motivated (admittedly,


--- PAGE 183 ---
Black Routes to Islam176
heavy-handedly) by my personal concern with practices that might elevate Arab 
culture to the detriment of African American Muslims, under the auspices of 
being more “Islamic.” By claiming that majnoon “just means crazy,” I attempted to 
interfere with the socialization process by reducing the definition to only its sim-
plest literal meaning. Yet it is clear that majnoon does not just mean crazy; embed-
ded in its meaning are community beliefs on the supernatural and the authority 
of the Arabic language. In this moment and in the encounter that I recount below, 
my attempt at linguistic intervention is no match for a language firmly rooted in 
the discourse on what it means to be an African American Muslim.
Speaking in God’s Name
Recently, I was in the company of another group of African American Muslim 
women who had gathered for a Ramadan break fast at a home in Queens, New 
York. Arabic words and phrases were used in many different ways throughout the 
evening’s conversations; here, I focus on one participant, Naimah, and her use of 
Arabic as a means of asserting authority. I have divided the evening’s discussions 
into two parts, distinguished by two different patterns of speaking. During the 
first part of the discussions, the following pattern developed. One woman would 
tell an anecdote or give a personal opinion related to the topic at hand. Naimah 
would then interject by summarizing the speaker’s narrative and providing her 
Islamic commentary on the issue. By Islamic commentary, I am referring to her 
habit of couching each topic in the context of the challenges (as she understood 
them) facing the world Muslim community. Whether using English exclusively 
or using Arabic as well, through the course of the evening’s conversations, she 
asserted herself as a religious commentator on each topic of discussion.
Naimah was a powerful speaker because she used a variety of linguistic tools to 
make her points. Overall, Naimah used Arabic significantly more than any other 
speakers in the discussion. She used Arabic in two specific ways: (1) she used 
words commonly known to African American Muslims while emphasizing an 
Arabic accent in her pronunciation of these words, and (2) she recited Qur’anic 
verses in Arabic, with and without a subsequent English translation. Naimah 
was also a powerful speaker because her speaking style evoked the elocutionary 
techniques of African American Christian preachers and Muslim Imams (mosque 
leader) in terms of cadence and intonation. In the tradition of Imams, she used 
Arabic as a stylistic feature of her speech and thus the authority she wielded in 
the conversation was in part drawn from her ability, through performance, to 
embody the authority of an Imam. Through this technique, we find Arabic as 
doubly meaningful again, drawing significance from its religious authority as the 
language of the Qur’an and from the cultural authority inscribed in the style of 
African American clergy.
Through her “Islamic” reframing of the conversation, she was attempting to 
establish herself as the representative of the one correct Islamic authority. Her 
interjections did not simply move her into the position of speaker vis-à-vis the


--- PAGE 184 ---
Black Arabic 177
listeners; rather, she promoted herself into the position of authority vis-à-vis those 
who must listen to, obey, and accept authority. Moreover, rather than embody 
the position of a speaker whose role is “animator, author and principal as one,” 
I believe Naimah did not perceive herself to be the author of her speech.
27 She 
rarely used “I” statements when speaking; instead, she would consistently state 
that “we [Muslims]” need to “realize” or “understand” that Allah wants or says 
“X” and the sunnah (tradition) of the Prophet directs us to do “Y.” Therefore it 
appeared that she perceived herself as playing the role of God’s representative in 
the conversation, and her authority was derived from being the orator of God’s 
speech. This perception—and the authority it afforded—appeared to be sup-
ported by the other women in the group, as in most cases she was able to deliver 
her commentary-monologues without interruption, interjection, or challenge by 
the other participants.
Her authority as God’s representative drew on the preeminence of Arabic in 
the African American Muslim community. Wielding Arabic terminology is a com-
mon conversational tool among African American Muslims, especially in debates, 
because it implies a religious knowledge base; if you speak the ‘Arabiya you must 
know the religion.
28 This is, of course, the same claim implicitly made by immi-
grant Muslims as noted above, although in these speech contexts, there are no 
immigrants present. Much like the white normative gaze articulated by Cornel 
West, we can understand the language ideologies of African American Muslims to 
function under an immigrant normative gaze.
29 The contestations over authority 
and representation that define the relations of power between the immigrant and 
indigenous communities shape behavior, in this case, language use, even when the 
immigrant is not present. Yet although the immigrant Muslim is not present, his 
claims of normativity still function and are often hegemonic within interactions 
between African American Muslims. Therefore, Arabic language use is designed 
to shift the power to be authoritative in the discussion or debate to the speaker 
who has the ability to supplement their argument with the incorporation of Ara-
bic words and phrases, whether drawn directly from religious texts or not.
Just as was the case in the sista fitna story, my participation in the conversation 
was particularly significant. My participation marks the second half of the discus-
sions during which I consistently challenged Naimah’s commentary-monologues. 
The first incidence of this followed Saleemah’s narration of her conversion to 
Islam during a visit to a prison inmate:
Naimah: You know what I realized . . . for many people, for many people going to 
prison can be a life saving movement.
[In the background: Oh yeah. Sure.]
Suad: For most people, it’s not.
[Silent pause]
Naimah (low voice): T rue . . . 
Naimah (raised voice): But um, I have, I have that hope because right now I have two 
brothers.


--- PAGE 185 ---
Black Routes to Islam178
As in the pattern of speaking that had developed in earlier conversations, Naimah 
interjects in order to provide her commentary, “You know I realized . . . ,” to 
which some of the other participants affirmed her comments with “Oh yeah” 
and “Sure.” My interjection was followed by a notable pause and it appeared as 
if Naimah was caught off guard. Her “T rue . . . ” response to my statement was 
stated in a lowered voice and it appeared that, during the pause, she was process-
ing this challenge to the pattern of conversation. However, she quickly regained 
her composure, conceded my comments, and resumed her commentary-mono-
logue ending with a story of the positive impact of imprisonment on the behavior 
of her two brothers.
Yet from that point until the end of the conversations that evening, the pat-
tern of speaking changed dramatically. I would consistently interrupt Naimah’s 
monologues and challenge her Islamic commentary with my own personal opin-
ions on what is religiously desirable. As a result of my resistance to the hegemonic 
religious impulse and in (I hope) deference to Naimah’s right to her own opinion, 
I prefaced many of my comments with “I” statements. In contrast, Naimah con-
tinued to speak with authority about what “we [Muslims]” need to understand. 
The following sequence occurred during discussion about gender roles:
Suad: I don’t think though, that what we need to do is, like, begin to sort of carve out 
particular sort of, like, cookie cutter roles for people to fit themselves into in their 
relationships with people
Naimah (interjects): But what we have to realize
Suad: What works, works
Naimah: What we have to realize is that, as Muslims, we have been sent down a furqan,
a criteria, we have been sent down social roles . . . 
Suad (interjects): and it doesn’t say, it doesn’t say, stay home.
Naimah: No it doesn’t say that, but Allah subhana wa ta’ala says clear in his mushaf, in 
the Qur’an, that the men are not like the women.
As the conversation moved through this discussion of gender roles to the dis-
cussion of polygyny, in which Naimah and I continued to argue opposing views, 
the other women were primarily listeners to our debate. As illustrated in the pre-
ceding dialogue, it also appeared that Naimah’s use of Arabic words and phrases 
increased as our debate ensued. I felt the increase to such an extent that I felt com-
pelled to respond in kind. I do not generally use Arabic to support my arguments, 
and so to reconcile this “weakness,” I paraphrased Qur’anic verses in English in 
order to confer my opinions the same religious legitimacy I (and the other partici-
pants) had given Naimah’s views because of her use of Arabic.
In the preceding speech events, Naimah adheres to one of the main language 
ideologies found among African American Muslims, which I call the ‘ Arabiya
ideology. The ‘Arabiya ideology represents the beliefs of African American Mus-
lims who posit that the use of Arabic (along with the adoption of specific modes 
of behavior: dress, hygiene, social etiquette) should be incorporated in everyday 
life in order to be “authentically” Muslim. They argue that the effort to follow


--- PAGE 186 ---
Black Arabic 179
God’s law as understood through interpretations of the Qur’an and the prac-
tices of Prophet Muhammad leads to the total reevaluation of former ways of 
sociality, a reevaluation that has clear cultural ramifications.
30 For these African 
American Muslims, all practices that are associated with the Prophet Muham-
mad—from prayer to wearing a long robe to speaking Arabic—are Islamic activi-
ties, and therefore their adoption is encouraged, if not deemed necessary.
31 Thus 
by deploying Arabic, Naimah lends what she believes to be the force of religious 
authority to her particular interpretations.
This is a technique that another dominant language ideology, the black Ameri-
canist, would describe as a misguided. The black Americanist ideology is the stand-
ing critique that challenges the discourse and practices of the ‘Arabiya ideology. 
The black Americanist ideology takes a position toward the Arabic language that 
is grounded in a definition of African American Muslim identity that insists on 
the primacy of the Americaness of African American Muslims. The black Ameri-
canist sees the ‘Arabiya ideology as an attempt to distance one’s self from her 
African American cultures. Where the ‘Arabiya ideology intentionally adopts the 
Arabic language, this language ideology consciously resists the incorporation of 
Arabic outside of a strictly religious context. Rather than proving to be religiously 
authentic, they would argue that the ‘Arabiya practitioner is parroting the immi-
grant Muslim in a rejection of their indigenous self.
In her examination of Spanish language use among white Americans in the 
southwestern United States, Hill finds that “Anglos use Spanish, but in limited 
and specialized ways that support a broader project of social and economic domi-
nation of Spanish speakers in the region.”
32 Hill also notes that distortions in the 
pronunciation of Spanish loan words by Anglo speakers are the enactment of 
social distancing between the Anglo and Spanish speakers. In the case of African 
American Muslims, the opposite rings true. For most African American Muslims, 
incorrect pronunciation results from limited instruction in the Arabic language, 
since this speech community very consciously orients itself toward the perfec-
tion of pronunciation. This goal of perfect pronunciation is shared by both black 
Americanist and ‘Arabiya adherents. However, their desire for linguistic perfec-
tion is imbued with a different meaning and a different underlying motivation. 
For the black Americanist practitioner, the attainment of this goal is most often 
situated within a context of ensuring scholastic access to Islamic texts. For those 
who adhere to the ‘Arabiya ideology, they, like Naimah, work toward a goal of the 
perfection of pronunciation in order to decrease the distance between themselves 
and Arabic speakers. Doing so, they believe, will grant them greater religious 
authenticity and power.
Hill’s insight directs us to consider how the use of a borrowed language 
indexes the value placed on those from whom the language is borrowed. The 
question posed by some African American Muslims is, does the value given to 
the Arabic language extend to Arabs and Arab culture? In the framework of 
the black Americanist ideology, as illustrated in the poetic verse below, using 
the Arabic language outside of religious activities is a practice that emerges


--- PAGE 187 ---
Black Routes to Islam180
from a preference for Arab culture—a preference that arises from the devaluation 
of African American culture.
 its like
 your leader looks nothing like u then you follow the rules
 but if he does you give him hell cause he’s not taught by their schools
 so u want to shape and mold me cause you find me obscene
 you can have it cause Allah created me fi ahsani taqweem.
The preceding verses are from a spoken-word poem by California-based Afri-
can American Muslim artist Kamilah Shuaibe. Shuaibe, raised among black 
Americanist African American Muslims, admonishes the African American Mus-
lim who values the opinions and leadership of non-African Americans, precisely 
because they are not African American. She objects to their efforts to declare her 
immoral and reminds her interlocutors that her racial and cultural identity is 
divinely ordained—she, like all humans, was made fi ahsani taqweem (in the 
best mold).
33 Shuaibe’s words are exemplary of the black Americanist ideology 
challenging practices such as Naimah’s and questioning the ‘Arabiya adherent’s 
authenticity as an African American. The black Americanist interprets the prac-
tices of the ‘Arabiya ideology as contemporary manifestations of the self-hate that 
has afflicted, and continues to affect, African Americans living in environments 
structured by and in the perpetuation of white supremacy. When Shuaibe declares 
she was “created fi ahsani taqweem ,” she joins African American Muslims who 
attempt to confront double consciousness with the possibility of blending their 
triple selves: black, American, and Muslim. This is an articulation of an African 
American Muslim identity that seeks to remain grounded in the history and con-
temporary reality of African Americans as the descendents of former slaves, as 
Americans, and as Muslims.
It is important to recognize that while these two ideologies have been depicted 
in stark contrast, there are consistent points of overlap or inconsistency within 
these ideological frameworks. For example, there are African American Muslims 
for whom the appropriation of the Arabic language becomes a conduit to connect 
not to an Arab Islamic tradition but to a different “foreign” tradition that is seen 
as familial: the African Islamic tradition. In the tradition of Afrocentricity, for 
these African American Muslims a diaspora framework is invoked through the 
adoption of the Arabic language, which stands a symbol of the grandeur of Afri-
can Islamic centers such as Timbuktu, Futa Jalon, and the Sokoto Caliphate. This 
movement beyond national borders is seen as “an effective and expedient means 
of breaking free of the master without imitating him and constructing a Blacka-
merican identity that does not contradict their sense of authentic self.”
34 There-
fore, in this diasporic context, the tension is not with blackness but Americaness; 
the relationship to the American self is ambiguous, ambivalent, or antagonistic.
Black Americanist resistance to Arabic is responding to the idea that an 
“authentic” Muslim identity that can only be created through the adoption 
of foreign cultural forms and practices. Yet even adherents of this ideology use


--- PAGE 188 ---
Black Arabic 181
Arabic outside of a strictly religious context. They routinely give their children 
Arabic names and may use Arabic in greetings and as terms of endearment as well. 
In a conversation between Hannan, an African American convert of over thirty 
years, and her second-generation Muslim daughter, Hannan expressed a wish that 
her granddaughter is taught to call her own mother umi rather than mommy. 
Hannan’s argument was based on the idea that “we are Muslims,” and Arabic 
was useful in this instance because it would mark her family members living in a 
non-Muslim majority country as Muslims. However, despite this particular wish, 
Hannan fiercely rejects the frequent inclusion of Arabic typically associated the 
‘Arabiya ideology. Frequency of Arabic language use may be the distinction that 
most clearly marks the difference between the two ideologies, and, for some, it is 
the flip side of another distinction—class.
T wo second-generation African American Muslim women, Sabra and Latifah, 
attributed higher incidences of Arabic language use to class. They made a dis-
tinction between their middle-class families and other Muslims who were more 
likely to use Arabic frequently—African Americans Muslims of lower socioeco-
nomic class. For them, these African American Muslims use Arabic to overcom-
pensate—to make up for what they lack in financial and educational stature and, 
most importantly, in cultural self-confidence. Sabra described their own use of 
Arabic as either solely related to religious practice or “words that are affection-
ate or complementary because we [African Americans] are an affectionate and 
complementary people.” In their interpretation, when they did use Arabic, it was 
conscious and used only in ways that would reflect self-love—any other use of the 
Arabic language was a laughing matter. Latifah is well known for calling friends 
and family while donning an obviously exaggerated Arabic accent to poke fun at 
the practice. Although their analysis unfairly generalizes African American Mus-
lims of low socioeconomic status, their observation of a correlation between class 
and the use of the Arabic language may not be unfounded.
As noted by scholars on African American Islam, the Islamic impulse in these 
communities is shaped by ideological trends within the broader African American 
context.
35 Class and the Arabic language appear to dovetail when segments of this 
community respond to American racism through a separatism that is not (black) 
nationalist but accepts the framework of Immigrant Islam. In this instance, one’s 
religious piety is in opposition to one’s Americaness: to be a good Muslim means 
to reject America, including the institutions that are the standard pathways to 
economic success in the United States.
36 This rejection of America is then coupled 
with the adoption of the Arabic language, in limited ways, and other customs 
typical of the immigrant Muslim.
Scholars also note the irony of the fact that these African American Muslims 
eschew the mechanisms of success that their immigrant counterparts eagerly par-
ticipate in, implying that these African Americans have become victims of a false 
consciousness.
37 Yet rather than simply be victims of false consciousness, these African 
American Muslims could be seen as making a rational choice as their class positions 
do not give them the freedom to choose how they are going to be American. The


--- PAGE 189 ---
Black Routes to Islam182
only America they have ever known perpetuates poverty and injustice in their 
everyday lives, in ways middle-class African American Muslims may no longer 
know as intimately. Of course, their rejection is severely limited—they may not 
vote or attend college but they use metropolitan transit and accept U.S. cur-
rency for their incense and oils.
38 Yet while their desire to reject America is not 
unproblematic, the choice might also be seen as creative: they imagine themselves 
as different, escaping injustice by traveling, through language and other practices, 
to those places their empty pockets, prison records, and poor education prevent 
them from reaching.
“Aww Man, Those Bints Are Crazy!”
Throughout this chapter, we have encountered examples of the way Arabic func-
tions in African American Muslim speech events in gender-segregated environ-
ments, yet these techniques are used by both women and men. In fact, African 
American Muslim men may feel the powers of authority wielded by Arabic with 
more intensity than their female counterparts. In a patriarchal social context where 
men are primarily expected to be leaders for the African American Muslim com-
munity and in its interactions with the immigrant Muslim community, African 
American Muslim men are called upon to show a facility with Arabic more often. 
Moreover, in a U.S. context where an empowered notion of black masculinity 
seems elusive, Arabic language use may also be entangled in notions of femininity 
and masculinity among African American Muslims and how they structure rela-
tions of power between the genders.
In a conversation with Shaheed, an African American Muslim male who con-
verted to Islam thirty years ago, he explained that “back in the days of ignorance 
we [African American Muslim men] used to use to say—‘Aww, man those bints is 
crazy!’” Notably, he remarked that bint was one of the first words he learned upon 
his release from prison. Its meaning was explained as a relationship between the 
Arabic word bint (daughter or girl) and a woman as a bent rib. The idea of women 
as bent ribs is derived from a saying attributed to the Prophet Muhammad in 
which women are said to be created from the rib of men. This description is 
followed by advising men that a woman is like a bent rib and if a man tries 
to straighten the rib, he will break it; therefore, men should leave women as 
they are.
Shaheed acknowledged that the two terms have no technical linguistic rela-
tionship and he explained that the concept derived from a belief among African 
American men that women are emotional and this could not be changed. He 
also laughingly noted that the term was often used by the brothers who were 
considered most “knowledgeable” in the deen (Islam) at the time, which meant 
they had been Muslim for three to five years and had two to three wives on public 
assistance. Therefore, bint and bent were seen as linguistically related because of 
the similarity of their sounds and the persons whom they signify. He also insisted 
I include another interpretation of that saying by the twelfth-century Islamic


--- PAGE 190 ---
Black Arabic 183
scholar Imam al-Ghazali. He informed me that al-Ghazali wrote that woman was 
not created from the feet of man to be below him, nor from the chest to be ahead 
of him, nor from the head to be on top of him, but from his heart to be loved by 
him and be his companion.
In a final Ramadan scene, an iftar in Brooklyn, New York, consisting primar-
ily of young African American Muslim professionals, the topic of how the Arabic 
language is used was discussed. A group of men informed the women present 
about the ways bint is used to refer to them. One claimed that men would use 
that word in phrases such as “those bints are crazy,” and “you better get your bint
in check.” The men interpreted this usage in two ways: (1) that bint became a 
substitute for the word “bitch” and (2) that bint was used as a power play—that 
through language the women in discussion and all women in particular are placed 
in a subordinate position in relation to men. Based on their interpretations, the 
use of bint is reflective of patriarchal behavior that can be attributed to particular 
interpretations of Islamic texts, particular beliefs within African American cultural 
contexts, and those found in broader American culture. As bints, adult women 
are, by nature, always girls, subordinate to men, and when “acting out,” bitches.
While greater study of these practices is warranted, the use of Arabic terms 
seems to reflect negotiations of power that occur both on the personal and every-
day level, as well as in more public and scholastic spaces
39—spaces in which, 
scholars have shown, African American Muslims confront, combat, and concede 
to power by directly engaging religious texts.
40 Through this engagement, they 
are providing interpretations through language that undoubtedly inform every-
day speech. In bints, majnoon individuals causing fitna, African American umis
and multicolored khimars, time and time again, located within Arabic language 
use are the major discourses of the African American Muslim community in the 
United States.
Conclusion
African American Muslims use Arabic in specialized and strategic ways that express 
the discourses and desires of a community that is always functioning in a con-
text that is simultaneously black, Muslim, and American. In this chapter, I have 
attempted to trace the life of the Arabic language for this community that merges 
multiple identities. Word choice—why zawj is used to substitute for spouse while 
sayaara is not chosen for car—may emerge from an engagement with the Arabic 
language through texts; yet once the words leave their textual context, they come 
to life in relationships reflecting an engagement with Islam that informs the every-
day—its highs and lows.
The discourse around the Arabic language within the African American Mus-
lim community reflects debates of authenticity. Each ideology—‘Arabiya and 
black Americanist—attempts to draw a theoretical line in the sand, so to speak, 
declaring who is the real African American Muslim. T o use Arabic excessively is 
the performance of “cultural apostasy”; to use Arabic too sparingly is the rejection


--- PAGE 191 ---
Black Routes to Islam184
of the “true Islamic identity.” However, in the practice of everyday life that seeks 
to respond to the African American Muslim here and now, those lines are consis-
tently crossed and smudged.
Albeit in a slightly different direction, I will end by invoking the suggestion 
of John Jackson, Jr., that analysts consider sincerity an alternative framework to 
authenticity in the analysis of identity.
41 Whether they use Arabic a little or a lot, 
these African American Muslims are the real deal. Through language and other 
practices they experience and bring into life identities, like those in the commu-
nities of the Amadous of West Africa and Symas of South Asia—identities born 
from the everyday negotiations of culture and faith.
42
Appendix
TERMS OF ENDEARMENT
Ak/Aki brother 
Ukt/Ukti sister 
Shaykh/Shaikh elder/respected friend 
Habibi/Habibti loved one 
FAMILY RELATIONSHIP TITLES
Um/Umi mother 
Abu/Abi father 
Ibn son 
Bint daughter 
Zawj spouse 
Jadda grandmother 
PLACES
Bayt house
Hamaam bathroom
Masjid mosque 
Suk marketplace
CLOTHES
Khimar/hijab female head covering
Kufi male head covering
Jilbab long, loose female dress
Niqab face veil
Abaya long, loose gown
Thobe long, loose male dress


--- PAGE 192 ---
Black Arabic 185
TITLES
Amir leader
Wali guardian
Imam religious leader
Salafi follower of Salafi movement
Bint female/bitch
COURTESIES/CIVILITIES
Shukran thank you
Afwan you’re welcome
La no
Na’am yes
Mabrook congratulations
Jazakallah thank you
Kaifal hal? How are you?
Tayyib good
EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES
Iddat after-divorce waiting period for women
Nikkah wedding/wedding ceremony
Walima wedding reception
Aqiqah newborn ceremony
Iftar meal to break Ramadan daily fast
Suhoor meal to begin Ramadan daily fast
Salat ritual prayer
Du’a supplication
Jummah Friday prayer
Taleem religious lecture, in many mosques typically held on Sunday
THEORETICAL CONCEPTS
Fitna social chaos
Kafir nonbeliever/non-Muslim
Majnoon insane
Deen religion/Islam
Dunya this world
Niyah intention
Sunnah practices of Prophet Muhammad 
Da’wah call to Islam/prostelyzation
Biddah innovation
Haram forbidden
Mu’tah temporary marriage


--- PAGE 193 ---
Black Routes to Islam186
Hijra migration from United States to the “Muslim World”
Adaab etiquette
Aqeedah creed
THINGS
Stinja  from verb istinjaa: water bottle used to clean private parts after 
using the bathroom
Faloos money
COMMANDS
Takbeer Say: Allahu Akbar
Ta’al, ta’al huna come/come here
Ijlis sit
Uskut be quiet/shut up
Notes
 1. See the appendix for introductory listing of Arabic terminology with translation, as used 
among African American Muslims in the United States.
 2. For some examples in the non-U.S. context, see John R. Bowen, “Does French Islam Have 
Borders?: Dilemmas of Domestication in a Global Religious Field,” American Anthropolo-
gist 106, no. 1 (2004): 43–55; John R. Bowen, “Salat in Indonesia: The Social Meanings 
of an Islamic Ritual,” Man  24, no. 4 (1989): 600–19; Magnus Marsden, Living Islam: 
Muslim Religious Experience in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier  (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005).
 3. I respect and acknowledge the arguments against the perpetuation of U.S. regional hege-
mony through using the term “American” to solely refer to U.S. citizens and “America” to 
the United States. However, for the sake of brevity and grammatical ease, in this chapter, 
the terms U.S. and America will be used interchangeably and the related “American” will 
be used to refer to U.S. citizens only.
 4. See John J. Gumperz, “The Speech Community,” in Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader, ed. 
Alessandro Duranti (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001), 43–52; Dell Hymes, “On Communica-
tive Competence,” in Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader, ed. Alessandro Duranti (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2001), 53–73; H. Samy Alim, You Know My Steez: An Ethnographic and Socio-
linguistic Study of Styleshifting in A Black American Speech Community  (Chapel Hill, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2005).
 5. Although I use the term conversion in this chapter to refer to the process of converting 
from one belief system to another—in this case, Islam—it is important to note that among 
African American Muslims, the term reversion is often used as an alternative. Reversion 
is meant to reflect both the belief that (a) all human beings are born Muslim, that is, in 
submission to God, and (b) because a number of Africans enslaved in the Americans were 
Muslim, African American Muslims are seen as reverting back to their ancestral religion.
 6. Susan Harding, “Convicted by the Holy Spirit: The Rhetoric of Fundamental Baptist 
Conversion,” American Ethnologist 14, no. 1 (1987): 178.
 7. Edward Sapir, The Collected Works of Edward Sapir, ed. R. Darnell and J. Irving (Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter, 1999), 90–91.


--- PAGE 194 ---
Black Arabic 187
 8. I recognize that the term lacks nuance, yet I find it a useful trope to describe the relation-
ships between these two communities, indigenous and immigrant, as I have seen it in the 
field. Therefore, the terms immigrant and indigenous when used according to these defi-
nitions will be italicized in the chapter.
 9. The earliest incidence of the use of this term that I have found so far is cited in Sulayman 
S. Nyang, Islam in the United States of America  (Chicago: Kazi, 1999), 143–47. Nyang 
cites the use of the term in the news publication of the Darul Islam, Al Jihadul Akbar, with 
dates of publication in the late 1960s.
 10. Pierre Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power, ed. John B. Thompson (Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press, 1991), 170.
 11. Although not addressed in this chapter, another question that emerges from this issue is 
the notion of legitimate political authority and representation in the relationship between 
American Muslims and different spheres of U.S. society, particularly the state and the 
media.
 12. “Immigrant Islam embodies the habit of universalizing the particular. It enshrines the 
historically informed expressions of Islam in the modern Muslim world as the standard of 
normativeness for Muslims everywhere . . . And in this process Immigrant Islam’s inter-
pretations are effectively placed beyond critique via the tacit denial that they are in fact 
interpretations.” Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican: Looking T oward the 
Third Resurrection (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005), 12.
 13. Jamillah Karim notes, “Many young African American Muslim women felt that Muslim 
immigrants question African American Muslim legitimacy not because they know Islamic 
teachings better but because they consider invalid any expression of Muslim identity out-
side their own cultural notions of Islam,” Karim, “Between Immigrant Islam and Black 
Liberation: Young Muslims inherit Global Muslim and African American Legacies,” The
Muslim World 95, no. 4 (2005): 503.
 14. Nyang notes that conflict between indigenous and immigrant Muslims stems in part from 
the fact that “most immigrants [in the late 1960s] were . . . South Asian and Middle 
Easterners who generally perceive themselves as ‘whites’ or ‘browns.’” Nyang, Islam in
the United States of America, 144. For another analysis of this type of racial identification 
among South Asian Americans, see Vijay Prashad, The Karma of Brown Folk (Minneapo-
lis: University of Minneapolis Press, 2000).
 15. See Karim, “Between Immigrant Islam and Black Liberation”; Jackson, Islam and the
Blackamerican.
 16. Elinor Ochs and Bambi B. Shiefflein, “Language Acquisition and Socialization: Three 
Developmental Stories and Their Implications,” in Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader, ed. 
Alessandro Duranti (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001), 264.
 17. Jane H. Hill, “Hasta La Vista, Baby: Anglo Spanish in the American Southwest,” Critique
of Anthropology 13, no. 2 (1993): 153.
 18. Hill, “Hasta La Vista, Baby,” 145–76.
 19. These constraints included the inability to pay for advanced Arabic language classes that 
would likely be held at academic institutions, the inability to afford overseas travel to 
study the Arabic language, and the inability, particularly for single mothers, to attend 
classes that conflicted with work and childcare demands.
 20. The same is true for the terms used by African Americans Muslims referring to fathers, abi
(my father) and abu (father) and those used by Arab speakers, baba (father).
 21. Qur’an 24:31 refers to khimar in its plural form, “wal yadribna bi khumurihina ‘ala juyu-
bihina” (and drape their coverings over their chests).
 22. Mona Siddiqui, Mona, “Veil,” in Encyclopedia of the Qur’an, ed. Jane Dammen McAuliffe, 
Vol. 5 (Leiden: Koninklijke Brill, 2006), 412.


--- PAGE 195 ---
Black Routes to Islam188
 23. Debra Spitulnik, “The Social Circulation of Media Discourse and the Mediation of Com-
munities,” in Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader, ed. Alessandro Duranti (Oxford: Black-
well, 2001), 97–99.
 24. Spitulnik, “The Social Circulation,” 99.
 25. Here I do not mean to imply that Islamic and African American folk beliefs are the only 
traditions that argue the existence of spirits or other supernatural beings, but rather that 
these are the sources of concepts of the supernatural that are particularly important to 
African American Muslims.
 26. Alan Dundes, Mother Wit from the Laughing Barrel: Readings in the Interpretation of Afro-
American Folklore (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1990), 378.
 27. Erving Goffman, Forms of T alk (Oxford: Blackwell, 1981), 145.
 28. In the Arabic language, the word for Arabic is ‘arabiya; in the field, I have noted the use of 
the Arabic word ‘arabiya as opposed to the English translation, “Arabic.”
 29. Cornel West, The Cornel West Reader (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 1999).
 30. Nyang describes this type of African American Muslim as an assimilationist who takes on 
a consciousness that negates American cultural norms and adopts foreign Muslim cultural 
practices as “an alternative, and sometimes superior, identity to his original ethnic iden-
tity.” Nyang, Islam in the United States of America, 73.
 31. It should be noted that the question of what is specifically required by the mandate to 
follow the Sunnah (tradition) of Prophet Muhammad remains contested among Muslims 
across the globe.
 32. Hill, “Hasta La Vista, Baby,” 146.
 33. This phrase comes from the Qur’an 95:4.
 34. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 153.
 35. See C. Eric. Lincoln, The Black Muslims in America (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 
1994); Aminah B. McCloud, African American Islam (New York: Routledge, 1995); Yusuf 
Nuruddin, “African-American Muslims and the Question of Identity: Between T raditional 
Islam, African Heritage, and the American Way,” in Muslims on theAmericanization Path?
ed. Yvonne Y. Haddad and John L. Esposito (Atlanta: Scholars, 1998), 267–330; Edward 
E. Curtis, Islam in Black America: Identity, Liberation, and Difference in African-American 
Islamic Thought (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002); Richard B. T urner, 
Islam in the African American Experience (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2003).
 36. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican.
 37. Ibid.
 38. As I have observed, and as other African American Muslim interlocutors living in major 
U.S. cities have described to me, peddling incense and scented oils is a common alterna-
tive occupation of African American Muslim men.
 39. In the case of African American Muslim women, one term that might reflect relations of 
power between the genders is aki (my brother). Many African American Muslim men call 
each other aki to reaffirm the importance of fraternity between African American Muslim 
men. I have noted instances where women, outside the company of men (though poten-
tially within their earshot), mimic this form of address to poke fun at the practice. In their 
enunciation of the word and their gestures, they act out a caricature of a caricature. They 
reproduce an exaggerated masculinity performed by men whom they see as pretending 
to be the ideal patriarch. Perhaps, as their wives, mothers, and daughters—as the women 
who are the primary targets and potential recipients of patriarchy—they know intimately 
where their men meet and fall short of this ideal. The women not only invoke the term 
playfully but also appear to offer a critique of the performance of masculinity embodied 
in the use of this Arabic term.


--- PAGE 196 ---
Black Arabic 189
 40. See, for example, Carolyn M. Rouse, Engaged Surrender: African American Women and 
Islam (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004).
 41. John L. Jackson, Jr., Real Black: Adventures in Racial Sincerity  (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2005).
 42. Amadou is the version of the Arabic name Ahmad common in West Africa; Syma is the 
version of the Arabic, Saa’ima, common in South Asia.


--- PAGE 197 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 198 ---
C HAPTER  11
Lights, Camera, 
Suspension
Freezing the Frame on the 
Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf-Anthem 
Controversy
Zareena Grewal
Introduction
In March 1996, Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf of the Denver Nuggets caused a 
national stir when the National Basketball Association (NBA) suspended him for 
refusing to stand during the national anthem before games. Across the country, 
Americans responded to Abdul-Rauf in a variety of ways, ranging from patri-
otic outrage to sympathy and admiration for his principled stance. Abdul-Rauf 
explained his dissent was an act of his “Muslim conscience.”
1 As the story of the 
NBA suspension broke in the national media, Muslim Americans were put on 
the defensive: did their belief in Islam compromise their ability to be loyal Ameri-
can citizens? The reaction of Muslim American spokespeople interviewed by the 
media (most of whom were immigrant Muslims) was striking; they approached 
the controversy as a public relations disaster and responded to the requests to 
explain Abdul-Rauf’s position with an embarrassed disavowal.
2
Muslim American spokespeople’s desire to distance themselves from Abdul-
Rauf’s stance reflects the climate of political fear in American mosques, the rou-
tine scrutinization of these populations, as well as their internal structures of ethnic 
and racial hierarchy. It is difficult to know how many Muslims live in the United 
States since the U.S. Census Bureau collects no information on religion, but there 
may be as many as five to eight million, making Islam the second religion in the


--- PAGE 199 ---
Black Routes to Islam192
U.S. after Christianity.3 T oday, most Muslim Americans are first- and second-gen-
eration immigrants from over sixty nations in South and Central Asia, the Middle 
East, Africa, the Far East, and the Balkans, who came in the largest numbers 
after the 1965 appeal of the Immigration Act, although some immigrant com-
munities date back to the turn of the century. For most of the twentieth century, 
most Muslims in the United States were black, and blacks still make up the larg-
est subset of Muslim Americans, with estimates ranging from 30 to 40 percent.
4
Muslim American communities are the most diverse in the world and mosques 
attract more heterogeneous congregations than any other houses of worship in 
the United States. The fact that Muslim Americans from different walks of life 
regularly pray next to one another, however, does not mean that they necessar-
ily understand one another. Typically led by highly educated, upwardly mobile 
immigrants from the Middle East and South Asia, Muslim American mosque 
communities and national religious organizations are riddled with racial and class 
tensions and cultural misunderstandings.
One particularly strong culture gap that crystallized in the Abdul-Rauf contro-
versy is the markedly different historical trajectories of African American Muslims 
and immigrant Muslims and their often radically different orientations to the 
state. The immigrants, often political and economic refugees, are torn between 
their loyalty to the United States for privileges and freedoms (including religious 
freedom) often denied in their home countries, the intense pressures to assimilate 
to the dominant American culture, their social marginalization due to rampant 
prejudices, and their sense of alienation from the U.S. government’s often brutal 
foreign policies in Muslim-majority countries, particularly in the Middle East. 
For many African American Muslims, Islam serves as a tablet on which to inscribe 
their painful history in the United States as well as their radical political desires 
for reshaping the structure of American society such that it is more egalitarian 
and just. Abdul-Rauf’s stance, although consistent with the political orientation 
of many African American Muslims (few of whom were interviewed in the main-
stream media), perplexed many immigrant Muslims consumed by a different set 
of political issues, an international rather than domestic focus, and who, in large 
part, do not possess the cultural reference to understand Abdul-Rauf’s decision in 
the context of a long history of American dissent. Sherman Jackson notes that the 
arrival of the post-1965 immigrants transformed religious discourse in American 
mosques and that “the West” became the new “countercategory” of American 
Islam. Black Muslims often mistook immigrants’ resentment and disdain for the 
West as a common opposition to white supremacy. The pursuit of the (racial) 
American dream that brought the immigrants to the United States often led them 
to distinguish whiteness (a status many immigrants coveted) from Westernness. 
And thus, the anti-Western sentiments expressed in impassioned Friday sermons 
rarely connected to domestic social and political problems or to explicitly racial 
politics. Issues such as police brutality, unemployment, and drugs were overlooked 
because, in the eyes of immigrants, they paled as social justice concerns compared 
to oppressive Western policies in the immigrants’ countries of origin.
5


--- PAGE 200 ---
Lights, Camera, Suspension 193
In this chapter, I reexamine the 1996 Abdul-Rauf anthem controversy and the 
accompanying representations of Islam, Muslim Americans, and African Ameri-
can political consciousness. The media became the stage where the competition 
for religious authority between blacks and immigrants was enacted, revealing the 
fractures within Muslim American communities as well as the particular secular 
and racial logics that structure mainstream media representations of Islam, con-
structions of race, and national debates about patriotism, freedom of speech, and 
freedom of religion. By placing this moment in a broader historical context of 
national discourses, we see the ways Islam is both raced and erased in the business 
of making black Muslim athletes into national heroes or villains.
By the “Mississippi Son’s” Life: 
American Dream or American Nightmare?
In the fall of 2000, as a graduate student in anthropology and history at the Uni-
versity of Michigan, I decided to make a short documentary film about Muslims 
in the United States in lieu of a seminar paper. Although my memories of the 
Abdul-Rauf-anthem controversy were fuzzy, I came across a recently published 
article that quickly brought them into focus. Daniel Pipes, a neoconservative col-
umnist, author, and frequent media terrorism analyst often accused of being an 
“Islamaphobe,” had written yet another one of his alarmist essays on the threat of 
Islam to Americans, arguing that Islam undermined the culture, customs, laws, 
and polices of the United States in more fundamental ways than fascist or Marx-
ist-Leninist ideologies. In this particular piece, he focused on the special threat 
to the United States posed by African American converts to Islam because their 
“protest” temperaments and special susceptibility to the contempt for America 
imported by Muslim immigrants made them dangerous.
6 As evidence of the ways 
Islam turned American converts against their own country, Pipes cited the exam-
ple of the 1996 suspension of Abdul-Rauf by the NBA for not standing for the 
national anthem. He also applauded the opposition to Abdul-Rauf voiced by the 
Muslim spokespeople as a rare expression of moderate Islam.
7
Pipe’s representation of Abdul-Rauf as the prototypical “un-American” Mus-
lim became one point of departure for my film, By the Dawn’s Early Light: Chris
Jackson’s Journey to Islam, which quickly snowballed from a class project into a 
feature-length educational documentary broadcast on the Documentar Channel.
8
By taking Abdul- Rauf’s life and career as a case study and the anthem controversy 
as the climax, the film provides an ethnographic window into Muslim Ameri-
can communities, particularly the cultural misunderstandings and rifts between 
immigrants and blacks. As a documentary in the true sense, the film documents 
multiple and competing perspectives by drawing on a wide range of archival foot-
age sources, personal interviews, and expert analyses by Muslim American public 
intellectuals and scholars. Rather than relying on a one-dimensional narration 
through a voice-over, the film’s montage of voices provides a rich, complex picture 
that weaves together Abdul-Rauf’s biography, analyses of the different histories


--- PAGE 201 ---
Black Routes to Islam194
and fractures in Muslim American communities, and various debates about the 
nature of patriotism, freedom of speech, and the complexities of racial politics in 
the United States at the turn of the century. Yet the film remains a simple story of 
one man’s spiritual journey. The argument I develop here offers a more sustained 
analysis of the coverage of the controversy than I was able to explore in the film. 
Here I draw on the narrative arc of Abdul-Rauf’s life in order to highlight how 
he went from being an icon of the American dream to the embodiment of Pipe’s 
American nightmare.
Long before the anthem controversy made him a national news story, Abdul-
Rauf was an established favorite as a human-interest story for sports journalists 
with a penchant for “American dream” angles. Born Chris Jackson to a single 
mother juggling two jobs to keep food on the table for her three boys, Jackson’s 
humble beginnings in the crime-ridden, drug-infested slums of Gulfport, Mis-
sissippi are almost an “up from your bootstraps” cliché. Journalists eagerly repro-
duced Jackson’s gripping descriptions of his loneliness as a child and his hungry 
desperation to change his family’s condition that drove him to spend countless, 
mean hours perfecting his skills on the basketball court, playing against an “invis-
ible man” who was always one step quicker, perhaps the father he had never 
known and who could never be mentioned or a kind of phantom manifestation 
of his own unforgiving perfectionism. His perfectionism and obsessive-compul-
sive practicing was indirectly tied to an undiagnosed neurological condition he 
suffered from, T ourette’s syndrome, which also caused involuntary grunting and 
body spasms that could become so intense he would often collapse in speech-
less exhaustion. Jackson’s condition went neglected and untreated for most of 
his childhood (in fact, he was even wrongly placed in the special education track 
for a period) until his high school coach referred him to a physician who finally 
diagnosed him properly and started him on a drug therapy. Despite suffering a 
disease that sometimes made it difficult to carry on a conversation or read a book, 
let alone thread a bounce pass through a crowd of looming opponents, Jackson’s 
remarkable skill made him a local legend and Mississippi’s Player of the Year for 
two years (earning him the nickname “The Mississippi Son”) as well as a recruit-
ing magnet for college talent scouts from around the country.
9
At Louisiana State University (LSU), “Action Jackson” set three NCAA records 
for freshman, averaged 30.2 points per game, and made nearly every post-season 
all-America first team, landing him on the cover of Sports Illustrated as a freshman. 
The next year he averaged 27.8 points per game, led the southeastern conference 
in scoring, and once again earned Player of the Year honors in the conference 
despite the looming presence of his friend and teammate Shaquille O’Neal. He 
was the third pick in the 1990 NBA draft, and in his rookie season with the Den-
ver Nuggets he averaged an impressive 14.1 points in 22.1 minutes coming off 
of the bench. It is as if by sheer will alone he rose from his humble conditions in 
the face of his debilitating disease, the crushing poverty, and the entrenched rac-
ism of Gulfport, Mississippi, to awe crowds as an NBA star, and journalist after 
journalist remarked on how he was “a perfect example of the American dream.”


--- PAGE 202 ---
Lights, Camera, Suspension 195
His soft-spoken and unassuming manner and his lean six foot one inch frame 
almost conveyed frailty in the world of NBA giants, yet time and time again, 
Jackson proved himself on the court with his explosive first step past defenders 
and his incredibly accurate shooting record. By the 1992/1993 season, he was the 
beloved, fan-favorite starting point guard of the Denver Nuggets and scored a 
career-high 19.2 points per game.
In addition to his remarkable talent, Jackson was also a spiritual seeker. 
Although Jackson was first exposed to Islam through The Autobiography of Mal-
colm X as a student at LSU, the stresses of the transition to the NBA ignited his 
desire to learn more about Islam and to read the Qu’ran. In 1991, he quietly 
converted but his new faith only became a news story once he legally changed 
his name from Chris Jackson to Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf in 1993. Despite the 
warnings that his new name would hurt his career since it was Chris Jackson that 
was the established household name and that the Arabic might be difficult for 
Americans to pronounce, fans and sports commentators adjusted to the change 
relatively easily, chanting “Rauf, Rauf, Rauf is on fire!” Although generally invis-
ible to spectators, Islam radically transformed Abdul-Rauf. He began to see his 
life, his disease, and his passion for basketball in a new light. Bruce Schoenfeld, 
in The Sporting News on February 14, 1994, quotes Abdul-Rauf: “God has given 
me, through His blessing, T ourrette’s, and he has given me basketball and Islam 
to cope with T ourrette’s. Through basketball, I get a little peace. And through 
Islam I get total peace.” He also began reading voraciously, everything from reli-
gious literature to history and global politics. His decision in 1995 to remain in 
the locker room during the national anthem developed out of his growing social 
consciousness, political awareness, and sense of global responsibility, all products 
of his new religious sensibility.
10
For over sixty games, Abdul-Rauf remained in the locker room or hallway to 
the stadium while the national anthem was being played and then walked silently 
onto the court for the starting lineup. Although his practice was recognized with-
out objection by the Denver Nuggets and the Players Association for the entire 
season, in early March 1996, fans called a local radio station and complained on 
air. This led to a newspaper story and a courtside television news interview the fol-
lowing T uesday (March 12) during a morning shootaround in Denver that pro-
duced the sound bite that spread like wildfire in the national media. Abdul-Rauf 
explained to a reporter that the United States flag is “also a symbol of oppression, 
of tyranny, so it depends on how you look at it. I think this country has a long 
history of that. If you look at history, I don’t think you can argue the facts.” Later 
the same day, the NBA suspended Abdul-Rauf indefinitely without pay (a loss of 
$31,707 per game) for being in violation of a clause in the league’s rule book that 
states, “Players, coaches and trainers are to stand and line up in a dignified posture 
along the sidelines or the foul line during the playing of the national anthem.” 
The Players Association disputed the suspension on the grounds that the rule 
“was not one agreed to in collective bargaining, but was imposed by the league 
unilaterally in an operations manual, without any input from the players.” The


--- PAGE 203 ---
Black Routes to Islam196
league countered by arguing that there is a standard clause in all player contracts 
stipulating league rules must be abided by. In a Denver Post poll, 72 percent of 
Denver-area adults took issue with Abdul-Rauf, many arguing his $2.6 million 
salary made it incumbent upon him to be appreciative and grateful to the United 
States. Abdul-Rauf remained firm in his conviction in face of the suspension and 
his critics: “My beliefs are more important than anything. If I have to give up 
basketball, I will.”
The Politics of Confusion
Despite the widespread media attention garnered by the Abdul-Rauf-anthem 
controversy, the coverage of the story was marked by inaccuracies, contradictory 
reports, and a sense of confusion. I argue that the cloud of confusion around 
the controversy reflects particular secular assumptions and racial logics regularly 
employed in the mainstream media’s representations of Islam and Muslims. First, 
there are the problematic false equivalences between Islam and the Middle East 
and Muslims and Arabs, which, in this case, led to a great deal of confusion 
about Abdul-Rauf’s racial, national, and religious identity. Second, much of the 
coverage was structured by a false opposition between Abdul-Rauf’s religious and 
political beliefs. Since Abdul-Rauf’s statements did not fit neatly into a secular 
division of religion and politics, his reasons for not standing sometimes seemed 
incoherent or even contradictory in the coverage. Islam was represented as a static 
body of beliefs and practices and an “eastern” religion, and, as a result, Abdul-
Rauf was often rendered an inauthentic or misguided religious novice.
The coverage of the Abdul-Rauf-anthem controversy reproduced a number of 
common misconceptions about Islam and Muslims. Americans often wrongly use 
the ethnic category of Arab and the religious category of Muslim interchangeably 
(in fact, Arabs only make up about 17 percent of the 1.2 billion Muslims in the 
world). This commonly held, but incorrect, view of Islam undermines the univer-
sality of the tradition and implies that Islam is not and cannot be an indigenous, 
American religion. Fixing Islam to the Middle East as an “eastern religion” in this 
way elides important facts: African Americans comprise the largest single Muslim 
American population, Americans are converting to Islam at a faster rate than any 
other religion, and Islam has a long history in the United States, beginning with 
the arrival of the African slaves, many of whom were Muslim.
In fact, the assumption that Muslims are a foreign population from somewhere 
else led many to assume that Abdul-Rauf was an immigrant. He received two 
garbage bags full of hate mail in the fallout from the controversy and many of the 
letters instructed him to “Go home!” or “Go back to Africa!”
11 In fact, even fans 
that came to his defense sometimes assumed he was from another country; one 
African American woman interviewed by a local Denver TV news reporter sug-
gested, “Maybe that’s what they do where he comes from.”
12 Part of the public’s 
failure to recognize Abdul-Rauf as African American may also be attributed to 
the general and striking silence on the part of African American Christian leaders


--- PAGE 204 ---
Lights, Camera, Suspension 197
during the controversy, which, like the embarrassed disavowal of Muslim immi-
grant spokespeople, reflects the fractures within the African American community 
along religious lines.
13 At one point, Jesse Jackson told a journalist he was willing 
to mediate the dispute; however, Abdul-Rauf’s camp dismissed this gesture as a 
media stunt since Jackson never contacted Abdul-Rauf or his representatives.
14
There was such confusion about Abdul-Rauf’s identity that he felt the need to 
identify as an African American as a premise to his official statement to the press: 
“I am an African-American, a citizen of this country, and one who respects free-
dom of speech and freedom of expression.”
In other instances, the representation of Abdul-Rauf as a Middle Eastern immi-
grant was purposeful and political. Cartoonist Drew Litton of the Rocky Mountain
News satirized Abdul-Rauf by “Arabizing” his features, giving him a Semitic nose, 
heavy-lidded, sunken eyes, and by lengthening his beard. A satire of Abdul-Rauf 
as a Sambo figure certainly would have offended readers and immediately drawn 
criticism, however, racial caricatures of Arabs, Middle Easterners, and Muslims 
as villains in the mainstream media are so common they rarely draw attention or 
objections. Interestingly, Litton replicated the patterns of coverage of the Middle 
East that so often represents political conflicts in the region as spontaneous, inex-
plicable, and without history.
15 By depicting Abdul-Rauf as casually tossing the 
flag in a dirty towel bin, Litton suggests that Abdul-Rauf’s decision was sponta-
neous rather than considered, that his “Muslim features” are explanation enough 
for his “un-American” disdain. We are perhaps most familiar with this narrative 
formula from the coverage of the terrorist attacks of September 11. For example, 
the incredulous and ubiquitous question and headline “Why do they hate us?” 
represents the attacks in the American media and the official discourse of the state 
as a spontaneous, ahistorical, and incomprehensible act of evil (“Because they 
hate freedom.”), rather than a calculated political action (or reaction) with a long 
(and modern) history tied to the shifting and complex political and economic 
relationship between the United States and the Middle East.
In addition to the confusion about Abdul-Rauf’s identity, his reasons for not 
standing for the anthem were also often presented in an unclear way in the media 
because they did not fit neatly into a clean secular division of religion and politics. 
In order to conform to secular categories more neatly, Abdul-Rauf’s explanation 
of his stance was distilled into two separate sound bites. The first was coded as 
religious: “I’m a Muslim first and a Muslim last. My duty is to my creator, not 
to nationalistic ideology.” This “theological” explanation of Abdul-Rauf’s dissent 
referenced the strong emphasis on God’s oneness and exclusive right to be wor-
shipped, which distinguishes expressions of monotheism in Islam from the other 
Abrahamic faiths. The second and much more ubiquitous sound bite was coded 
as political rather than religious: “[The flag is] also a symbol of oppression, of tyr-
anny, so it depends on how you look at it. I think this country has a long history 
of that. If you look at history, I don’t think you can argue the facts.” The sentence 
immediately following this quote was usually left out the clip: “You can’t be for 
God and for oppression. It’s clear in the Qu’ran.” The excluded sentence makes


--- PAGE 205 ---
Black Routes to Islam198
it quite clear that for Abdul-Rauf, his political and religious beliefs cannot be so 
neatly bifurcated.
The interpenetration of religion and politics in Abdul-Rauf’s explanation 
characterizes not only African American Islam but also what a number of scholars 
have referred to as the specifically American tradition of Black Religion.
16 Black 
Religion should not be confused with the Black Church nor mistaken as a syn-
onym for the supercategory or mother set of “African-American religion.”
17 A 
more instructive definition of Black Religion is as an aggregate of black American 
religious experience whose most enduring feature is its radical, holy protest against 
the material and psychological effects of racism.
18 The secular binary opposition 
between political and religious beliefs obscures more than it illuminates in the 
coverage of Abdul-Rauf’s case, just as in the early scholarly analyses of African 
American Islam the same secular logic was invoked to dismiss communities like 
the Nation of Islam as thinly guised ideological, sociopolitical movements beyond 
the pale of genuine religious experience. Interestingly, several articles mistakenly 
identified Abdul-Rauf as a member of the Nation of Islam. The representation of 
Abdul-Rauf as an inauthentic Muslim was propelled in part by contrasting him 
with Hakeem Olajuwon, a Nigerian Muslim who played for the Houston Rock-
ets. He explained, “In general, Islamic teachings require every Muslim to obey 
and respect the law of the countries they live in. You know, that is—that is Islamic 
teachings. You know, to be a good Muslim is to be a good citizen.” As an immi-
grant with a heavy accent, Olajuwon was assumed to be the authentic Muslim 
with authentic religious authority. In addition, in the New York Times, Olajuwon 
even reproduced the clean binary opposition between religion and politics. “The 
difference must be distinguished between worship and respect,” he said. “Islam 
orders you to obey and respect, as long as you are not worshiping anything other 
than God. The Koran teaches respect for all people. That’s why it’s so important 
that people understand that there is a difference between respect and worship. 
People that worship the flag should also understand that there is a difference. 
Islam is a religion of peace. You don’t attack. You explain.” Olajuwon’s two sound 
bites corresponded to Abdul-Rauf’s as correctives. In one, Abdul-Rauf’s “theo-
logical” logic is represented as a confusion of respect and worship. In the other, 
Abdul-Rauf’s politics are represented as a radical departure from a religion that 
requires the faithful to be good law-abiding citizens. Despite the frequent refer-
ences to Olajuwon in the national press, his acknowledgement of Abdul-Rauf’s 
ability to have a valid religious interpretation that diverged from his own was not 
included in their coverage. On March 14, only Ed Fowler of the Houston Chroni-
cle reported that Olajuwon said that “if Abdul-Rauf is certain his interpretation is 
the only acceptable one, he should be applauded for taking that stand at the cost 
of a magnificent livelihood.”
The same insistence on the clean division between political and religious 
beliefs came out in the equally confused legal analyses of the NBA’s suspension. 
Experts were called on to determine whether Abdul-Rauf was legally bound by 
his NBA contract to stand for the anthem or whether the NBA had violated


--- PAGE 206 ---
Lights, Camera, Suspension 199
Abdul-Rauf’s Title VII right not to be discriminated against as an employee due 
to his religion. In Jason Diamos’s March 14 New York Times article, legal expert 
Martin Garbus cast doubt not only on Abdul-Rauf’s potential legal case but also 
on his religious integrity. He explained, “There is a difference between religious 
and political beliefs. If it’s religious, he has an absolute right to do it. He’s saying 
religious, but a lot of the language is political. And to the extent that the religious 
and political become intertwined, you may find yourself in a situation where 
there is a clear and present danger.” Garbus’s alarm about the “clear and pres-
ent danger” posed by Abdul-Rauf echoes Pipes. There is also another incorrect 
assumption at work here: that Islam is a monolithic and static body of beliefs 
and practices and that there is only one possible “correct” Islamic position on any 
given issue. Garbus’s analysis seems particularly odd given that the U.S. legal sys-
tem recognizes the diversity of opinions within any community of believers and, 
therefore, the legal system only requires that litigants establish that they hold “a 
sincere religious belief” and that they prove that they communicated their beliefs 
to their employer.
19
When determining if one’s religious beliefs are protected under the Free Exer-
cise Clause of the First Amendment as opposed to Title VII, courts conclude that 
“interfaith differences . . . are not uncommon among followers of a particular 
creed, and the judicial process is singularly ill equipped to resolve such differences 
in relation to the Religion Clauses . . . [The] guarantee of free exercise is not lim-
ited to beliefs which are shared by all of the members of a religious sect . . . Courts 
are not arbiters of scriptural interpretation.”
20
Yet again and again, in legal analyses of the potential case, Muslim immigrants’ 
claims that standing for the flag did not contravene Islam was presented as evi-
dence that Abdul-Rauf was either trying to hide his political beliefs in the guise of 
religion in order to acquire some kind of legal protection (a kind of perversion of 
Islam) or that he, as a black convert, failed to understand Islam the “right” way, as 
authentic Muslims from the east could.
The same assumption about a singular “correct” or “authentic” understanding 
of Islam emerged in the coverage of the resolution of the suspension. Abdul-Rauf 
was blasted in the media first for his refusal to stand and then for finding a way 
to reconcile his religious beliefs and honor his contract. The suspension was lifted 
after one game because Abdul-Rauf agreed to be on the court during the anthem 
ceremony and to stand and the NBA agreed to let him pray silently rather than 
sing the anthem. He told a reporter, “This is what I believe, and, and, I’m not 
wrong for the stance that I took, and in no way am I compromising, but I’m say-
ing I understand and recognize that there is a better approach and in Islam . . . 
after making a decision, if you see that which is better, you do that.” In another 
interview, he emphasized that his religious feeling and opposition to injustice 
transcended racial, national, and religious lines: “I’ll stand but I’ll offer a prayer, 
my own prayer, for those who are suffering. Muslim. Caucasian. African-Ameri-
can. Asian. Whoever is in that position, whoever is experiencing difficulties.”


--- PAGE 207 ---
Black Routes to Islam200
Abdul-Rauf’s willingness to adjust his practice did not satisfy his critics. In his 
first game back on the court following the suspension, the Chicago crowd show-
ered him with boos as he scored nineteen points. According to Roscoe Nance’s 
March 14 article in USA T oday, the Denver Nuggets had already received more 
than two hundred phone calls from fans threatening to boycott games if Abdul-
Rauf remained with the team or threatening to cancel their season tickets. The 
league decision to suspend him was influenced by the fear that the economic 
consequences of dissatisfied fans might translate into a reduction in support from 
advertisers like Nike and television networks like NBC. Michael Hiestand, in the 
October 22, 1996, USA T oday revealed that Nike was also considering buying 
Ascent Entertainment, which owned the Denver Nuggets in the same period. 
Given these circumstances, it is not particularly surprising that Abdul-Rauf was 
traded to the Sacramento Kings the following season, despite being the Nuggets’ 
playmaker and lead scorer and one of the better free-throw shooters in NBA his-
tory. His basketball career never fully recovered from the damage of the contro-
versy and he eventually began playing in Europe.
Racing and Erasing Islam: Religion in the World of Sports
Of course, Abdul-Rauf is not the first professional athlete to bring religion into 
the sacred space of the stadium. As depicted in the Academy Award winning 
movie Chariots of Fire in 1981, Eric Liddell, a member of Great Britain’s track 
team at the 1924 Paris Olympics, opted out of the 100-meter race once he learned 
he would have to run a heat on the Sabbath. His stance shocked the sports world 
and he eventually won a gold medal in the 400-meter race. In 1965, Sandy Kou-
fax, a pitcher for the Dodgers, refused to play on opening day of the World Series 
because it fell on Yom Kippur. The league accommodated Koufax by shifting 
the series by a day. Steven Maranz of The Sporting News detailed on November 
28, 1994, how Shawn Bradley, a Morman basketball player, delayed his poten-
tial earnings from a lucrative professional basketball career with the Philadelphia 
76ers in order to fulfill his obligation to his faith to carry out a two-year mission. 
While all of these athletes should be admired for the strength of their convictions 
in the face of enormous pressure, what makes them different from Abdul-Rauf is 
that their religious beliefs did not interrupt the secular division between religious 
and political beliefs the way Abdul-Rauf’s did. Arguably, their ability to fit easily 
within secular discursive frames facilitated both the processes of accommodating 
them as well as representing them as principled heroes. There is another impor-
tant iconic athlete who challenged the division between religion and politics in 
much more profound and radical ways than Abdul-Rauf: Muhammad Ali. In 
the name of Islam, Ali had refused to serve America in the time of war and, as 
a result, was nearly imprisoned, lost his title, was banned from competing, and 
was condemned by the national media. In 1967, Ali refused to step forward to be 
inducted into Vietnam and within the hour, before being been charged with any 
crime, the New York State Athletic Commission suspended his boxing license and


--- PAGE 208 ---
Lights, Camera, Suspension 201
stripped him of his title as heavyweight champion, with all other jurisdictions in 
the United States quickly following suit. 21 Yet, today, Ali is a national icon, the 
quintessential American. Louisville, the city that once legally renounced him, 
now boasts a highway in his name.
I am not invoking Muhammad Ali only because he is the most famous example 
of a dissenting athlete or because, like Abdul-Rauf, he is black and Muslim. Rather, 
the comparison to Ali brings Abdul-Rauf’s case into relief because Ali’s image was 
reinvented in 1996, overlapping with the Abdul-Rauf-anthem controversy. In the 
opening ceremony of the 1996 Olympics, Muhammad Ali raised a trembling arm 
to light the fuse to the Olympic cauldron, followed by a recitation of an excerpt 
from Martin Luther King Jr.’s March on Washington speech. The widely broad-
cast image suggested a kind of fulfillment of King’s dream in the national embrace 
of Ali as an icon of harmony and goodwill. Outside the stadium, Hosea Williams, 
a former colleague of King’s, led a small protest against the Georgia state flag’s 
Confederate stars and bars fluttering over games that celebrated human equality 
but few reporters covered her demonstration. At halftime during the Olympic 
basketball final, Ali was presented with a replacement gold medal for the one he 
had flung into the Ohio River thirty-six years earlier precisely because of the gaps 
between the Olympic ideals and American social realities. USA T oday credited 
Ali’s Olympic cameo with sparking “a renaissance for the Greatest” and he took 
Sports Illustrated’s cover for a record-breaking thirty-fourth time.
For all the sudden interest in Ali’s legacy in 1996, the fact that, in his heyday, 
he had always been more popular abroad than at home was seemingly forgotten. 
After all, his anti-American defiance is what made him an international hero in 
much of Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Europe in that period. Equally signifi-
cant, Ali’s Islam seemed to be erased from collective memory as well, or at least 
irrelevant in the new coverage that rarely focused on his Muslim identity except 
as a biographical detail. Analysts of the Black Power movement of the 1960s fre-
quently divide the radicalism of the movement between the elements that were 
co-opted and sanitized and those that were destroyed. Muhammad Ali embodies 
both of those processes; he has been co-opted and depoliticized as a national icon 
decades after being the most reviled figure in American sports and, in some sense, 
physically destroyed. The stripping of his title and his resultant lengthy absence 
from the ring meant that when Ali finally returned to the ring, he was slower and 
had to rely on his ability to absorb punches, which is undoubtedly related to his 
current medical condition.
22
The Ali offered up for veneration in the 1990s is not the Ali of the 1960s, 
and the image of the 1960s that is celebrated or damned in the 1990s is a mere 
caricature of the original. In both cases, a complex and contradictory reality has 
been homogenized and repackaged for sale in an ever-burgeoning marketplace 
for cultural commodities. In the nineties, we were told that the causes and com-
plaints of the sixties were redundant, that the conflicts that once surrounded Ali 
have been resolved. Somehow the rights and wrongs of the hard choices he made 
have been declared peripheral to his legacy—as if racism and warfare, Islam and


--- PAGE 209 ---
Black Routes to Islam202
the West, personal identity, black leadership and the use of U.S. military might in 
the poorer, darker countries were yesterday’s issues, no longer pertinent, no longer 
divisive.
23
Ali’s fame was renewed and reinterpreted in such a way that his Islam was 
either erased or represented as benign, apolitical in order for him to be converted 
into a symbol of national identity. Since being reborn as a benign, national icon, 
Ali’s image has been used to sell everything from Sprite to Microsoft to the war 
on terror in the Muslim world by the State Department. In this sense, the story of 
the evolution of Abdul-Rauf’s image is the inverse of Ali’s. Ali, once demonized 
for his Islam, has been transformed into a national icon through the muting of 
his religious identity. Abdul-Rauf, on the other hand, once heralded as an icon 
of the American dream as the “Mississippi Son,” has come to represent all that 
is wrong, threatening, and dangerous about Islam by muting his identity as an 
African American.
Before the anthem controversy, Abdul-Rauf was involved in another minor 
controversy that made sports page news briefly when he went head-to-head with 
Nike, who had initially given him a shoe contract. As recounted by John Moss-
man of The Baton Rouge Advocate on March 15, 1996, after a scuffle with Nike 
that led to the loss of the contract, Abdul-Rauf began covering the logos on his 
shoes with masking tape and refused to identify the brand when asked by journal-
ists. In this regard, Abdul-Rauf is the inverse of that other American icon so often 
compared to Muhammad Ali: Michael Jordan. Jordan, however, is no Muham-
mad Ali. Where Ali refused “to carry a sign,” Jordan only carries the signs he gets 
paid for and his patriotic feelings seem to be inseparable from his capitalist acu-
men. During the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, Michael Jordan and fellow 
face of Nike Charles Barkley used the American flag to cover a Reebok logo on 
the Olympic medal stand as a symbol to their commitment to life, liberty, and the 
pursuit of endorsements, and when Nike was blasted in the media over its Indone-
sian sweatshops controversy, it was the patriotic “CEO Jordan” ad campaign that 
salvaged the company’s image.
24 Where Ali was the idealistic hero carrying the 
banner of humanitarian internationalism in the global struggles against inequal-
ity, poverty, and injustice, Jordan is the American emblem of globalization. Jordan 
is a symbol of “corporate America and its winner-takes-all ethic. His blackness has 
been deliberately submerged within his Americanness, which is reduced, in the 
end, to his individual wealth and success.”
25 In contrast to Jordan, Abdul-Rauf no 
longer has the option to submerge his blackness with his Americanness because, 
in a sense, his Islam negates both his blackness and his Americanness. If the trans-
formations of Ali’s image are any indication, it seems Black Muslim athletes can 
either be represented as (black) American heroes or as Muslim villains.
Conclusion
On August 1, 2001, two days after my camera crew had packed up and left Gulf-
port, Abdul-Rauf’s home, which was under construction, was burned to the


--- PAGE 210 ---
Lights, Camera, Suspension 203
ground. Abdul-Rauf reported finding KKK graffiti on his property, and although 
the arson investigation is ongoing, the FBI’s prime suspect in the case remains 
the KKK. The documentary ends on the image of Abdul-Rauf’s burning house, 
anticipating another burning building and another terrorist attack that would 
take place just over a month later. Since September 11, the culture of hyperpa-
triotism, the suppression of dissent, and the scrutinization of Muslim Americans 
has been dramatically increased, although all of these elements were present in the 
Abdul-Rauf-anthem controversy as well.
Perhaps most disturbing, before September 11, racial profiling had largely 
been dismissed as an “inefficient, ineffective, and unfair” policy and, in fact, it was 
explicitly condemned by President Bush and John Ashcroft, but in the months 
after September 11, polls indicated that the American public consensus was that 
racial profiling was not only a good thing but essential for the nation’s survival. 
A Gallup poll found that one-third of New Yorkers supported the internment of 
Arab Americans. Another Gallup poll surveying African Americans in the weeks 
after September 11 found the majority (71 percent) supported racial profiling 
of Middle Easterners and Arabs. As other minorities endorsed the racial profil-
ing of Middle Easterners, Arabs, and Muslims, their endorsement Americanizes 
them and consolidates the new configuration of a singular, multicultural nation. 
“[Although] racial policing continues apace in all communities of color, and we 
can anticipate that this new multiculturalist national identity is a momentary 
phenomenon, whites, African Americans, East Asian Americans, and Latinas 
and Latinos are in a certain sense now deemed safe and not required to prove 
their allegiance. In contrast, those who inhabit the vulnerable category of looking 
‘Middle Eastern, Arab, or Muslim,’ and who are thus subject to potential profil-
ing, have had to, as a matter of personal safety, drape their dwellings, workplaces, 
and bodies with flags in an often futile attempt at demonstrating their loyalty.”
26
The exaggerated appearance of American flags in Arab and Muslim American 
communities is predictable because flags are so often the means of normalizing 
and disciplining “others.” Like marginal communities before them, Muslims have 
a range of motivations in displaying them, from defiant assertions of patriotism 
to talismanic shields protecting them from hostility.
27
It becomes obvious very quickly that pressures are not being applied evenly 
across Muslim American communities. Veiled women, as the most visible and, 
therefore, vulnerable segment of the community, have suffered the brunt of hate 
crimes and harassment. Arab and Middle Eastern Muslims are profiled much 
more frequently than African American Muslims. Blackness often acts as a layer 
of insulation for African American Muslims and guarantees their status as social 
citizens in ways not shared by their immigrant coreligionists. We might imagine 
how the media, the Justice Department, and the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service might have reacted had the 2003 “D.C. Sniper” been a Middle Easterner 
rather than an African American. (The fact that John Muhammad is a Muslim 
received little comment in the press.) Certainly, the American public would have 
responded with outrage had the attorney general rounded up hundreds of African


--- PAGE 211 ---
Black Routes to Islam204
American Muslims and held them for months without charges the way Arab and 
Middle Eastern Muslims have been. Since the association of Islam with Arabs 
and the Middle East in the American imagination is so blindingly strong, blacks 
generally remain an invisible part of the Muslim American community and are 
often immune from social stigma and exclusions.
28 Abdul-Rauf’s case demon-
strates that the layer of social insulation to African American Muslims provided 
by their blackness could easily slip. In this sense, Abdul-Rauf’s case is both an 
important historical moment that takes on greater relevance in a post-September 
11 America as well as a cautionary tale about the fluidity and the brutality of race 
in the United States.
Notes
 1. Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf, interview with author, July 20, 2001.
 2. National Muslim organizations made public statements insisting that standing for the 
national anthem did not contravene Islam; only the Islamic Society of North America’s 
(ISNA) statement was neutral. Jason Diamos reported in The New York Times on March 
15 that ISNA’s secretary general Sayyed M. Syeed told the Associated Press that the deci-
sion to stand for the anthem or the flag is a subjective one, and believers are responsible to 
their own consciences.
 3. Karen Isaksen Leonard, Muslims in the United States : The State of Research (New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 2003).
 4. Fareed H. Nu’man, The Muslim Population in the United States  (Washington, DC: Ameri-
can Muslim Council, 1992).
 5. Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican: Looking T owards the Third Resurrection
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2005), 72.
 6. Daniel Pipes, “In Muslim America: A Presence and a Challenge” National Review, Febru-
ary 21, 2000.
 7. Pipes, “In Muslim America.”
 8. Zareena Grewal. By the Dawn’s Early Light: Chris Jackson’s Journey to Islam (Cinema Guild, 
2004).
 9. Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf, interview with author, July 20, 2001.
 10. Abdul-Rauf, interview.
 11. Ibid.
 12. Zareena Grewal, By the Dawn’s Early Light.
 13. Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican.
 14. Shareef Nasir, interview with author, July 20, 2001.
 15. Melani McAlister, Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East 
1945–2000 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).
 16. Gayraud Wilmore, Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpretation of the Religious 
History of Afro-American People (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1983).
 17. Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican , 25, 29. Black Religion is one among 
many black religious traditions in the United States, although its hegemonic (but not uni-
versal) influence has been unparalleled in the United States over the past two centuries.
 18. Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 25, 29.
 19. Kelly B. Koenig, “Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf’s Suspension for Refusing to Stand for the 
National Anthem: A ‘Free Throw’ for the NBA and Denver Nuggets, or a ‘Slam Dunk’ 
Violation of Abdul-Rauf’s Title VII Rights?” Washington University Law Quarterly 76, no. 
1 (1998).


--- PAGE 212 ---
Lights, Camera, Suspension 205
 20. Thomas v. Review Bd. of the Ind. Employment Sec. Div., quoted in Koenig.
 21. Thomas Hauser, Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1991), 172.
 22. Dave Zirin, What’s My Name Fool : Sports and Resistance in the United States  (Chicago: 
Haymarket Books, 2005).
 23. Mike Marqusee, Redemption Song: Muhammad Ali and the Spirit of the Sixtie (New York: 
Verso, 1999) 5.
 24. Jes Cortes, “Star Spangled Business: Labor, Patriotism, and Michael Jordan in a Nike 
Advertisement.” http://to-the-quick.binghamton.edu/issue%201/nike.html (accessed 
June 16, 2006).
 25. Mike Marqusee, Redemption Song, 295.
 26. Leti Volpp, “The Citizen and the T errorist,” September 11 in History:A Watershed Moment?
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003), 151.
 27. Andrew Shryock, “New Images of Arab Detroit: Seeing Otherness and Identity through 
the Lens of September 11,” American Anthropologist 104 (2002): 919.
 28. Sherman A. Jackson, Islam and the Blackamerican, 132–33.


--- PAGE 213 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 214 ---
C HAPTER  12
Protect Ya Neck (Remix)
Muslims and the Carceral 
Imagination in the Age of 
Guantánamo
Sohail Daulatzai
The small man builds cages for everyone he knows.
While the sage, who has to duck his head when the moon is low,
Keeps dropping keys all night long for the beautiful rowdy prisoners.
—Hafiz, “Dropping Keys”
The screening of the Gillo Pontecorvo’s 1965 film BATTLE OF ALGIERS at
the Pentagon in 2003 revealed a great deal about American imperial ambition 
and the measures that they were willing to take in order to fulfill the neocon 
prophesy of “full spectrum dominance.” As a result of the Pentagon screening, 
the film has garnered a great deal of attention and quite predictably has also been 
completely reappropriated by the Beltway belligerati not as the embodiment of 
the struggles for national liberation against racist colonial violence but instead as 
a blueprint and training manual for “terrorism” in a post-9/11 world. In framing 
the film in this way, American officials engaged in an act of selective memory 
and collective amnesia as they attempted to erase the history of colonialism and 
violence that is endemic to the European and American encounter with the Third 
World. Not only that, this attempt at historical revisionism also sought to erase 
America’s own complicity with, and extension of, European colonialism as the 
Cold War unfolded (Iran, Vietnam, the Congo, etc.) while also attempting to 
reaffirm their current occupation of Iraq and Afghanistan as another example of 
American imperial benevolence.
What else was the United States hoping to gain from viewing the film? How 
to deal with an insurgency? How to win the battle but not lose the “hearts and 
minds” of the colonized? The film anticipates many of the forms of control and


--- PAGE 215 ---
Black Routes to Islam208
violence exhibited within the current American imperial project such as 
the military-media alliance, the multiple forms of surveillance of the Muslim 
body (check points, cameras, searches), the use of counterrevolutionary methods 
(bombings of civilians, psychological warfare, disinformation), and the empty 
rhetoric of “democracy” when done at gunpoint. But it is the central role of tor-
ture and the prison as technologies of colonial violence within the film that eerily 
anticipate the revelations at Abu Ghraib, Guantánamo, Bagram and other U.S. 
detention centers throughout the world.
How are we to understand the place of torture and incarceration as forms of 
control in the current global order of imperial violence? While torture and colo-
nial imprisonment used by Europeans and the United States as forms of coun-
terinsurgency against Black and Third World peoples is not new, the sands seem 
to be shifting. Because in this new age of empire where the formal elements of 
colonization no longer persist, but their neoliberal residue does, we are now seem-
ingly in a situation where the nation-as-prison has become the operative model 
for continued Euro-American dominance. Where the nation was once the site for 
liberation, it is now the space for violent containment—as economic control vis-
à-vis International Monetary Fund and World T rade Organization policy, strict 
control over migration flows, increased militarization, and Western-backed repres-
sion within the global south have severely controlled the lives of the majority of 
the worlds peoples. But just as violent is the possibility that the nation-as-prison 
is no longer only expressed through the ambient force of postcolonial power and 
the bloody borders drawn by the West. Instead, the erection of prison walls, elec-
tric fences, minefields, concrete barriers, and barbed wire now emerging around 
the West Bank, the Afghan-Pakistan border, and the U.S.–Mexico border have 
become the de facto practice that now tragically separates peoples, histories, and 
even the possibilities for change. The metaphoric is now the literal as the border 
watchers, checkpoint battalions, and anti-immigrant hysteria running rampant in 
the West still presumes that we from the global south are guilty, yet on furlough, 
and allowed to work, survive, or even cling to life—but only if deemed “useful” in 
a highly racialized neoliberal global order.
These contemporary configurations of power have, according to Achille 
Mbembe, historic roots within a European juridical order based upon a racialized 
hierarchy of nation-states. For Mbembe, the colony—that space existing at the 
frontiers of “civilization”—has its roots within the slave plantation. Through the 
idea of “necropolitics,” Mbembe views modern war as an extension of previous 
“topographies of cruelty” emanating from Europe and the United States—such 
as the colony and the slave plantation—where race becomes the arbiter that not 
only determines but also sanctions who can be killed and who will be allowed 
to live as imperial power unleashes itself.
1 Where Mbembe links the plantation 
and the colony through violence and race, Loic Waquant links the plantation
to the prison as an extension of racial violence within the United States. 2 I am 
interested in the cartographies of American power that link the colony to the 
prison—where the dom estic politics of race and captivity that sit at the heart of


--- PAGE 216 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 209
the empire become the means by which those in the colony become legible under 
brutal American power. The linking of American imperial reach today, through 
the space of the prison, becomes a way of exploring and exposing the lie that is 
“American exceptionalism”—a brutal charade about a mythic American univer-
salism that not only fractures America’s historic complicity with European empire 
building, but also masks America’s own violent history as an expansionist power 
through slavery, Native genocide, and its imperial ambition throughout the globe 
up to today.
In exploring the prison as an emerging form of transnational power and empire 
state building of Pax Americana, my interest lies in the increasingly blurred lines 
between the foreign and the domestic, nations and their fragments, and national-
isms and their “others.” In doing so, I borrow from the work of Amy Kaplan, who 
writes that “domestic and foreign spaces are closer than we think, and that the 
dynamics of imperial expansion cast them into jarring proximity.”
3 For Kaplan, 
U.S. imperialism demands a coherent and stable national identity but U.S. impe-
rial culture has continually created anxiety about this coherence as it expanded 
its power abroad. She states, “the idea of the nation as home is inextricable from 
the political, economic, and cultural movements of empire, movements that both 
erect and unsettle the ever-shifting boundaries between the domestic and the for-
eign, between ‘at home’ and ‘abroad.’”
4 I want to examine these “movements of 
empire” through the space of the prison in order to explore the domestic and 
international regimes of imprisonment that have forged a kind of transnational 
“carceral imagination” around the most prominent figure of racial otherness 
today—the Muslim. In attempting to locate this “carceral imagination,” this piece 
will explore the links between the global mapping of imprisonment and control 
of Arabs and South Asians as evinced by the emergence of Abu Ghraib, Guan-
tánamo, secret detention centers, and the Orwellian euphemisms “extraordinary 
rendition” and “ghost detainees” with the domestic assault on African American 
Muslims in U.S. prisons who have been very recently targeted as a potential “fifth 
column” of recruitment and radicalization against the United States in the “War 
on T error.”
The racial anxieties about the threats posed by Muslim “terrorists” abroad are 
projected upon its domestic racial analog—African American Muslims—an anxi-
ety that is more acute due to the ambivalent place of Blackness within the history 
of U.S. expansionism and imperial culture. Made legible through the historic gaze 
of American imperial power, the presence of African American Muslims within 
the United States threatens a coherent national identity that upsets racial hier-
archies and domestic unity. As Kaplan says, “underlying the dream of imperial 
expansion is the nightmare of its own success, a nightmare in which the move-
ment outward into the world threatens to incorporate the foreign and dismantle 
the domestic sphere of the nation.”
5
The racialized figure of the Muslim haunts the geographic and imagina-
tive spaces of American empire. As the site of the phantasmatic, the excessive 
and the perverse, the tortured figure of the Muslim—be it the immigrant and


--- PAGE 217 ---
Black Routes to Islam210
foreign (Arab, Asian, Persian or African) or indigenous and domestic (African 
American)—fluidly and flexibly mobilizes various constituencies, nationally and 
internationally, in the service of American imperial designs. Whether it’s “freeing 
Muslim women” abroad, creating fractures within and between African Ameri-
cans and immigrants in the United States, mobilizing Christian evangelicals, 
liberal multiculturalists, right-wing extremists, New Right culture warriors, and 
anti-immigrant xenophobes, the figure of the Muslim has been used to cultivate 
tremendous ideological ground by containing and limiting the scope of dissent, 
forging an imperial citizenry, masking structural inequalities and massive eco-
nomic instability, and reinforcing the philosophical basis of “colorblindness” by 
promoting an American triumphalism in which a panracial enemy (the Muslim) 
threatens a multicultural America.
In a global order structured along the lines of race, this is not the first time in 
American history where race has been the thread that negotiates the interplay and 
fluidity between the foreign and domestic realms of American power. With the 
end of World War II and the dawning of the Cold War, the United States used 
the threat of “Communism” as a proxy for race as it sought to replace Europe as a 
global power in the era of decolonization and national liberation movements–—
using “anticommunism” (via the T ruman Doctrine) to fulfill American imperial 
desire through interventions within the Third World to destabilize the burgeon-
ing anticolonial and anti-imperialist movements taking place in Asia and Africa. 
The “Communist” threat also achieved its domestic goals on race by fracturing 
very powerful alliances being forged by African Americans who sought to tie their 
claims toward racial justice to those within the Third World. Instead, the rhetoric 
of “anticommunism” birthed a heightened American nationalism as influential 
African American liberals who sought to gain concessions on civil rights domesti-
cally supported violent American foreign policy throughout Africa and Asia. This 
fractured an emergent Black internationalism by containing antiracism within 
a national framework and created new kinds of imperial citizen-subjects during 
a new period of empire building. But it also isolated and increased the domes-
tic repression of African Americans (such as Du Bois and Robeson) who linked 
the legacies of slavery with colonialism in the Third World as a means toward 
systemic change rather than reform against Jim Crow segregation, disenfranchise-
ment, and civil death.
6
Similarly, in a post–Cold War era, the rhetoric of “terrorism” has also become 
a proxy for race, generating tremendous political and ideological capital. The sine 
qua non for “terrorism” has been the Muslim—a highly racialized figure that has 
been mobilized to reinforce American hegemony abroad, while also containing 
antiracist and economic justice movements domestically. This threat of “terror-
ism” to American interests abroad has justified a violent reassertion of American 
power and militarism to extend Cold War alliances, further American geopoliti-
cal dominance, and refashion the United States as the sole power in a unipolar 
world through “preemptive war,” covert intervention, aggressive militarism, and 
unilateralism. Domestically, the threat of “terror” from the immigrant Muslim


--- PAGE 218 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 211
has justified a highly racialized and vicious crackdown on immigrants in the 
United States, as the Immigration and Naturalization Services (INS), now under 
the Department of Homeland Security, has normalized deportations, detentions, 
and disappearance. In addition, the increasing prominence of the figure of the 
indigenous Muslim—the African American Muslim—within the security appara-
tuses and mainstream political discourse carries tremendous symbolic and historic 
significance, as African American Muslims have historically been constructed as 
fundamental threats to American democracy and racial harmony dating back to 
slavery. The November 2007 PBS America At A Crossroads series episode “Home-
grown: Islam in Prison” on African American Muslims revealed that these fears 
are alive and well, as the documentary’s alarmist tone echoes within the U.S. 
security establishment around Black Muslim communities. This notion of an 
“enemy within” plays on highly racialized fears deeply embedded within the white 
imagination, while also heightening tensions within African American communi-
ties along class, religious, and political lines, as it polices the boundaries of race 
through its attempts at forging an imperial Blackness.
The ideological elasticity of the Muslim and the rhetoric of “terrorism” has 
morphed and begun to outline the contours of the threat posed by the figure of 
the African American Muslim. The racialized discourse of empire is now produc-
ing a subject where the foreign and the domestic collapse upon themselves, as 
fears of “terror” are conflated with “Black criminality,” gangs, prison culture and 
urban violence. The carceral logic and captive power that has historically been 
forged around Blackness not only makes legible this new emerging “threat”—as it 
was the “logic” used by the Los Angeles Police Department in its recent testimony 
in Congress to “map” Muslim communities—but it also becomes the template 
for the exporting of this prison regime to the colony in the “War on T error.” This 
fear of “homegrown terrorism” that collapses the domestic and the foreign around 
the figure of the Muslim can be clearly seen in the recent, near unanimous pas-
sage of House Resolution 1955 (“The Violent Radicalization and Homegrown 
T errorism Prevention Act of 2007”). This bill seeks to establish grant programs, 
assigning a university-based “Center of Excellence for the Study of Radicalization 
and Homegrown T errorism in the United States,” and conduct research into how 
other countries—ostensibly in Europe—work to prevent “homegrown terrorism 
and radicalization.” In addition, Michael Downing, the LAPD’s commanding 
officer for “Counter-T errorism” testified before the Committee on Homeland 
Security and Governmental Affairs in the U.S. Senate—one week after the pas-
sage of H.R. 1955—on the need to “map” Muslim communities in Los Angeles 
as a way to prevent—coincidentally–“homegrown terrorism” and “violent radical-
ization.” In his testimony, Downing highlighted the need for this kind of surveil-
lance, mentioning 9/11, the current wars, attacks in Europe and their policing of 
Muslims in their midst, and, not surprisingly, he cites gang culture in Los Angeles 
and the ways in which they have been policed as the blueprint and analog for 
mapping Muslim communities—“their history, demographics, language, culture, 
ethnic breakdown, socio-economic, status, and social interactions.”
7


--- PAGE 219 ---
Black Routes to Islam212
Through the figure of the Muslim, then, I will trace the intimacies between the 
colony and the prison within the unfolding narrative of American imperial hubris 
by exploring the relationships between U.S. prisons and the emergence of impe-
rial imprisonment in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Guantánamo and the connections 
being forged between the military and local police in the United States. I will also 
examine recently published reports by the Departments of Justice and Homeland 
Security, and Congressional committee testimonies to historicize the state’s racial-
ization of African American Muslim inmates. I will then close with a discussion 
of Rap DNA, the yet to be published prison writings of the most prominent 
incarcerated African American Muslim in the United States today, Imam Jamil 
Al-Amin (formerly H. “Rap” Brown), who was transferred in August 2007 from 
Georgia to the federal government’s highest security prison—the Federal Super-
max in Florence, Colorado. As a counternarrative to the State’s captive power, his 
writings embody a stunning act of Michael Eric Dyson calls “Afrecriture.”
In exploring these diverse narratives, it is important to view the broader archi-
tecture of power that is in place: that to “map” Muslims, police thought, invade, 
occupy, bomb, incarcerate, torture, render, and murder—these are not reflective 
of just a will to power, but is raw naked power in full effect, and it is this structure 
of power that is central to the whole notion of what I am calling the “carceral 
imagination.” The American legal, political, and security apparatuses are animat-
ing this “carceral imagination” by constructing a domestic threat of “homegrown 
terrorism” around the figure of the African American Muslim and his poten-
tial links to “gang Islam,” “prison Islam,” and global “terrorist” networks. While 
the foreign Muslim has been incorporated within the prison regime through 
the exporting of American carceral power vis-à-vis Abu Ghraib, Guantánamo, 
and secret detention centers, the specter of the African American Muslim—as 
the “enemy within”—haunts the domestic homeland by shattering the divisions 
between the national and the global as the spaces of imperial power continue 
to converge.
From Abner Louima to Abu Ghraib
In Discipline & Punish, Michel Foucault argues that prior to the prison, violence 
inflicted upon the prisoner, or the executed, brought pleasure to the crowd as a 
parade of body parts became central to popular violence and the imagination that 
fueled it, and so the prison transformed punishment and its relationship to power. 
With the “birth of the prison” in the nineteenth century, “the great spectacle of 
physical punishment disappeared; the tortured body was avoided; the theatrical 
representation of pain was excluded from punishment. The age of sobriety in 
punishment had begun.”
8 I am intrigued by Foucault’s discussion about the birth 
of the prison, the public display of the body, and the “imagination” that it fuels in 
the Age of Abu Ghraib and the Birth of Guantánamo. For Foucault and others, 
the prison ushered in an “age of sobriety” around punishment when it seems that


--- PAGE 220 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 213
the post-9/11 imperial state has revealed a new “age of excess” around torture, 
display, and penal power around the Muslim body.
For me, this “age of excess” is central to the globalization of imprisonment and 
the carceral logic of America’s “War on T error.” In exploring the transnational logic 
of incarceration and the institutional links between the prison regimes around 
African American Muslims in the United States and the emergence of military 
prisons in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Guantánamo, history may have come full circle. 
According to Alan Gomez, a 1961 gathering called “The Power to Change Behav-
ior: A Symposium Presented by the U.S. Bureau of Prisons” was a key moment in 
“the politicization of institutionalized brainwashing, behavior modification and 
torture within the prison regime” that resulted in a national directive to “experi-
ment with these techniques, originally used against American POW’s in Korea, 
on the black Muslim prison population.” With these experiments, the federal 
government utilized physical and psychological torture to suppress political activ-
ity and dissent and to redefine accepted notions of “cruel, inhuman and torturous 
treatment.”
9 With the emergence of the Nation of Islam and Malcolm X (as well 
as increased Muslim immigration and the anticolonialism of the Third World), 
the FBI and law enforcement agencies monitored Black Muslims as a potential 
threat to the emerging orthodoxy of the Civil Rights Movement, so that the use of 
Black Muslims in prison in the early 1960s for use in state-sanctioned torture and 
experimentation raises profound questions, not the least of which are its possible 
connections and historical precedents to the more recent tortures of Muslims in 
Abu Ghraib, Guantánamo, Bagram, and elsewhere.
The collapsing of the ideological and territorial boundaries between the for-
eign and the domestic are embodied in the increasing consolidation of the two 
major security institutions within American imperial culture—the military and 
the prison—revealing the emergence of a new kind of formation of power and 
domination used to implement a violent global order that has challenged and 
usurped both national and international juridical foundations through torture, 
the abrogation of habeas corpus, the Birth of Guantánamo, military tribunals, 
the Patriot Act, preemptive war, and the legal declaration of Muslims as not “fall-
ing within the definition of ‘person.’”
10 This confluence between the military 
and the prison regime runs deep in the current “War on T error.” According to 
Avery Gordon, Mark S. Inch, the corrections and internment branch chief at 
the Office of the Provost Marshal General, stated that “the synergy between the 
reservist’s civilian employment in the corrections field and his or her duty to con-
fine enemy combatants in Afghanistan, Cuba [Guantánamo] and Iraq . . . could 
not be more evident and essential to mission success.”
11 According to Gordon, 
the 300th Military Police Brigade, the 327th Military Police Battalion, and the 
800th Military Police Brigade, designed Camp Delta at Guantánamo Bay, have 
run various detention centers throughout Afghanistan and have reorganized the 
prison systems in Iraq for enemy combatants and prisoners of war, respectively. 
In addition, prison guards and administrators at state and federal penitentiaries 
throughout the United States continue to contribute a great deal to America’s


--- PAGE 221 ---
Black Routes to Islam214
global archipelago of imprisonment—from John Vannatta, the superintendent of 
the Miami Correctional Facility in Indiana who works in Guantánamo, to many 
Chicago policemen and prison guards throughout Afghanistan, and to Captain 
Michael Mcintyre and Master Sergeant Don Bowen who work at the federal peni-
tentiary at T erre Haute, Indiana, who helped to build the Iraqi prison system.
12
According to Leah Caldwell, in May of 2003, just two months after the inva-
sion of Iraq, Attorney General John Ashcroft gathered a group of American prison 
officials under the auspices of the International Criminal Investigative T raining 
Program (ICITAP) and sent them to Iraq to prepare existing Iraqi prisons to 
house additional prisoners. ICITAP , which is based within the Department of 
Justice and funded by the State Department, has been in existence since 1986 
and has been sent throughout the world to “rebuild” criminal justice systems and 
to support police and prison regimes in American-backed client states, including 
Haiti, Indonesia, and the former Soviet Union. According to Caldwell, ICITAP 
is a successor to a training program run by the Agency for International Develop-
ment, which was stopped in the mid-1970s after it was revealed that this program 
was used to train police forces and prison officials abroad in murder and torture 
against mostly leftist insurgencies.
13
What is especially revealing is that many of the prison officials sent by Ashcroft 
to Iraq were not only employed by private prison firms around the United States, 
but were also heads of various state departments of corrections throughout the 
country, including T erry Stewart (Arizona), Gary Deland (Utah), John Armstrong 
(Connecticut), and Lane McCotter (T exas, Mexico, and Utah). In fact, all have 
been involved in a range of human rights abuses and legal cases from inmates in 
the United States, including denial of medical treatment, harsh conditions, sexual 
harassment, torture, and even death. McCotter, who was forced to resign as head 
of Utah’s State Board of Corrections due to the death of an inmate shackled naked 
to a chair, was, according to Gordon, chosen by then Attorney General John 
Ashcroft to head the reopening of Iraqi jails under American rule and also to 
train Iraqi prison guards just one month after the Justice Department released a 
report—following the death of a prisoner—about the lack of medical and mental 
health treatment at one Management and T raining Corporation’s jails, a private 
firm where McCotter was an executive.
14 T o add insult to irony, McCotter and 
Deland were at the ribbon-cutting ceremony at Abu Ghraib when it first opened, 
as McCotter said of Abu Ghraib, it was “the only place that we agreed as a team 
was truly closest to an American prison.”
15
While the administrative and institutional framework for United States colo-
nial imprisonment in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Guantánamo has deep ties to the 
domestic prison establishment, state corrections, and even private prison corpo-
rations, it is also the case that some of the guards involved in the Abu Ghraib 
tortures had careers within U.S. prisons. According to Anne-Marie Cusac, Ivan 
L. (Chip) Frederick II and Charles Graner worked in the United States as correc-
tions officers. Frederick was a guard in Virginia while Graner, who was described 
as one of the “most feared and loathed of American guards”
16 at Abu Ghraib and


--- PAGE 222 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 215
who is infamously known for his sinister glasses and wicked “thumbs up” signs 
in the released photos of torture, was an officer at the Greene County Prison in 
Pennsylvania.
According to Cusac, the Taguba Report investigating torture at Abu Ghraib 
found that U.S. military personnel placed detainees in sexually explicit positions, 
engaged in forced sodomy on Iraqis with chemical lights and possibly even a 
broom handle, beat them, and wrote vulgar epithets on their bodies. Cusac goes 
on to reveal that in 1998, Greene County guards, where Graner worked, were 
charged with sodomy with a nightstick, unlawful nude searches, and using pris-
oners’ blood to write “KKK” on the floor of the prison.
17 In fact, according to 
Gordon, Graner was repeatedly “implicated in violence against prisoners at the 
Pennsylvania super-maximum security State Correctional Institute at Greene, 
where he was employed . . . and given supervisory roles at Abu Ghraib because of 
his guard experience.”
18
Ironically, part of Bush II’s reconstruction plans for Iraq include the build-
ing of a “Supermax” prison where Abu Ghraib now stands as a way of erasing 
the stain and stigma of the tortures that went on there. The “Supermax” prison 
has proliferated throughout the United States, becoming the penal blueprint for 
imprisonment, and is widely seen as the most repressive kind of carceral power 
available. According to Gordon, “the Abu Ghraib photographs did not expose a 
few bad apples or an exceptional instance of brutality or perversity. They exposed 
the modus operandi of the lawful, modern, state-of-the-art prison. Nowhere is 
this clearer than in the growth over the past 25 years of what is called super-
maximum imprisonment, the cutting edge in technology and the prototype for 
re-tooling the military prison for the war on terror.”
19 In fact, Supermax prisons 
emphasize the state’s desire for ultimate control, as the “language of security has 
authorized Supermax imprisonment by treating it not as punishment but as a 
set of administrative procedures for managing high-security populations.”
20 More 
specifically, the policies and procedures used in Supermax facilities in the United 
States, “now legally sanctioned as ordinary and acceptable norms of prison life, 
were once considered violations of the U.S. Constitution’s Eighth Amendment 
prohibiting cruel and unusual punishment. The Supreme Court’s Eighth Amend-
ment cases are the legal and linguistic basis for the “detainee interrogation” memos 
prepared for the War on T error.”
21
As the American prison establishment exports to the outposts of empire new 
technologies of carceral power, the lines between the domestic and the foreign 
blur. And with the establishment of Abu Ghraib, Guantánamo, and other struc-
tures of imperial imprisonment in the “War on T error,” the legibility of “ter-
rorists” as detainees is made possible through the domestic politics of race and 
incarceration. But the incorporation of the foreign Muslim within the imperial 
prison regime raises the haunting specter of a domestic analog: the African Ameri-
can Muslim.


--- PAGE 223 ---
Black Routes to Islam216
Home Is Where the Hatred Is
In addition to the links between Abu Ghraib, Guantánamo, and other sites abroad 
with prison structures here in the United States, there is also an emerging connec-
tion being forged between local policing in the United States with the military. 
LAPD Chief William Bratton has been advocating and lobbying that Los Angles 
become the national nerve center for an official agency collaboration between 
Homeland Security and local law enforcement throughout the country. And he 
has made tremendous institutional strides. Known for his part in the draconian 
implementation of the Manhattan Institute’s “Broken Windows” policy in New 
York in the early 1990s under Rudolph Giuliani, which led to police abuse cases 
such as Abner Louima and Amadou Diallo, Bratton has declared a “War on Gangs” 
in Los Angeles, referring to gang activity as “homeland terrorism” and lamenting 
that the federal government “needs to get preoccupied with the internal war on 
terrorism as well.”
22 This linking of local policing with global war, and the highly 
racialized language of “terrorism” linking Black black and Brown brown com-
munities in the United States with their neocolonial counterparts in the Global 
South, forges an ideological link between domestic control and imperial power 
that generates tremendous political capital in a post-9/11 environment.
But Bratton takes the ideological and material links between domestic polic-
ing and colonial war much further. According to Bratton, there are about seventy 
LAPD officers in Iraq training with the United States military at any one time, 
while Los Angeles police officers have also trained Marines how to gather evidence 
at a bomb scene and also to give their guidance on urban policing for the United 
States military abroad.
23 In addition, the military is helping the LAPD prepare 
for the “eventuality” of suicide bombers and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) 
in Los Angeles. In fact, according to Bratton, a team of soldiers from the U.S. 
military in Baghdad visited Los Angeles to share with the LAPD their knowledge 
about “IED’s and suicide bombers and the tactics employed by death squads and 
insurgents in Iraq.”
24 Bratton continues, “We’re always wondering why we don’t 
have suicide bombers and IED’s here. We’re trying to learn from each other. It’s 
only a matter of time before we are experiencing the issue here. We have no idea 
why it hasn’t occurred. What they’re dealing with is what we may face.” For Brat-
ton, there are “many similarities between what is going on in Baghdad and here. 
The similarities to gang warfare are strong.”
25
While the racial and ideological calculus behind such comparisons helps gener-
ate the necessary fear and political will needed for increased domestic repression, 
Bratton is suggesting something more—a rhetorical strategy that has historically 
resonated within the United States and has resoundingly reappeared in a post-
9/11 climate that links Muslims, Blackness, prisons, and gang culture.
26 Bratton 
mentions the “growing influence of converted Muslim radicals in the U.S. prison 
system” who, upon release, will spread their new ideas to their companions such 
that gangs will conspire with “terrorist” organizations to carry out attacks on U.S. 
cities. As Bratton says, “There is a potential of some gangs who are disaffected to 
latch on to the Islam movement. We’ve seen movement in that direction.”
27


--- PAGE 224 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 217
This kind of alarmist rhetoric echoes a larger concerted chorus of voices who 
are constructing an “indigenous” component to the global “threat” posed by Mus-
lims. The projection of racial anxiety from the foreign Muslim to the domestic 
complement—the African American Muslim—mobilizes national fears, as Afri-
can American Muslims in prisons are perceived as a “fifth column” of potential 
recruitment into “terrorist” activities within the United States. Not surprisingly, 
high level officials, numerous think tanks, policy institutes, nongovernmental 
organizations, and official state agencies have published reports and presented to 
several congressional committees and other law enforcement agencies their fears 
about African American Muslims within United States prisons, and their poten-
tial for “radicalization.” This kind of institutional power bearing down upon what 
is being constructed as an emerging frontline in America’s “War on T error” is 
an extension of the policing and surveillance of Muslims in the United States 
over the last forty years or so and also a continuation of the pernicious forms of 
racial profiling that have impacted Black communities dating all the way back 
to slavery—what Loic Waquant argues is the historical continuity between 
the slave plantation and mass incarceration of African Americans within the 
United States.
28
A 2004 Department of Justice report issued a series of warnings about the pos-
sibilities of African American Muslim “radicalization” within prisons, the emer-
gence of “Prison Islam,” and the lack of monitoring of and by Muslim chaplains 
that could lead to “extremist” ideologies circulating within prisons.
29 In 2005, 
FBI director Robert Mueller told the Senate Intelligence Committee: “Prisons 
continue to be fertile ground for extremists who exploit both a prisoner’s con-
version to Islam while still in prison, as well as their socio-economic status and 
placement in the community upon their release,”
30 and Republican Senator Susan 
Collins from Maine has said that radical Islam within U.S. prisons was “an emerg-
ing threat to our national security.”
31 In April 2006, Attorney General Alberto 
Gonzalez also weighed in on the topic of Muslims in prison and the “challenges 
to detection” that this poses to authorities.
32 A 2006 study by the Homeland 
Security Policy Institute at George Washington Institute in conjunction with the 
University of Virginia was released at a Senate Homeland Security and Govern-
mental Affairs Committee hearing on “homegrown” terrorists. It argues that, due 
to limited funds, there is little supervision of Muslims within prisons so that 
“radical Islam is spreading and raising a new generation of potential terrorists,” 
and warns that “Jailhouse Islam,” which is “based upon cut-and-paste versions of 
the Qu’ran and incorporates violent prison culture into religious practice,”
33 is a 
threat to prison security. In addition, Charles Colson, who was special counsel to 
Richard Nixon during Watergate in 1974, and who now runs the Prison Fellow-
ship Ministries, says that al-Qaeda training manuals “specifically identify Amer-
ica’s prisoners as candidates for conversion because they may be “disenchanted 
with their country’s policies.”
34 Colson asserts that “terrorism experts fear these 
angry young recruits will become the next wave of terrorists. As U.S. citizens, they 
will combine a desire for ‘payback’ with an ability to blend easily into American


--- PAGE 225 ---
Black Routes to Islam218
culture.”35 In addition, Roy Innis, the national chair and executive director of the 
Council of Racial Equality (CORE), has also met with federal officials and has 
been vocal about the threat he perceives coming from African Americans Muslims 
who are not properly monitored both within and outside prisons.
As a “U.S. citizen” who can “blend easily into American culture” and who, 
according to Attorney General Gonzalez, poses “challenges to detection,” African 
American Muslims become the site upon which the projection of racial anxiety 
from the foreign Muslim—who is deemed more recognizable by his “foreign-
ness”—is branded. But because of the historic relationship of Blackness within 
the United States, and the familiarity that this contempt bred, African American 
Muslims are potentially more threatening and not racially legible in the same 
ways that the foreign Muslim is. The carceral regimes in Iraq, Afghanistan, and 
Guantánamo are then, in Kaplan’s formation, the “success” which has birthed a 
“nightmare” that now threatens the domestic front of American imperial culture 
and which is woven through the very rhetoric about African American Muslims 
in prisons, as they are threats not only to the “security” of the prison regime (as 
prison officials have declared) but also to the very organizing logic of the state’s 
architecture of power.
This specter of threat is deeply rooted within fears of African American conver-
sion to Islam, particularly as prisons have become the site for transformations in 
selfhood of all types, where a whole new aesthetics of being erupts. For African 
American Muslims like Malcolm Little—who got his “X” inside—or H. Rap 
Brown–who, in the 1970s, became Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin—the prison becomes 
the crucible for a rejection of that imposed master narrative of nonbeing and the 
subjection of Blackness upon which—through chattel slavery, disenfranchisement, 
and social death—America ultimately rests. For if prison is about disappearance 
and erasure, silence, and violence, then epiphany, conversion, and politicization 
are a kind of ontological resurrection against social and civic death—redefining 
one’s existence and challenging the panoptic power of the state.
Conversion then, is what Richard Brent T urner calls “signification,”
36 and is a 
stunning effacement of the state’s attempt to contain blackness within the ideo-
logical boundaries of the United States and its history of enslavement. As Chuck 
D argues, “if people with African roots are connected to Islam, then you got 
a problem of taking your slaves away, ‘we lost our slaves—they’re international 
now!’”
37 As Chuck D’s poignant argument suggests, this loss demands that African 
American Muslims be monitored, policed, and disciplined as fundamental threats 
to the American racial project and its imperial ambition. The fear of their incor-
poration stems from their forging of an alternative Black identity and commu-
nity of belonging rooted in an expressed solidarity with Third World liberation 
struggles, their fundamental and radical challenge to America’s racial hierarchies 
rooted in white supremacy, and their remapping of a Black diasporic identity 
that Amiri Baraka referred to as “post-American.”
38 In occupying a liminal space 
within the United States, the presence of African American Muslims, especially


--- PAGE 226 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 219
in the post-9/11 moment, shatters the coherence of American nationhood and 
haunts the tattered edges and imaginative spaces of the empire.
The Last Real Nigga Alive
Rap became a version of Malcolm and Martin.
—Nas, “Last Real Nigga Alive”
Who frame Rap Jamil Al-Amin?
—Amiri Baraka, “Somebody Blew Up America”
Imprisoned in 2000 and sentenced to life in Georgia State Prison at Reidsville, 
Imam Jamil Al-Amin (formerly H. “Rap” Brown) was transferred to the Fed-
eral Supermax prison in Florence, Colorado in August 2007—a prison where the 
federal government houses its most “dangerous inmates” and is openly referred 
to as the “domestic Guantanamo.” The October 2007 60 Minutes piece on the 
Colorado Supermax, titled “A Cleaner Version of Hell,” focused on the security 
and secrecy of the prison and talked almost completely about the immigrant Mus-
lims who were inside—“The Shoe Bomber” Richard Reid, the supposed twenti-
eth 9/11 hijacker, Zacarias Moussaoui, the convicted “mastermind” of the 1993 
World T rade Center bombing, Ramzi Youssef, and others. While Imam Jamil was 
not mentioned, it is important to understand that this transfer (done while an 
appeal is underway in the State of Georgia) reflects so much of the geographies of 
power around the Muslim in post-9/11 America.
While Al-Amin’s transfer to this prison is no doubt endemic of the state’s 
desires to violently continue the narrative of Black captivity that sits at the heart 
of the empire, it is also difficult to underestimate the post-9/11 climate and the 
ways in which, as an African American Muslim, Imam Jamil is viewed as the 
“homegrown terrorist.” Even in the State of Georgia prison system, Imam Jamil 
was deemed a “high security” captive who was subjected to around-the-clock sur-
veillance and solitary confinement, while his trial and conviction have been called 
into question by sev eral prominent legal experts and international human rights 
organizations. Now in the Supermax and under a “behavior modification pro-
gram,” Imam Jamil’s history within the Civil Rights Movement (as a member of the 
Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee [SNCC]), his Black Power activ-
ism and his work as a Muslim leader to thirty-four different urban communities in 
the United States over several decades embodies the multiple histories and identi-
ties that have consistently challenged American militarism, economic injustice, and 
racism nationally and internationally. During his trial, he was constructed by the 
state as the embodiment of the “homegrown terrorist,” but his is not the case of the 
captive who becomes “radicalized” in prison but the revolutionary who is impris-
oned by the state. His captivity can, in many ways, be seen as a metaphor for the 
continued attempts by the racial state to rewrite the history of Black radicalism and 
Third World internationalism over the last fifty years, the sustained attacks on Black 
community-based leadership, the suppression of political dissent in the United


--- PAGE 227 ---
Black Routes to Islam220
States, and the increased surveillance on the immigrant, but especially African 
American Muslim, as the haunting figure within American imperial culture.
While in prison, Al-Amin has completed a manuscript titled Rap DNA  that 
extends the legacy of powerful Black political prison writings that narrate a resis-
tance to captivity and transcend the boundary between the free and the unfree—
that vicious structuring logic of America that is centered around Black captivity 
and containment. Like his first book—the vastly overlooked Black Power mani-
festo Die Nigger Die! (1969), which is a brilliant political autobiography and nar-
rative of rebellion—Rap DNA is also a stunning act of what Michael Eric Dyson 
has called “Afrecriture,”
39 a poignant act of the writing of Black presence into 
history. Written in rhyme form and the embodiment of the talking book, Rap
DNA is a powerful glimpse into a revolutionary aesthetic that invokes and chal-
lenges a range of Black thought within the violent crucible of American slavery, 
as the opening lines state: “I am the seed of the survivors of the Middle Passage, 
the harvest from those who could not be broken, would not be broken, never a 
slave.” With this as the opening salvo, Rap DNA  also explores Fanon, Langston 
Hughes, Rakim, the murder of Amadou Diallo, critical race theory, his experi-
ences in exile, the Patriot Act, American militarism, the “War on T error,” and an 
incredible range of ideas through lyricism and irony, insight and wit.
But it is his reclamation of the moniker as “Rap” that is most compelling, as 
this becomes, in many ways, the voice through which he narrates. This is striking 
because it suggests an embrace of his multiple identities and histories that so often 
get overlooked within narratives of conversion that are meant to inaugurate a new 
ontology of the self and a rejection of one’s “slave name.” Though not an embrace 
of Hubert Brown (his former name), the reclaiming of “Rap” works on multiple 
levels: as an embrace of his persona as the fiery Black Power orator of the past and 
also an embrace of the act of speaking. T o “Rap,” then, is a radical process that 
is a scream against the silence imposed by the captive power of the prison. And 
as indicated by the title of the writings, Rap DNA is not only a gesture suggest-
ing that this radical act of speech as “Rap” continues beyond conversion and is 
imprinted upon his very being, but it also becomes a suggestion that these writ-
ings and his history are the ideological blueprint and life line for rap music as well. 
In fact, throughout the writings he brilliantly challenges contemporary hip-hop 
artists in rhyme style, battling them on page to use hip-hop as forum for transcen-
dence, redemption, and rebellion, while also laying claim as the father of hip-hop, 
as he says, “if Christian music is alive / It’s the only music named after someone 
besides Rap that survives”
40 and then later where he politicizes the gangster figure 
when he says, “No gangster rap music/Rap was the gangster of his time.”41
In a piece called “Conflict Or Conciliation,” Al-Amin invokes his history with 
the American racial state to inform contemporary generations about Black his-
tory, referencing how the U.S. Congress (“passed a law named after me, trying to 
stop the flow of the R-A-P”) and the FBI (“for the first time in history of their 
ten most wanted list . . . changed it to eleven, and before the manhunt could 
even start, they moved Rap to the top of the chart”) sought not only to sanction


--- PAGE 228 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 221
and criminalize him but also to incarcerate him. In doing so, Al-Amin also cri-
tiques the hip-hop generation, writing “Rap became public enemy number one, 
and I ain’t talking about Billboard son,”
42 arguing that material excess and record 
sales are not tied to Black uplift and transformation but to Black repression and 
degradation. In Al-Amin’s view, rap music should aspire to be at the top of the 
FBI’s charts as a barometer of its Fanonian possibilities, not the music industry’s 
attempts at promoting a commodified rebellion in the form of hip-pop.
Rap DNA also gives eloquent testimony to his life of struggle and his persistent 
attempts to connect Black radical praxis not within the confines of a collective 
bourgeois racial identity or a narrow nationalism that edifies white supremacist 
power but in relationship to a global struggle against the racial and economic 
legacies of slavery and colonialism. A battle cry from behind enemy lines, titled 
“Seconds,” highlights the painfully enduring question about the role of Blackness 
within the American imperial project, as he writes, “always talking that we, us, 
our, my country, our war our team our dream, USA USA how many kids you 
kill today? Negroes greatest dream? Take one for the team.” Al-Amin contin-
ues critiquing the complicity of certain forms of Blackness with empire when he 
writes, “more than willing to kill in a foreign land, women, children another man, 
Buffalo soldiers like their fathers of old, put the sin of empire on their soul.” He 
powerfully interrogates the historic role of African Americans as imperial citizens 
who have supported the expansionist project of the United States not only in the 
distant past, but more recently during the Cold War and in the “War on T error,” 
when he writes, “give their sons and daughters to spread tyranny and slaughter, in 
the name of empire’s new world order.”
43
As simultaneously Black and Muslim, endemic threat and exogenous insur-
gent, Jamil Al-Amin’s imprisonment links the domestic politics of race with the 
global terrain of the American warfare state, highlighting the central place that 
race continues to occupy within the security apparatus around who is to be incar-
cerated, surveilled, declared war upon, tortured, and killed. And in this time 
when the euphoria around Barack Obama’s election is seen by many as a stamp 
of legitimacy for the American imperial project, giving the United States both 
the allure of democracy and the seduction of benevolence, Al-Amin’s writings 
ask a profound question: in this moment where Blackness and American-ness are 
closer than they ever were, how are Black communities and constituencies, in all 
their plurality and diversity, going to align themselves in relationship to American 
empire—as promoters of an imperial Blackness or as critical resisters against it? As 
Malcolm would say, time will tell.
Notes
 1. Achille Mbembe, “Necropolitics,” Public Culture 15, no. 1 (Winter 2003): 11–40.
 2. Loic Waquant, “From Slavery to Mass Incarceration,” New Left Review  13 (January–
February 2002).
 3. Amy Kaplan, The Anarchy of Empire In the Making of U.S. Culture (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 2002), 1.


--- PAGE 229 ---
Black Routes to Islam222
 4. Ibid.
 5. Ibid., 12.
 6. See Penny M. Von Eschen, Race Against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism, 
1937–1957 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997).
 7. T estimony by Michael P . Downing, Commanding Officer for Counter T errorism/Crimi-
nal Intelligence Bureau, Los Angeles Police Department before the Committee on Home-
land Security and Governmental Affairs of United States Senate, October 30, 2007.
 8. Michael Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (New York: Vintage 
Books), 14.
 9. Alan Gomez, “Resisting Living Death at Marion Federal Penitentiary, 1972,” Radical His-
tory Review, no. 96 (Fall 2006): 60.
 10. See the Center for Constitutional Rights at http://www.ccrjustice.org/newsroom/press-releases/ 
judges-dismiss-suit-seeking-damages-guantanamo-torture.
 11. Avery Gordon, “Supermax Lockdown,” http://www.middle-east-online.com/english/ 
?id=18365.
 12. Ibid.
 13. Leah Caldwell, “From Supermax to Abu Ghraib,” http://www.counterpunch.org/
caldwell10152004.html.
 14. Gordon, “Supermax Lockdown.”
 15. Caldwell, “From Supermax to Abu Ghraib.”
 16. Quoted in Anne-Marie Cusac, “Abu Ghraib, USA,” The Progressive, August 6, 2004, 
http://www.alternet.org/story/19479/.
 17. Cusac, “Abu Ghraib, USA.”
 18. Gordon, “Supermax Lockdown.”
 19. Ibid.
 20. Ibid.
 21. Ibid.
 22. Megan Garvey and Richard Winton, “City Declares War on Gangs,” Los Angeles Times,
December 4, 2002, A1.
 23. Pamela Hess, “Analysis: Police Take Military Counsel,” found at http://lapd.com/article
.aspx?a=4150.
 24. Ibid.
 25. Ibid.
 26. These alarmist rhetorical strategies have a history that date back to the rise of the Nation 
of Islam, particularly in the 1950s and 1960s as well as during the uprisings in Los Angeles 
in 1992 when the gang truce was brokered with the help of the Nation of Islam. In addi-
tion, the case of Jeff Fort and the El Rukns in the 1980s, an offshoot of the Blackstone 
Rangers in Chicago, is another prominent case in point.
 27. Hess, “Analysis: Police Take Military Counsel.”
 28. Waquant, “From Slavery to Mass Incarceration.”
 29. “A Review of the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ Selection of Muslim Religious Services Provid-
ers,” from the Office of the Inspector General, Department of Justice, April 2004.
 30. Hess, “Analysis: Police Take Military Counsel.”
 31. Quoted in “US: Prisons Are Breeding Grounds for Muslim T errorists” found at www
.westernresistance.com/blog/archives/002992.html.
 32. T estimony before the World Affair Council of Pittsburgh, “Stopping T errorists before 
They Strike: The Justice Departments Power of Prevention,” April 16, 2006.
 33. “Out of the Shadows: Getting Ahead of Prisoner Radicalization,” A Special Report by the 
George Washington University Homeland Security Policy Institute, 2006, iv.


--- PAGE 230 ---
Protect Ya Neck (Remix) 223
 34. Bill Berkowitz, “American Muslims: A Clear and Present Danger?” http://zmagsite.zmag
.org/Jun2003/berkowitz0603.html.
 35. Berkowitz, “American Muslims.”
 36. See Richard Brent T urner, Islam in the African-American Experience (Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press, 1997) for an excellent history of African American Islam.
 37. Personal interview, August 2006.
 38. Marvin X and Faruk X, “Islam and Black Art: An Interview With Leroi Jones,” Dictionary
of Literary Biography: Black Arts Movement, ed. Jeff Decker (Detroit: Gale, 1984), 128.
 39. Michael Eric Dyson, Open Mike: Reflections on Philosophy, Race, Sex, Culture and Religion
(New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2003), 27.
 40. Imam Jamil Al-Amin, Rap DNA, unpublished.
 41. Ibid.
 42. Ibid.
 43. Ibid.


--- PAGE 231 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 232 ---
P ART  III
Urban Encounters


--- PAGE 233 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 234 ---
C HAPTER  13
Overlapping Diasporas, 
Multiracial Lives
South Asian Muslims in U.S. 
Communities of Color, 
1880–1970
Vivek Bald
Lives in Motion
In the span of a few years in the 1920s, two brothers, Bahadour and 
Rostom, and their elder sister, Roheamon, all got married in Harlem. The three 
siblings were recent arrivals to New York City from the U.S. South. Roheamon 
and Rostom had been born in New Orleans and Bahadour in Waveland, Mis-
sissippi, all in the first years of the century. Sometime in 1910, their mother 
Ella brought them north, along with three other siblings, and, by 1920, the 
mother and six children were living with a family relation in the Bronx.
1 At the 
moment they had reached their teens and early twenties, Roheamon, Rostom, 
I wish to thank Alaudin Ullah for his generosity in sharing his family’s history in discussions 
over the course of the last six years and for his continuing insights regarding this work, and 
Noor Choudry and Habib Ullah, Jr., for their openness in discussing their lives and recol-
lections in recent interviews. I also wish to thank Brent Hayes Edwards, Adam Green, Vijay 
Prashad, Kym Ragusa, Suresht Renjen Bald, Andrew Ross, and Gayatri Spivak; my colleagues 
Rich Blint, Miabi Chatterji, Dawn Peterson, Sujani Reddy, Emily Thuma, and Manu Vimal-
assery; and the members of NYU’s Faculty Working Group on Diasporas—Aisha Khan, Lok 
Siu, Gayatri Gopinath, Jacqueline Nassy Brown, Juan Flores, Vanessa Agard Jones, Michael 
Birenbaum Quintero, and Anantha Sudhakar—for reading and commenting on earlier drafts 
of this chapter, and Gary Okihiro, Sohail Daulatzai, Junaid Rana, Jigna Desai, Sunaina Maira, 
Rajini Srikanth, and Gita Rajan for feedback on portions of the article which were delivered at 
the 2006 Association for Asian American Studies Conference in Atlanta, Georgia.


--- PAGE 235 ---
Black Routes to Islam228
and Bahadour were thus poised at the edge of Harlem, and it was not long before 
all three moved the short distance across the river into a neighborhood begin-
ning to crackle with possibility for people of color from all over the country and 
all over the world. Bahadour moved right into the center of Harlem’s growing 
black community to an apartment on West 133rd Street between Seventh and 
Lenox avenues, and married a young woman who had also come from the South, 
twenty-four-year-old Margaret Carree from Savannah, Georgia. On their mar-
riage certificate, Bahadour gave his age as twenty-three and his occupation as 
“actor” and both Margaret and Bahadour were officially classified as “colored.”
2
Rostom moved just two blocks away to an apartment on 135th Street and mar-
ried seventeen-year-old New York–born Pearl Pierce. Their 1924 marriage certifi-
cate also records husband and wife as “colored” and shows that Rostom had found 
a far less glamorous occupation than his younger brother; Rostom was working 
as a “fireman”—a term that, in this era, for workers of color, most likely referred 
to the job of shoveling coal and stoking furnaces in the basement boiler rooms 
of hotels and other large buildings.
3 Around this same time, sister Roheamon 
married Arthur Straker, a former boarder in their family’s Bronx apartment. In 
1930, according to census records, the two were living on St. Nicholas Avenue 
between 151st and 152nd streets. Their occupations were recorded as “housewife” 
and “laborer,” respectively, and both were racially classified as “negro.” Younger 
brother Bahadour was now living with them, along with his second wife, Thelma, 
who was listed as a twenty-six-year-old “negro” actress from T exas.
4
In many respects, the lives of these three siblings, as captured in the fragments 
of archival records, suggest stories typical of the early years of the Great Migra-
tion: a family that moves first from one part of the South to another, then thou-
sands of miles away to one of the great expanding cities of the North; young black 
women and men from Louisiana, Mississippi, Georgia, and T exas, converging, 
colliding, and coming of age in 1920s Harlem. What sets Roheamon, Rostom, 
and Bahadour apart from most of their contemporaries, however, was the fact 
that their father, Moksad Ali, was an Indian Muslim, most likely from East Ben-
gal, the region that would eventually become Bangladesh. According to census 
records, Moksad Ali came to New Orleans in the year 1888, worked as a street 
peddler, and, in 1894, married a local African American woman, Ella Blackman. 
The two had eight children in all: four in New Orleans and four more after mov-
ing to Mississippi.
5 Moksad drops out of the historical record at this point, but 
the archival traces of the couple’s movements—Moksad’s from India to Louisiana 
to Mississippi and Ella’s from Louisiana to Mississippi to New York—provide a 
glimpse of two lives in motion and two historical trajectories brought together in 
a single family. Roheamon, Rostom, Bahadour, and the other children of Moksad 
and Ella Ali indeed embody the overlap and the convergence of two separate dia-
sporas—African and South Asian—on U.S. soil.
What makes this particular family even more significant is the fact that their 
connections to both New Orleans and Harlem tie together two little-known his-
tories of South Asian Muslim migration to the United States and two sites of


--- PAGE 236 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 229
contact, interaction, and intermarriage. While much pathbreaking work has been 
done in the emerging scholarly field of South Asian American studies over the 
past three decades, there remains a gap in the historical narrative of South Asian 
immigration to the United States—a gap in which the stories of Moksad Ali, 
Ella Blackman, and their children lie largely hidden, along with those of hun-
dreds of other families and individuals. In one sense, this “gap” can be measured 
quantitatively as the roughly fifty-year period between the consolidation of U.S. 
anti-Asian immigration laws in 1917 and the “reopening” to Asian immigration 
brought about by the Hart-Celler Act of 1965. It has been largely assumed that 
during this period, South Asian immigration to the United States was reduced to 
a mere trickle of students and professionals. However, evidence from a range of 
archival sources shows that this was not the case—that, in fact, large numbers of 
working class Indian Muslim men were moving in and out of, and often settling 
in, U.S. port cities from the late nineteenth century through the 1910s and 1920s 
and that this continued and quite possibly increased during the high years of 
Asian exclusion from the 1920s through the 1940s. These migrants remain largely 
unaccounted for in the official statistics that we have used to determine the size, 
nature, and significance of South Asian immigration to the United States in the 
first half of the twentieth century.
But coming to terms with the gap in the historical narrative, I believe, goes 
beyond correcting dates and statistics. In a number of significant ways, this par-
ticular migration was qualitatively different from others that have previously 
defined the story of South Asians in the United States. First, the largest group of 
men among those who were settling in and around U.S. port cities during this 
period, like Moksad Ali, were Muslims from Bengal. Second, most of these men 
appear to have been part of a larger population of British maritime workers who 
were circulating between multiple metropolitan sites in Britain, the United States, 
the Middle East, and Asia, participating in both the global economic circuits of 
the British empire and the more localized urban and industrial economies in and 
around different port cities, moving on and off ships in different locations as 
opportunities shifted, legal regimes changed and onshore networks became more 
established. Third, in cities like New Orleans and New York, a significant number 
of Indian Muslim men ended up living, working, marrying, and starting fami-
lies within local working-class communities of color—among African Americans 
in New Orleans and among Puerto Ricans and African Americans in Harlem.
6
Finally, the children who emerged from this early history of South Asian migra-
tion and settlement in the United States—who constituted the first sizable “South 
Asian second generation” east of California—were not only beginning to appear 
over a century ago, but were, by and large, working-class, Muslim-descended, and 
racially mixed, and were growing up primarily in urban African American and 
Latino communities.
7
This chapter, then, is part of a larger project of historical recovery. In the pages 
that follow, I will first draw on archival sources and then upon interviews with the 
descendants of early South Asian immigrants to New York City. My work here


--- PAGE 237 ---
Black Routes to Islam230
is an effort to open up for reconsideration our understanding of the South Asian 
presence in the twentieth-century United States as well as our understanding of 
the relations between South Asians—and in particular, South Asian Muslims—
and other U.S. communities of color. Such a project must start from an under-
standing of cities like New Orleans and New York as unique sites of intersection 
and interaction, where the members of multiple migrations come to share the 
same spaces—buildings, blocks, neighborhoods, workplaces—and through the 
encounter with and negotiation of difference, generate new senses of individual 
and collective identity. This insight is in itself not new, nor is it new in consider-
ations of the relationship between Muslim immigrants and U.S. communities of 
color. In his groundbreaking Islam in the African American Experience, for exam-
ple, Richard Brent T urner focuses on the processes of “urbanization, migration, 
and immigration,” which he argues were key to the rise of the various African 
American Islamic movements of the twentieth century. T urner asserts that groups 
like the Moorish Scientists and the Nation of Islam embodied the creative, syn-
cretic, and heterodox responses of African Americans to the experience of uproot-
ing during the Great Migration and to the need for new self-definitions in urban 
contexts—New York, Chicago, Detroit, Pittsburgh—which were marked not 
only by continued oppression but by exposure to a multiplicity of new peoples 
and ideas.
8 In his treatment of the influence of South Asian and Arab Muslims 
in these processes, T urner looks primarily at individual figures whose impact was 
made in the arena of religious and political movements—from Marcus Garvey’s 
Sudanese-Egyptian adviser Duse Mohammed Ali to the Indian emissary Mufti 
Muhammad Sadiq, who introduced Ahmadiyya Islam into black communities 
throughout the cities of the North and Midwest.
What I hope to add here, even in preliminary form, is a consideration of 
another arena of encounter between Muslim immigrants and U.S. communities 
of color—one which was also taking shape over the first half of the twentieth cen-
tury but which stemmed from the settlement of groups of working-class Indian 
men in African American and Latino neighborhoods. This entails a shift in focus 
to a more local and personal register—to the daily exchanges across difference 
that occur in urban spaces shared by members of multiple migrant groups. Here 
we find experiences of encounter, interchange, and transformation that did not 
directly manifest themselves in political or religious movements. In the case of the 
Indian Muslims who were settling in places like New O rleans and New York, 
these experiences were, in fact, often accompanied by the muting of any strict 
or explicit Muslim religious identity. I believe a consideration of these histo-
ries and processes is equally important to an understanding of the presence 
of Islam, and of Muslims, in African American and Latino/a communities in the 
United States.
Following on the work of a range of scholars—Gilroy, Edwards, Prashad, 
Gopinath, Lewis
9—this project also seeks to contribute to a broadening in the 
conceptualization of “diaspora” as an analytic category. In presenting the histories 
that follow, I wish to shift (1) away from a linear, binary conception of diasporic


--- PAGE 238 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 231
movement (from “homeland” to “diaspora”) toward a conception diaspora as a 
set of movements and relations between multiple locations; (2) away from an 
overdetermining focus on “homeland” as either a place of origin or a place of real 
or imagined return toward an emphasis on the complex histories and dynamics 
of settlement in the places to which migrants have come; and (3) away from a 
singular emphasis on particular racial, ethnic, religious, or national groups “in 
diaspora” toward an understanding of diaspora itself as a process of encounter, 
intermixture, and the negotiation of difference across all these lines.
“Hindoostanis” in New Orleans
New Orleans is not typically the first place that comes to mind in relation to the 
history of South Asian immigration to the United States—but it is here where we 
find traces of one of the first settlements of South Asians in the country. From the 
1890s through the 1930s, census records show a growing and expanding commu-
nity of Indian men, primarily Bengali Muslims, living in what it records as “black” 
sections of New Orleans’ fourth and fifth wards.
10 When Moksad Ali settled in 
New Orleans in the closing decades of the nineteenth century, he was not alone. 
Alef Ally, for example, had arrived six years earlier than Moksad, in 1882. Eshrack 
Ali had arrived in 1893, Sofur and Majan Ali in 1895, and Solomon Mondul in 
1896. The 1900 U.S. Census recorded about a dozen Indian Muslim men living 
in New Orleans; all of them were listed as “peddlers” and the majority were living 
together at two adjacent addresses, 1420 and 1428 St. Louis Street, on a predomi-
nantly African American block just west of Congo Square and a short distance 
north of the French Market.
11 The earliest arrival of these men, Alef Ali, married 
a local black Creole woman, Minnie Lecompte, some time in the 1890s, and by 
the time of the 1900 census, was widowed with two young daughters, Viola and 
Mary Sadie Ali.
12 T en years later, when the 1910 census was conducted, Alef Ali 
was fifty years old and had been a resident of New Orleans for more than half his 
life, almost thirty years. Now, in addition to continuing work as a “merchant,” 
he was running 1428 St. Louis Street as a boarding house for more recent arrivals 
from India. Besides himself, his younger daughter Viola, and a sixty-five-year-old 
African American woman, Costina Gardner,
13 the census shows twenty-one other 
Indian men residing at Alef Ali’s address on St. Louis Street. These men ranged 
in age from twenty-two to sixty years old and most were recorded as having been 
in the United States for between one and five years.
14 Spread across several other 
New Orleans addresses, there were now, in 1910, around fifty other Indian men, 
most with clearly Muslim names and a number with names that suggested they 
were both Muslim and specifically Bengali. All of these men were engaged in 
the peddling of “dry goods,” “fancy goods,” “oriental goods,” or simply “retail 
merchandise.”
15
The 1920 and 1930 censuses record a continuing expansion of the popula-
tion of Indian Muslim men living in the fourth and fifth wards. By 1930, there 
were at least fifteen addresses, in a rough semi-circle to the west and north of


--- PAGE 239 ---
Black Routes to Islam232
Congo Square, where either groups of Indian men or mixed Indian-black families 
resided. While in previous censuses men from this population had been listed with 
the birthplaces “Hindoostan” or “India” and with a mother tongue of “Hindu,” 
“Hindoostani,” or, occasionally, “Arabian,” by the 1920 and 1930 censuses, these 
same men and others who had arrived more recently were now more often listed 
with “India” or “East India” as their place of birth and with a mother tongue of 
“Bengal,” “Bengali,” “Bangola,” or “Bengalese.”
16 Street peddling continued to be 
the most common form of work listed for these men, though by 1920 and 1930, 
a growing number were moving into more stable and settled work as merchants 
or shop owners.
By 1930, an increasing number of these men had also married and started 
families with local African American and Creole women. In some cases, the 
mixed-race sons of these families had followed their fathers into work as street 
peddlers. And quite significantly, a number of the men who were living in New 
Orleans in 1910 had now moved out of the Crescent City. In addition to Moksad 
Ali’s family, for example, a number of other Bengali men and their families took 
part in the Great Migration, ending up in places like Chicago and even moving 
westward from Louisiana to Los Angeles.
17 Equally significantly, by 1930, several 
of the men who were living and working as street peddlers in New Orleans in the 
first decade of the century had now moved their business out to other parts of the 
American South. So, for example, the 1930 census shows groups of Bengali men 
working as peddlers in Jacksonville, Florida, in Atlanta, Georgia, and in Chat-
tanooga and Memphis, T ennessee.
18
The settlement of working-class Indian men in and around New York City also 
gained momentum during this period, picking up during and immediately after 
World War I and continuing steadily over subsequent decades. By the 1920s and 
1930s, a wide range of sources—census records, city directories, marriage records, 
newspaper articles, and interviews with family members of early immigrants—
indicate that groups of Indian men, again predominantly Muslims from Bengal, 
were now living and working in the Lower East Side of Manhattan and in Central 
and East Harlem as well as in waterfront areas like Hell’s Kitchen and the Syrian 
Quarter and across the water in New Jersey. While the migration to New Orleans 
may have begun earlier, the migration to New York was larger and more exten-
sive. In New York, therefore, certain aspects of this migration become clearer. 
New York was also a particular kind of destination in the 1920s and 1930s. The 
working-class men who came to New York from Bengal and other parts of the 
subcontinent in these years were entering a city that had become a unique space 
of overlap between multiple diasporas. In neighborhoods like Harlem, these men 
lived alongside the increasing numbers of African Americans who were arriving 
from the U.S. South and black and Latino/a (im)migrants who were arriving 
from Puerto Rico, Jamaica, Cuba, and other parts of the Caribbean. I will draw 
out some of the contours of this intersection below. In New York, it also becomes 
increasingly evident that these men, and likely others settling in New Orleans and 
other U.S. port cities at this time, were part of a larger history of Indian labor


--- PAGE 240 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 233
on, and desertion from, British merchant marine vessels. At the same moment 
that Roheamon, Rostom, and Bahadour Ali were moving into Harlem as young 
people caught up in the Great Migration, there was a steady flow of Indian Mus-
lim men moving into Harlem after deserting British merchant ships. The migra-
tion of these men was likely more closely linked to that of their father Moksad’s 
in New Orleans and, indeed, to the migration of hundreds of other Indian men 
who were settling at this time in port cities like London, Glasgow, Southampton, 
and Hull. Theirs was a migration of Indian laborers escaping from the circuits of 
British imperial trade.
Jumping Ship
During the first two decades of the century, there had already been a steady flow 
of Indian merchant sailors moving in and out of New York port areas. These 
men typically came in on ships that carried cargo like jute, hemp, and cotton 
from Calcutta and Bombay or which plied the shorter and more heavily traveled 
passenger and trade routes between New York and various English and Scottish 
ports. Indian sailors had been used on British merchant vessels since the eigh-
teenth century, but as Tabili, Visram, Balachandran, and others have noted,
19 a 
major change occurred in the latter half of the nineteenth century with the advent 
of steam navigation and the opening of the Suez Canal. The move to the use of 
steamships initiated the industrialization of maritime work, creating, as Visram 
puts it, “totally new categories of labour in the engine room, those of [the] fire-
men and trimmers needed to stoke the furnaces.”
20 British shipping lines made 
use of the large pools of colonial labor available to them in India, Egypt, Yemen, 
Somalia, and elsewhere to do these jobs, which involved working below deck in 
intense heat for hours and days at a time. In the racist logic of the British shipping 
companies and indeed the British government, these men were considered natu-
rally suited to such work because they came from a “tropical” climate. Of course, 
there were also clear economic advantages to using a colonized work force and, 
ultimately, the British used these sailors both below and above deck—not just as 
firemen and trimmers but as cooks, stewards, and servants.
21 The largest group of 
colonial maritime workers on British ships were Indians, who, by the 1920s com-
prised roughly 25 percent of the British maritime work force.
22 The vast majority 
of these Indian sailors were Muslim and the largest regional group was Bengali, 
usually hailing from rural inland regions such as Sylhet and Noakhali. These men 
would sign on from the port city of Calcutta and then circulate globally almost 
everywhere the British traded goods.
Significant numbers of Indian merchant sailors deserted their ships in Brit-
ish ports during the first decades of the twentieth century—a phenomenon that 
became the basis for some of the earliest communities of Indians in Britain.
23
Most of the existing scholarly work on Indian merchant marine desertion has 
focused on this British context. But what is striking about the British scholar-
ship is how closely it describes the contours of the working-class Indian Muslim


--- PAGE 241 ---
Black Routes to Islam234
communities that were beginning to emerge in places like New Orleans and New 
York. Peddling, for example, was one of the first and most widespread onshore 
occupations for Indian maritime workers who had jumped ship in Britain. While 
this began in the nineteenth century, by the 1920s and 1930s, there were Indian 
ex-sailors working as peddlers of clothes, silks, perfumes, and household goods in 
street markets and door-to-door all over England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales.
24
From World War I onward, it was also common for escaped Indian seamen to 
find employment in factories onshore, where the work was sometimes similar to 
what they did on steamships—firing and stoking furnaces—but in a less captive 
environment, with marginally better and more regular wages.
25
In virtually every major British port, boardinghouses were also established by 
some of the earliest Indian sailors to arrive and desert. The proprietors of these 
boardinghouses played a key role in helping sailors find work, navigate the pro-
cess of establishing legal residence, and adjust to life onshore.
26 Some of the first 
Indian restaurants and cafes in Britain were established by Sylheti sailors who 
had jumped ship and these became spaces, according to Visram, “where news 
of jobs, friends, and family were exchanged” and where networks began to take 
shape.
27 Many of the Indian men who chose to stay in England after jumping ship 
also married English women from the working-class neighborhoods where they 
settled. These women engaged in a range of work—from domestic and reproduc-
tive labor to their work as cultural and literal translators—which facilitated the 
assimilation of Indian men into local economies and communities. For those men 
who were proprietors of the boardinghouses and restaurants that became early 
spaces of community formation, the labor of their wives was absolutely crucial. 
“As partners,” Visram writes, these women, “helped to run [their] businesses and 
keep accounts” as well as navigating legal paperwork and, when necessary, dealing 
with police and municipal officials.
28
The evidence in both New Orleans and New York indicates that these patterns 
of settlement were not in fact limited to Britain but were occurring simultane-
ously across the Atlantic in U.S. ports. New Orleans census records, for example, 
show most of the same dynamics at work: peddling as a key means of economic 
support; marriages between Indian men and local working-class women; a board-
inghouse run by one of the earliest Bengali settlers, Alef Ali, and the presence 
of an older African American woman living with Alef Ali, who quite likely was 
involved in the labor of running his boardinghouse and looking after his daugh-
ter. In New York, the picture we get is even fuller and the ties to the maritime 
trade more explicit. A series of news reports, deportation cases, and labor disputes 
from the early 1920s point to a growing presence of Indian merchant marine 
deserters who were either seeking out or being recruited into factory work in New 
York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. Census records from 1920 and 1930 show 
groups of Indian Muslim men working in silk-dying shops in Paterson, New 
Jersey,
29 and in the steel works in Lackawanna, New York, where they worked 
the furnaces as “firemen.”30 On the shop floor, these men worked alongside other 
immigrant laborers—Arab, Greek, Italian, and Eastern European workers, among


--- PAGE 242 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 235
others—and were also thrust into the racial politics of American labor, being used 
as strikebreakers alongside African American and Chinese workers.31
We also get a clearer picture of the lives that these men were building for 
themselves in New York, and, here again, boardinghouses and restaurants played 
a crucial role. Some New York City boardinghouses were conduits channeling 
Indian men into factory work, while others connected them to day labor and 
restaurant work. The 1930 census, for example, shows almost fifty Indian men 
living together in two adjacent buildings on Eighth Avenue around Forty-seventh 
Street; about half have given their occupation as simply “Laborer—Odd Jobs” 
and a handful of others list their occupation as either a “Seaman,” “Deck Stew-
ard,” “Waiter,” or “Cook” on steamships. Interspersed with these men, about 
a dozen others list occupations connected to restaurants—there is one restau-
rant owner, one owner of a “tea garden,” six waiters, two busboys, two cooks, a 
counterman, and a dishwasher.
32 This census record is suggestive both because 
it implies another continuity between maritime and onshore occupations—in 
this case, ship’s cooks and stewards becoming cooks and waiters onshore—and 
because the Eighth Avenue boarding house was itself located just blocks away 
from the Ceylon Restaurant and the Ceylon India Inn, two of the first Indian 
restaurants in the city, which were important gathering places for the small but 
growing Indian community in New York in the 1910s through 1930s and hubs 
of Indian nationalist activity.
33
A New York Community
Ibrahim Choudry, one of the key figures among the group of Bengali Muslim 
men who settled in Harlem, appears to have made a transition from an involve-
ment in Indian nationalism to a much deeper engagement with local community 
building. Through his story, we can track the movement of Indian Muslim men 
from waterfront areas into working-class residential neighborhoods in the city. 
Choudry had been a student activist in East Bengal in the early 1920s, where he 
had been involved in the pan-Islamic Khilafat movement at the time of its align-
ment with the movement for Indian independence. Because of these activities, 
he had to flee the subcontinent, and after working his way across to the United 
States on a merchant marine vessel, jumped ship in New York.
34 Some time in the 
mid-1930s, Choudry moved to East Harlem, where he married a Puerto Rican 
woman from the neighborhood and had two children. By the 1940s, he was at the 
center of a growing Bengali Muslim community in Harlem, and while he did not 
run a boardinghouse per se, he played many of the roles that boardinghouse keep-
ers had taken on in other locations. Choudry’s son Noor remembers his father 
always rushing off to someone in the community who needed help dealing with 
immigration officials, securing housing, writing letters, filling out forms. “That 
particular group,” says Noor Chowdry, “were very, very tight. If they called and 
they needed something, my dad was boom, gone, now. He would say, son, there’s 
a can of soup in [the cupboard] . . . I gotta go.”
35


--- PAGE 243 ---
Black Routes to Islam236
Such a role was formalized in 1943, when Ibrahim Choudry became the first 
manager of New York’s British Merchant Sailor’s Club for Indian Seamen. The 
club, which occupied the two upper floors of a four-story building at 100 West 
38th Street, included a small prayer room, a recreation room, and a mess hall 
where visiting seamen could get fresh Indian meals, served three times a day by a 
staff cook, Secunder Meah.
36 The records of the Indian Seamen’s Club give us a 
sense of both the sheer number of Indian sailors going in and out of New York by 
the 1940s and the range of work Ibrahim Choudry was doing among this popula-
tion. By the end of its first year, the club had 66,221 visits by Indian seamen and 
served 198,200 meals. Choudry himself regularly went out to the docks to meet 
with incoming Indian crews and bring them in groups by city bus to the midtown 
club. He oversaw weekly prayer meetings, “special parties . . . on Mohammedan 
festivals . . . general recitations and songs, with drum accompaniment on Satur-
days [with] local residents participating . . . [and f]ilm shows three nights a week” 
as well as arranging “excursions to the Bronx Zoo and Coney Island,” tickets to 
the theater, and “bi-weekly English lessons.” Choudry also took dictation in his 
office from nonliterate seamen who wanted to send letters back home, and he 
arranged visits for incoming sailors “to [the] homes of local Indian residents.”
37
Perhaps what is most striking in the records of the British Merchant Sailor’s 
Club for Indian Seamen is the acknowledgment of both a large Indian seafaring 
population and a smaller “resident” Indian population in New York, of which 
men like Ibrahim Choudry, Secunder Meah, and others listed as employees of the 
club—Sekunder Yassim, Salim Darwood, Wahed Ali—were all themselves a part. 
This “resident” community was taking shape over the course of the 1920s and 
1930s in two main locations—the Lower East Side and Harlem. Census records 
from 1930 show clusters of Indian Muslim men in both locations. Downtown, 
fifteen men ranging in age from nineteen to thirty-one years old were living at 
three addresses within a few blocks of each other in the Lower East Side—127 
Eldridge Street, 99 Suffolk Street, and 42 Rivington Street—working in restau-
rants and living among Jewish, Italian, Greek, and T urkish immigrants.
38 Uptown 
at the same time, census records show more than sixty-five Indian men living at 
roughly forty-five different addresses throughout Harlem—in small groups, alone 
as boarders, or with their African American or Puerto Rican wives. Again, most 
of these men had recognizably Muslim names, were in their twenties, and were 
working as “laborers” or as hotel and restaurant workers. Here they were living 
primarily among immigrants from Puerto Rico, the British West Indies, and Italy, 
and among African Americans from the U.S. South.
39 There is some indication 
that the Indian men who were initially living on the Lower East Side were moving 
over time up to Harlem. Habib Ullah, a friend of Ibrahim Choudry, for example, 
had lived on the Lower East Side when he first arrived in New York in the 1920s 
after deserting from a ship in Boston. Some time in the 1930s, Ullah moved 
straight up the East Side subway line to 102nd Street and Lexington Avenue, 
where he met and married his first wife, Victoria Echevarria, a young woman who 
had recently migrated to Spanish Harlem from Puerto Rico.


--- PAGE 244 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 237
Marriages between Indian men and Latina and African American women were 
occurring in both the Lower East Side and Harlem, but appear more frequent 
uptown, where a more settled community was coalescing in the 1930s. New York 
City marriage records from the late 1920s through the 1930s show a whole range 
of these unions: in 1926, Nawab Ali, a twenty-four-year-old laundry worker from 
Calcutta living at 222 East 100th Street married Frances Santos, an eighteen-
year-old from Puerto Rico; in 1930, twenty-three-year-old Wohad Ali, another 
Indian laundry worker living on East 100th Street, married Maria Louisa Rivera, 
a nineteen-year-old from Vega Baja, Puerto Rico; in 1934, Nabob Ali, a twenty-
eight-year-old cook from Calcutta, India, living on East 110th Street, married 
twenty-two-year-old Maria Cleophe Jusino from Sabana Grande, Puerto Rico; in 
1937, Eleman Miah, a twenty-seven-year-old “cook’s helper” from Calcutta living 
on West 112th Street married twenty-two-year-old Emma Douglass, a “colored” 
woman from Indianapolis.
40 Noor Chowdry and Habib Ullah, Jr., describe their 
fathers’ marriages as part of a larger process in which Harlem was becoming home 
to them—these were the women, in other words, with whom Indian men came 
in contact on a daily basis after they settled uptown, the women they got to know 
in their buildings, on their blocks, and in their neighborhoods. This is echoed in 
the marriage records from this time, in which bride and groom often appear to 
have been living within a two to three block radius of each other. There were also 
spaces beyond their immediate blocks where Indian men were interacting socially 
with local Latino/a and African American men and women. Ibrahim Choudry’s 
younger brother Mawsood describes going with his Bengali friends to parties in 
Puerto Rican neighborhoods in the Bronx,
41 and Alaudin Ullah, Habib Ullah’s 
youngest son, recounts family stories about the parties his father and friends threw 
in rented halls in Spanish Harlem, where Indian food mixed with Puerto Rican and 
Cuban music.
42 These are spaces where longer-term relationships may have begun. 
At the same time, Alaudin and Habib Ullah, Jr., both suspect that naturalization 
played a role in some of these marriages—that their father’s circle wanted to marry 
women whose status would allow them to stay in the United States.
43
Bengali Harlem
It is difficult to know exactly how many Indian Muslim men lived with Latina 
and African American women in Harlem during this period, or, for that matter, 
how many chose to live with other men in a variety of domestic settings, from 
sailors’ boardinghouses to shared apartments and homes. There were presum-
ably a number of ex-seamen who lived with and even started families with local 
women but who were never officially married, and, indeed, given their legal status 
after the 1917 Immigration Act, most of the ex-seafaring population would have 
felt the imperative to remain out of view of local officials, and thus, ultimately, 
out of the archival records. Yet interviews with the children of early twentieth-
century Indian, Latina, and African American migrants to New York City—a 
“second generation” who are now in their sixties and seventies—suggest that by


--- PAGE 245 ---
Black Routes to Islam238
the 1940s and 1950s, a community had quietly taken shape in the New York 
area, with Harlem as its apparent center of gravity. This group included roughly 
100 to 150 Muslim men, predominantly from those areas of East Bengal, which, 
after the partition of the subcontinent in 1947, became East Pakistan, as well as 
almost an equal number of Latina and African American women and a growing 
number of U.S.-born mixed-race children. While the men of this community 
were connected to each other through preexisting ties of kinship, language, labor, 
region, and religion, their daily lives and those of their families, neighbors, and 
the others with whom they came in regular contact were such that all were forced 
to move beyond the realm of what had previously been familiar to them and to 
create new familiarities and new forms of kinship specific to the places in which 
they settled. The stories of the second generation give us a glimpse of these pro-
cesses by providing a sense of the different spaces that their parents created and 
adopted in 1940s through 1960s New York and of the lives which they forged in 
and through these spaces.
As in Britain, restaurants became some of the primary locations in which Indian 
Muslim ex-seamen both reconstituted their ties with one another and interacted 
on a daily basis with members of other communities. By the 1940s, an increasing 
number of Bengali men were opening Indian restaurants either in Harlem, close 
to where they lived, or, if they could afford it, in the midtown theater district. For 
their proprietors, restaurants were a means of escaping and moving on from the 
types of jobs they had labored at since jumping ship—as doormen, laundrymen, 
line cooks, street vendors, and factory workers. This was the case, for example, for 
Habib Ullah, who, after years of work as a dishwasher in the kitchens of hotels, 
opened the Bengal Garden Restaurant at 144 West 48th Street with the finan-
cial backing of Ibrahim Choudry and another Bengali friend who had saved up 
$20,000 selling hotdogs from a pushcart on 110th Street.
44 The Bengal Garden 
was jointly operated by Victoria and Habib Ullah—Victoria worked the register 
and did the books while Habib cooked in the kitchen—and was a space marked 
by its heterogeneity. On a day-to-day basis, it catered to a non-South Asian crowd 
of midtown office workers and evening theatergoers. Often, the first person these 
customers encountered upon arrival at the Bengal Garden was a Puerto Rican 
woman—Victoria Ullah. On key occasions, the restaurant transformed into a 
meeting place, filling up with Muslim ex-seamen from the subcontinent, brought 
together under the banner of an organization cofounded by Ibrahim Choudry in 
1947: the Pakistan League of America. Beginning in the late 1940s, many of the 
Pakistan League’s banquets and special events were held at the restaurant, includ-
ing communal celebrations of Eid and public discussions of U.S. immigration 
policy and events on the subcontinent with invited guests that included U.S. 
Senator William Langer and the writer Hans Stefan Santesson.
45
The restaurants which Bengali ex-sailors opened up in Harlem during in 
the 1940s through 1960s were, in some ways, even more complex social spaces 
because of their groundedness in local communities—because, in other words, 
they developed into places where the multiple populations who shared the larger


--- PAGE 246 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 239
neighborhood of Harlem spent time and came in contact with one another on a 
daily basis. These restaurants included Said Ali’s on East 109th Street, Ameer’s on 
West 127th Street, Eshad Ali’s, also known as the Bombay India Restaurant, on 
West 125th Street between Morningside and Amsterdam avenues, and another 
unnamed restaurant in the basement of a building in the East 100s. As was the 
case with the Bengal Garden, the proprietors often involved family members in 
the daily operation of these establishments, so their African American and Latina 
wives and mixed-race children were often the ones greeting and serving customers. 
Said Ali, for example, ran his East Harlem restaurant with the help of his African 
American wife and two sons, while Eshad Ali’s wife Mamie operated the Bombay 
India Restaurant on 125th Street for many years after her husband’s death.
These restaurants were, of course, important spaces for those men from the 
subcontinent who had settled in Harlem. They could come to places like Said 
Ali’s to eat familiar food, converse in Bengali, and discuss events that were unfold-
ing “back home.” At the same time, it is apparent from a number of sources 
that these Indian restaurants became integrated into the lives of Harlem’s African 
American residents. Miriam Christian, a community activist who came to Harlem 
in the 1950s and ultimately wrote for the New York Amsterdam News, recalled 
fondly in a 1996 interview that in the mid-1960s, she and her circle—which 
included other black journalists, artists, organizers, and local politicians—used to 
have special occasions catered by one of the neighborhood’s Indian restaurants.
46
In an interview shortly before his death, the poet and East Harlem resident Sekou 
Sundiata similarly described frequent visits to “Ali’s place” on 109th Street in the 
late 1960s and early 1970s, where he remembered offering one of Said Ali’s sons 
a sympathetic ear as he struggled with the prospect of taking on his father’s busi-
ness.
47 Miles Davis is said to have regularly patronized one of the neighborhood’s 
Indian establishments, most likely the Bombay India Restaurant on 125th Street, 
where percussionist James Mtume claims Davis soaked in the sounds of the music 
the proprietor played.
48 But perhaps most significantly, since these were some 
of the earliest halal restaurants in Harlem, they became spaces where Bengali 
and African American Muslims frequently met and interacted. Ameer’s on 127th 
Street, for example, became a regular spot for both groups; here, according to 
stories passed down to Habib Ullah’s son Alaudin, immigrant Muslims engaged 
in discussion and debate with members of Malcolm X’s Organization of African 
American Unity about their differing practices and interpretations of Islam.
49
Beyond these restaurants, the neighborhood of Harlem itself—or more accu-
rately the neighborhoods that comprised Harlem—were spaces of ongoing inter-
action and exchange between Bengali Muslim immigrants and their African 
American and Latino/a neighbors, friends, and family members. Half-brothers 
Alaudin and Habib Ullah, Jr., provide a vivid picture of their father Habib, Sr.’s 
relationship to his adopted neighborhood of Spanish Harlem. “It was bi-cultural,” 
says Habib, Jr., who was born in 1942 and lived with his father on East 102nd 
Street after his mother Victoria died ten years later, “[My father’s] friends were 
basically Indian and Spanish—and he got along well equally with both groups.”
50


--- PAGE 247 ---
Black Routes to Islam240
Alaudin, whose childhood memories date from the early 1970s, describes accom-
panying his father on his rounds through the neighborhood, where he would 
engage in “the art of conversation”—either with his Bengali friends who con-
gregated at an Indian-owned jewelry store on East 103rd Street, with his Puerto 
Rican neighbors, or with the proprietors of the various shops he visited: “It 
seemed like he used to venture [out] a lot by foot because I remember when I was 
really young, maybe four or five years old, I would hold his hand and we would go 
from store to store. Like we’d go to Paul’s place, the jewelry store, we’d go to Said 
Ali’s restaurant on 109th, and he would just [talk to people]—it was like the art of 
conversation for him is what he thrived on, what he loved.”
51 Habib, Jr., describes 
his own experience, from the early 1950s, of going with his father to buy food and 
supplies on Saturdays at Spanish Harlem’s huge covered market, La Marqueta:
In those days, it went from 110th Street up to 116 Street. We would walk through 
the whole thing and Pop would have his certain stalls that he would go to. And there 
was a botanica there, and Pop would go there and . . . the lady behind the counter 
knew him. And this is how he made his own curry, because he would go there and 
he would say “give me a pound of that, give me a pound of this, give me a pound of 
that” . . . he knew the spices. And she would put it in, mix it up for him, and that 
was his own curry. That’s why Pop’s curry was always distinct.
52
Habib Ullah, Sr.’s walks through East Harlem—which comprised a routine 
that he repeated day after day in one variation or another over the course of 
thirty years—are significant not merely because they were part of the process by 
which he made a home out of the physical space of his adopted neighborhood. 
His circuits through Spanish Harlem were also the means by which he forged and 
maintained a new set of human relationships—often across differences of race, 
ethnicity, language, religion, and so on—in this new home.
Most of the second generation grew up navigating this kind of multiplic-
ity within the very context of their immediate and extended families. Ibrahim 
Choudry’s son Noor, whose mother was born in Cuba to Puerto Rican parents 
who later settled in Spanish Harlem, spent his childhood moving between a series 
of multiracial spaces. For the first few years of his childhood, he lived with his 
mother and maternal grandmother in East Harlem, speaking only Spanish until 
the age of six. Later he lived with his Bengali uncle, African American aunt, and 
their college-age son Hassan in Belleville, New Jersey. Here, Noor says, he fell in 
love with jazz music after spending hours listening to his cousin play saxophone: 
“I very seldom even saw him. I heard him and when the door was closed we were 
told just leave—don’t bother him. By the night time he got out of there, you 
know, doing his thing. I remember he played at clubs at night—jazz clubs in 
the city. And he just got me to the point where I said ‘I want to play the sax like 
him.’”
53 Noor would also spend time with his father’s friend Abdul, who had mar-
ried and settled in another African American community in New Jersey and had a 
son Noor’s age. Abdul ran a small business making perfumes and lotions which he 
sold door to door—an echo of the earliest Bengali settlers in New Orleans—and


--- PAGE 248 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 241
Noor and Abdul’s son often accompanied the father on his own routine circuits 
through working-class black neighborhoods, where, moving from one home to 
the next, he would meet with his regular customers and make his sales.
54
Noor Chowdry’s descriptions of the extended family on his father’s side give us 
a sense of the larger multiracial community that had taken shape by the 1950s. 
His father and his friend Habib had married Puerto Rican women from Spanish 
Harlem, two of his father’s cousins had married African American women in New 
Jersey, and his father’s younger brother had married an English woman during a 
two-year stay in London. When these men and women gathered for Thanksgiv-
ing each year at Noor’s uncle Idris’s home in Montclair, New Jersey, they brought 
together a group of more than a dozen American-born cousins who were Bengali 
and Puerto Rican, Bengali and African American, Bengali and white, who grew 
up, among other things, hearing multiple languages and eating multiple kinds 
of home-food, and who were exposed through different family members both to 
Islam and various strains of Christianity. This was a microcosm of a community 
that, by the 1950s and 1960s, Noor Chowdry and Habib Ullah, Jr., estimate 
numbered somewhere between four and five hundred men, women, and chil-
dren.
55 By this time, Ibrahim Choudry and others had started the yearly tradition 
of a group boat trip from Battery Park up the East River to Rye Beach Playland. “I 
remember standing on line,” says Ullah, “there were literally hundreds of people 
out there waiting to get on that boat . . . Bengali, Indian, Pakistani” men, their 
Latina and African American wives, and all their children. “There was a big picnic 
and there was a band on the boat and they would dance . . . [T]his was how they 
renewed their bonds as a community.”
56
The relationship of this large mixed community to Islam appears to have been 
a varied and complicated one. On the one hand, according to Habib Ullah, Jr., 
a lot of his father’s friends relaxed their religious observances after coming to 
New York. For these men, Islam consisted largely of the maintenance of dietary 
strictures, the observance of the yearly Ramadan fast, and the celebration of Eid 
at the end of fasting. Some of the Latina and African American women who were 
part of this community converted to Islam. Others did not convert but partici-
pated in prayers on occasions like Eid. Still others appear to have been vocally 
opposed to aspects of Islamic practice they believed subordinated women. When 
it came to the young people of this community, their relationship to Islam largely 
depended on their fathers. Habib Ullah, Sr., for example, de-emphasized both 
Islam and the Bengali language in bringing up his children because he wanted 
them to “fit in and become American.” Significantly, “fitting in” was, in this case, 
less of an assimilation into white American society than one into the immediate 
neighborhood of Spanish Harlem.
57 But there were other Bengali men, such as 
Ibrahim Choudry, who had a more active and explicit religious life. According to 
Noor Chowdry, his father often played the role of an imam in the earlier years of 
the community, leading prayers and officiating at religious events. Later, he was 
involved in the formation and activities of a series of religious and cultural orga-
nizations; in addition to cofounding the Pakistan League of America in the late


--- PAGE 249 ---
Black Routes to Islam242
1940s, Ibrahim Choudry was also secretary of the Islamic Council of New York 
and an active member of a citywide interfaith organization in the 1950s, and in 
the early 1970s, helped found one of New York City’s first mosques, on Second 
Avenue and T enth Street.
58 Not surprisingly then, Choudry tried to instill in his 
son the importance of daily observance. Noor took in what his father taught him 
but recalls his ambivalence about some of the experiences that this observance 
entailed—such as praying on the side of the highway with his father and other 
members of the community during long road trips: “He’d ask me to do the call to 
prayer, and I’d do it. You know, you see all these cars slowing down and looking 
at you while everybody’s praying. But then you just get back on the bus and 
keep going.”
59
Noor Chowdry and other members of the second generation are more enthu-
siastic in describing the Pakistan League’s yearly Eid celebrations, which brought 
out a larger, more diverse group and were as much social as religious events. While 
the Pakistan League played multiple roles—social, political, and religious—these 
yearly Eid celebrations were perhaps its most important contribution to the life 
and coherence of a larger community. These events were initially held at the 
league’s offices in the Lower East Side and then, as they got larger, in a series of 
banquet halls in the midtown hotels where its members were employed as kitchen 
workers and doormen. By the1950s and 1960s, the Pakistan League’s Eid celebra-
tions brought out hundreds of people—as with the boat rides, primarily Bengali 
men, their Latina and African American wives, and their children. “In the early 
days, when I was younger,” remembers Chowdry,
we’d go to the Eids and there’d have to be three or four hundred people maybe even 
more. The men would get there earlier and they’d have to do a lot of praying and 
it seemed like there were at least a hundred, hundred-and-fifty men only. And after 
that it came time to have the big feast and then the women would come, so then it 
was wall to wall people . . . And I can remember at one time they had twelve rows 
of tables, and these guys would come marching out of the kitchen—had to be eight 
or nine of them with everything, putting it on the table, family style—the rice, the 
bowls of chicken, and stuff like that, everything. If you went home hungry it was 
your own fault. Eid was always a great celebration . . . it was a time when everybody 
was joyful.
60
T o be sure, the life of this community was not always so joyful, nor was it with-
out significant conflicts, strains, and fissures. These included failed marriages, 
men who abdicated care of their children, business partnerships that went sour, 
and members of the community—Bengali, Puerto Rican, African American, and 
mixed—who left Harlem as soon as they were in a financial position to do so, 
gradually weakening what was once a collective center of gravity.
The Pakistan League of America’s Eid celebrations are, however, a window 
into a different kind of Muslim presence within twentieth-century U.S. com-
munities of color—different, for example, from the histories of both Ahmadiyya 
communities and the Nation of Islam. The Pakistan League itself is perhaps most


--- PAGE 250 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 243
interesting for all the complexity, multiplicity, and localized dynamics that existed 
just beneath the surface of its deceptively narrow invocation of the nation of Paki-
stan. The organization was founded by men who, when they came to the United 
States in the 1920s and 1930s had been Indians—albeit subjects of a colonized, 
British-controlled India—and then had stayed in the United States. Because they 
came from Muslim majority regions of British India, these men became “Paki-
stani” in 1947—but in absentia, when their home regions were included in the 
newly formed Pakistan.
61 Since the majority of the Pakistan League’s members 
were Bengali—and thus specifically “East Pakistani”—they would again change 
their national identity in absentia when East Pakistan gained its independence 
and became Bangladesh in 1971. For these men, the yearly Eid celebrations were 
a means of maintaining a connection to the lives they had once lived in a place 
that had gone through vast transformations in their absence and a way of carry-
ing forward past cultural and religious practices into a new social and national 
context. At the same time, these Eid celebrations brought out a community that 
included more African American and Puerto Rican women and U.S.-born mixed-
race children than Muslim men with roots in the new nation of Pakistan. For 
these women and children, Eid presented one of the few formalized settings in 
which they could gain some access to their husbands’ and fathers’ past worlds. 
But this was not ultimately a form of ethnic consolidation, a closing in around 
a particular identity or set of practices passed on by the men of the community. 
For the women and children, these events were part of lives that accommodated, 
navigated, and opened up to multiplicity. Through its Eid celebrations, in other 
words, the Pakistan League played the role of creating and sustaining a multi-
racial, -ethnic, -religious, -linguistic, and -generational community—one that 
arguably had more to do with New York City than with the nation which gave 
the organization its name.
However, this unique mixed community—which was at once Bengali, Puerto 
Rican, and African American—slowly dissipated after the generation of Muslim 
immigrant men who gave rise to it began to pass away. Ironically, this generation’s 
preexisting bonds and shared experiences of migration, and their efforts to main-
tain a connection both with each other and with elements of their shared pasts, 
may have been the glue which held together something that went far beyond 
themselves—and, at the same time, the specificity of these connections may have 
been the reason that the larger community did not outlast the men around whom 
it formed. The Hart-Celler Immigration Act of 1965, which favored profession-
als and allowed for the immigration and reunification of entire families from the 
subcontinent, meant that a larger, wealthier suburban South Asian community 
quickly overshadowed those who were already here. This was a community that 
was more inclined, and in more of a position, to become insular, and one that 
largely played the role of upholding, rather than transgressing, the existing racial 
divisions of the United States. This change in the community is openly lamented 
by some of those who lived through the earlier and lesser known history of South 
Asians in the United States. “There was a different atmosphere, a differentattitude,


--- PAGE 251 ---
Black Routes to Islam244
a different way of life in those days,” says Habib Ullah, Jr. “And I think its sad. 
T o a certain extent I understand keeping your culture, and I think my father’s 
generation did to a great extent. But now [South Asians] . . . keep their culture 
and put a wall around what is around them, and I think that’s a disservice to the 
coming generations.”
62
A Photograph
Alaudin Ullah, Habib Ullah, Sr.’s younger son and a lifelong resident of Span-
ish Harlem, remembers a photograph that he saw as a child, in the early 1970s, 
perhaps in the apartment of Ibrahim Choudry. The image is of Choudry and 
Malcolm X standing together amidst a group of other African American and 
South Asian Muslims.
63 Ullah has been trying, for years, to locate this photo-
graph, which may now simply be a fading memory of a snapshot that no longer 
exists. The histories that I have begun to lay out here, which exist in stories, 
memories, and scattered archives, have also been fading and disappearing. But the 
significance of these histories is multiple. On the one hand, they raise a series of 
productive questions about diaspora: What does it mean that the first South Asian 
“second generation” in the United States was everywhere racially mixed: Punjabi 
and Mexican in California,
64 Bengali and African American in New Orleans, and 
Bengali, African American, and Puerto Rican in New York? What would it mean 
to consider the Latina and African American women who married Indian Muslim 
immigrants in New York and New Orleans as part of the South Asian diaspora? 
What would it mean to consider these escaped Indian maritime workers as part 
of the black diaspora? How do we speak of the mixed second generation in a 
way that sees them not as anomalous, exceptional, or inauthentic but rather as 
complex embodiments of equally complex intersections of history? These and 
other scholarly questions, however, capture only part of what is important here. 
Alaudin Ullah’s quest to find the lost photograph of Ibrahim Choudry and Mal-
colm X is driven by more than the image’s ability to link his father’s community 
to an iconic figure of African American Islam and liberatory political change. For 
Ullah, this image represents a past of shared everyday lives of which his father was 
a part—and a sense of possibility that is still connected to this past. As important 
as it is to Alaudin Ullah that he find the lost photograph, it seems crucial for us to 
understand this possibility of interracial community and solidarity that the image 
represents to him, and which was realized, however momentarily, in the lives of a 
now disappearing generation.
Notes
  The term “overlapping diasporas” is drawn here from Earl Lewis’s article “T o T urn as on 
a Pivot: Writing African Americans into a History of Overlapping Diasporas,” American
Historical Review 100 (June 1995): 765–87. Lewis employed the term to describe the 
meeting of culturally and linguistically different African populations in the context of 
plantation slavery in the U.S. South and to explore the processes by which these multiple


--- PAGE 252 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 245
African groups and later their descendents in Northern cities came to forge a more sin-
gular African American community/identity/culture. I use the term to explore a different 
context: that of the neighborhoods, buildings and other spaces where migrant popula-
tions from multiple continents—Asia, Africa, the Americas, and Europe—met and inter-
mingled in the early twentieth-century United States. As Juan Flores, Rich Blint, Michael 
Quintero, and others have pointed out in their readings of earlier versions of this chapter, 
such a shift away from Lewis’s original use of the term must account for the ways different 
(im)migrant groups who share the same spaces are differently racialized and thus come 
to have different relationships and access to power. With this in mind, it is important to 
specify here that in the press and in government documents of this era, the racialization 
of working-class Indian immigrants shifted between an identification of these men with 
African Americans (evidenced by their classification as “black,” “negro,” or “colored” in a 
variety of official and popular sources) and an identification with other legally excluded 
Asian immigrant populations (evidenced by their classification and description at other 
times as “Asiatics,” “Hindoos/Hindus,” or “aliens”). In both cases, their access to power 
and social mobility was severely limited by their racialization and criminalization (as “ille-
gal” immigrants). I will be exploring these processes in greater detail in future work; here, 
I use the term “overlapping diasporas” as part of an effort to think through the experiences 
of encounter and transformation that occur among and between different migrant groups 
in diaspora. I also follow on Brent Hayes Edwards’s insistence, in considering the move-
ments and encounters of black artists, intellectuals, and political figures in 1920s Paris, 
that “[i]f diaspora is an appropriate term to describe these circuits, it is partly because 
it . . . forces us to understand a context like Paris as multiple, as heterogeneous, in a man-
ner that makes it impossible to consider any single history of migration and exile without 
considering ‘overlapping diasporas’—simultaneous, transnational patterns that influence 
one another.” Brent Hayes Edwards, “The Shadow of Shadows,” positions: east asia cultures 
critique 11, no. 1 (2003): 13.
 1. United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (hereafter, USDC/BC), 
U.S. Census, 1900: Population Schedule, New Orleans, Louisiana, Orleans Parish, 9th 
Precinct, Ward 11, Supervisor’s District 1, Enumeration District No. 115, Sheet No. 18. 
USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1920: Population Schedule, Bronx, New York, Supervisor’s Dis-
trict 6, Enumeration District No. 271, Sheet No. 7.
 2. New York City Municipal Archives (hereafter, NYCMA), State of New York Certificate and
Record of Marriage, August 20, 1923, Certificate No. 26075.
 3. NYCMA, Certificate and Record of Marriage, October 29, 1924, Certificate No. 33040.
 4. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, New York, Ward AD21, Block L, 
Enumeration District No. 31-1019, Supervisor’s District 24, Sheet No. 6B.
 5. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1900: Population Schedule, New Orleans, Louisiana, Orleans 
Parish, 9th Precinct, Ward 11, Supervisor’s District 1, Enumeration District No. 115, 
Sheet No. 18. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1920: Population Schedule, Bronx, New York, 
Supervisor’s District 6, Enumeration District No. 271, Sheet No. 7.
 6. There is also evidence of Indian men living and working in and around Galveston, T exas; 
Atlanta, Georgia; Jacksonville, Florida; Baltimore, Maryland; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 
and Detroit, Michigan, and evidence of intermarriage within the black community in 
Detroit.
 7. This history complements the stories of Punjabi-Mexican intermarriage in California in 
the 1910s through 1940s, as described in Karen Leonard’s Making Ethnic Choices . See 
Karen Isaksen Leonard, Making Ethnic Choices: California’s Punjabi Mexican Americans
(Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1992).


--- PAGE 253 ---
Black Routes to Islam246
 8. Richard Brent T urner, Islam in the African American Experience (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1997, 2003), 74.
 9. Earl Lewis, “T o T urn as on a Pivot: Writing African Americans Into a History of Over-
lapping Diasporas,” American Historical Review 100 (June 1995): 765–87; Paul Gilroy, 
The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1993); Paul Gilroy, Postcolonial Melancholia (New York: Columbia University Press, 
2004); Brent Hayes Edwards, The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation, and the Rise 
of Black Internationalism (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2003); Gayatri Gopi-
nath, “‘Bombay, U.K., Yuba City’: Bhangra Music and the Engendering of Diaspora,” 
Diaspora 4, no. 3 (1995): 303–21; Vijay Prashad, Everybody Was Kung Fu Fighting: Afro-
Asian Connections and the Myth of Cultural Purity (Boston: Beacon, 2001).
 10. Although from one U.S. Census to the next, racial categories changed, such that, in some 
years, categories like “mulatto” and “quadroon” were available to census-takers, it appears 
from most of the census sheets examined here that the variety, multiplicity, and mixture 
of New Orleans’ “non-white” population, was flattened into the category “black.” Indian 
men were themselves often recorded in these documents with the racial categorization 
“B” or sometimes “Mu” (mulatto), which was then in many instances scratched out and 
replaced with “H” or “Hin” for “Hindu” (the broad racial categorization used for anyone 
from India). It is unclear when and where these recategorizations from “B” to “H” took 
place and who made them—that is, whether it was the census-taker or a local supervisor 
or a Washington D.C.-based clerk.
 11. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1900: Population Schedule, New Orleans, Louisiana, Orleans 
Parish, 3rd Precinct, Ward 4, Supervisor’s District 1, Enumeration District No. 36, Sheets 
No. 6 & 7.
 12. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1900: Population Schedule, New Orleans, Louisiana, Orleans 
Parish, 3rd Precinct, Ward 4, Supervisor’s District 1, Enumeration District No. 36, Sheet 
No. 6.
 13. This name, which is difficult to read in the original census record, could also be “Christina 
Gardner.”
 14. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1910: Population Schedule, New Orleans, Louisiana, Orleans 
Parish, 2nd Precinct, Ward 4, Supervisor’s District 1, Enumeration District No. 59, Sheet 
No. 5.
 15. See, for example, USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1910: Population Schedule, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, Orleans Parish, 2nd Precinct, Ward 4, Supervisor’s District 1, Enumeration 
District No. 59, Sheet No. 7 and Enumeration District No. 60, Sheets No. 8 & 12.
 16. See, for example, USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, Orleans Parish, 6th Precinct, Ward 5, Block 182, Supervisor’s District 11, Enu-
meration District No. 36-76, Sheet No. 14B.
 17. See, for example, USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, Chicago, Illinois, 
Cook County, 6th Precinct, Ward 25, Block 393, Supervisor’s District 6, Enumeration 
District No. 16-2638, Sheet No. 5A.
 18. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, Chattanooga, T ennessee, Hamilton 
County, 7th Precinct, Supervisor’s District 13, Enumeration District No. 33-22, Sheet 
No. 13B. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, Memphis, T ennessee, 
Shelby County, District 6, Ward 11, Block 417, Supervisor’s District 9, Enumeration 
District No. 79-36, Sheet No. 3B.
 19. Laura Tabili, “We Ask for British Justice”: Workers and Racial Difference in Late Imperial 
Britain (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1994); Rozina Visram, Asians in Britain: 400 
Years of History (London: Pluto, 2002); G. Balachandran, “South Asian Seafarers and 
their Worlds: c. 1870–1930s,” Paper presented at Seascapes, Littoral Cultures, and


--- PAGE 254 ---
Overlapping Diasporas, Multiracial Lives 247
T rans-Oceanic Exchanges, Library of Congress, Washington D.C., February 12–15, 
2003. http://www.historycooperative.org/ proceedings/seascapes/balachandran.html 
(accessed July 9, 2006); Conrad Dixon, “Lascars: The Forgotten Seamen,” in Working
Men Who Got Wet, ed. Rosemary Ommer and Gerald Panting (Newfoundland: Maritime 
History Group, Memorial University of Newfoundland, 1980).
 20. Visram, Asians in Britain, 54.
 21. Ibid., 54–56.; see also Dixon, “Lascars: The Forgotten Seamen,” 269; Balachandran, 
“South Asian Seafarers and their Worlds,” par. 10–11.
 22. Balachandran, “South Asian Seafarers and their Worlds,” par 8.
 23. Visram, Asians in Britain , 64–69, 196–224; Balachandran, South Asian Seafarers and 
their Worlds,” par. 18, 31–37.
 24. Visram, Asians in Britain, 260.
 25. Ibid., 196–97.
 26. Ibid., 257.
 27. Ibid.
 28. Ibid., 258.
 29. See, for example, USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, Paterson, New 
Jersey, Passaic County, Ward 1, Supervisor’s District 2, Enumeration District No. 16-8, 
Sheets No. 1B & 14A; Enumeration District No. 16-9, Sheet No. 6A.
 30. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1920: Population Schedule, Lackawanna, New York, Erie 
County, Ward 1, Supervisor’s District 21, Enumeration District No. 306, Sheets No. 
53A, 62B.
 31. In 1922, the Erie Railroad attempted to break a railroad shop workers’ strike by hiring 
African American workers to work in their Jersey City rail yards, along with “fifty Hin-
dus and thirty-one Chinese . . . most of whom,” according to the New York Times , had 
“deserted ships in port here.” At the time, the Times reported, there were “about 5000 
Chinese and Hindus stranded in this port” and looking for work “because of dull ship-
ping.” See “Strikers Migrate to Take Rail Jobs,” New York Times, July 12, 1922, 1.
 32. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, New York, Borough of Manhat-
tan, 10th Assembly District, Block E, Supervisor’s District 21, Enumeration District No. 
31-1198, Sheets No. 49A, 50B.
 33. In the 1920s, the connections between the Indian maritime population and New York-
based Indian radicals—particularly Sailendranath Ghose and his Friends of Freedom for 
India—were in fact quite significant. These connections are discussed in greater depth in 
my essay, “‘Lost in the City’: Spaces and Stories of South Asian New York, 1917–1965,” 
South Asian Popular Culture 5, no. 1 (2007): 59 76, and are the subject of ongoing research 
and writing.
 34. Mawsood Choudhury, interview by the author, New York, February 2004.
 35. Noor Chowdry, interview by the author, Los Angeles, CA, January 2005.
 36. F .O. 371/42909.
 37. Ibid.
 38. USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, New York, Borough of Manhat-
tan, 2nd Assembly District: Block B, Supervisor’s District 21, Enumeration District No. 
21-717, Sheet No. 8A; Block F , Supervisor’s District 21, Enumeration District No. 31-93, 
Sheet No. 15B; Block O, Supervisor’s District 21, Enumeration District No. 31-106, 
Sheet No. 20A.
 39. NYCMA, State of New York Certificate and Record of Marriage (various), 1923–37; 
USDC/BC, U.S. Census, 1930: Population Schedule, New York, Borough of Manhattan, 
16th Assembly District: Block J, Supervisor’s District 23, Enumeration District 754B, 
Sheet No. 10A; 17th Assembly District: Block C, Supervisor’s District 23, Enumeration


--- PAGE 255 ---
Black Routes to Islam248
District 31-1242, Sheet No. 16A; Block D, Supervisor’s District 23, Enumeration District 
31-786, Sheet No. 31A; Block D, Supervisor’s District 24, Enumeration District 31-922, 
Sheet No. 6B; 18th Assembly District: Block 6, Supervisor’s District 23, Enumeration 
District 31-810, Sheet No. 23B.
 40. NYCMA, State of New York Certificate and Record of Marriage (various), 1923–37.
 41. M. Choudhury, interview.
 42. Alaudin Ullah, interview by the author, New York, June 2003.
 43. Alaudin Ullah, interview by the author, New York, December 2006; Habib Ullah, Jr., 
interview by the author, New York, May 2005.
 44. N. Chowdry, interview. 
 45. New York Times, “Freedom of India Celebrated Here,” August 16, 1948, 8; “Events 
T oday,” February 20, 1949, 64; The New York Amsterdam News , “Pakistan Group to 
Honor Sen. Langer,” February 19, 1949, 32; “Sen. Langer Is Honored By Pakistanis,” 
March 3, 1951, 18.
 46. Miriam Christian, interview by the author, New York, 1996.
 47. Sekou Sundiata, interview by the author, New York, May 2007.
 48. Paul Tingen’s biography, Miles Beyond, describes a series of meetings between Davis and 
Mtume in 1972 at an establishment that was almost certainly the Bombay India Restau-
rant: “Miles and I would often go to this restaurant at 125th Street in Harlem,” Mtume 
says, “and discuss some of the influences he was hearing. It was an Indian restaurant, and 
obviously they were playing Indian music, and it was at that point that he was telling me 
about the idea of using the electric sitar and tablas.” Paul Tingen, Miles Beyond: The Elec-
tric Explorations of Miles Davis, 1967–1991 (New York: Watson-Guptill, 2001), 130.
 49. A. Ullah, interview.
 50. H. Ullah, interview.
 51. A. Ullah, interview.
 52. H. Ullah, interview.
 53. N. Chowdry, interview.
 54. Ibid.
 55. N. Chowdry, interview; H. Ullah, interview.
 56. H. Ullah.
 57. Ibid.
 58. “A Call to Prayer for Peace in the Holy Land: An Open Letter to the Security Council 
of the United Nations,” New York Times, April 20, 1956, 14; “Holy Land to Get ‘Pillar 
of Peace,’” New York Times, July 16, 1956, 18; “Islamic Groups Meet T oday,” New York
Times, July 27, 1956, 7; M. Choudhury, interview; A. Ullah, interview.
 59. N. Chowdry, interview.
 60. Ibid.
 61. Many of these men had presumably been involved in a prior New York-based organiza-
tion, the India League of America (as was the case with Ibrahim Choudry), and had 
broken off from this organization to form the Pakistan League in 1946–47, a move which 
appears to have had as much to do with the class differences between Hindu and Mus-
lim Indian immigrant communities in New York as it did with the geopolitics of the 
subcontinent.
 62. H. Ullah, interview.
 63. Alaudin Ullah, interview by the author, New York, May 2005.
 64. Leonard, Making Ethnic Choices.


--- PAGE 256 ---
C HAPTER  14
West African “Soul 
Brothers” in Harlem
Immigration, Islam, and the 
Black Encounter
Zain Abdullah
Introduction
In 1999, a media blitz covering the police killing of Amadou Diallo, an
innocent victim from Guinea mistaken for a Black serial rapist, revealed he was 
not only one of many Black immigrants living in New York, but he was also a 
member of an emerging West African Islamic community.
1 In 2003, an under-
cover officer wrongfully killed another African Muslim, Ousmane Zongo, an 
African arts restorer from Burkina Faso, deepening the city’s engagement with 
these recent arrivals.
2 For the first time, New Yorkers were exposed to the Muslim 
practices of their West African neighbors. There was even press coverage following 
their slain bodies from funeral services in New York mosques to their respective 
countries in Africa.
3 Because of a tendency to view immigrants in terms of their 
labor rather than their humanity, the media spread taught us another lesson. West 
African life in the United States cannot be fully understood by focusing on their 
This chapter was originally published as “African ‘Soul Brothers’ in the ‘Hood: Immigration, 
Islam and the Black Encounter,” Anthropological Quarterly 82, no. 1 (Winter 2009): 37–62.
“Soul Brother” used in the title was originally a fraternal reference for an African American 
man with a special kind of cache. I use it here to speak to the ways West African Muslims are 
forging new Black and religious identities in African American communities across the country.


--- PAGE 257 ---
Black Routes to Islam250
work habits alone. Will Herberg’s classic work Protestant, Catholic, Jew4 revealed 
how early European immigrants used religion to aid their assimilation into mid-
dle America. As Black immigrants, however, West African Muslims are already 
classified at the bottom of the U.S. racial hierarchy. Yet, just as Judith Weisenfeld 
argues that the “African American religious experience has rendered the margin a 
site of power and of creativity, an activity that necessarily alters the center,” Afri-
can Muslim migrants also challenge their peripheral status by creating religious 
practices they hope will shield them from a Black underclass.
5
A recent influx of 100,000 West Africans into New York City, for example, is 
creating an enclave that Harlem residents call “Little Africa” or “Africa T own.” 6
For the Muslims among these newcomers, their masjids, 7 Islamic schools, busi-
nesses, and associations are essential for how they are integrating themselves into 
the landscape of this predominately Black neighborhood. There has even been a 
street sign hung at Harlem’s major intersection on the corner of 125th Street and 
7th Avenue that reads “African Square.” Other regions are renamed by Africans 
themselves, such as “Fouta T own,” a heavy Fulani Muslim settlement in Brooklyn 
where ethnicity and religion evenly overlap.
8 This ongoing Islamic and cultural 
activity creates a unique kind of Muslim space,9 a pulsating environment driving 
their sense of self and collective determination. These practices, then, are a major 
resource in their attempt to prevent a downward spiral into poor social condi-
tions. Most observers, however, are unaware that religion plays a crucial role in 
this urban transformation. Because westerners view Islam as an Arab faith, many 
pay no attention to the Muslim identity of these Black immigrants. Yet, few miss 
them wearing their wide-sleeve, boubou robes with tasseled hats, hawking items 
out of brief cases in midtown Manhattan or, perhaps, strolling Harlem streets. 
But this costuming represents an important way African immigrants assert their 
Muslim presence and impact the Black public sphere. In Harlem, this perfor-
mance reworks the rhythm of the metropolis, allowing them to redefine Blackness 
or Black identity on their own terms.
Some researchers believe that new immigrants are being absorbed into three 
different and sometimes disadvantageous segments of American society. Whereas 
traditional assimilation, for example, taught that newcomers entered the United 
States and followed a “straight-line” path into the dominant Anglo-American cul-
ture, current scholars claim that the integration is not straight but segmented, 
which recognizes that today’s ethnically diverse migrants are incorporated into 
either the White middle class, the downward path of a Black and Latino under-
class, or the ethnic community characterized by tight group solidarity and rapid 
economic advancement.
10 The workings of West African Muslims in Harlem, 
instead, reveal that immigrants can settle in poor Black communities, form solid 
ethnic niches and intergroup cooperatives, and not experience downward mobil-
ity, especially if they are able to create new types of religious capital.
11 In other 
words, rather than merely self-segregating themselves as a strategy against failure, 
many forge alliances and build bridges between themselves and native-born Blacks 
and, particularly, African American Muslims. Paul Stoller argues that Islam has


--- PAGE 258 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 251
historically played a major role in structuring relations between African Muslims 
of different ethnicities, 12 and it continues to inform their business sense in the 
diaspora. While money may have “no smell,” as Stoller would have it, and there-
fore may trump Islamic etiquette for many West Africans in New York, he asserts 
that “Islam has always constructed the moral framework for West African trading 
transactions.”
13 As such, their collaboration with African American Muslims is 
often facilitated through their shared religious precepts. This does not suggest, 
however, the absence of any conflict, and while the community as a whole has 
advanced, their presence in Harlem has not been problem free.
Starting in the early 1990s, the rapid rise of Muslims from West Africa quickly 
found its way into Harlem’s informal economy, creating a vibrant African bazaar 
with street vendors stretched along 125th Street.
14 Organized like traditional 
West African markets, the open-air sidewalk businesses created a celebratory 
atmosphere punctuated with a timbre of African languages and dialects, haggling 
voices, and colorful displays of traditional African, domestic, and designer prod-
ucts. Prior to its dissolution and relocation to 116th Street in 1994, the African 
Market had become a major tourist attraction. Double-decker buses from Apple 
T ours brought scores of European sightseers on holiday to take pictures (within 
the protected confines of a company vehicle), capturing an exotic souvenir of 
New York’s “authentic” African culture.
15 It also provided African Americans seek-
ing to reclaim their African identity with an opportunity to buy handicrafts that 
symbolized a piece of Africa.
16
While some store owners benefited from the way the selling of African culture 
attracted new customers to the area, others felt the cultural alterity of the market 
hampered business. Influential business owners provoked elected officials to enact 
the no-vending laws, a request that was made against a barrage of protests and 
demonstrations. Still, African street merchants and other sidewalk vendors were 
ousted.
17 During the conflict, each faction invoked “culture” to justify its agenda. 
African sellers, on the one hand, claimed that selling “African things” on 125th 
Street helped to revitalize the area.
18 Angry store owners, on the other hand, 
claimed that Africans clutter the sidewalks and restrict movement, dirty and litter 
the streets, and that their informal habits create chaos and induce crime. Donald 
T rump and the Fifth Avenue Merchants Association made a similar argument to 
clear midtown Manhattan of Senegalese vendors in 1985. In this way, so-called 
African Third World habits, portraying chaos, informality, and uncleanliness, 
is pitted against “First World” sensibilities representing order, regulation, and 
purity. Such an objectifying discourse compares African culture on a hierarchi-
cal scale with that of the West, and it is deemed incapable of occupying one and 
the same time and space. “Oh, East is East, and West is West,” Rudyard Kipling 
once barked, “and never the twain shall meet.”
19 While Kipling’s refrain in this 
1892 poem actually ridiculed this polarized view of the world, it has become clear 
that the two spheres have indeed met. Some, despite arguments to the contrary, 
believe they have even clashed.
20 In either case, with thousands of new immigrants 
pouring into U.S. cities and, more often than not, settling into predominately


--- PAGE 259 ---
Black Routes to Islam252
Black communities, few can argue there has not been a genuine encounter. Inter-
national forces seamlessly link the East and the West, and the global and the local 
(not to mention the urban and rural) have become connected in ways we could 
have hardly imagined.
West African Muslim Immigration
As a result of the post-1965 immigration, which signals the unprecedented arrival 
of new immigrants from parts of Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean, and Africa, 
American neighborhoods are undergoing changes that have impacted more than 
their demographics. The new immigration promises to bring alternative pieties 
and new understandings of the sacred, altering our social and religious worlds like 
never before. According to some estimates, Africans are arriving in the United 
States at rates that surpass the highest figures during the T ransatlantic Slave T rade.
21
While New York remains a major point of entry for these Muslim migrants, their 
numbers are rapidly increasing in Boston, Washington, D.C., Atlanta, Chicago, 
Houston, and Los Angeles, “luring them away from New York City—especially 
if they have what they call ‘papers,’ namely, an employment authorization permit 
from the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS).”
22 Their attraction 
to these areas is somewhat straightforward. Most migrate to large cities where 
employment opportunities are more or less widely available and flexible, espe-
cially for those juggling several jobs and Muslims needing special times to pray 
throughout the day.
Prior to urban renewal and the subsequent rise of gentrification, affordable 
housing in poor and working class areas is likewise appealing. More importantly, 
though, many early African migrants were drawn to Harlem not merely because it 
was economically viable but for its reputation as a major center of Black life. That 
is, despite its existing reputation for crime, West Africans saw it as a Black space in 
the center of America, and this gave them a glimmer of hope that they might be 
successful. This is very different, however, for Indian migrants, who have mostly 
settled in Queens, New York. Madhulika S. Khandelwal points out while they 
resided in mix communities and “interacted with people of different racial and 
ethnic backgrounds, . . . many Indian immigrants continue to be uncertain about 
their ‘race.’”
23 Under the current American racial system, West Africans appar-
ently do not have that problem. However, moving into Black Harlem (despite 
its changing racial landscape) means they must learn to negotiate an entirely new 
sense of what it means to be Black. In his recent book, Real Black, anthropolo-
gist John L. Jackson, Jr., rehearses a kind of racial bricolage on what it means to 
navigate multiple shades of Blackness, and he untangles the significance of these 
claims of authenticity for a place like Harlem.
24
As I have pointed out elsewhere, 25 West African immigration to the United 
States can be divided into three phases: (1) the T ransatlantic Slave T rade between 
the sixteenth and early nineteenth centuries; (2) the period between the Prohibi-
tion of the Slave T rade Act of 1808 and 1965; and (3) from 1965 to the present.


--- PAGE 260 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 253
During the first two phases, Islam had been the religion of the ruling classes, 
the urban elite, and foreign populations under the rule of West African Muslim 
empires. Following this period, Islam continued to spread but this time among 
the masses. From the late sixteenth to the mid-eighteenth centuries, the religious 
campaigns of Islamic Sufi brotherhoods and other reform movements prompted 
mass conversion.
26 Following the collapse of these Muslim kingdoms, the entire 
region (with the exception of Liberia, which was nonetheless heavily influenced by 
U.S. economic interests) gradually fell under European control. Western nations 
met at the Berlin Conference in 1884 to partition West Africa into “spheres of 
influence” and essentially divided the area into two territories: Anglophone (Eng-
lish-speaking) and Francophone (French-speaking). Only the German occupation 
of T ogoland, along with the Portuguese control of Guinea-Bissau and the Cape 
Verde Islands, remained beyond their reach. Thousands of agricultural workers 
emigrated out of French colonies to escape the official mandate of conscription. 
While laborers moved from one colonial territory to another, producing a type 
of “interterritorial” migration,
27 the next period of decolonization and African 
independence ushered in an international migration that is steadily becoming 
transnational.
28
By 1960, the French colonial territory in West Africa was independent, and 
the rise of African nations brought about new boundaries. Like the colonial parti-
tions, these state borders cut across preexisting ethnic group settlements. Family 
members were forced to migrate across countries to reunite with kin or to obtain 
employment. Establishing the free but limited movement of goods and people 
within French speaking states, the CEAO (Communauté Economique d’Afrique 
Occidentale/the West African Economic Community) was established.
29 Allow-
ing greater movement, but only for a ninety-day period, West African countries 
formed the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in 1975. 
This freedom of movement has fostered a “floating population,”
30 referring to a 
pattern of labor migration that crosses countries within Africa and, I would add, 
extends to western nations abroad.
During independence, West Africans from former French colonies were 
encouraged to migrate to France as a source of cheap labor. By the next decade, 
however, the desire for African workers waned and France terminated legal immi-
gration in 1974,
31 which was further enforced under the Pasqua law of 1993. At 
the same time, the U.S. Immigration Act of 1965, which rescinded the old quota 
system that favored immigrants from northern and western Europe, enacted a 
preference system supporting family reunification for permanent residents (74 
percent), skilled labor (20 percent), and refugees seeking political asylum (6 per-
cent).
32 This new legislation significantly opened the door of immigration to West 
African Muslims and many other non-Europeans. T o facilitate the move between 
Dakar (Senegal’s capital) and New York, new direct flights were added in the 
mid-1980s.
33 Prompted by an economic crisis in Europe and devastatingly poor 
conditions in West Africa, the migration of West African Muslims to France was 
redirected to America. Until the last two decades or so, the initial migration phase


--- PAGE 261 ---
Black Routes to Islam254
was dominated by West African immigrants with Christian leanings from Eng-
lish-speaking countries like Gambia, Ghana, and Nigeria. Still, the desire to leave 
poor conditions does not mean migrants will have a place to go, especially if the 
point of destination is not willing to receive them.
34 Thus, by the 1980s, both 
French restrictions on immigration and a liberal American immigration policy 
prompted West African Muslim migration to the United States.
According to the Census Bureau’s Current Population Survey (CPS), the 
total population count for West Africans in the United States was approximately 
167,000 in March of 2000. The figures from the 1990 census estimated that 
for West Africans claiming foreign-born status in New York, there were 2,287 
Senegalese, 1,388 Ivoirians, and 1,032 Guineans in the country. When compared 
with the 2000 census, only a slight difference is discernable.
35 Because the Immi-
gration and Naturalization Service (INS) only records legal immigration to the 
United States, their numbers are invariably much lower than the U.S. Bureau of 
the Census, which counts both legal and illegal residents. Some informal esti-
mates claim that the Senegalese in New York City, for example, number anywhere 
between 10,000 and 20,000.
36 Other unofficial counts have placed Murid follow-
ers, a Sufi Brotherhood from Senegal, at 4,000 to 6,000 nationally, with approxi-
mately 2,500 in New York City.
37 Because many West African Muslims overstayed 
their visiting or student visas in the 1980s, they took advantage of the lottery 
system granting amnesty to undocumented migrants. Once they are permanent 
residents, married men generally send for their wives and other family members. 
These opportunities will undoubtedly increase their numbers significantly over 
time. Nonetheless, while official figures are generally too low, informal estimates 
are usually exaggerated.
West African Islam in Black America
As mentioned above, West African Muslims claimed that the image of Harlem 
as a “Black Mecca” (i.e., a Black borough) initially attracted them to New York 
City.
38 In contrast, they were also led to believe American Blacks were criminals 
and not to be tr usted. When they encountered poor Black residents, for example, 
and witnessed the way some were caught in a cycle of drugs and violence, the rac-
ist stereotypes they had internalized prior to their migration were confirmed upon 
their arrival. Moreover, because the conduct of their non-Muslim neighbors would 
at times contradict their Islamic ethics, they tended to view these Harlem residents 
with contempt. Despite their strained relations with some Black residents, the Afri-
can American Muslim community at Masjid Malcolm Shabazz, on Malcolm X 
Boulevard and 116th Street, served as their “proximal host,” and this certainly has 
affected the nature of their incorporation. The term “proximal host” is used here to 
mean the indigenous group to which immigrants are assigned or voluntarily adopt 
due to their racial or ethnic affinities.
39 For instance, because West African immi-
grants are thought to resemble Black Americans racially, they are often treated 
accordingly by outsiders. By the same token, many African immigrants choose


--- PAGE 262 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 255
to settle in Black communities and utilize Black institutions due to the racial 
category they share. Still, the racial designation is often resented by immigrants, 
especially if the group to which they are assigned is disenfranchised.
By 1990, large numbers of West African Muslims were attending the weekly 
jum‘ah (Friday) prayers at Masjid Malcolm Shabazz. Realizing their growing 
attendance could translate into greater economic rewards, the Masjid leadership 
began to display signs in French instructing Africans where to pay their weekly 
charity. According to Hamdi, an African American Muslim pioneer and Murid 
convert, because of their Islamic upbringing, West African Muslims understand 
that their first responsibility is to support the Masjid. “They realize,” he said, “if 
they’re successful with their religious obligations, the other aspects of their life 
will follow suit.” He continued to say that West African Murids made donations 
of $3,000 or more a week. He added that the Murids had such a strong religious 
network and work ethic that once they were able to raise $75,000 in just two 
weeks, which was just in time to purchase a limousine for the arrival of their 
shaykh (marabout).
Some claim the same group remits nearly $15,000 per month to their Islamic 
city of T ouba in Senegal. Researchers report that the Banque de l’Habitat du 
Senegal (BHS), which opened a New York branch in 1993, handled savings and 
transfers for Senegalese clients amounting to $900,000 during its first year of 
operation.
40 By 1994, due to the 50 percent devaluation of the CFA (French 
African Franc), that figure increased to $4 million. The rise in bank dealings was 
because they were remitting more to help family members survive the economic 
crisis back home. As perhaps the only African bank operating in the United States, 
its dealings have escalated to as much as $7.5 million a year.
41 While these figures 
hardly compare to those for Ghanaian immigrants, who, over ten years ago, were 
estimated to remit between $250 and $350 million a year,
42 it does demonstrate 
the economic strength of West African Muslims in the greater New York area. 
This also speaks volumes about the role religion plays in their economic incorpo-
ration into Harlem. Besides the kind of tensions that can arise between members 
belonging to the same racial category, divergent religious orientations can force 
people to reconfigure their racial identities and sense of place as well.
Because Masjid Malcolm Shabazz grew out of the Black Nationalist sentiment 
of the Nation of Islam (NOI), the Friday khutba (sermon) usually addresses racial 
themes or some aspect of American race relations. West African Sunnis (orthodox 
Muslims) felt they had different needs and wanted a sermon advocating survival 
through spiritual development. They also complained that their prayer attendance 
was much too regimented requiring, for instance, members to stop at the door to 
sign in and sometimes answer questions by Masjid security. They were likewise 
at odds with the Black preacher style of the khutba, sparking frequent rejoinders 
from the congregation known as “call-and-response.”
43 Some claimed their pres-
ence was made even more uncomfortable when the Imam gave a sermon exhort-
ing “all Africans to go home.” In 1993, when the Egyptian-led Islamic Center 
of New York opened on 3rd Avenue and 96th Street, many West African Sunnis


--- PAGE 263 ---
Black Routes to Islam256
left Shabazz for a more familiar religious environment. Others began attending 
the Mosque of Islamic Brotherhood (MIB), an African American orthodox com-
munity on West 113th Street and Nicholas Avenue. Because members of MIB are 
African Americans who use Qur’anic Arabic and dress in modified Islamic and 
African garb, African attendees felt somewhat at ease. Unlike the fees they were 
charged to use Masjid Malcolm Shabazz for their weddings, funerals or meetings 
(regarded by some as less than brotherly), MIB allowed them complete access 
without cost.
On the other hand, African Murids, a prominent Senegalese Sufi order, were 
much more familiar with the inclusion of Black themes in the khutba and stayed 
at Shabazz.
44 In the introduction to his classic ethnography on the Murids, Donal 
B. Cruise O’Brien states that the “brotherhood originated in the late nineteenth 
century as a collective response of the Wolof . . . to changes brought about by 
French conquest.”
45 A major reaction to French colonization was to challenge 
their race-based policy and the colonial mandate of an Islam noir or a Black 
Islam.46 Nonetheless, the Murid Sufi order, affectionately referred to as, Muridi-
yyah, emerged out of a racialized and religious context where both Blackness and 
Islam are equally rehearsed. As such, many Murids in Harlem actually appreciated 
the inclusion of “race talk” during the Friday jum`ah service at Shabazz.
In short, while West African Sunni Muslims left Masjid Malcolm Shabazz 
for a more traditional host, West African Murids remained. More importantly, 
their respective selection in favor of a familiar congregational culture reveals an 
important divide between them. Prior to establishing their own masjids, both 
groups joined Masjid Malcolm Shabazz. Because the Sufi doctrine of Muridi-
yyah was not in conflict with the Black Nationalist rhetoric at Shabazz, Murid 
followers embraced it as an appropriate platform before relocating to their own 
House of Islam on 137th and Edgecombe. West African Sunnis, in contrast, left 
Shabazz because they desired a more conventional setting or a place more suited 
to their own sense of religious orthodoxy. This does not mean African Sunni 
Muslims reject a Black discourse at the masjid. In fact, they have adopted their 
status as Black immigrants quite well and incorporated these conversations into 
their Islamic practice. What they sought, however, was a racial sensibility that 
would be totally subservient to their Islamic teachings. African Murids, on the 
other hand, did not recognize a separation between the two. That is, one did 
not supersede the other because race and religion were viewed as one and the 
same. This precept had already been central to the Nation of Islam’s teachings 
and continued in many ways among African Americans at Shabazz. For both, 
their premigration perception of Harlem as a “Black Mecca,” their practice of 
appropriating Black narratives into their Islamic practice, and their selection of 
dissimilar hosts are important ways a Black place is negotiated at African masjids
in Harlem. Nonetheless, it is certainly not the only way they exert their identities 
onto the urban terrain.
The Murid own and operate most of the restaurants, variety stores, fashion 
boutiques, Islamic books, and supply shops on West 116th Street. As places of


--- PAGE 264 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 257
cultural production, African restaurants, for example, inscribe identity by employ-
ing religious symbols or wording like halal to guarantee the food is authentic 
and religiously “pure.”
47 The stores also bear the name of their spiritual guides 
(Mbacke or Kara), their holy city in Senegal, “T ouba,” or a combination of both. 
T o the outsider, however, the religious nature of these businesses is less obvious. 
As one African American young man once asked a Senegalese storeowner, “Man, 
who is this guy T ouba? His name is all over the place. He must be rich!” In a sense, 
the young man was right to recognize something very important about the signi-
fication of these businesses. T ouba is the group’s spiritual center.
48 Because it was 
founded by Shaykh Amadou Bamba, the holy city of T ouba and the founder are 
viewed as one and the same. In fact, Amadou Bamba is frequently called “Serigne 
T ouba” or “Sir T ouba.” As such, the sacredness of the city is transferable to other 
marabouts. When Murid leaders visit their taalibés (disciples) in New York or 
elsewhere, for instance, the announcement, “T ouba is coming to town”
49 is made 
regularly. Moreover, T ouba is a frame of mind. It is always carried in the heart of 
the devout Murid as a point of reference.
50 By hanging pictures of the founder or 
their Great Mosque in Senegal on the walls of their shops, T ouba is there. T ouba, 
therefore, can be reproduced and transported to create Murid identity anywhere 
in the world. Accordingly, “making” this kind of cultural space is one way West 
African Muslims create transnational identities that link T ouba with New York.
Other cultural performances include the daily practice of wearing African 
clothes. While their dress may make them easily recognizable, publicly wearing 
traditional African clothing is a religious act that not only creates Muslim space 
but also inscribes their Africanness onto the geography of the city. In contrast to 
the Pan-Islamic view of West African Sunnis, Murids construct their own Islamic 
discourse challenging Arab hegemony and notions of Black inferiority. According 
to their publication, “Shaykh Ahmadou Bamba inaugurated a new era in the his-
tory of Islam and of the black man. He is the first spiritual black guide massively 
followed by people from all over the world, thus showing that all men are issued 
from the same soul.”
51 Clothing can operate as a symbol of identity the wearer 
and the observer can read.52 It can mark a change in political orientation,53 or, as 
Roland Barthes asserted, act as a sign interpreted to suit different contexts. 54 For 
Harlem residents, however, the traditional clothing worn by the Murid clearly 
identifies them as African but not necessarily Muslim. In fact, most residents 
described their new neighbors as simply “African” wearing some sort of African 
clothing. Nonetheless, their boubou clothes and tasseled hat do not merely fore-
ground their Africanity alone, but they signify a commitment to an age-old, West 
African Islamic tradition.
The Shaykh Ahmadou Bamba Day parade illustrates this point as well.
55 Estab-
lished in 1988, each year on this day, thousands of West African Murids march in 
a procession up 7th Avenue (Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Blvd.) from 110th Street 
and Central Park North to 125th. Men, women, and children march decked out 
in their traditional garb, full of color and regalia. What sets this parade apart from 
many others like the St. Patrick’s Day, Puerto Rican Day, and African American


--- PAGE 265 ---
Black Routes to Islam258
Day parades is the absence of elaborate floats, loud marching bands with girls 
dressed in bathing-like costumes throwing batons, celebrities, or even televised 
coverage interpreting each event for viewers. In fact, when interviewed, no spec-
tator knew what was going on or why. Most speculated that it was “something 
African” but could not figure it out.
Why, after two decades, would they still undergo so much planning and orga-
nizing to have a police-escorted parade no spectator understood? Public perfor-
mances like parades allow groups to rework their identity and infuse space with 
special meaning. Parade participants carry large banners in different languages 
and march chanting Islamic slogans. These actions represent the group’s attempt 
to communicate internally and contest competing versions of membership. It 
also represents their struggle to put forth a Murid identity against the backdrop 
of other Muslim constituencies in Harlem. At the same time, banners urge Afri-
can Americans to racial pride and their own version of Blackness. Some partici-
pants carry the Senegalese and American flag along with huge portraits of Shaykh 
Ahmadou Bamba, Shaykh Mouhammadou Mourtada Mbacke (a prominent 
Murid leader), and Shaykh Salih Mbacke, the Murid’s khalifa (supreme leader). 
While the parade received little media attention in New York City, journalists 
from Senegal (and the British Broadcasting Corporation [BBC], on a different 
occasion) arrived to cover the event and, according to reports, televise it in their 
home country for an entire week. The national symbolism of the flags and the 
parade’s international coverage allow them to construct their Black and Muslim 
identities on a much larger canvas but necessarily within the context of Black 
America. Still, West African Muslims do not exist in a vacuum and their lives are 
not restricted by their association with their Muslim counterparts alone. Their 
Islamic sensibilities are obviously influenced by their encounter with the external 
world, the vast space beyond masjid walls and well outside the confines of pub-
lic celebrations. Consequently, their engagement with local residents opens up a 
whole new set of issues that challenge their presence in Black America.
The Black Encounter
African Hair braiding salons are sites where Africans and African Americans inter-
act on a regular basis. While Blacks are generally consumers, West African women 
either work for an American proprietor or, more recently, own their boutiques. 
Leslie’s Hair Salon in Harlem was no exception. During my initial visit, I peeked 
in the window and saw more than a dozen African women dressed in traditional 
garb, braiding hair at each station. In fact, there were so many African workers, I 
was certain the shop was African-owned. I was wrong. On one occasion, I was at 
the salon when a Black woman came stumbling out yelling at the African worker, 
“Come out bitch . . . , I’ll cut your motherfuckin’ throat.” At the same time, 
people held the African hair braider inside as she yelled, “You better gimme 
my money . . . ” With her hand in her pocketbook, the Black woman stood 
outside the door repeating her threat. While the situation illustrates just how


--- PAGE 266 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 259
explosive things can get between old residents and newcomers, the underlying 
factor appeared to be financial rather than cultural. But Rob, a twenty-three-year-
old Black security worker at the salon, disagreed.
On the day of the incident, I was struck by Rob’s composure during the scuffle. 
He sat back in his lawn chair on the sidewalk and watched things unfold. He has 
lived in Harlem since the age of seven, and he appeared to have grown accus-
tomed to witnessing these outbursts. In his mind, these conflicts were indicative 
of cultural differences that separated Africans from Blacks. In fact, “culture,” and 
the way it is objectified as a “thing” representing a set of values, appears to struc-
ture relations between African Americans and other immigrants as well. Robert 
C. Smith’s work on Mexicans in New York illustrates how mexicanidad (Mexican-
ness) or, more precisely, ticuanensidad (Ticuaniness), constructs a boundary of 
cultural difference between them and their Black and Puerto Rican neighbors. In 
the view of Smith’s respondent, Blacks and Puerto Ricans actually suffer because 
they lack “culture” entirely and not so much for having a different one.
56 What 
makes this curious is how culture is often blamed by residents as the reason groups 
cannot get along. As the fight between the two women ended, Lenny, a Black 
man in his early thirties and a salon employee, left the shop and joined us outside. 
They began talking about the fight and their view of Africans in Harlem:
“They’re not like us,” Rob said, shaking his head and rocking in his chair. “They’re 
different,” he added.
“Ahhh,” Lenny interjected, “Don’t get me started on them.”
He continued, “They’re some nasty people!”
“And ruuude,” he stressed.
“But,” Rob blurted out, staring into space a bit, “I don’t know how to explain it, I 
guess it’s just cultural differences.”
“Yeah, I don’t know,” Lenny replied. “I do know they don’t mess with me, ’cause they 
know I’ll tell ’em about themselves,” he griped, “but they are some nasty people.”
“What do you mean by nasty?” I asked.
Lenny thought about it for a moment and said, “Ya know, just nasty.” I waited for 
more.
“They throw trash and stuff all over the floor and they have an attitude,” he added.
This story illustrates the assumptions some Blacks in Harlem make about what 
separates them from Africans. As a conversation sparked by a conflict at the salon, 
Rob stated there were some “cultural differences” between Africans and Blacks 
he was just unable to explain. Whether he could justify his statement or not is 
unimportant. What is worth explo ring is how he recognized differences between 
the two groups. He was convinced “they’re not like us.” As such, he assumed “cul-
ture” might be the reason. Of course, people from foreign countries possess values, 
worldviews, and share meanings that differ in certain respects from native residents. 
However, “cultural differences,” in and of themselves, do not create a separation. In 
other words, the fact that differences exist do not automatically construct a bound-
ary forcing people to see themselves as separate and distinct. What creates and 
maintains the divide is the social importance or cultural meanings people attach


--- PAGE 267 ---
Black Routes to Islam260
to these differences. While Rob used culture as a way to mark the boundary that 
set the two of them apart, Lenny defined the line with a characteristic that gave 
meaning to both sides of the cultural border.
Lenny used the word “nasty” as a term many Black residents used to describe 
Africans. In Harlemworld, John L. Jackson, Jr., quotes Paula, a thirty-eight-year-
old black woman who accused Africans of acting like “they are royalty” and 
claimed, “They all nasty.”
57 He also referred to an eighteen-year-old black Latina, 
Elisha, who criticized them for how they wear “their African shit and act like they 
still in Africa. All they want us for,” she asserted, “is so they can braid our hair 
and give us extensions.”
58 As Jackson’s work suggests, “nasty” is a term applied to 
Africans who appear pompous and antisocial. This is partially determined by the 
way their African dress marks a distinctions between them and others in Harlem. 
While some embrace their cultural practices as a public display of their Afri-
can heritage, others mock it as a barrier wedged between them and their African 
neighbors. These are clearly fault lines where a high level of distrust exists. It is a 
site where even services provided by African hair braiders are held in contempt. 
Lenny struggled to define what he meant by calling Africans “nasty” and later 
associated it with unclean work habits. Being “nasty” could actually mean all sorts 
of things; however, whatever it means is only important when it creates a sense of 
emotional attachment differentiating one group from the other.
Dean, a twenty-five-year-old African American and lifelong Harlem resident, 
revealed his sense of the border between Africans and Blacks. He divided Africans 
into two types. “There are the ones that wear traditional clothes,” he assessed, 
“they stick to themselves.” He added, “I don’t know if they think there’re better 
than us or what.” As for the other, he argued that “they are the Americanized Afri-
cans, the ones you see at the club.” T o Dean, Africans wore their garb not merely 
as a marker of distinction but as a sign of superiority. Ann Miles claims in her 
study that migrants from Ecuador living in Queens, New York, used clothing as 
a sort of protection that separated them from the deleterious effects of street life. 
Idealizing her old country ways above her newly adopted “MTV” urban world, 
“Rosa,” Miles asserts, “proudly wore the traditional pollera [wide pleated skirt] 
that identified her as a chola [rural folk].”
59 Outsiders, however, rarely understand 
these internal cultural musings. Instead, they are at times viewed as adverse fash-
ion attempts and, thus, presumptuous.
West African Muslims, on the other side, believe Blacks view them as “ani-
mals.” Yahya, a young man in his early twenties from Guinea, claimed, “Black 
Americans look down on Africa.” “I don’t really blame them,” he continued, “it 
is because of what they see on TV—it’s what they’ve been taught. All they show 
is famine and destruction in Africa.” Despite the media distortions they believe 
influence the view Blacks have of them, some West African Muslims admitted 
they treat African Americans and particularly non-Muslims with a measure of 
“indifference.” On other occasions, West Africans are unsure how to understand 
the existing tensions between them and Black Americans. In Money Has No Smell,
Paul Stoller’s West African respondents complained that they were “disappointed”


--- PAGE 268 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 261
when treated badly by African Americans and accused of selling their “ancestors 
into slavery.”60
As a familiar way to mark distinctions between ethnic groups in Africa, some 
African Muslims see Islam as a way to partition Harlem into dar al-harb (outsider) 
and dar al-Islam (insider). Scholars of Islamic studies see this dichotomy as a Mus-
lim innovation that deviates from the principles of the religion. I have decided 
to translate these Arabic terms as “outsider” and “insider,” respectively, because a 
literal rendering would miss the way they are meant to act as well-defined fron-
tiers in Harlem. In a literal sense, they would be translated as dar al-harb (abode 
of war) and dar al-Islam (abode of peace). Contrary to its religious role, Islam, in 
this context, is used as an organizing principle, a bifurcated way of looking at the 
world and those who inhabit it. Like Lenny’s use of “nasty” to define the bound-
ary dividing the two groups, West African Muslims use what they believe to be 
a Black misperception of Africa to justify maintaining a similar distance. What 
helps to erect the borderline is a condescending attitude that renders Harlem 
residents blameworthy.
61 My conversation with Rob and Lenny quickly takes a 
religious turn. As we thought about Rob’s answer, Lenny continued to talk about 
Africans. “And they call themselves Muslims?” he mocked. “I don’t know what 
kind of Muslims they are, because the Muslims I know aren’t nasty—and they’re 
not rude!” he asserted. “Muslims are clean people and polite,” Lenny added. Then 
he repeated, “I don’t know what kinda Muslims they are.”
Lenny’s criticism of their Muslim affiliation is another way of disparaging the 
group and, thus, contesting identity. Moreover, his rejection of their self-identi-
fication reserves Muslim identity for a different group of “people,” a people who 
are, as he would have it, not “nasty” or “rude.” So, if Muslims are “polite” and 
“clean,” West Africans, in contrast, cannot be Muslims. Otherwise, this would 
contradict his wayward depiction of them. Said differently, Lenny already had a 
positive image of Muslims in Harlem. Since the Africans at the shop claim to be 
Muslims, too, the only way he can maintain his negative view of them is to reject 
their religious claim. In this informal setting, however, he realizes his sanction has 
little impact on their ability to declare their Muslim identity. In essence, his state-
ment that he doesn’t “know what kinda Muslims they are” raises two points. First, 
it is an assertion that brings into question and ultimately rejects their right to be 
Muslims. Second, even if they are acknowledged as Muslims by others, the fact 
that he is unaware of their “kind” places them in a strange and unusual category. 
Because Black Muslims have a long and reputable history in Harlem, an Islamic 
affiliation for these Africans is hotly contested by outsiders.
Talib Abdur-Rashid, a fifty-year-old Black resident and imam of the Mosque 
of Islamic Brotherhood (MIB), admitted, “Coming in contact with African 
immigrants has challenged our ideas of Africa and Africans.” He continued to say 
that the presence of Muslims from West Africa has compelled African American 
Muslims and non-Muslims to “r eadjust” their sense of themselves. It also forced 
them to rethink their idea of Africa and their relationship to it. Maxine L. Margolis’s 
work on New York’s Little Brazil unearths a similar internal shift when disparate


--- PAGE 269 ---
Black Routes to Islam262
groups meet. In her case, however, white middle-class Brazilian immigrants in 
New York were forced to abate their “racist attitudes” once they encountered mid-
dle-class African Americans in the United States. “White Brazilians contrast what 
they perceive as the ‘aggressiveness’ of African-Americans,” Margolis argues, “with 
the deferential behavior they are used to and have come to expect from African-
Brazilians back home.”
62 She adds, “In Brazil people from the lower echelons of 
society are expected to act with deference towards their purported ‘social superi-
ors.’ And, because African-Brazilians are disproportionately found in the lower 
strata of Brazilian society, Brazilians conflate such behavior with skin color.”
63
By the same token, while West African street merchants may come across fewer 
African American professionals, using an “underclass” slur, such as when Africans 
chide Black residents for having an “unwillingness” to work,
64 has less to do with 
a sort of “racial epiphany” that there are different kinds of Black people from vari-
ous social strata. It has more to do with the type of strained relations that exist 
between groups and their perceptions of each other as they vie for scarce resources.
Still, it is precisely this notion of “readjustment,” or racial “abatement,” in the 
case of white Brazilian immigrants, that is most interesting because it allows us 
to examine the dividing lines that structure our engagement with one another. 
Moreover, it provides a prism through which to understand the complex nature 
of identity formation in America. Ahmed Shahid, a Black Muslim in his fifties 
and a former manager at the Harlem African Market, asserted, “We had a glorious 
idea of Africa in our heads, until we met ‘real’ Africans.” He added, “That helped 
to change our view of things.” This “re-adjustment,” as Imam Talib stated, or 
the “change of view,” mentioned by Ahmed, is an essential way Blacks and Afri-
cans contest identities, conjure new meanings, and navigate their place in Harlem 
society. The altercation and conversation in front of Leslie’s Hair Salon speak to 
the informal ways these meanings are recognized and sustained. In other words, 
everyday interactions are places where boundaries are realized and then rehearsed. 
Rob was forced to articulate hidden assumptions about what divided Blacks and 
Africans, contentions that nonetheless played an important role in defining the 
Black and African presence in Harlem.
Conclusion
While Linda Beck perceptively writes about an intra-Muslim conflict in New 
York between West Africans and their Arab, South Asian and African American 
fellows,
65 the ethnographic context of a post-9/11 climate forces us to rethink the 
relevance of these internal fissures in today’s world. That is to say, sectarian divi-
sions have had a long and arduous history in Islam, as rifts emerged shortly after 
the religion’s founding in the seventh century. In the early period, the labels obvi-
ously were not “Wahhabist” or “moderate,” but they reflected similar political 
and theological differences with terms like “Kharijite” or “Mu’tazilite.”
66 What 
is particularly telling, then, is not the divides that separate African Muslims 
from their coreligionists. Rather, beyond shifting policies that have increased


--- PAGE 270 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 263
surveillance and restricted movement, the events of September 11 have brought 
about a new cultural order, marked by a unipolar world, and a war that has impli-
cated Islam and Muslims in unanticipated ways. As such, West African Mus-
lims have come under much closer scrutiny prior to migration and during their 
sojourn in the United States. Accordingly, many have undergone feelings of angst 
followed by bouts of depression, when pundits publically excoriate their religion 
and its prophet, essentially charging them and all Muslims with adherence to a 
faith that promotes wrongdoing or outright terrorism. Public condemnation is 
weighty enough for any immigrant, but it is especially daunting for these new-
comers already fearful of criminal violence, racial profiling, or police brutality, in 
addition to a widespread anti-Muslim backlash.
As Beck has argued, West African Muslims have begun to close ranks with 
other Muslims (mostly at the behest of their Arab and South Asian counter-
parts).
67 More importantly, however, West Africans have also actively sought to 
educate the community and local authorities about concepts of tolerance and 
nonviolence in Islam.
68 They are additionally working with federal agencies as the 
first line of defense against terrorism, albeit with some caution against feelings of 
entrapment and community suspicion.
69 These actions illustrate their ongoing 
efforts to defend their religion against what they feel are gross misrepresentations 
perpetuated by both outsiders and factions within the faith. In short, a post-9/11 
world and their reaction to it has cemented the presence of West African Muslims 
within these communities, dispelling the misplaced “myth of return” idea that 
they will migrate to America, grab the Golden Fleece and return home in a few 
years, unscathed.
70
It is evident that West African Muslims will continue to create practices that 
will help to define who they are or will become in Black America. What is less 
apparent is the result this will yield. While West African Murids have already 
developed some sort of presence for themselves, one they transported from Senegal 
and reshaped in the New York context, their Africanness is heavily nuanced with 
Islamic and Black overtones and appear to operate on a somewhat equal footing. 
West African Sunni Muslims, on the other hand, arrived in Harlem with a Mus-
lim identity that was much more universal and less particular. It will be interesting 
to see what forms their identities take as they become more ensconced in Black 
communities. Besides this, a major concern is whether or not they can afford to 
remain in a gentrified Harlem, especially when the high cost of upscale develop-
ment and rising rents threaten their daily existence. Due to religious restrictions, 
they have chosen not to acquire interest-bearing loans, and this has stretched 
their resources to the limit. In fact, the African Sunni masjids of Aqsa and Salaam 
recently comprised a strategy to stave off mounting expenses by combining their 
congregations. While the Murids own the building where their T ouba Masjid and 
House of Islam are located, African Sunnis are desperately looking to purchase 
land or a building somewhere in Harlem.
Despite the conflict between the Black patron and West African hair braider at 
Leslie’s Salon, it is evident that African Muslims are marrying American Muslims


--- PAGE 271 ---
Black Routes to Islam264
along with some Black and Latino Christians. The manner in which Rob and 
Lenny understood the rift revealed crucial fault lines between African immigrants 
and longstanding Black Harlem residents. Even so, this episode speaks to a whole 
host of formulations like class differences, a clash of worldviews and values, and 
contrasting histories and relations with state power. The incident can certainly 
be unpacked in a number of ways, which would be far beyond the scope of this 
chapter. At the same time, political coalitions are being built that involve African 
leaders and Black American officials. As more turn into permanent residents and 
U.S. citizens, they will become concerned with their political rights and civic 
duties. The political campaign of Sadique Wai is a case in point. In 2001, Wai, 
a Sierra Leonean Muslim and, reportedly, the first continental African to run for 
political office in America, was supported by a West African Muslim (Sunni) lead-
ership group called Association des Imams Africains de New York (the Association 
of African Imams of New York). During a meeting, the members agreed that a 
masjid-sponsored voter registration drive for a West African Muslim candidate 
was not only important but crucial for their continued survival. While Wai’s city 
council bid for the 35th district seat in Central Brooklyn was unsuccessful, his 
run signals a growing political presence of West Africans in the political process 
and, subsequently, marks their involvement in the power dynamics of the city. 
Moreover, other Sunnis are already organizing a national organization designed to 
mobilize West African Muslims under a single umbrella. In fact, the first national 
conference was held on Labor Day in 2001 at a hotel in Atlanta. Subsequent con-
ferences are being planned for Philadelphia and New York.
While the Murid Islamic Community in America (MICA) is still getting set-
tled in their newly renovated building, they already have plans to find a larger 
place to accommodate their growing community. Because of their deep religious 
commitment and strong work ethic, which, according to Scott Malcomson, “can 
make Protestants look like pikers,”
71 the Murids will continue to make economic 
strides and, by strengthening their transnational networks, secure a better place 
for themselves in the American economy. Besides the diligent work of street ven-
dors and traders, Murid intellectuals and professionals have been organized in 
New York since the late 1980s.
72 Like most West African associations in the dias-
pora, their parent organizations already existed in the country of origin. They 
have also been making sustained efforts to make Muridiyya more appealing to the 
American middle class. Their attempts could further the appeal of the order and 
ease their assimilation into Black communities and middle America.
Much of this activity is occurring among the first generation. We cannot be 
certain whether or not their Islamic practices will be transferred to their chil-
dren—especially when African Muslims are marrying Americans (both Muslims 
and non-Muslims). Even for those who bring brides to New York from their 
home countries, pressures to maintain a two-parent income have undermined the 
necessary time needed to pass on traditions. For some, polygyny (having a wife 
in America and another in Senegal) is the answer. Still, this does not solve the 
problem. Many immigrants fail to realize that when they come to America for its


--- PAGE 272 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 265
economic or educational opportunities, they, too, are being transformed in the 
process. The extent to which this change happens may be debatable. Nonetheless, 
while the parents are adjusting to life abroad, their children are raised by relatives 
back home with old-country ways, and, accordingly, major problems often occur 
when they are reunited.
73 Of course, the solution to these problems is not simple. 
However, if we are able to understand something about the way West African 
Muslims participate in the processes of identity construction, assimilation, and 
encounter, perhaps we will come to grasp a bit more about the current juncture in 
which we live and the new global forces shaping its destiny.
Acknowledgments
The bulk of the data for this chatper was derived from my ethnographic research 
in Harlem and the New York metropolitan area between 2000 and 2004. Updates 
were made for subsequent years until December of 2007. I thank all my respon-
dents who opened their lives to me during this time. I am likewise grateful for 
support from the Social Science Research Council, the Center for Folklife and 
Cultural Heritage, and the National Musuem of African Art at the Smithsonian 
Institution, the International Center for Migration, Ethnicity and Citizenship at 
the New School for Social Research in New York, and the Rutgers Institute on 
Ethnicity, Culture and the Modern Experience for a course release grant. I also 
want to thank Andrew Shryock for his helpful comments on an earlier draft. 
Paul Stoller’s close read of the piece and his suggestions were invaluable. Finally, 
I extend my thanks to all the anonymous reviewers for their very thoughtful 
remarks.
Notes
 1. The term Black, including its derivatives like Blackness, will be capitalized throughout 
this chapter. Like other ethnic, national, or linguistic designations that refer to a people 
(e.g., Italian, Nigerian, Chinese, etc.), I believe the name Black also speaks to the various 
experiences, cultures, worldviews, and unique speech patterns people share and the term 
should, likewise, be capitalized.
 2. Amy Waldman, “Killing Heightens the Unease Felt by Africans in New York,” New York
Times, February 14, 1999; Shaila K. Dewan, “Police Shooting of Immigrant Happened 
in Modern-Day Maze,” New York Times, May 26, 2003, Metropolitan Desk, Late Edi-
tion–Final. Standing in the vestibule of his apartment building, Amadou Diallo was killed 
in a hail of forty-one bullets shot by four plain-clothed New York City policemen, who 
were members of a special Street Crimes Unit, on February 4, 1999. Diallo was unarmed 
and reaching for his wallet for identification when the killing occurred. A $3 million 
settlement was reached in January 2004. On March 22, 2003, Ousmane Zongo was shot 
four times and killed by Bryan Conroy, an undercover New York City police officer, dur-
ing a warehouse raid on a CD/DVD pirating operation. Among other West African art 
dealers at the warehouse, Zongo was declared innocent and, two years later, his family was 
awarded a $3 million settlement.
 3. Susan Sachs, “Anger and Protest at Rite for African Killed by the Police,” New York
Times, February 13, 1999, Section A; Herb Boyd, “Homecoming for Amadou Diallo,”


--- PAGE 273 ---
Black Routes to Islam266
Amsterdam News, February 18, 1999, Section 3:1; Marianne Garvey, “Zongo Is Buried in 
Africa,” New York Post, June 10, 2003, News section.
 4. Will Herberg, Protestant, Catholic, Jew; an Essay in American Religious Sociology (Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday, 1955).
 5. Judith Weisenfeld, “On Jordan’s Stormy Banks: Margins, Center, and Bridges in African 
American Religious History,” in New Directions in American Religious History, ed. Harry 
S. Stout and D. G. Hart (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 433. For a somewhat 
dated but excellent treatise on the underclass debate and the correctness of the term itself, 
see Michael B. Katz, ed., The “Underclass” Debate: Views from History (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1983).
 6. Amy Waldman, “Killing Heightens the Unease”; Janet Allon, “A Little Africa Emerges 
Along 2 Harlem Blocks,” New York Times, December 3, 1995, Section 13:6.
 7. Western readers may be more familiar with the word mosque (many believe it to be of 
French origin) to indicate the place of worship for Muslims. The Arabic word masjid,
however, is the proper term in Islam, and it literally means the place where one prostrates, 
presumably, before God or Allah.
 8. Sylviane Diouf-Kamara, “Senegalese in New York: A Model Minority?” Black Renaissance/ 
Renaissance Noire 1, no. 2 (1997).
 9. I employ the term space or, more precisely, Muslim space to mean the social relations (e.g., 
Muslim gatherings or ritual performances), cultural productions (e.g., reinvention of old 
narratives or traditions), and physical objects (e.g., Islamic clothing, Muslim architecture, 
incense aroma, Islamic bumper stickers) that signify and sustain a Muslim presence or 
identity. For a more detailed examination, see Barbara Daly Metcalf, ed., Making Muslim
Space in North America and Europe (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996).
 10. Min Zhou, “Segmented Assimilation: Issues, Controversies, and Recent Research on the 
New Second Generation,” in The Handbook of International Migration: The American 
Experience, ed. Charles Hirschman, Philip Kasinitz, and Josh DeWind (New York: Russell 
Sage Foundation, 1999), 196–211.
 11. The term religious capital, along with other variations like social capital, cultural capital, 
and human capital, have taken on various usages and meanings over the years and across 
disciplines. I use the phrase here to mean the ways in which religious practices create a 
group network leading to the mobilization of resources and some real or imagined form of 
self-actualization.
 12. Paul Stoller, Money Has No Smell: The Africanization of New York City (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2002), 30–31.
 13. Ibid., 34.
 14. Most of this African merchant activity was situated along 125th Street between Malcolm 
X Boulevard (Lenox Avenue) and 7th Avenue.
 15. Paul Stoller, “Spaces, Places, and Fields: The Politics of West African T rading in New York 
City’s Informal Economy,” American Anthropologist 98, no. 4 (1996): 778; see also Stoller, 
Money Has No Smell, 12–14.
 16. For an extensive discussion on the relationship between objects and religious identity, 
see JoAnn D’Alisera, “I 
 Islam: Popular Religious Commodities, Sites of Inscription, 
and T ransnational Sierra Leonean Identity,” Journal of Material Culture 6, no. 1 (2001): 
91–110; see also her book An Imagined Geography: Sierra Leonean Muslims in America
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004).
 17. See Jonathan P . Hicks, “Vendors Ouster and Boycott Divide Harlem,” New York Times,
October 23, 1994.
 18. See Stoller, “Spaces, Places, and Fields,” 780.


--- PAGE 274 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 267
 19. This line was excerpted from Rudyard Kipling’s poem “The Ballad of East and West,” 
which is reprinted in many volumes. For a discussion of Rudyard Kipling’s work, see 
Kingsley Amis, Rudyard Kipling and His World (London: Thames and Hudson, 1975).
 20. For a major proponent of this argument, see the work of this late author, Samuel Hunting-
ton, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (New York: T ouchstone, 
1997).
 21. See Sam Roberts, “More Africans Enter US than in Days of Slavery,” New York Times,
February 21, 2005, Section A:1,
 22. Stoller, Money Has No Smell, 7.
 23. Madhulika Khandelwal, Becoming American, Being Indian: An Immigrant Community in 
New York City (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002), 4.
 24. John L. Jackson, Jr., Real Black: Adventures in Racial Sincerity  (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2005).
 25. Zain Abdullah, “West Africa,” in Encyclopedia of American Immigration, ed. James Ciment 
(Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 2001), 1070–78.
 26. For a general religious history of Islam and a history of Islam in West Africa, see Reza 
Aslan, No god but God: The Origins, Evolution, and Future of Islam. New York: Random 
House, 2005). See also the time-honored work by Peter B. Clarke, West Africa and Islam: 
A Study of Religious Development from the 8th to the 20th Century (London: E. Arnold, 
1982). For a concise history of identity formation and Islamization in Black West Africa, 
see Zain Abdullah, “Negotiating Identities: A History of Islamization in Black West 
Africa,” Journal of Islamic Law and Culture 10, no. 1 (2008): 5–18.
 27. P . K. Makinwa-Adebusoye, “Emigration Dynamics in West Africa,” International Migra-
tion 33, nos. 3–4 (1995): 459.
 28. In contrast to traditional understandings of international migration that view people as 
uprooted from their home countries and permanently settled in their places of destina-
tion, transnational migration or transnationalism recognizes that due to globalization, 
which refers to the processes that produce a rapid growth of new global technologies, 
worldwide mass media, and an accelerated transportation system, migrants create a single 
field of activity that links several nations simultaneously. There are many books on dif-
ferent transnational formations among migrants. For one of the first in anthropology, see 
Nina Glick Schiller, Linda Basch, and Cristina Blanc-Szanton, T owards a Transnational
Perspective on Migration: Race, Class, Ethnicity, and Nationalism Reconsidered (New York: 
New York Academy of Sciences, 1992).
 29. Margaret Peil, “Ghanaians Abroad,” African Affairs 94 (1995): 345–67.
 30. Makinwa-Adebusoye, “Emigration Dynamics in West Africa,” 435. The concept of “float-
ing population” was borrowed by P . K. Makinwa-Adebusoye from W . M. Freund. See 
W . M. Freund, “Labour Migration to the Northern Nigerian Tin Mines, 1903–1945,” 
Journal of African History 22, no. 1 (1981). Freund uses this term to describe how African 
laborers, seeking to earn cash income, were forced to migrate in and out of French and 
English colonial territories—creating a short-term population movement from poor sub-
sistence agricultural areas to more prosperous plantations and mines. Following African 
independence, the term is applied to a similar labor migration that crosses national bor-
ders and stretches as far away as Europe and the United States.
 31. Jacques Barou, “In the Aftermath of Colonization: Black African Immigrants in France,” 
in Migrants in Europe: The Role of Family, Labor and Politics, ed. Hans C. Buechler and 
Judith-Maria Buechler (New York: Greenwood, 1987).
 32. The percentages allocated for each preference category was quoted in Nancy Kleniewski, 
Cities, Change, and Conflict: A Political Economy of Urban Life (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth,


--- PAGE 275 ---
Black Routes to Islam268
1997); however, she extracted the data from Gregory Defreitas, “Fear of Foreigners: Immi-
grants as Scapegoats for Domestic Woes,” Dollars and Sense 9, no. 33 (1994).
 33. Donna L. Perry, “Rural Ideologies and Urban Imaginings: Wolof Immigrants in New York 
City,” African T oday 44, no. 2 (1997): 229–59.
 34. For a discussion on the politics of reception for migrants, see Aristide R. Zolberg, “The 
Next Waves: Migration Theory for a Changing World,” International Migration Review
23, no. 3 (1989): 403–30.
 35. U.S. Census Bureau, Characteristics of the Foreign-Born Population in the United States
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2000); U.S. Census Bureau, Char-
acteristics of the Foreign-Born Population in the United States (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1990); U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2000).
 36. Perry, “Rural Ideologies and Urban Imaginings,” 229.
 37. Scott L. Malcomson, “West of Eden: The Mouride Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,” 
Transition: An International Review 6, no. 3 (1996): 30.
 38. T o protect the identity and privacy of my respondents, I have replaced their actual names 
and that of stores with pseudonyms. For a more extensive treatment of this ethnographic 
material, see the forthcoming book by Zain Abdullah, Black Mecca: The African Muslims 
of Harlem (New York: Oxford University Press, in press).
 39. My use of the concept is derived from the work of David Mittelberg and Mary Waters. 
They employ the term to explore similar tensions between American Jews and their Israeli 
coreligionists and, under different circumstances, African Americans and Haitian immi-
grants. See David Mittelberg and Mary C. Waters, “The Process of Ethnogenesis among 
Haitian and Israeli Immigrants in the United States,” Ethnic and Racial Studies 15, no. 3 
(1992): 412–35.
 40. Diouf-Kamara, “Senegalese in New York: A Model Minority?”
 41. Ibid., 4.
 42. Peil, “Ghanaians Abroad,” 359.
 43. Evans E. Crawford and Thomas H. T roeger, The Hum: Call and Response in African Ameri-
can Preaching (Nashville: Abingdon, 1995).
 44. Of course, Murids are also Sunnis or orthodox Muslims. I refer to them as “Murid” and 
their African Muslim counterparts as “Sunni,” first, because of the way they self-identify 
and, second, because it provides a useful categorization. I thank Sylviane Diouf for her 
question regarding this. The name of this Sufi group is spelled variously: Murid, Mouride, 
or Mourid.
 45. Donal B. Cruise O’Brien, The Mourides of Senegal: The Political and Economic Organiza-
tion of an Islamic Brotherhood (Oxford: Clarendon, 1971), 1.
 46. Cheikh Anta Babou, Fighting the Greater Jihad: Amadu Bamba and the Founding of the 
Muridiyya of Senegal, 1853–1913 (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2007), 156–57.
 47. For a discussion on migrants, religion, and authenticity in the public sphere, see Ruth 
Mandel, “A Place of Their Own: Contesting Spaces and Defining Places in Berlin’s 
Migrant Community,” in Metcalf, Making Muslim Space, 147–66.
 48. For a discussion on the role T ouba plays in the lives of some African Muslims, see Mama-
dou Diouf, “The Senegalese Murid T rade Diaspora and the Making of a Vernacular Cos-
mopolitanism,” Public Culture 12, no. 3 (2000): 679–702.
 49. Victoria Ebin, “Making Room Versus Creating Space: The Construction of Spatial Cat-
egories by Itinerant Mouride T raders,” in Metcalf, Making Muslim Space, 92–109.
 50. Ibid.
 51. Shaykh Seye, “A Little We Know About Shaykh Ahmadou Bamba [sic],”A Special Publica-
tion of Murid Islamic Community in America (2001): 7–8.


--- PAGE 276 ---
West African “Soul Brothers” in Harlem 269
 52. Hildi Hendrickson, Clothing and Difference: Embodying Colonial and Post-Colonial Identi-
ties (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996).
 53. Joseph Nevadomsky and Aisien Ekhaguosa, “The Clothing of Political Identity: Costume 
and Scarification in the Benin Kingdom,” African Arts (1995): 62–100.
 54. Roland Barthes, The Fashion System (New York: Hill and Wang, 1983).
 55. For a full discussion of the Shaykh Ahmadou Bamba Day Parade, see Zain Abdullah, 
“Sufis on Parade: The Performance of Black, African and Muslim Identities,” Journal of
the American Academy of Religion (forthcoming).
 56. Robert C. Smith, Mexican New York: Transnational Lives of New Immigrants  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2006), 167.
 57. John L. Jackson, Jr., Harlemworld: Doing Race and Class in Contemporary Black America
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 43.
 58. Ibid.
 59. Ann Miles, From Cuenca to Queens: An Anthropological Story of Transnational Migration
(Austin: University of T exas Press, 2004), 32–33.
 60. Stoller, Money Has No Smell, 153.
 61. For a similar discussion on these tensions and how Islam is used as a marker of superiority, 
see Stoller, Money Has No Smell, 153, 165–66.
 62. Maxine L. Margolis, Little Brazil: An Ethnography of Brazilian Immigrants in New York City
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994), 234.
 63. Ibid., 234–35.
 64. Stoller, Money Has No Smell, 153.
 65. Linda Beck, “West African Muslims in America: When Are Muslims Not Muslims?” in 
African Immigrant Religions in America, ed. Jacob K. Olupona and Regina Gemignani 
(New York: New York University Press, 2007).
 66. These sorts of divisions are so endemic to Islam (and all religions and spiritual bodies 
have similar divisions) that there is a prophetic tradition that predicted Muslims will be 
divided into seventy-three sects. For a brief and cogent discussion, see Reza Aslan, No god
but God.
 67. Beck, “West African Muslims in America.”
 68. Bradley Hope, “T o Gain Immigrants’ T rust, Police Reach Out to African Imams, Revive 
Dormant Unit,” New York Sun, January 12, 2007, 3.
 69. Michael Moss, with Jenny Nordberg, “A Nation at War: Muslims; Imams Urged to be 
Alert for Suspicious Visitors,” New York Times, April 6, 2003, Metropolitan Desk, Late 
Edition–Final.
 70. Besides the little known fact that countless Muslims from West Africa worked at the 
World T rade Center and died in the attacks, including the cousin of Masjid Aqsa’s Ivo-
rian imam, Souleimane Konate, many believe that because West African Harlem business 
owners were Muslim, customers ostracized them the day following 9/11. See Vinette K. 
Pryce, “In Harlem, Christians, Muslims, Arabs, African-Americans, Capitalists Confront 
New American Order,” New York Amsterdam News 92, no. 38 (September 2001): 4, 2.
 71. Malcomson, “West of Eden,” 41.
 72. Diouf, “The Senegalese Murid T rade Diaspora.”
 73. For an examination of the problems West Indian immigrant parents face when reunited 
with their children, see Mary C. Waters, Black Identities: West Indian Immigrant Dreams 
and American Realities (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999).


--- PAGE 277 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 278 ---
C HAPTER  15
The Blackstone Legacy
Islam and the Rise of Ghetto 
Cosmopolitanism
Rami Nashashibi
This chapter explores the encounter of Islam with one of America’s oldest
black street gangs. The story of the Black P . Stone Nation (also known as the 
Blackstones or the El Rukns) is rife with controversy and contradiction. The New
York Times once dubbed them “the nation’s deadliest gang,” while the Chicago 
T ribune described the organization’s leader, Jeff Fort, as “the most feared man in 
Chicago.”
1 Yet the Blackstones are also the only American street gang ever to be 
invited to the White House for a presidential inauguration.2 Black Entertainment 
T elevision (BET) helped fuel the folkloric fascination with this group when it 
recently broadcast an episode of its American Gangster series that focused entirely 
on the long and complicated history of the Blackstones.
3 This chapter tries to go 
beyond some of the more sensational and criminological accounts to examine the 
broader cultural and social aspects of the Blackstones’ encounter with Islam in 
post-1960s ghetto space.
I became interested in the Blackstones first as a community organizer and 
then as a sociology graduate student at the University of Chicago. While work-
ing in different neighborhoods on Chicago’s South Side, I became familiar with 
many individuals who had been associated with the Blackstones. I was curious 
about the role of Islam in the Blackstones story. Over a ten-year period I con-
ducted multiple interviews, took copious field notes, and spent many hours with 
people connected to this group’s history. I also became increasingly interested in 
how individuals in this marginalized and highly stigmatized community tried to 
implement the tenets of Islam on Chicago’s gritty postindustrial ghetto streets. 
Declarations of an Islamic identity by the Blackstones were often dismissed by 
criminologists and researchers alike as a mere cover-up for the gang’s criminal 
activities.
4 But the Blackstones did make literal, symbolic, and transnational


--- PAGE 279 ---
Black Routes to Islam272
connections to Muslim culture and identity, and, in so doing, engaged in what I 
call ghetto cosmopolitanism, moments of extraordinary and transnational connec-
tions made among the most isolated and marginal sectors of our urban periphery.
What is ghetto cosmopolitanism and why do I suggest it is important? I begin 
with a critique of the concept of “cosmopolitanism.” In explaining the transatlan-
tic reverberations of the Haitian uprising of 1791 through 1803, literary scholar 
Ifeoma Nwankwo notes that traditional nineteenth-century understanding of 
cosmopolitanism were exceedingly elitist: “Cosmopolitanism is reserved for those 
at the top, and everyone else is viewed as comfortably provincial.” Nwankwo sees 
“black cosmopolitanism” as an alternative terrain for blacks seeking a political sub-
jectivity outside the constraining identities available for most African Americans 
during this era. “Black cosmopolitanism traces the dialects of a cosmopolitanism 
from below. It is one that came of age at the same time forces of hegemonic cos-
mopolitanism in the Atlantic world (cosmopolitanism from above) were forced 
to reconfigure themselves to deal with the new threats posed by the uprisings 
in Haiti.”
5 Defining cosmopolitanism as “the definition of oneself through the 
world beyond one’s own origins,” she concludes that black cosmopolitanism, 
“does not simply complicate, but also often undercuts traditional understanding 
of cosmopolitanism.”
Following Nwankwo, I view ghetto cosmopolitanism as a form of a “cosmo-
politanism from below.” The concept is intended to challenge the overwhelmingly 
constraining parameters of racial and national identities imposed on contempo-
rary ghetto residents by underlining the process of identity construction that gets 
configured outside the criminalizing conditions of the modern ghetto. Starting 
in the late 1960s, a combination of forces including deindustrialization, white 
flight, and the exodus of the black middle class led to the growth of a distinct 
and devastated urban landscape. Scholars have used various terms to identify and 
theorize this space: “the global ghetto,” “the excluded ghetto,” and “the hyper-
ghetto.”
6 Depictions of the American ghetto in the media and popular culture 
have invariably centered on dilapidated housing projects, pervasive violence, and 
the war on drugs. It is in this isolated and hollowed-out ghetto that the unique 
intersection of Islam with a legendary black street gang can illustrate what an 
alternative cosmopolitanism may look like. In this chapter, I provide an overview 
of the Blackstones’ encounter with Islam using primary and secondary sources, 
including various ethnographic notes, which are in quotations. I examine the 
Blackstones’ history as part of a larger account of how young and criminalized 
black men developed a cosmopolitan narrative, while constrained by the racial and 
economical constraining borders of the contemporary ghetto.
7
The Black Stone Nation to El Rukns
It is one of those long and humid Chicago summer days. A group of approxi-
mately 250, mostly men with some women and children, gather in what feels like 
a typical outdoor barbeque in a park on Chicago’s South Side. This has become an


--- PAGE 280 ---
The Blackstone Legacy 273
annual tradition for this multigenerational group of African Americans who had 
at one point or another had been connected to the almost fifty-year history of the 
Blackstones. Men in red turbans, bushy gray beards, sunglasses, and traditional 
Islamic prayer beads dangling from their necks mingle alongside those dressed in 
the more typical summer urban gear: oversized white T-shirts, do-rags, and baggy 
blue jeans. Amidst the modest consumption of alcohol and the occasional whiff 
of marijuana, there is a general deference to Muslim cultural sensibility, particu-
lar in the more vigilantly observed Islamic prohibition against the consumption 
of pork, a point I jokingly allude to as I walk by some of the men flipping the 
burgers. “Any swine on that grill akh?” I ask. “Noo sur! Not on this grill. Never!” 
a middle aged and balding man emphatically states while nodding his head and 
smiling. As time for the late afternoon Muslim prayer comes around, one of the 
men with turbans directs himself toward Mecca and performs the Adhan, call 
to prayer, in a rich and deeply melodic voice. A space clears and a much smaller 
group of the men and women gather to prostrate in prayer. I ask one of the 
younger men more about his life and to reflect on what an outsider may perceive 
as a contradiction between a gang experience and Islam. He thinks and responds 
by suggesting that, “Blackstone was his bridge to Islam, and Islam was his ladder 
to Allah.”
Such a gathering speaks in part to the long and complex story of the Black-
stones.
8 Under the leadership of Jeff Fort and Eugene Hairston, the Blackstones 
began in Chicago almost fifty years ago as the Blackstone Rangers and evolved 
into the late 1960s into the Black P . Stone Nation. The earlier references to Black-
stone came from the street bearing that name, upon which Fort and Hairston 
founded the Blackstone Rangers. In the mid-1970s, Fort, then referred to as 
Chief Malik, became associated with Moorish Americans while in prison. Dur-
ing this era, members of the Blackstone community exemplified more traditional 
aspects of cosmopolitanism even while subverting many of its key propositions. 
In the early 1970s, for instance, while still influenced by the Moorish Science 
teachings, the El Rukns started carrying alternative passports connecting them to 
a glorious African past. This provided a foundation for alternative notions of citi-
zenship that rejected the degrading racial subjectivities of black urban life. They 
also immersed themselves in the study of Arabic and Islamic theology as they 
began to identify with Muslims across the world. Significant numbers of them 
have traveled to parts of that world for spiritual pilgrimages, marriage, or study. 
This ongoing engagement with various aspects of Islam would produce a legacy 
steeped in a tradition beyond the world of their own origins.
Upon release, Fort introduced the first wave of Muslim teachings to the orga-
nization. As part of this change, Fort renamed the Black P . Stone Nation into the 
El Rukns, an Arabic word referring to the Pillars of Islam. Yet the shift to the El 
Rukns required a number of changes, which many of the Black P . Stone Nation 
members, including Chief Bull, were not willing to make, and, for some time, 
both the Black P . Stone Nation and the El Rukns existed simultaneously. Though 
members of both entities claimed partial or total loyalty to Chief Malik, other


--- PAGE 281 ---
Black Routes to Islam274
gangs as well as the police still considered both groups to be a single organization 
under his leadership. Yet many who were part of this history remember these 
events as marking a distinct moment in the evolution of the El Rukns.
The El Rukn’s transformation was most evident in the structure, language, and 
philosophy of the organization. New Arabic concepts were introduced such as 
majleek, in reference to the Islamic governmental term majlis; likewise, the terms 
amirs and officer muftis became part of a larger El Rukn lexicon. Strict protocols 
and codes of conduct were also gradually introduced into the Blackstones. Codes 
of behavior prohibited cursing and mandated rules about respecting elders, which 
were enforced by the El Rukn generals through a range of sanctions. Contrary to 
popular views about the violent imposition of these rules on El Rukn members, 
one of the worst sanctions was actually a formalized but often temporary exile 
from the El Rukn community.
During this era, the term “Black Stone” stopped referring to a street on Chi-
cago’s South Side and came to stand for the black-colored stone that lay within 
the Kabbah of Mecca, the center of the Islamic world. This convenient change 
in reference had great ideological implications for the El Rukns as they grew to 
identify with a global culture and religious tradition. Such a shift is memorialized 
in a popular part of the Blackstone literature referred to as the Blackstone Creed:
Out of the darkness into the light, Blackstone gives us courage, Blackstone gives 
us sight. Blackstone gives us something that no man should be deprived of, a hap-
piness called “Stone Love.” ALL means everything, MIGHTY means great, and 
that’s who we are, Almighty Blackstones. For many are called, but a few are chosen. 
Many seek, but only a few knows that 9,000 miles across the waters due east in the 
center of the earth lies a Blackstone called the Kabah, and we are the chosen few to 
represent it. Who so ever falls upon a stone shall be broken, and whosoever a stone 
falls upon shall be grounded to dust.
As the El Rukns adopted an overtly Islamic character in the mid-seventies and 
-eighties, they not only memorized the Blackstone Creed but a longer set of les-
sons from the Moorish Koran. They also sought to convey an explicitly Islamic 
affect through dress and other symbols. T urbans, fezzes, and medallions with pyr-
amids on them became part of their Islamic hipster apparel that clearly set them 
apart from others in the community.
After Fort’s release from prison in 1975, he, along with high-ranking members 
in his organization, formed the El Pyramid Maintenance and Management Cor-
poration. In late 1978, El Pyramid purchased a building at 3947 South Drexel 
and listed it as the El Rukn Grand Major T emple of America, though it quickly 
became know as “the Fort.” This building became the cultural and spiritual center 
of all those associated with the Blackstone Nation and would go on to occupy a 
prominent place in street lore as the ultimate gang headquarters. The Fort explic-
itly showcased the El Rukn’s Islamically informed aesthetics.


--- PAGE 282 ---
The Blackstone Legacy 275
“The Heart of the Nation”
The building originally opened on March 3, 1916, as the Oakland Square The-
ater located at 3947 South Drexel Avenue. Located in the heart of Bronzeville, 
also known as Chicago’s Black Metropolis, it was primarily used as a theater until 
the 1960s, when it became a black cultural center. Residents still recall how in the 
1960s, the theater became a site where representatives of the Black Power move-
ment were invited to speak. Leaders like Dick Gregory, Oscar Brown, Jr., H. Rap 
Brown, and Stokley Carmichael were all reported to have spoken there during the 
1960s and early 1970s.
After the purchase, the El Rukns quickly went about revamping the Fort. A 
large mural of Mecca was painted outside the building along with pictures of 
palm trees and pyramids. The rooms were transformed to reflect the group’s often 
contradictory uses of Islamic aesthetics. For instance, while one large room was 
used for regular Friday and Sunday prayer services, the second floor contained a 
fully decked disco open to the public every Friday night. Other rooms catered 
to specific functions of the organization and each one was named (or renamed) 
to reflect the shifting El Rukn understanding of Islam. In the “Kabah Room,” 
the El Rukns would hold large weekly meetings with many ceremonial proce-
dures, such as a ritual that entailed an El Rukn stylishly sauntering around a circle 
of his “brothers” while reciting a series of memorized lessons from the Moorish 
Koran. This process was referred to as “demonstrating” and was the way El Rukns 
achieved a sense of social and structural status within the organization’s hierarchy. 
In this room, there was also a throne-like structure where Jeff Fort would sit; the 
throne faced east toward Mecca and was decorated with Islamic adornments. In 
other rooms members were expected to memorize the “Six El Rukn Require-
ments,” a set of principles that drew from the Moorish Koran and lessons com-
posed by Jeff Fort himself.
The sign hanging in front of the Fort initially declared the building to be 
the “Moorish T emple of North America” but when the El Rukns incorporated 
more Arabic, the building was renamed Masjid Al-Malik. This sign was displayed 
prominently and also stated in bold “Say No to Drugs” and beneath that, “Come 
All Muslims to Salah (prayer).” The calls to prayer at the Fort bespoke the group’s 
shift away from the Moorish Science T emple and to a more orthodox understand-
ing of Sunni Islam. Many suggested that this change took place in 1982, when 
Fort came upon the Holy Qur’an in prison. Jummah prayer would henceforth be 
held at noon, Ramadan became mandatory and the study of Arabic was taken 
seriously. The El Rukns also met once a week to study the Qur’an and for Jum-
mah prayers. Many El Rukns, particularly women, also attended what was termed 
the Maghreb meeting on Sunday at sundown. El Rukns learned how to make the 
five daily prayers, including the communal prayer during the appointed Jum-
mah and Maghreb times. These gatherings served as a powerful affirmation of 
the El Rukn culture and provided a great incentive to memorize “the literature.” 
While the literature was memorized and recited dogmatically at highly ritualized 
meetings, the meaning and application of various laws and rules were constituted


--- PAGE 283 ---
Black Routes to Islam276
through a much more dynamic and interactive process. I recorded an instance 
of this process through a former El Rukn’s comic description of intricate debates 
over the use of drugs and Islamic protocol:
I remember how we used to have these long three-hour arguments about when we 
could wear our fezes. Nobody thought we couldn’t wear them when we was smok-
ing weed. There wasn’t much of a debate about that, since we all agreed weed was 
divine. The tricky debates came over when and how we could use cocaine. If we was 
using cocaine we knew that we shouldn’t be wearing our Fezzes. But the real dif-
ficult debates came when some dude who thought he was being really philosophical 
threw out a question about, how about when we smoke weed with cigarettes lined 
with coke. Now that one jammed all us up for hours.
The Fort became the site where El Rukns would spend countless hours in 
dialogue negotiating their new spiritual and cultural identity. It was an identity 
that increasingly reflected an interest in Islam as a means of identifying with a 
transnational Muslim community.
The El Rukns global outlook and outreach is epitomized by the group’s head-
line-generating contact with the Libyan government in 1986. The contact with 
Libya was the ideological and cultural culmination of the El Rukns ten-year 
shift to an internationalist worldview. One former El Rukn recalls the time as a 
moment of great excitement within the organization:
We saw Qadaffi giving all this money to Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam think-
ing that these jokers were Muslim. So Chief sent General Qadaffi this tape of all of 
us giving him salaams and demonstrating some of our knowledge and when they 
got the tape they must have been like these guys are the real Muslims, these guys 
ain’t no joke. After that Chief sent three Generals over there to visit with them and 
everything. When these guys came back they was so blown away by what they saw. 
They told us they seen each and everyone us over there. I mean for everyone of us 
here they was someone like that over there that looked and acted like us and they 
was all Muslim. Man that’s when we knew we was part of something larger than we 
ever imagined. It was deep.
This moment, which, in many ways, captures the peak of the Blackstones’ 
global Islamic consciousness, also precipitated the group’s demise. A federal crack-
down ensued charging the El Rukns with, among other things, conspiring with 
the Libyan government to commit acts of terror on American soil and resulted 
in the dismemberment of the El Rukn infrastructure and yet another indictment 
against Jeff Fort. This period of growth and spiritual development for the El 
Rukns came to a symbolic end on a day in the summer of 1989 when city officials 
had the building razed. On that day, Chicago Mayor Richard Daley addressed the 
media and a host of local residents. “T oday we are here to rid the community of the 
El Rukn blight once and for all. From this building, they ran their crime syndicate, 
terrorized the surrounding communities and sold narcotics. People were afraid to 
walk the streets and afraid to enjoy their community.” Police superintendent LeRoy


--- PAGE 284 ---
The Blackstone Legacy 277
Martin then stepped to the podium. “This is a symbol of pain and destruction,” 
he said, gesturing toward the doomed building. “It is my vision that with the 
removal of this building something can be put here to represent life for those 
young people who have to live in this neighborhood.”
9 T wenty years later, where 
the Fort once stood, a visitor can now see a chain of elegant multimillion dollar 
single-family homes in what has become one of the most gentrified parts of the 
historic Bronzeville.
Mo Town and the Reign of Young Prince Keetah
In the wake of the Fort’s demolition and the El Rukns’s effective dissolution, 
those remaining loyal to Jeff Fort, whether in prison or in the community, began 
referring to themselves as abdullahs (servants of God), attempting to signify a 
more refined understanding of Islam. A younger generation of Black P . Stone 
Nation members claiming Chief Malik as their leader reemerged in the early nine-
ties, scattered throughout Chicago. These Blackstones embraced the amalgam 
of lessons, symbols, and culture developed throughout the different periods of 
Blackstone history. In the 1990s, a Blackstone stronghold, known as Mo T own, 
emerged on Chicago’s South Side that indicated the development of a hybrid 
Blackstone identity.
10
“Mo T own or No T own” reads the scrawled graffiti adorning one of the many 
dilapidated buildings in the heart of Chicago’s South Side. Sporting different 
combinations of red and black, with flipped baseball caps cocked unabashedly to 
the far left, a group of young Black men congregate outside a Palestinian owned 
liquor and grocery store. Outside, along the wall an arched BPSN (Black P . Stone 
Nation) is clumsily spray painted on a large five-pointed star and crescent. Inside, 
overlooking three rows of outrageously priced groceries and other household 
items, shelves of liquor dwarf the cash register. A verse of the Holy Quran adorns 
a plastic transparent casing holding cigarettes, condoms, lighters, Phillie blunts 
and other miscellaneous items. A young Palestinian man stocking the refrigera-
tor with sagging jeans, cap busted to the left and cigarette drooping from the 
side of his mouth, pauses to engage in an elaborate, sophisticated and clearly 
well-rehearsed handshake with a Blackstone. The Stones smile as the young and 
recent immigrant tries his best to shade an unmistakably Arab accent with a Black 
vernacular. Somewhere between gang nomenclature and a hardcore fellahin (peas-
ant) Palestinian Arabic, the youth manages to rattle off something eliciting great 
amusement from a group of Stones and second generation Palestinian youth con-
versing in the corner. Stepping up to the register I offer the Muslim greetings of 
peace, to which the reply, wa’alaikum salaam (and may peace also be with you) 
echoes throughout the store.
While Mo T own grew to prominence after the destruction of the Fort, the 
history of this stronghold should be understood within the larger racial context 
of thee white working class neighborhoods of Chicago’s South Side. Among the 
small number of black families moving into these neighborhoods during the late


--- PAGE 285 ---
Black Routes to Islam278
1960s and early 1970s, young black men often joined groups like the Blackstones 
for protection from violence of white gangs like the Gaylords and the Popes. One 
resident known as Slick Cat recalled the moment when the El Rukns first stood 
decisively against the Gay Lords, establishing a balance of power in the gang 
territory:
Another time, me and my brother-in-law went over to the park to celebrate his 
birthday, shit when we were in the car and went over the bridge when I turned over. 
There was shit 200 maybe 300 of those son of a guns coming across that bridge. 
They were like, “Go home niggers, go home niggers!” They had bats, rakes and all 
kinds of stuff. They was trying to kill us. Man it was something else on Bishop, 
Laflin and Justine. When the El Rukns came over, and we went over to the park, 
talking about we can’t come over there shit. When the Els came we all went over 
to that Park tat tat tat tat (simulating machine-gun fire), you should’ve seen them 
motherfuckers running like hell and the next 4th of July, we all was well. Children 
and kids could run around and play and everything, no more problems, they started 
moving out. They moved out to Beverly Hills, you know what I mean, I mean when 
love and unity is together, man that’s something you just can’t stop! Now we just 
ain’t going just let you hurt us now . . . We ran the first time but we ain’t running 
no more.
For residents like Slick Cat, it was this convergence of “love and unity,” two fun-
damental teachings of the Blackstones, that he remembers fondly.
Many of the El Rukn generals in places like Mo T own were known as practicing 
Muslims who saw Islam as the Blackstones’ official religion and who infused the 
youth around the community with a respect and deference for the Muslim faith. 
One such youth was Prince Keetah, Fort’s son, who was mentored and raised by 
older El Rukns, and who grew into a fearsome leader who imposed a remarkable 
level of discipline and order in Mo T own, helping make it one of the largest and 
most intimidating stretches of gang territory in Chicago’s South Side. Keetah’s 
reputation is still part of Mo T own’s lore. Young children swear oaths on his name, 
and many of the Blackstones who were considered Keetah’s right-hand men went 
so far as to tattoo “YCK” (Young Chief Keetah) on their foreheads and finger-
tips. Keetah’s appreciation for, and emphasis on, Muslim principles and teachings 
drew on his father’s teachings and what he had learned from older El Rukns. 
Keetah was a figure of contradictions: he underlined the Blackstone commitment 
to learning and respect for others as aspects of Islam, while peddling drugs and 
practicing violence to consolidate Blackstone power in Mo T own. Even after his 
arrest, from behind prison walls, Keetah would repeatedly urge the Blackstones to 
continue consulting the Qur’an and following the teachings of Islam.
T oday, nostalgia for an earlier era among the Blackstones across Chicago has 
curiously made certain parts of the city more receptive and accommodating of 
Muslim immigrants than most other communities. Some Blackstones often spoke 
of Mo T own as if it were an indigenous part of the Muslim world.


--- PAGE 286 ---
The Blackstone Legacy 279
“The Palestinian Moes”
During Keetah’s era, a generation of Palestinian children had grown up overseeing 
their parents’ liquor stores or other businesses in the African American commu-
nity and interacted regularly with the Blackstones. Keetah worked hard at build-
ing ties with second generation Palestinian Blackstones while he was running Mo 
T own. At one point in the mid 1990s, some of these youth created their own 
gang known as the Arabian Posse—also known as the TAP Boys. The TAP Boys’ 
relationship with a well-entrenched entity like the Blackstones became critical 
in lending these Palestinian American youth legitimacy in the eyes of opposing 
gang members. These youth often lived in surrounding inner-city neighborhoods 
and spent much time cosorting with the Blackstones or other street gangs. Even 
when their families moved out of the city into the suburbs they came back to 
places like Mo T own to “represent.” Palestinian youth in Mo T own often sug-
gested that they affiliated with the Blackstones because of their mutual respect 
for Islam as opposed to other gangs who they perceived as “anti-Muslim.” The 
youth were given a sense of importance as they were sought by the Blackstones at 
meetings to help them learn the Islamic prayers or pronounce different types of 
greetings. Other Palestinians, especially those who had spent time incarcerated, 
were also elevated as teachers of the Qur’an, even though, in many cases, second-
generation Palestinians growing up on Chicago’s South Side knew little about 
Islam, sometimes knowing less than the average Blackstone. For example, one 
Palestinian youth told me of his first experience in Cook Country Jail, in which 
the Blackstones offered him protection after they found out he was Muslim: “It 
was incredible how nice they treated me, hooked me up with cigarettes, slippers 
and food. Before we all ate, they asked me to read Fatiha and then we ate together, 
just like one Muslim family. They would always come to me and ask me how to 
read this and that from the Quran, I was embarrassed to tell them I didn’t know 
anything about my own religion, what an embarrassment. They’re more Muslim 
then any of these perpetuating fake wanna be Arab out here.”
Although this individual’s knowledge of Islam was severely limited, the Black-
stones valued his ability to help them in Arabic pronunciation of qur’anic verses. 
One night, the Palestinian youth was accosted and beaten up by a couple of 
Gangster Disciples. The following morning the Blackstones demanded that the 
Disciple leadership punish the culprits of the action or threatened that a serious 
conflict would ensue between the two gangs. The Disciples respected the order 
and—in the presence of the young Palestinian—carried out the “violation,” as 
punishments carried out by gang members on a fellow member are called. Due 
to incidents such as these, many Palestinian youth who grew up in the inner city 
during this era hold places like Mo T own in special regard as one of the historical 
bases of the Blackstones. (Incidentally, identification with the Blackstones even 
traveled to Palestine, as members of Chicago’s Palestinian American community 
voyaged back and forth between Ramallah and Chicago in the 1990s. Upon 
returning to villages and cities of Palestine, these Chicago-raised youth would 
once again find that familiarity and proximity to the experience with entities like


--- PAGE 287 ---
Black Routes to Islam280
the Blackstones resonated among a younger generation of Palestinians growing up 
in the West Bank and Gaza.)
Forging an urban masculinity while adhering to an austere Muslim lifestyle is 
challenging for young black and Palestinian men who situate themselves within 
the Blackstone legacy. Individuals I interviewed have repeatedly talked about this 
tension as arising from the contradictory struggles of immigrant Muslims to sus-
tain their spiritual identity, while succeeding economically in the West. The abun-
dant number of liquor stores run by Arab Muslims in cities like Chicago reflects 
this tension. Many associated with the Blackstone legacy talk about their contra-
diction of selling drugs and asserting a Muslim identity with a direct reference to 
their “Arab brothers” selling liquor and other haram (prohibited) items. On sev-
eral occasions, I have been in such spaces and observed debates take place among 
Blackstones hanging out in the store with an Arab Muslim liquor storeowner over 
the religious implications of selling pork or alcohol for both of them as Muslims. 
These conversations show the Blackstones’ ability to identify with the presence 
of middlemen minorities, in this case Arab Muslims, in a way that most other 
residents do not; the Blackstones, in fact, often themselves acting as middlemen 
between the Arab grocers and the larger community. This identification is a subtle 
indicator of a ghetto cosmopolitanism, which emerges from an interpretation of 
Islam adapted to local urban dynamics.
Conclusion
I have presented the idea of ghetto cosmopolitanism as a way to challenge the 
more exclusive notions of cosmopolitanism associated with the contemporary 
global era. Not unlike the “cosmopolitanism from below” that served to under-
cut the racist and elitist notions of nineteenth-century cosmopolitanism and its 
implications for black subjectivity, the Blackstone legacy’s long and complicated 
relationship with Islam is illustrative of a ghetto cosmopolitanism that undercuts 
reigning notions of cosmopolitanism. The encounter of Islam with the Black-
stone legacy is an instance of cosmopolitanism that takes place in the context 
of globalization and which challenges us to reconsider the role that Islam has 
played among the most marginalized and stigmatized actors in this space. While 
the Blackstones were not the only street organization in Chicago with a relation-
ship to Islam, and many individuals associated with this group did not, and do 
not, identify themselves as observant Muslims, this group represents a broader 
urban engagement with Islamic belief and culture.
11 I find that one of the Black-
stones’ most powerful legacies is a repository of terms and practices that render 
one of the most stigmatized segments of urban society the most open to accepting 
and understanding Islamic practices and embracing Muslim immigrants. In the 
course of my interviews, I came across a significant number of men associated 
with the Blackstone legacy who have traveled to parts of the Muslim world for 
the hajj, religious study, or even marriage. Others became intimately familiar with 
the etiquette, religious symbolism, customs, and transnational networks of first


--- PAGE 288 ---
The Blackstone Legacy 281
and second-generation South East Asians and Arab Muslim immigrants. Such 
discursive knowledge gets infused into the everyday ghetto interactions. It is this 
knowledge and corresponding set of practices that illustrate an alternative cosmo-
politanism working in the heart of a marginal ghetto space. Moreover, the Qur’an 
and the Arabic language become associated with an alternative body of knowledge 
that is often seen as an important extension of El Rukn and Blackstone identity. 
T oday, many individuals connected to the Blackstone legacy see themselves as 
part of a larger Muslim community. In many cases, they may be the only segment 
of similar populations who have managed to connect with the international arena 
and to think of themselves outside the parameters of one block or any specific 
Blackstone neighborhood.
The confining, criminalizing, and racializing parameters of the postindustrial 
ghetto are typically left out of analyses of cosmopolitism. Moreover, the role of 
Islam in the development of such cosmopolitan movements in these spaces is 
rarely acknowledged. The Blackstone legacy’s complex intersection with Islam is 
thus particularly instructive. By introducing the concept of “ghetto cosmopoli-
tanism,” I have tried to highlight both the economic and political realities of the 
black urban experience in America as well as the cultural and religious innovation 
that gangs such as the Blackstones were able to introduce under such conditions.
Notes
 1. “Five Draw Long Sentences for T errorism Scheme,” New York Times, December 31, 1987, 
and the “The Fall of the EL Rukns,” Editorial, Chicago Tribune, September 16, 1991, 
16.
 2. This took place in 1969 with President Richard Nixon. Most speculate that the invitation 
was extended in gratitude for an unusual but critical role that the Blackstones played in 
supporting the Republicans in 1968 elections among Chicago’s black community.
 3. The American Gangster series focusing on the Blackstones aired on BET in Novem-
ber 2007. It can be seen at http://www.bet.com/OnTV/BETShows/americangangster/
americangangster_gangsterguide_jefffort.htm.
 4. See, for instance, criminologist George Knox’s well-regarded introductory text on gangs 
and their usage of religious symbolism: “Fort used religion as a springboard for his first 
major foray in gang organization. The religious identity . . . Moorish Science T emple of 
America and Islamic influences was just a front.” George W . Knox, An Introduction to
Gangs (Bristol, IN: Wydom Hall, 1994).
 5. Ifeoma Kiddoe Nwankwo. Black Cosmopolitanism: Racial Consciousness and Transnational 
Identity in the Nineteenth-Century Americas (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 2005).
 6. The scholars most associated with, “the global ghetto,” “the excluded ghetto,” and the 
“hyperghetto” are Carl H. Nightingale, “A Tale of Three Global Ghettos: How Arnold 
Hirsch Helps Us Internationalize U.S. Urban History,” Journal of Urban History  29, no. 
3 (2003): 257–71; Peter Marcuse “The Ghetto of Exclusion and the Fortified Enclave,” 
American Behavioral Scientist 41, no. 3 (1997): 311–26; and Loic Wacquant, Urban Out-
casts: A Comparative Sociology of Advanced Marginality (Polity, 2008).
 7. In piecing together the brief historical narrative of the Blackstone encounter with Islam, I 
have relied almost exclusively on my interviews and field notes over the years. While there 
are a few books, like R. T . Sales’s The Blackstone Rangers (Random Books, 1971), which


--- PAGE 289 ---
Black Routes to Islam282
provide a look at the early history and formation of the group, there are few academic 
sources that examine the question of the Blackstones’ encounter with Islam.
 8. One potential point of confusion in referencing the larger Blackstone legacy is the many 
names associated with the group: the Blackstone Rangers, Black P . Stone Nation, and El 
Rukns all refer to different stages in the Blackstones’ ideological and cultural development. 
For simplification purposes, I use the term “Blackstones” in referring to all these stages.
 9. Chinta Strausberg, “El Rukn’s headquarters smashed,” Chicago Defender, June 7 1990.
 10. Among themselves and others, Blackstones started to use the term “Mo” in the early 
1990s, hearkening back to the times when the El Rukns called themselves Moorish Ameri-
cans. While the genealogy of the term is relatively unknown among many who use it, the 
ubiquitous greeting of “what’s up Mo” became a trademark of the Blackstone parlance. 
Over the years, Kanye West, Commom, Lupe Fiasco, and other Chicago rappers have lent 
additional caché to the term by incorporating it into many of their tracks.
 11. The Vicelords, the Four Corner Hustlers, and even the Latin Kings have all incorporated 
some Islamic elements into their structures and literature over the last several decades.


--- PAGE 290 ---
C HAPTER  16
Jihadis in the Hood
Race, Urban Islam, 
and the War on Terror
Hishaam D. Aidi
In his classic novel MUMBO JUMBO, Ishmael Reed satirizes white America’s
age-old anxiety about the “infectiousness” of black culture with “Jes Grew,” an 
indefinable, irresistible carrier of “soul” and “blackness” that spreads like a virus 
contaminating everyone in its wake from New Orleans to New York.
1 Reed sug-
gests that the source of the Jes Grew scourge is a sacred text, which is finally 
located and destroyed by Abdul Sufi Hamid, “the Brother on the Street.” In a turn 
of events reminiscent of Reed’s storyline, commentators are advancing theories 
warning of a dangerous epidemic spreading through our inner cities today, infect-
ing misguided, disaffected minority y outh and turning them into anti-Ameri-
can terrorists. This time, though, the pathogen is Islam—more specifically, an 
insidious mix of radical Islam and black militancy.
Since the capture of John Walker Lindh, the Marin County “black nationalist”-
turned-Taliban,
2 and the arrest of the would-be terrorist José Padilla, a Brooklyn-
born Puerto Rican ex-gang member who encountered Islam while in prison, 
terrorism experts and columnists have been warning of the “Islamic threat” in 
the American underclass and alerting the public that the ghetto and the prison 
system could very well supply a fifth column to Osama bin Laden and his ilk. 
Writing in New York City’s Daily News, the social critic Stanley Crouch reminded 
us that in 1986, the powerful Chicago street gang al-Rukn—known in the 1970s 
as the Blackstone Rangers—was arrested en masse for receiving $2.5 million from 
Libya’s strongman, Muammar Qaddafi, to commit terrorist acts in the United 
This chapter originally appeared in Middle East Report, Issue 224, Fall 2002.


--- PAGE 291 ---
Black Routes to Islam284
States. “We have to realize there is another theater in his unprecedented war, one 
headquartered in our jails and prisons,” Crouch cautioned.
Chuck Colson of the evangelical American Christian Mission, which ministers 
to inmates around the country, penned a widely circulated article for the Wall Street
Journal, charging that “al-Qaeda training manuals specifically identify America’s 
prisoners as candidates for conversion because they may be ‘disenchanted with 
their country’s policies’ . . . As U.S. citizens, they will combine a desire for ‘pay-
back’ with an ability to blend easily into American culture.” Moreover, he wrote, 
“Saudi money has been funneled into the American Muslim Foundation, which 
supports prison programs,” reiterating that America’s “alienated, disenfranchised 
people are prime targets for radical Islamists who preach a religion of violence, of 
overcoming oppression by jihad.”
3
Since September 11, 2001, more than a few American-born black and Latino 
jihadis have indeed been discovered behind enemy lines. Before Padilla (Abdal-
lah al-Muhajir), there was Aqil, the troubled Mexican American youth from San 
Diego found in an Afghan training camp fraternizing with one of the men accused 
of killing the journalist Daniel Pearl. Aqil, now in custody, is writing a memoir 
called My Jihad. In February, the New York Times ran a story about Hiram T or-
res, a Puerto Rican whose name was found in a bombed-out house in Kabul on 
a list of recruits to the Pakistani group Harkat al-Mujahedeen, which has ties to 
al-Qaeda. T orres, also known as Mohamed Salman, graduated first in his New 
Jersey high school class and briefly attended Yale before dropping out and heading 
to Pakistan in 1998. He has not been heard from since. A June edition of U.S.
News and World Report mentions a group of African Americans, their whereabouts 
currently unknown, who studied at a school closely linked to the Kashmiri militia 
Lashkar-e Taiba. L ’Houssaine Kerchtou, an Algerian government witness, claims 
to have seen “some black Americans” training at al-Qaeda bases in Sudan and 
Pakistan.
Earlier this year, the movie Kandahar caused an uproar in the American intel-
ligence community because the African American actor who played a doctor was 
the American fugitive David Belfield. Belfield, who converted to Islam at Howard 
University in 1970, is wanted for the 1980 murder of the Iranian dissident Ali 
Akbar Tabatabai in Washington. Belfield has lived in T ehran since 1980 and goes 
by the name Hassan Tantai.
4 The two most notorious accused terrorists now in 
U.S. custody are black Europeans, the French Moroccan Zacarias Moussaoui and 
the English Jamaican shoe bomber, Richard Reid, who were radicalized in the 
same mosque in the London ghetto of Brixton. Moussaoui’s ubiquitous mug shot 
in orange prison garb, looking like any American inner-city youth with his shaved 
head and goatee, has intrigued many and unnerved some. “My first thought when 
I saw his photograph was that I wished he looked more Arabic and less black,” 
wrote Sheryl McCarthy in Newsday. “All African-Americans need is for the first 
guy to be tried on terrorism charges stemming from this tragedy to look like one 
of our own.”


--- PAGE 292 ---
Jihadis in the Hood 285
But assessments of an “Islamic threat” in the American ghetto are sensational 
and ahistorical. As campaigns are introduced to stem the “Islamic tide,” there 
has been little probing of why alienated black and Latino youth might gravitate 
toward Islamism. There has been no commentary comparable to what the British 
race theorist Paul Gilroy wrote about Richard Reid and the group of Britons held 
at Guantánamo Bay: “The story of black European involvement in these geopo-
litical currents is disturbingly connected to the deeper history of immigration 
and race politics.” Reid, in particular, “manifest[s] the uncomfortable truth that 
British multiculturalism has failed.”
5
For over a century, African American thinkers—Muslim and non-Muslim—
have attempted to harness the black struggle to global Islam, while leaders in 
the Islamic world have tried to yoke their political causes to African American 
liberation. Islamism, in the U.S. context, has come to refer to differing ideologies 
adopted by Muslim groups to galvanize social movements for “Islamic” politi-
cal ends—the Nation of Islam’s “buy back” campaigns and election boycotts or 
Harlem’s Mosque of Islamic Brotherhood lobbying for benefits and cultural and 
political rights from the state. Much more rarely, it has included the jihadi strain 
of Islamism, embraced by foreign-based or foreign-funded Islamist groups (such 
as al-Rukn) attempting to gain American recruits for armed struggles against 
“infidel” governments at home and abroad. The rise of Islam and Islamism in 
American inner cities can be explained as a product of immigration and racial 
politics, deindustrialization and state withdrawal, and the interwoven cultural 
forces of black nationalism, Islamism, and hip-hop that appeal strongly to disen-
franchised black, Latino, Arab, and South Asian youth.
Islam in the Transatlantic
The West Indian–born Christian missionary Edward Blyden was the first Afro-
diasporan scholar to advocate an alliance between global Islam and Pan-African-
ism, the system of thought that is considered his intellectual legacy. After studying 
Arabic in Syria and living in West Africa, Blyden became convinced that Islam 
was better suited for people of African descent than Christianity because of what 
he saw as the lack of racial prejudice, the doctrine of brotherhood, and the value 
placed on learning in Islam. His seminal tome, Christianity, Islam and the Negro 
Race (1888), laid the groundwork for a Pan-Africanism with a strong Islamic cul-
tural and religious undergirding.
Blyden’s counterpart in the Arab world was the Sudanese Egyptian intellectual 
Duse Muhammad Ali. In 1911, after the First Universal Races Congress held at 
the University of London, Duse Mohammad launched the African Times and
Orient Review, a journal championing national liberal struggles and abolitionism 
“in the four quarters of the earth” and promoting solidarity among “non-whites” 
around the world. Published in both English and Arabic, the journal was circu-
lated across the Muslim world and African diaspora, running articles by intel-
lectuals from the Middle East to the West Indies (including contributions from


--- PAGE 293 ---
Black Routes to Islam286
Booker T . Washington). Duse would later become mentor to the American black 
nationalist Marcus Garvey when he worked at the Review in London in 1913 and 
would leave his indelible stamp on Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Asso-
ciation, whose mission “to reclaim the fallen of the race, to administer and assist 
the needy” would become the social-welfare principles animating myriad urban 
Islamic and African American movements.
6 In 1926, Duse created the Universal 
Islamic Society in Detroit, which would influence, if not inspire, Noble Drew 
Ali’s Moorish Science T emple and Fard Muhammad’s T emple of Islam, both seen 
as precursors of the modern-day Nation of Islam (NOI).
Blyden’s and Duse’s ideas, which underlined universal brotherhood, human 
rights, and “literacy” (i.e., the study of Arabic), had a profound impact on sub-
sequent Pan-Africanist and Islamic movements in the United States, influenc-
ing leaders such as Garvey, Elijah Muhammad, and Malcolm X. The latter two 
inherited an “Arabo-centric” understanding of Islam, viewing the Arabs as God’s 
“chosen people” and Arabic as the language of intellectual jihad—ideas still cen-
tral to the Nation of Islam today. The NOI’s mysterious founder, Fard Muham-
mad, to whom Elijah Muhammad referred as “God himself,” is widely believed 
to have been an Arab.
7 “Fard was an Arab who loved us so much so as to bring us 
al-Islam,” Minister Louis Farrakhan has said repeatedly. For the past thirty-five 
years, Farrakhan’s top adviser has been the Palestinian American Ali Baghdadi, 
though the two fell out recently when Farrakhan condemned suicide bombings.
8
In the NOI “typologist” theology, Arabs are seen as a “Sign” of a future people, a 
people chosen by God to receive the Qur’an but who have strayed, and so God 
has chosen the American Negro to correct “Arab misunderstanding” of God’s 
ordinances and to spread Islam in the West.
9
Malcolm X was probably the most prominent African American Muslim leader 
to place the Civil Rights Movement not just in a Pan-Islamic and Pan-African 
context but also within the global struggle for Third World independence. In 
addition to his historic visit to Mecca, where he would witness “Islamic universal-
ism” and eventually renounce the NOI’s race theology, Malcolm X would con-
fer with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser and Algerian President Ahmed 
Ben Bella, leaders of the Arab League and Organization of African Unity, respec-
tively, and consider taking African American problems to the floor of the United 
Nations General Assembly.
When Warith Deen Muhammad, who had been educated at Al-Azhar Univer-
sity, took over the Nation of Islam after the death of his father, Elijah, in 1975, he 
renounced his father’s race theology and changed his organization’s name to the 
World Community of al-Islam in the West to emphasize the internationalist ties 
of Muslim over the nationalistic bonds of African Americans—leading to a split 
with Farrakhan who then proceeded to rebuild the NOI in its old image. Arab 
and Islamic states would persistently woo Warith Deen Muhammad, apparently 
eager to gain influence over U.S. foreign policy. “But,” lamented one scholar, “he 
has rejected any lobbying role for himself, along with an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to employ the international pressure of Arab states to improve the social 
conditions of black Americans.”
10


--- PAGE 294 ---
Jihadis in the Hood 287
Targeting the Disaffected
Is there any truth to the claim that Muslim states or Islamist groups specifically 
targeted African Americans to lobby the U.S. government or to recruit them in 
wars overseas? U.S. News and World Report notes that, just in the 1990s, between 
1,000 and 2,000 Americans—of whom “a fair number are African-Americans”—
volunteered to fight with Muslim armies in Bosnia, Chechnya, Lebanon, and 
Afghanistan. Many were recruited by radical imams in the United States. Accord-
ing to several reports, in the late 1970s, the Pakistani imam Sheikh Syed Gilani, 
now on the run for his alleged role in Daniel Pearl’s murder, founded a movement 
called al-Fuqara (The Poor), with branches in Brooklyn and New Jersey, where he 
preached to a predominantly African American constituency. Using his Soldiers
of Allah video, Gilani recruited fighters for the anti-Soviet jihad in Afghanistan. 
Likewise, according to the FBI, working out of his “jihad office” in Brooklyn, the 
blind cleric Sheikh Omar Abel Rahman raised millions of dollars for the Afghan 
resistance and sent two hundred volunteers to join the mujahedeen.
According to a recent study, Saudi Arabia has historically exerted the strongest 
influence over the American Muslim community, particularly since the rise of 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in 1973.
11 Through the Islamic 
Society of North America (ISNA), Muslim Student Associations, the Islamic Cir-
cle of North America, and the Saudi-sponsored World Muslim League, the Saudis 
have financed summer camps for children, institutes for training imams, speak-
ers’ series, the distribution of Islamic literature, mosque building, and proselytiz-
ing. In addition, the Saudi embassy, through its control of visas, decides who in 
the American Muslim community goes on the pilgrimage to Mecca. But there is 
absolutely no evidence suggesting a connection between this influence and terror-
ism against the United States, as has been alleged by several media outlets.
12
In the early 1980s, Iran attempted to counter Saudi influence over the Ameri-
can Muslim community and to gain African American converts to Shiism. On 
November 13, 1979, Ayatollah Khomeini had ordered the release of thirteen Afri-
can American hostages, stating that they were “oppressed brothers” who were also 
victims of American injustice. In 1982, a study commissioned by the Iranian 
government to appraise the potential for Shiite proselytizing in black America 
attacked the Nation of Islam and Sunni Muslims for their “insincerity” and 
argued that Saudi proselytizers were in cahoots with the CIA. The report stated, 
“Besides being dispirited, the African-American Muslims feel that nobody cares 
about them. [Everyone] only wants to use them for their own personal reasons 
as they languish . . . The majority of African-Americans really want pure Islam. 
However, until and unless someone is willing, qualified and able to effectively 
oppose active Saudi oil money . . . the Islamic movement in America will plod on 
in a state of abject ineptitude and ineffectiveness.”
13 But the Iranian revolution 
did not have much influence over African American Muslims, with the notable 
exception of the aforementioned Belfield.
The majority of African Americans, and increasingly Latinos, who embrace 
Islam do not end up wearing military fatigues in the mountains of Central Asia.


--- PAGE 295 ---
Black Routes to Islam288
For most, Islam provides order, meaning, and purpose to nihilistic and chaotic 
lives, but even if most do not gravitate toward radical Islamism, why the attrac-
tion to Islam in the first place?
Exiting the West
Many blacks and Latinos in American metropolises live in poverty and feel 
alienated from the country’s liberal political and cultural traditions. Repelled by 
America’s permissive consumerist culture, many search for a faith and culture 
that provides rules and guidelines for life. Often they are drawn to strands of 
Christianity that endorse patriarchy, “family values,” and abstinence. But many 
young African Americans, and increasingly Latinos, reject Christianity, which 
they see as the faith of a guilty and indifferent establishment. Christian America 
has failed them and stripped them of their “ethnic honor.” Estranged from the 
United States and, in the case of Latinos, from their parents’ homelands, many 
minority youth search for a sense of community and identity in a quest that has 
increasingly led them to the other side of the Atlantic to the Islamic world. Sunni 
Islam, the heterodox Nation of Islam, and quasi-Muslim movements such as the 
Five Percenters and Nuwaubians allow for a cultural and spiritual escape from the 
American social order that often entails a wholesale rejection of Western culture 
and civilization.
Family breakdown and family values come up often in conversations and ser-
mons at inner-city mosques as explanations for the younger generation’s disen-
chantment with American society and liberalism. The decline of the two-parent 
household, which preoccupies discussions of family values, has economic and 
political roots. In the 1970s and 1980s, the middle classes left for the suburbs, 
investors relocated, and joblessness in urban areas increased rapidly. As one analyst 
observed, “The labor market conditions which sustained the ‘male breadwinner’ 
family have all but vanished.” Matrifocal homes arose in its place. The new urban 
political economy of the 1980s—state withdrawal and capital flight—led to “the 
creation of a new set of orientations that places less value on marriage and rejects 
the dominance of men as a standard for a successful husband-wife family.”
14 But 
in the view of many inner-city Muslim leaders, family breakdown and economic 
dislocation result from racism, Western decadence, and immorality—they are the 
effect of straying from the way of God. Raheem Ocasio, imam of New York’s 
Alianza Islamica, contends, “Latinos in the society at large, due to pressures of 
modern Western culture are fighting a losing battle to maintain their traditional 
family structure . . . Interestingly, the effects of an Islamic lifestyle seem to miti-
gate the harmful effects of the Western lifestyle and have helped restore and rein-
force traditional family values. Latino culture is at its root patriarchal, so Islam’s 
clearly defined roles for men as responsible leaders and providers and women as 
equally essential and complementary were assimilated. As a result, divorce among 
Latino Muslim couples is relatively rare.”
15
By embracing Islam, previously invisible, inaudible, and disaffected individu-
als gain a sense of identity and belonging to what they perceive as an organized,


--- PAGE 296 ---
Jihadis in the Hood 289
militant, and glorious civilization that the West takes very seriously. One Chicano 
ex-convict tried to explain the allure of Islam for Latino inmates and why Mexican 
Americans sympathize with Palestinians: “The old Latin American revolutionaries 
converted to atheism, but the new faux revolutionary Latino American prisoner 
can just as easily convert to Islam . . . There reside in the Latino consciousness 
at least three historical grudges, three conflicting selves: The Muslim Moor, the 
Catholic Spanish and the indigenous Indian . . . [For the Mexican inmates] the 
Palestinians had their homeland stolen and were oppressed in much the same way 
as Mexicans.”
16
“Bringing Allah to Urban Renewal”
In the wretched social and economic conditions of the inner city, and in the face 
of government apathy, Muslim organizations operating in the ghetto and prisons 
deliver materially. As in much of the Islamic world, where the state fails to provide 
basic services and security, Muslim organizations appear, funding community 
centers, patrolling the streets, and organizing people.
As the state withdrew and capital fled from the city in the Reagan-Bush era, 
social institutions and welfare agencies disappeared, leaving an urban wasteland. 
Churches have long been the sole institutions in the ghetto, but Islamic institu-
tions have been growing in African American neighborhoods for the past two 
decades. In Central Harlem, Brownsville, and East New York—areas deprived 
of job opportunities—dozens of mosques (Sunni, NOI, Five Percenter, and 
Nuwaubian) have arisen, standing cheek by jowl with dozens of churches that try 
to provide some order and guidance in these neighborhoods. In the ghettoes of 
Brooklyn, on Chicago’s South Side, and in the barrios of East Harlem and East 
Los Angeles, where, aside from a heavy police presence, there is little evidence of 
government, Muslim groups provide basic services. The Alianza Islamica of New 
York, headquartered in the South Bronx, offers afterschool tutorials, equivalency 
diploma instruction for high school dropouts, marriage counseling, substance-
abuse counseling, AIDS-awareness campaigns, and sensitivity talks on Islam for 
the New York Police Department. The Alianza has confronted gangs and drug 
posses, training young men in martial arts to help clean up the streets of the bar-
rios with little reliance on trigger-happy policemen.
One quasi-Islamic group, the United Nation of Islam, which broke away 
from Farrakhan’s NOI in 1993, has adopted the slogan “Bringing Allah to Urban 
Renewal” and is resurrecting blighted urban neighborhoods across the country, 
opening up health clinics, employment centers, restaurants, and grocery stores 
that do not sell red meat, cigarettes, or even soda because they are bad for cus-
tomers’ health.
17 The United Nation of Islam does not accept government funds, 
fearing that federal money would compromise its mission of “Civilization Devel-
opment.” Similarly, the NOI conducts “manhood training” and mentoring pro-
grams in inner cities across the country; earning the praise of numerous scholarly 
reports, which claim that young men who participate in these programs for an


--- PAGE 297 ---
Black Routes to Islam290
extended time show “positive self-conception,” improved grades, and less involve-
ment in drugs and petty crime.18
In addition to delivering basic services, the NOI today tries to provide jobs and 
housing. The NOI’s Los Angeles branch is currently buying up homes for home-
less young men (calling them “Houses of Knowledge and Discipline”), build-
ing AIDS treatment clinics, and starting up a bank specializing in small loans.
19
In 1997, Farrakhan announced a “three-year economic program” that aimed to 
eliminate “unemployment, poor housing and all the other detriments that plague 
our community.”
20 Farrakhan seems to have reverted to the strategies of economic 
nationalism pursued by Elijah Muhammad. One scholar argues that under Elijah, 
the NOI was essentially a development organization emphasizing thrift and eco-
nomic independence among poor black people, with such success that it turned 
many followers into affluent entrepreneurs. The organization itself evolved into a 
middle-class establishment, allowing Warith Deen Muhammad, after his father’s 
death, to shed black-nationalist rhetoric and identify with a multiracial umma
(community)—moves that resonated with his middle-class constituency.
21 In the 
1970s, the NOI had owned thousands of acres of farmland, banks, housing com-
plexes, retail and wholesale businesses, and a university and was described by 
C. Eric Lincoln as one of the “most potent economic forces” in black America, 
but Warith Deen Muhammad liquidated many of the NOI’s assets. When Farra-
khan resuscitated the NOI in the 1980s, he revived Elijah Muhammad’s message 
of black economic empowerment (appealing to many poorer blacks) and began 
rebuilding the NOI’s business empire. According to Business Week, in 1995, the 
NOI owned 2,000 acres of farmland in Georgia and Michigan, a produce-trans-
port business, a series of restaurants, and a media-distribution company.
Islam behind Bars
Over the past thirty years, Islam has become a powerful force in the American 
prison system. Ever since the Attica prison riots in upstate New York in 1971, 
when Muslim inmates protected guards from being taken hostage, prison officials 
have allowed Muslim inmates to practice and proselytize relatively freely. Prior 
to the rise of Islam, the ideologies with the most currency among minorities in 
prison were strands of revolutionary Marxism—Maoism and Guevarism—and 
varieties of black nationalism. According to one report, nowadays, one third of 
the million or more black men in prison are claiming affiliation with the Nation 
of Islam, Sunni Islam, or some quasi Muslim group, such as the Moorish Science 
T emple.
22 Mike Tyson, during a stint in prison in the mid-1990s, seems to have 
combined all three currents, leaving prison as a Muslim convert, Malik Shabazz, 
but with Mao and Ché Guevara tattoos. “I’m just a dark guy from the den of 
iniquity,” the former heavyweight champion explained to journalists.
The presence of Muslim organizations in prisons has increased in the past 
decade as the state has cut back on prisoner services. In 1988, legislation made 
drug offenders ineligible for Pell grants; in 1992, this was broadened to include


--- PAGE 298 ---
Jihadis in the Hood 291
convicts sentenced to death or lifelong imprisonment without parole, and in 
1994, the law was extended to all remaining state and federal prisoners. In 1994, 
Congress passed legislation barring inmates from high education, stating that 
criminals could not benefit from federal funds, despite overwhelming evidence 
that prison educational programs not only help maintain order in prison but also 
prevent recidivism.
23 Legislation also denies welfare payments, veterans’ benefits, 
and food stamps to anyone in detention for more than sixty days.
In 1996, the Clinton administration passed the Work Opportunity and Per-
sonal Responsibility Act, preventing most ex-convicts from receiving Medicaid, 
public housing, and Section Eight vouchers. Clinton forbade inmates in 1998 
from receiving Social Security benefits, saying that prisoners “collecting Social 
Security checks” was “fraud and abuse” perpetrated against “working families” 
who “play by the rules.”
24 All these cutbacks affected minorities disproportion-
ately but African Americans in particular because of the disproportionately high 
incarceration rates of African American men. Disparate treatment by the criminal 
justice system—which has a devastating effect on the black family, the inner-city 
economy, and black political power, since convicts and ex-convicts cannot vote in 
thirty-nine states—is another powerful factor fueling the resentment of minori-
ties toward the establishment.
In this atmosphere, it is no surprise that Muslim organizations in prisons are 
gaining popularity. The Nation of Islam provides classes, mentorship programs, 
study groups, and “manhood training” that teaches inmates respect for women, 
responsible sexual behavior, drug prevention, and life-management skills. Main-
stream American Muslim organizations also provide myriad services to prisoners. 
At ISNA’s First Conference on Islam in American Prisons, Amir Ali of the Insti-
tute of Islamic Information and Education described the services and support sys-
tem that his organization provides to Muslim inmates: regular visits to prisons by 
evangelists who deliver books and literature, classes in Arabic and Islamic history, 
correspondence courses in other subjects, twenty-four-hour toll-free phones and 
collect-calling services for inmates to fall families, mentorship programs for new 
converts, and “halfway houses” to help reintegrate Muslim inmates into society 
after release.
Those who study Islam behind bars cast doubt on the assertions of Colson 
and Crouch. At ISNA’s Third Annual Conference on Islam in American Prisons 
in July 2002, the keynote speaker, David Schwartz, who recently retired as reli-
gious services administrator for the Federal Bureau of Prisons, strongly rejected 
the notion that American prisons were a breeding ground for terrorists and stated 
that Islam was a positive force in the lives of inmates. Robert Dannin adds, “Why 
would a sophisticated international terrorist organization bother with inmates—
who are fingerprinted and whose data is in the U.S. criminal justice system?”
25
Islam and Hip-hop
The street life is the only life I know
I live by the code style it’s made PLO


--- PAGE 299 ---
Black Routes to Islam292
Iranian thoughts and cover like an Arabian
Grab a nigga on the spot and put a 9 to his cranium.
—Method Man, “PLO Style” Tical. Def Jam 1994
If Rastafarianism and Bob Marley’s Third Worldist reggae anthems provided the 
music and culture of choice for marginalized minority youth two decades ago, 
in the 1990s, “Islamic hip-hop” emerged as the language of disaffected youth 
throughout the West.
Arabic, Islamic, or quasi Islamic motifs increasingly thread the colorful fabric 
that is hip-hop, such that for many inner-city and suburban youth, rap videos, 
and lyrics provide a regular and intimate exposure to Islam. Many “Old School” 
fans will recall the video of Eric B and Rakim’s “Know the Ledge,” which fea-
tured images of Khomeini and Muslim congregational prayer, as Rakim flowed, 
“In control of many, like Ayatollah Khomeini . . . I’m at war a lot, like Anwar 
Sadat.”
26 Self-proclaimed Muslim rap artists proudly announce their faith and 
include “Islamic” messages of social justice in their lyrics. Followers of Sunni 
Islam (“al-Islam” in hip-hop parlance), q-Tip (Fareed Kamal), and Mos Def are 
among the most highly acclaimed hip-hop artists, lauded as representatives of 
hip-hop’s school of “Afro-humanism” and positivity. Mos Def, in an interview 
with the Web site Beliefnet, described his mission as a Muslim artist: “it’s about 
speaking out against oppression wherever you can. If that’s gonna be in Bosnia 
or Kosovo or Chechnya or places where Muslims are being persecuted; or if it’s 
gonna be in Sierra Leone or Colombia—you know, if people’s basic human rights 
are being abused and violated, then Islam has an interest in speaking out against 
it, because we’re charged to be the leaders of humanity.”
27
The fluidity and variegated nature of Islam in urban America is seen in the 
different “Islams” represented in hip-hop and most poignantly in the friction 
between Sunni Muslims and Five Percenters. T oday, most “Islamic” references in 
hip-hop are to the belief system of the Five Percent Nation, a splinter group of the 
NOI founded in 1964 by Clarence 13X. The Five Percent Nation (or the Nation 
of Gods and Earths) refashioned the teachings of the NOI, rejecting the notion 
that Fard was Allah and teaching instead that the black man was God and that 
his proper name is ALLAH (Arm Leg Leg Arm Head). They taught that 85 per-
cent of the masses are ignorant and will never know the truth. T en percent of the 
people know the truth but use it to exploit and manipulate the 85 percent; only 5 
percent of humanity know the truth and understand the “true divine nature of the 
black man who is God or Allah.”
28 In Five Percenter theology, Manhattan (par-
ticular Harlem) is known as Mecca, Brooklyn is Medina, Queens is the desert, the 
Bronx is Pelan, and New Jersey is the New Jerusalem. Five Percenter beliefs have 
exerted a great influence on hip-hop argot and street slang. The expressions “word 
is bond,” “break it down,” “peace,” “wassup G” (meaning God, not gangsta), and 
“represent” all come from Five Percenter ideology.
Orthodox Sunni Muslims see Five Percenters as blasphemous heretics who call 
themselves “Gods.” They accuse Five Percenters of shirk, the Arabic word mean-
ing polytheism—the diametrical opposite of tawhid (unitary nature of God) that


--- PAGE 300 ---
Jihadis in the Hood 293
defined the Prophet Muhammad’s revelation. Since Five Percenters often wear 
skullcaps and women cover their hair, Sunni Muslims will often greet them with 
al-salaam alaykum (peace be unto you), to which the Five Percenters respond 
“Peace, God.” Five Percenters refer to Sunni Muslims as deluded and “soon to be 
Muslim.” In the “ten percent,” Five Percenters include the “white devil,” as well 
as orthodox Muslims “who teach that Allah is a spook.”
Busta Rhymes, Wu Tang Clan, and Mobb Deep are among the most visible 
Five Percenter rappers. Their lyrics—replete with numerology, cryptic “Islamic” 
allusions, and, at times, pejorative references to women and whites (as “white 
devils” or “cave dwellers”)—have aroused great interest and controversy. The 
journalist and former rapper Adisa Banjoko strongly reprimands Five Percenter 
rappers for their materialism and ignorance: “In hip-hop a lot of us talk about 
knowledge and the importance of holding on to it, yet under the surface of hip-
hop’s ‘success’ runs the thread of ignorance [jahiliyya, the Arabic term referring to 
the pagan age in Arabia before Islam].”
29 Like “the original jahiliyya age,” hip-hop 
today is plagued by “jahili territorialism and clan affiliation,” a “heavy disrespect 
of women,” and a materialism that “borders on jahili idol worship.” 30 The Five 
Percenter Ibn Dajjal responded angrily to Adisa’s criticism: “No amount of fatwas
or censorship will ever silence the sounds of the NOI and Five Percent mushrik
(idolator) nations. The group will continue to rise in fame with customers com-
ing from all walks of life: black, white and Bedouin. Far from a masterpiece of 
style, the book [the Quran] is literally riddled with errors and clumsy style which 
yield little more than a piece of sacred music . . . Maybe there should be a new 
hip-hop album titled Al-Quran al-Karim Freestyle by Method Man and Ghostface 
Killa!”
31
Though it has nothing to do with the jihadi trend, the language of Islam in 
the culture of hip-hop does often express anger at government indifference and 
U.S. foreign policy and challenge structures of domination. The outspoken rap-
per Paris, formerly of the NOI, who galled the establishment with his 1992 single 
“Bush Killer,” has raised eyebrows again with the single “What Would You Do?” 
(included on his forthcoming LP , Sonic Jihad), which excoriates the “war on ter-
ror” and the USA PATRIOT Act and implies government involvement in the 
September 11 attacks. In early 2002, the Brooklyn-based Palestinian American 
Hammer Brothers, “originally from the Holy Land, living in the Belly of the 
Beast, trying to rise on feet of Yeast,”
32 released their pro-Intifada cut, “Free Pal-
estine,” now regularly blared at pro-Palestinian gatherings in New York. One par-
ticularly popular and articulate artist is spoken-word poet Suheir Hammad, the 
Palestinian-American author of Born Black, Born Palestinian, on growing up Arab 
in Sunset Park, Brooklyn. Hammad appeared on HBO’s “Def Poetry Jam” some 
weeks after September 11 and delivered a stirring rendition—to a standing ova-
tion—of her poem, “First Writing Since,” on being an Arab New Yorker with a 
brother in the U.S. Navy.
33


--- PAGE 301 ---
Black Routes to Islam294
“No Real Stake”
Pan-Africanism and Pan-Islam were fused together by African American and 
Muslim intellectuals over a century ago to fight colonialism, racism, and Western 
domination. T oday, that resistance strategy has been adopted by tens of thousands 
of urban youth (judging by NOI rallies in the United States and Europe) in the 
heart of the West. The cultural forces of Islam, black nationalism, and hip-hop 
have converged to create a brazenly political and oppositional counterculture that 
has a powerful allure. At root, the attraction for African American, Latino, Arab, 
south Asian, and West Indian youth to Islam, and movements that espouse dif-
ferent brands of political Islam, is evidence of Western states’ failure to integrate 
minority and immigrant communities and deliver basic life necessities and social 
welfare benefits—policy failures of which Islamic groups (and right-wing Chris-
tian groups) are keenly aware.
Rather than prompt examination of why minority youth in the ghetto and its 
appendage institution, the prison, would be attracted to Islam—whether in its 
apolitical Sunni or Sufi, its Five Percenter, or its overtly political Nation of Islam 
or jihadi variety—the cases of Moussaoui, Reid, and Padilla have led to arguments 
about how certain cultures are “unassimilable,” hysterical warnings of a “black (or 
Hispanic) fifth column,” and aggressive campaigns to counter Islamic influence 
in the inner city. Evangelical groups are trying to exclude Islamic institutions from 
George W . Bush’s faith-based development initiative. Jerry Falwell has stated that 
“it is totally inappropriate under any circumstances” to give federal aid to Mus-
lim groups because “the Muslim faith teaches hate, Islam should be out the door 
before they knock. They should not be allowed to dip into the pork barrel.”
34
Another Christian effort, Project Joseph, conducts “Muslim awareness seminars” 
in inner cities across the country, warning that Muslim leaders are exploiting 
the weakness of black churches, informing African Americans that conversion to 
Islam does not imply “recovering their ethnic heritage” and publicly admonishing 
that “if the conversion rate continues unchanged, Islam could become the domi-
nant religion in black urban areas by the year 2020.”
35
The aspirations of the very poor and disenfranchised in America will continue 
to overlap with the struggles and hopes of the impoverished masses of the Muslim 
Third World, who will in turn continue to look toward African Americans for 
inspiration and help. Minister Farrakhan’s recent “solidarity tour” of Iraq and 
recent meetings between Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson and Yasser Arafat show 
that Muslim causes continue to reverberate in the African American community. 
By and large, African Americans do not seem to share the hostility to Islam that 
has intensified since September 11. Akbar Muhammad, professor of history at the 
State University of New York, Binghamton, and son of Elijah Muhammad, wrote 
in 1985 that because African Americans have “no real political stake in America, 
political opposition to the Muslim world is unworthy of serious consideration.”
36
These words still hold true for many minorities in post-September 11 America.


--- PAGE 302 ---
Jihadis in the Hood 295
Notes
 1. Ishmael Reed, Mumbo Jumbo (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996).
 2. Many say Lindh was corrupted by reading The Autobiography of Malcolm X and by his 
love of hip-hop. See Shelby Steele, “Radical Sheik,” Wall Street Journal, December 18, 
2001. Lindh often posed as black online, going by the names “Doodoo” and “Prof J.” He 
attacked Zionism, once writing: “Our blackness does not make white people hate us, it 
is THEIR racism that causes hate. . . . [The “N” word] has, for hundreds of years, been a 
label put on us by Caucasians . . . and because of the weight it carries with it, I never use 
it myself.” See Clarence Page, “The ‘White Negro’ Taliban?” Chicago Tribune, December 
14, 2001.
 3. Chuck Colson, “Evangelizing for Evil in Our Prisons,” Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2002. 
See also Mark Almond, “Why T errorists Love Criminals (and Vice Versa): Many a Jihadi 
Began as a Hood,” Wall Street Journal, June 19, 2002; Earl Ofari Hutchinson, “Hispanic 
or African-American Jihad?” Black World T oday, June 12, 2002; Christian Science Monitor,
June 14, 2002.
 4. Guardian, January 10, 2002.
 5. Paul Gilroy, “Dividing into the T unnel: The Politics of Race between the Old and New 
Worlds,” Open Democracy, January 31, 2002.
 6. Robert A Hill, Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), 302.
 7. Despite Farrakhan’s claim to have renounced race theology, The Final Call still prints on 
its back page that “God appeared in the person of W . Fard Muhammad.”
 8. Ali Baghdadi, “Farrakhan Plans to Meet Sharon,” Media Monitors Network , April 14, 
2002, available online at http://www.mediamonitors.net (accessed April 20, 2002).
 9. See Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of 
Islam (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996), 62, 193.
 10. Allen, “Minister Louis Farrakhan and the Continuing Evolution of the Nation of Islam,” 
73.
 11. Dannin, Black Pilgrimage to Islam.
 12. Gause, “Be Careful What You Wish For.”
 13. Muhammad Said, “Questions and Answers about Indigenous U.S. Muslims,” unpub-
lished manuscript, T ehran, 1982.
 14. “In 1993, twenty-seven percent of all children under the age of eighteen were living with a 
single parent. This figure includes fifty-seven percent of all black children, thirty-two per-
cent of all Hispanic children and twenty-one percent of all white children. Wilson, When
Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1996), 
85. Elsewhere, Wilson argues that the sharp increase in black male joblessness since 1970 
accounts in large measure for the rise in the number of single-parent families. Since jobless 
rates are highest in the inner city, rates of single parenthood are also highest there.
 15. Rahim Ocasio, “Latinos, the Invisible: Islam’s Forgotten Multitude,” Message, August 
1997.
 16. Los Angeles Times, June 23, 2002.
 17. Christian Science Monitor, December 1, 1999.
 18. Majors and Wiener, Programs That Serve African-American Youth.
 19. Los Angeles Times, February 13, 2002.
 20. Final Call, February 11, 1997.
 21. Mamiya, “Minister Louis Farrakhan and the Final Call.”
 22. Newsweek, October 30, 1995.


--- PAGE 303 ---
Black Routes to Islam296
 23. Josh Page, “Eliminating the Enemy: A Cultural Analysis of the Exclusion of Prisoners 
from Higher Education” (MA thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 1997).
 24. Bill Clinton, radio address, April 25, 1998, transcript available online at http://www
.whitehouse.gov (accessed June 10, 2005).
 25. Quoted in Hishaam Aidi, “Jihadis in the Cell Block,” Africana.com, July 22, 2002.
 26. Eric B. and Rakim, “Juice (Know the Ledge),” Juice, MCA, 1992.
 27. Hishaam Aidi, “Hip-Hop for the Gods,” Africana.com, April 30, 2001.
 28. Nuruddin, “The Five Percenters.”
 29. Adissa Banjoko, “Hip-Hop and the New Age of Ignorance,” FNV Newsletter, June 2001, 
available online at http://www.daveyd.com/age ofignorance.html (accessed August 22, 
2006).
 30. Banjoko, “Hip-Hop.”
 31. Ibid.
 32. Hammer Brothers, “Free Palestine,” Free Palestine, Wax Poetic Productions, 2002.
 33. S uheir Hammad, “First Writing Since,” appeared in Middle East Report 221 (Winter 2001), 
http://www.teachingforchange.org/News%20Items/first_writing_since.htm (accessed August 
22, 2006).
 34. Washington Post, March 8, 2001.
 35. USA T oday, July 19, 2000.
 36. Muhammad, “Interaction between ‘Indigenous’ and ‘Immigrant’ Muslims in the United 
States.”


--- PAGE 304 ---
P ART  IV
Conclusion


--- PAGE 305 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 306 ---
C HAPTER  17
Rediscovering
Malcolm’s Life
A Historian’s Adventures in 
Living History
Manning Marable
T o the majority of older white Americans, the noted African American
leaders Malcolm X and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., seem as different from each 
other as night and day. Mainstream culture and many history textbooks still sug-
gest that the moderate Dr. King preached nonviolence and interracial harmony, 
whereas the militant Malcolm X advocated racial hatred and armed confrontation. 
Even Malcolm’s infamous slogan, “By Any Means Necessary!” still evokes among 
whites disturbing images of Molotov cocktails, armed shoot-outs, and violent 
urban insurrection. But to the great majority of black Americans and to millions 
of whites under thirty, these two black figures are now largely perceived as being 
fully complementary with each other. Both leaders had favored the building of 
strong black institutions and healthy communities; both had strongly denounced 
black-on-black violence and drugs within the urban ghetto; both had vigorously 
opposed America’s war in Vietnam and had embraced the global cause of human 
rights. In a 1989 “dialogue” between the eldest daughters of these two assassi-
nated black heroes, Yolanda King and Attallah Shabazz, both women emphasized 
the fundamental common ground and great admiration the two men shared for 
each other. Shabazz complained that “playwrights always make Martin so passive 
and Malcolm so aggressive that those men wouldn’t have lasted a minute in the 
same room.” King concurred, noting that in one play “my father was this wimp 
who carried a Bible everywhere he went, including someone’s house for dinner.” 
King argued, “That’s not the kind of minister Daddy was! All these ridiculous 
clichés . . . ” Both agreed that the two giants were united in the pursuit of black 
freedom and equality.


--- PAGE 307 ---
Black Routes to Islam300
As a child of the radical sixties, I was well ahead of the national learning curve 
on the King vs. Malcolm dialectic. At age seventeen, as a high school senior, I had 
attended Dr. King’s massive funeral at Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta; on 
April 9, 1968, I had walked behind the rugged mule-driven wagon carrying Dr. 
King’s body, along with tens of thousands of other mourners. The chaotic events 
of 1968—the Vietnamese T et offensive in February, President Johnson’s surprise 
decision not to seek reelection, the assassinations of both Dr. King and Bobby 
Kennedy, the Paris student and worker uprisings that summer, the “police riot” in 
Chicago at the Democratic National Convention—all were contributing factors 
in spinning the world upside down.
By the end of that turbulent year, for the generation of African-American stu-
dents at overwhelmingly white college campuses, it was Malcolm X, not Dr. King, 
who, overnight, became the symbol for the times we were living through. As 
leader of my campus black student union, I reread The Autobiography of Malcolm
X during the winter of 1969. The full relevance and revolutionary meaning of 
the man suddenly became crystal clear to me. In short, the former “King Man” 
became almost overnight a confirmed, dedicated “X Man.”
Malcolm X was the Black Power generation’s greatest prophet who spoke the 
uncomfortable truths that no one else had the courage or integrity to broach. 
Especially for young black males, he personified for us everything we wanted to 
become: the embodiment of black masculinist authority and power, uncompro-
mising bravery in the face of racial oppression, the ebony standard for what the 
African American liberation movement should be about. With Talmudic-like 
authority, we quoted him in our debates, citing chapter and verse the precise 
passages from the Autobiography, and books like Malcolm X Speaks, By Any Means 
Necessary, and other edited volumes. These collected works represented almost 
sacred texts of black identity to us. “Saint Malcolm X-the-Martyr” was the ecu-
menical ebony standard for collective “blackness.” We even made feeble attempts 
to imitate Malcolm’s speaking style. Everyone quoted him to justify their own nar-
row political, cultural, and even religious formulations and activities. His birth-
day, May 19, was widely celebrated as a national black holiday. Any criticisms, no 
matter how minor or mild, of Malcolm’s stated beliefs or evolving political career 
were generally perceived as being not merely heretical, but almost treasonous, to 
the entire black race.
Working-class black people widely loved Brother Malcolm for what they per-
ceived as his clear and uncomplicated style of language and his peerless ability in 
making every complex issue “plain.” Indeed, one of Malcolm’s favorite expres-
sions from the podium was his admonition to other speakers to “Make it Plain,” 
a phrase embodying his unshakable conviction that the black masses themselves, 
“from the grassroots,” would ultimately become the makers of their own revolu-
tionary black history. Here again, inside impoverished black urban neighborhoods 
and especially in the bowels of America’s prisons and jails, Malcolm’s powerful 
message had an evocative appeal to young black males. In actor Ossie Davis’s 
memorable words, “Malcolm was our manhood! . . . And, in honoring him, we


--- PAGE 308 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 301
honor the best in ourselves. And we will know him then for what he was and is—a 
Prince—our own Black shining Prince!—who didn’t hesitate to die, because he 
loved us so.”
The Autobiography of Malcolm X, released into print in November 1965, sold 
millions of copies within several years. By the late sixties, the Autobiography had 
been adopted in hundreds of college courses across the country. Malcolm X’s life 
story, as outlined by the Autobiography, became our quintessential story about the 
ordeal of being black in America. Nearly every African American at the time was 
familiar with the story’s basic outline. Born in the Midwest, young Malcolm Little 
became an orphan: his father was brutally murdered by the Ku Klux Klan and 
his disturbed mother, overwhelmed by caring for seven little children, suffered a 
mental breakdown and had been institutionalized. Malcolm then relocated east to 
Roxbury and Harlem. He then became an urban outlaw, the notorious “Detroit 
Red,” a pimp, hustler, burglar, and drug dealer. Pinched by police, “Detroit 
Red” was sentenced to ten years’ hard labor in prison, where he then joined the 
Black Muslims. Once released, given the new name Malcolm X, he rapidly built 
the Black Muslims from an inconsequential sect to over one hundred thousand 
strong. But then Malcolm X grew intellectually and politically well beyond the 
Muslim. He decided to launch his own black nationalist group, the Organization 
of Afro-American Unity. He started preaching about human rights and “the ballot 
or the bullet.” Malcolm made a pilgrimage to the holy city of Mecca, converted to 
orthodox Islam, and became “El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz.” He was then acclaimed 
by Islamic, African, and Arab leaders as a leading voice for racial justice. Then, at 
the pinnacle of his worldwide influence and power, Malcolm was brutally struck 
down by assassins’ bullets at Harlem’s Audubon Ballroom. This was the basic 
story nearly every activist in my generation knew by heart.
A number of Malcolm X’s associates and others who had known him person-
ally published articles and books in the late sixties, which firmly established the 
late leader as the true fountainhead of Black Power.
1 Far more influential, how-
ever, for popularizing the Malcolm legend was the Black Arts Movement. Poets 
were particularly fascinated with the magnetic physical figure of Malcolm as a 
kind of revolutionary black Adonis. In life towering at six feet, three inches tall 
and weighing a trim 175 to 180 pounds, broad-shouldered Malcolm X was mes-
merizingly handsome, always displaying a broad, boyish smile, and always spot-
lessly well-groomed; in death, he would remain forever young. In photographs, 
he seemed both strong and sensitive.
After receding somewhat during much of the late 1970s and early 1980s, Mal-
colm X’s cultural reputation among artists, playwrights, and musicians exploded 
again with the flowering of the hip-hop generation. Malcolm’s cultural renais-
sance began with the 1983 release of Keith LeBlanc’s “No Sell-Out,” a twelve-
inch dance single featuring a Malcolm X speech set to hip-hop beat. Old School 
group Afrika Bambaata and the Soul Sonic Force followed in 1986 with “Ren-
egades of Funk,” declaring that both King and Malcolm X had been bold and 
bad “renegades of the atomic age.” On its classic 1988 hip-hop album, “It Takes


--- PAGE 309 ---
Black Routes to Islam302
a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back,” Public Enemy (PE) generously sampled 
from a Malcolm X speech, constructing the provocative phrase, “T oo Black, T oo 
Strong.” On “Party for Your Right to Fight,” Public Enemy told the hip-hop 
nation that “J. Edgar Hoover . . . had King and X set up.” PE’s massive popular-
ity and its strong identification with Malcolm’s image led other hip-hop artists 
to also incorporate Malcolm X into their own music. In 1989, the Stop the Vio-
lence Movement’s “Self Destruction” album featured a Malcolm X lecture, and 
its companion video included beautiful murals of the black leader as the hip-hop 
background for rappers. The less commercially popular, but enormously talented 
artist, Paris released “Break the Grip of Shame” in 1990, which prominently fea-
tured Malcolm’s ringing indictment: “We declare our right on this Earth to be 
a man, to be a human being, to be respected as a human being to be given the 
rights of a human being in this society on this Earth in this day, which we intend 
to bring into existence, by any means necessary!”
As “Thug Life” and “Gangsta Rap” emerged from the West Coast and soon 
acquired a national commercial appeal, these artists painted Malcolm X in their 
own cultural contexts of misogynistic and homophobic violence. Ice Cube’s 1992 
“Predator,” for example, sampled a Malcolm address over a beat on one cut; on 
another, “Wicked,” Ice Cube rapped, “People wanna know how come I gotta gat 
and I’m looking out the window like Malcolm ready to bring that noise. Kinda 
trigger-happy like the Ghetto Boys.” Less provocatively, KRS-One’s 1995 “Ah-
Yeah” spoke of black reincarnation: “They tried to harm me, I used to be Malcolm 
X. Now I’m on the planet as the one called KRS.” Perhaps the greatest indi-
vidual hip-hop culture has yet produced, T upac Shakur, fiercely identified himself 
with Malcolm X. On T upac’s classic 1996 “Makaveli” album, on the song “Blas-
phemy,” he posed a provocative query: “Why you got these kids minds, thinking 
that they evil while the preacher being richer. You say honor God’s people, should 
we cry when the Pope die, my request, we should cry if they cried when we buried 
Malcolm X. Mama tells me am I wrong, is God just another cop waiting to beat 
my ass if I don’t go pop?”
The widespread release and commercial success of Spike Lee’s 1992 biofilm 
“X,” combined with hip-hop’s celebration of Malcolm as a “homeboy,” created 
the context for what historian Russell Rickford has termed “Malcolmology.” Hun-
dreds of thousands of African American households owned and displayed por-
traits of Malcolm X, either in their homes, places of business, or at black schools. 
By the 1990s, Malcolm X had become one of the few historical figures to emerge 
from the black nationalist tradition to be fully accepted and integrated into the 
pantheon of civil rights legends, an elite of black forefathers, who included Fred-
erick Douglass, W . E. B. Du Bois, and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
As with every mythic figure, the icon of Saint Malcolm accommodated a vari-
ety of parochial interpretations. T o the bulk of the African American middle 
class, the Malcolm legend was generally presented in terms of his inextricable 
trajectory of intellectual and political maturation, culminating with his dra-
matic break from the Nation of Islam and embrace of interracial harmony. For


--- PAGE 310 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 303
much of the hip-hop nation, in sharp contrast, the most attractive characteristics 
of Saint Malcolm emphasized the incendiary and militant elements of his career. 
Many hip-hop artists made scant distinctions between Malcolm X and his for-
mer protégé and later bitter rival, Louis X (Farrakhan). Some even insisted that 
Malcolm X had never supported any coalitions with whites, despite his numer-
ous public statements in 1964 and 1965 to the contrary. The hip-hop Malcol-
mologists seized Malcolm as the ultimate black cultural rebel, unblemished and 
uncomplicated by the pragmatic politics of partisan compromise, which was fully 
reflected in the public careers of other post-Malcolm black leaders, such as Jesse 
Jackson and Harold Washington. Despite their black cultural nationalist rhetoric, 
however, hip-hop Malcolmologists also uncritically accepted the main parameters 
of the black leader’s tragic life story, as presented in The Autobiography of Malcolm
X. They also glorified Malcolm’s early gangster career as the notorious, streetwise 
“Detroit Red” and tended to use selective quotations by the fallen leader that gave 
justification for their use of weapons in challenging police brutality.
The widespread sampling of Malcolm’s speeches on hip-hop videos and albums, 
plus the popular acclaim for Lee’s biopic, culminated into “Malcolmania” in 1992 
and 1993. There were “X” posters, coffee mugs, potato chips, T-shirts, and “X-
caps,” which newly elected President Bill Clinton wore occasionally when jogging 
outside the White House in the morning. At the time, CBS News estimated the 
commercial market for X-related products at $100 million annually. The Malcol-
mania hype had the effect of transporting the X-man from being merely a black 
superhero into the exalted status of mainstream American idol.
This new privileged status for Malcolm X was even confirmed officially by the 
U.S. government. On January 20, 1999, about 1,500 officials, celebrities, and 
guests crowded into Harlem’s Apollo Theater to mark the issuance by the U.S. 
Postal Service of the Malcolm X postage stamp. Prominently in attendance were 
actors Ruby Dee, Ossie Davis, and Harry Belafonte. Also on hand was Harlem 
millionaire entrepreneur, media mogul (and Malcolm’s former attorney) Percy 
Sutton. The Malcolm X stamp was the Postal Service’s latest release in its “Black 
Heritage Stamp Series.” Pennsylvania Congressman Chaka Fattah, the ranking 
Democrat on the House of Representatives Postal Subcommittee, remarked at 
the festive occasion, “There is no more appropriate honor than this stamp because 
Malcolm X sent all of us a message through his life and his life’s work.” T o Con-
gressman Fattah, Malcolm X’s “thoughts, his ideas, his conviction, and his cour-
age provide an inspiration even now to new generations to come.” Few in the 
audience could ignore the rich irony of this event. One of America’s sharpest and 
most unrelenting critics was now being praised and honored by the same govern-
ment that had once carried out illegal harassment and surveillance against him. 
Ossie Davis, who understood the significance of this bittersweet moment better 
than anyone else, jokingly quipped, “We in this community look upon this com-
memorative stamp finally as America’s stamp of approval.”
The Malcolm X postage stamp was the twenty-second release in the “Black Heri-
tage Series,” which had previously featured other black heroes such as Frederick


--- PAGE 311 ---
Black Routes to Islam304
Douglass, Harriet T ubman, Martin Luther King, Jr., Mary McLeod Bethune, and 
W . E. B. Du Bois. The U.S. Postal Service also released a short biographical state-
ment accompanying the stamp’s issuance, noting that the retouched photographic 
image of Malcolm X had been taken by an Associated Press photographer at a 
press conference held in New York City on May 21, 1964. The statement explains 
that soon after this photograph was taken, that Malcolm X “later broke away 
from the organization,” referring to the NOI, and “disavowed his earlier separat-
ist preaching.” The most generous thing one could say about his curious state-
ment was that it was the product of poor scholarship. The photograph actually 
had been taken during an interview in Cairo, Egypt, on July 14, 1964. Malcolm 
X had publicly broken from the NOI on March 8, 1964, two months earlier 
than the official statement had suggested. More problematic was the U.S. Postal 
Service’s assertion that Malcolm X had become, before his death, a proponent 
of “a more integrationist solution to racial problems.” But none of these errors 
of fact and slight distortions disturbed most who had gathered to celebrate. The 
Malcolm X postage stamp was a final and fitting triumph of his legacy. The full 
“Americanization of Malcolm X” appeared to be complete.
When, in 1987, I decided to write what was to have been a modest “politi-
cal biography” of Malcolm X, there was already a substantial body of literature 
about him. By 2002, those published works had grown to roughly 930 books, 
360 films and Internet educational resources, and 350 sound recordings. As I 
plowed through dozens, then hundreds, of books and articles, I was dismayed 
to discover that almost none of the scholarly literature or books about him had 
relied on serious research that would include a complete archival investigation of 
Malcolm’s letters, personal documents, wills, diaries, transcripts of speeches and 
sermons, his actual criminal record, FBI files, and legal court proceedings. Some 
informative articles had appeared written by individuals who had either worked 
closely with Malcolm X or who described a specific event in which they had been 
brought into direct contact with the black leader. But these reminiscences lacked 
analytical rigor and critical insight. What staggered the mind, however, was the 
literal mountain of badly written articles, the turgid prose, and various academic-
styled ruminations about Malcolm X’s life and thought, nearly all based on the 
same, limited collection of secondary sources.
There was remarkably little Malcolm X literature that employed the tradi-
tional tools of historical investigation. Few writers had conducted fresh interviews 
with Malcolm X’s widow, Dr. Betty Shabazz, any of his closest coworkers, or the 
extended Little family. Writers made few efforts to investigate the actual criminal 
record of Malcolm X at the time of his 1946 incarceration. Not even the best 
previous scholarly studies of Malcolm X—a small group of books including Peter 
Goldman’s The Death and Life of Malcolm X  (1973), Karl Evanzz’s The Judas
Factor: The Plot to Kill Malcolm X (1992), and Louis DeCaro’s On the Side of My
People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X (1966)—had amassed a genuine “archival” 
or substantive database of documentation in order to form a true picture of Mal-
colm-X-the-man rather than the pristine icon.
2 One problem in this was Malcolm


--- PAGE 312 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 305
X’s inescapable identification as the quintessential model of black masculinity, 
which served as a kind of gendered barricade to any really objective appraisal of 
him. Cultural critic Philip Brian Harper has observed that Malcolm X and the 
Black Powerites who later imitated him constructed themselves as virile, potent, 
and hypermasculinist, giving weight to the false impression that racial integra-
tionists like King were weak and impotent.
3
Nearly everyone writing about Malcolm X largely, with remarkably few excep-
tions, accepted as fact most, if not all, of the chronology of events and personal 
experiences depicted in the Autobiography’s narrative. Few authors checked the 
edited, published “transcripts” of Malcolm X’s speeches as presented in Malcolm
X Speaks and By Any Means Necessary  against the actual tape recordings of those 
speeches or the transcribed excerpts of the same talks recorded by the FBI. Every 
historian worth her or his salt knows that “memoirs” like the Autobiography are 
inherently biased. They present a representation of the subject that privileges cer-
tain facts, while self-censuring others. There are deliberate omissions, the chrono-
logical reordering of events, and name changes. Consequently, there existed no 
comprehensive biography of this man who arguably had come to personify mod-
ern, urban black America in the past half-century.
There continued to be, for me, so many unanswered basic questions about 
this dynamic yet ultimately elusive man that neither the Autobiography, nor the 
other nine hundred-plus books written about him, had answered satisfactorily. 
The most obvious queries concerned his murder. Substantial evidence had been 
compiled both by Goldman and attorney William Kuntsler that indicated that 
two of the men convicted in 1966 for gunning down Malcolm at the Audubon 
Ballroom, Thomas 15X Johnson and Norman 3X Butler were completely inno-
cent. In 1977, the only assassin who had been wounded and captured at the crime 
scene, Talmadge Hayer, had confessed to his prison clergyman that both Johnson 
and Butler had played absolutely no roles in the murder, confirming that, in fact, 
they had not even been present at the Audubon that afternoon.
There had always been whispers, for years, that Louis Farrakhan had been 
responsible for the assassination; he had been Malcolm X’s closest protégé, and 
then following his vitriolic renunciation of Malcolm, inherited the leadership of 
Harlem’s Mosque Number Seven following the murder. Then I had to explain the 
inexplicable behavior of the New York Police Department (NYPD) on the day of 
the assassination. Usually one to two dozen cops blanketed any event where Mal-
colm X was speaking. Normally at the Audubon rallies, a police captain or lieu-
tenant was stationed in a command center above the Audubon’s main entrance, 
on the second floor. Fifteen to twenty uniformed officers, at least, would be mill-
ing at the periphery of the crowd, a few always located at a small park directly 
across the street from the building. On February 21, 1965, however, the cops 
almost disappeared. There were no uniformed officers in the ballroom, at the 
main entrance, or even in the park at the time of the shooting. Only two NYPD 
patrolmen were inside the Audubon but at the opposite end of the building. 
When the NYPD investigation team arrived, forensic evidence was not properly


--- PAGE 313 ---
Black Routes to Islam306
collected and significant eyewitnesses still at the scene were not interviewed for 
days and, in several instances, weeks later. The crime scene itself was preserved for 
only a couple of hours. By 6 p.m., only three hours after Malcolm X’s killing, a 
housekeeper with detergent and a bucket of water mopped up the floor, eliminat-
ing the bloody evidence. A dance was held in the same ballroom at 7 p.m. that 
night, as originally scheduled.
Perhaps I could never completely answer the greatest question about Malcolm 
X: if he had lived, or somehow had survived the assassination attempt, what could 
he have become? How would have another three or four decades of life altered how 
we imagine him and the ways we interpret his legacy? The legion of books that 
he inspired presented widely different, and even diametrically opposing, theories 
on the subject. Virtually every group—the orthodox, Sunni Islamic community, 
black cultural nationalists, T rotskyists, prisoners and former prisoners, main-
stream integrationists, and hip-hop artists—had manipulated the “black shining 
prince” to promote their own agendas, or to justify their causes. The enormous 
elasticity of Malcolm’s visual image could be universally appropriated, stretching 
from Ice Cube’s 1992 apocalyptic “predator” to being used as the template for the 
film character “Magneto” in the 1999 block buster hit, “The X-Men,” illustrated 
the great difficulty I now confronted. Malcolm X was being constantly reinvented
within American society and popular culture.
But the first, most original, and most talented revisionist of Malcolm X was 
Malcolm X himself. I slowly began to realize that Malcolm X continuously and 
astutely refashioned his outward image, artfully redesigning his public style and 
even language to facilitate overtures to different people in varied contexts and 
yet beneath the multiple layers of reinvention, who was he? Was the powerful 
impact of his short thirty-nine years of existence actually grounded in what he had 
really accomplished, or based on the unfulfilled promise of what he might have 
become? Malcolm X is memorialized by millions of Americans largely because of 
the Autobiography, which is today a standard text of American literature. But was 
Malcolm’s hajj to Mecca in April 1964, the dramatic turning point of the Auto-
biography, the glorious epiphany Malcolm claimed it was at the time, and that 
virtually all other interpreters of him have uncritically accepted? Was this spiritual 
metamorphosis, the embracing of color blindness, and the public denouncing of 
Elijah Muhammad’s sexual misconduct all just part of the political price he was 
now prepared to pay to gain entry into the Civil Rights Movement’s national lead-
ership? Was this not the final “reincarnation” the necessary role change for El-Hajj 
Malik El-Shabazz to reach inside the court of the Saudi royal family and to gain 
access to the corridors of governmental power throughout the newly independent 
nations of Africa and Asia?
With so many unanswered questions to explore, there seemed to me to exist 
paradoxically a collective conspiracy of silence surrounding Malcolm X , an unwit-
ting, or perhaps witting, attempt not to examine things too closely, to stick to the 
accepted narrative offered by the Autobiography and Lee’s biopic. By not peering 
below the surface, there would be no need to adjust the crafted image we have


--- PAGE 314 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 307
learned to adore, frozen in time. We could simply all find enduring comfort in the 
safe, masculinist gaze of our “black shining prince.”
Historians are trained in graduate school to state only what we can actually 
prove, based primarily on archival or secondary source evidence. Information we 
collect from oral interviews can only be used from informed subjects, who have 
an opportunity to review what they have said for the record. Thus, the discipline 
itself provides certain safeguards to interviewees and informants. Most histori-
ans, in other words, do not see themselves as investigative reporters or would-be 
“cold case” investigators. Yet the skills of both seemed to me necessary in order 
to crack open the Malcolm X collective conspiracy of silence. Malcolm’s actual 
legacy was dogmatically preserved and fiercely guarded by nearly everyone privy 
to important information pertaining to him. This was a highly unusual situation 
for a researcher to confront, especially considering that Malcolm X lived a very 
“public” existence, appearing on numerous television shows, and speaking at liter-
ally thousands of venues across the country.
When I started my biography of Malcolm X in 1987, I was then Chair of 
Black Studies at Ohio State University. Working with several graduate students, 
we began compiling photocopies of articles about Malcolm X that appeared in 
academic journals. We began a newspaper-clipping file of more recent media cov-
erage related to our subject (remember, these were the days before the Internet 
and World Wide Web). I knew that I would need to penetrate four principal, 
core areas of investigation in order to present a really balanced and fair portrait 
of the man. These four broad areas were (1) the black organizations in which 
Malcolm X played a significant leadership role—the Nation of Islam, the Muslim 
Mosque, Inc., and the Organization of Afro-American Unity; (2) the surveillance 
of Malcolm X by the FBI and other governmental agencies; (3) the materials of 
Alex Haley, coauthor of the Autobiography, used in preparing the book; and, of 
course; (4) the family of Malcolm X, especially his widow, Dr. Betty Shabazz, and 
their access to any manuscripts, correspondence, texts, or transcripts of speeches 
and sermons, legal documents, and odd paraphernalia. All four of these areas, for 
different reasons, proved to be intractable. In 1989, I accepted a professorship 
in ethnic studies at the University of Colorado in Boulder, and in the following 
academic year, I organized a research team of six to ten graduate students and 
work-study assistants, who were dedicated to reconstructing Malcolm’s life. After 
three hard years, we had made, at best, marginal headway. I then accepted my 
current appointment at Columbia. I had no idea at that time that another decade 
would elapse before I could really successfully infiltrate these four core areas of 
Malcolm-related investigation.
The first nearly overwhelming difficulty was the lack of a comprehensive, 
well-organized archive on Malcolm X. Primary source materials, such as corre-
spondence and personal manuscripts, were literally scattered and fragmented. For 
some inexplicable reason, the Shabazz family had never authorized a group of 
historians or archivists to compile these rare documents into a central, publicly 
accessible repository. By my own count, as of 2003, chunks of Malcolm’s core


--- PAGE 315 ---
Black Routes to Islam308
memorabilia were located at seventy-three different U.S. archives and libraries, 
including the Library of Congress, New York University’s Tamiment Library, the 
Schomburg Center of the New York Public Library, Cornell University Library, 
Wayne State University Library, the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Emory 
University Library, Howard University Library, and Columbia University’s Oral 
History Research Center. I contrasted this chaotic situation to the profession-
ally archived life records of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., then at Atlanta’s King 
Center, that would serve as the core database for historian Clayborne Carson’s 
magnificent, thirty-year-long effort, the King Papers Project. Booker T . Wash-
ington’s papers, carefully archived and preserved, fill exactly 1,077 linear feet of 
archival boxes at the Library of Congress. Most dedicated Malcolmologists also 
knew that Dr. Shabazz still retained hundreds of documents and manuscripts by 
her late husband in her Mount Vernon, New York, home. But no one really had 
a clue how much primary source material there was and whether any efforts had 
been made to preserve it.
I had more than a nostalgic desire to preserve memorabilia. As a historian, I 
also knew that all artifacts made by human beings inevitably disintegrate. Paper, 
left unprotected, without a climate-controlled environment and acid-free folders, 
“lives” only about seventy-five years. Audiotape recordings based on magnetic 
recording technology survive about forty years. People who had worked closely 
with Malcolm X and who had known him intimately would nearly all be dead 
in another two decades. Only the Shabazz family had the moral authority to 
initiate such an undertaking, to secure Malcolm X’s place in history. It simply 
did not make sense. Much later, in 2002, when the near-public auction by But-
terfield’s of a major cache of Malcolm memorabilia fetching offers of $600,000 
and more came to light, I discovered that the Shabazz family had squirreled away 
several hundred pounds of Malcolm X-related documents and material. Maliakah 
Shabazz, the youngest daughter, had, without the rest of the family’s knowledge, 
managed to pack and transport her father’s materials to a Florida storage facility. 
Her failure to pay the storage facility’s monthly fee led to the seizure and disposi-
tion of the bin’s priceless contents. The new purchaser, in turn, had contacted 
eBay and Butterfield’s to sell what he believed to be his property. Only a legal 
technicality voided the sale, returning the memorabilia to the Shabazzes.
After the international publicity and outcry surrounding the Butterfield’s 
abortive auction, however, the Shabazzes decided to deposit their materials at 
the Schomburg Center in Harlem. In January 2003, the Schomburg publicly 
announced to the media its acquisition on the basis of a seventy-five-year loan. I 
have previously written in detail about the Butterfield’s abortive auction fiasco, 
and I had been extensively involved in the financial negotiations with the auc-
tion house and the Shabazzes on behalf of Columbia University. But what none
of the principals, including myself, could bear to ask ourselves and the Shabazz 
Estate in public, is why hundreds of pounds of documents, speeches, manuscripts, 
Malcolm’s Holy Qur’an, and so on, been left deteriorating in storage in their base-
ment for thirty-five years?


--- PAGE 316 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 309
The intransigence of the Shabazzes forced me to contemplate negotiations with 
the Nation of Islam. I had written extensively, and quite critically, about Louis 
Farrakhan and his philosophy over a number of years. Yet during my research, 
I had learned that Muslim ministers like Malcolm X, under the strict authori-
tarian supervision of Elijah Muhammad, had been required to submit weekly 
reports about their mosques’ activities. All sermons they delivered were audio-
taped, with the tapes mailed to the national headquarters in Chicago. When I 
broached the possibility of examining their archives through third parties, the 
NOI curtly refused, explaining that they wished to “protect Dr. Betty Shabazz 
and her family.”
Another potential avenue of biographical inquiry existed among Malcolm X’s 
friends and associates in Muslim Mosque, Inc., and the Organization of Afro-
American Unity (OAAU), two groups formed in 1964 and that had disintegrated 
in the months after Malcolm’s assassination. Here I had better luck. Prior friend-
ships with several prominent individuals, such as actor Ossie Davis, provided valu-
able oral histories of their relationships with Malcolm X. Most key individuals I 
wanted to interview, however, were either reclusive or elusive. Some were literally 
“underground” and living in exile in either South America, the Caribbean, or in 
Africa. A few, such as writer Sylvester Leaks, cordially agreed to converse off the 
record, then angrily refused to be formally interviewed. Some pivotal figures such 
as Malcolm X’s personal bodyguard, Reuben Francis, had literally disappeared 
months following the murder. I subsequently learned that Francis had somehow 
been relocated to Mexico sometime in 1966 and, from then, fell into complete 
obscurity. Lynn Shiflett, OAAU secretary and a trusted personal assistant to Mal-
colm X, had refused all interviews and even written contacts since 1966.
The FBI avenue of inquiry proved to be even more daunting. Despite the pas-
sage of the Freedom of Information Act, which required the bureau to declassify 
its internal memoranda that required secrecy for the sake of national security, 
by 1994, only about 2,300 pages of an estimated 50,000 pages of surveillance 
on Malcolm X was made public. Much of this information was heavily redacted 
or blacked out by FBI censors, supposedly to protect its informants or to pre-
serve “national security.” For several years, a group of my student research assis-
tants helped me to make sense of this maze of FBI bureaucratic mumbo jumbo. 
Eventually, I learned that whatever the FBI’s original motives, they fairly accu-
rately tracked Malcolm X’s precise movements, public addresses, and dozens of 
telephone calls, all without legal warrants, of course. In 1995, Farrakhan had 
proposed announcing a national campaign to pressure the bureau to open up 
its archives about Malcolm X and especially to release any relevant information 
concerning his assassination. According to Farrakhan, the Shabazz family insisted 
that there be no effort to force the bureau to divulge what it knew. Friends close 
to the family subsequently explained to me that the memories were still too pain-
ful, even after thirty long years. A public inquiry would be too traumatic for all 
concerned.


--- PAGE 317 ---
Black Routes to Islam310
Without my knowledge, historian Clayborne Carson at Stanford University 
was, in the early 1990s, working independently along parallel lines. He success-
fully annotated the FBI memoranda available at that time, publishing an invalu-
able reference work, Malcolm X: The FBI File (New York: Ballantine Books, 1995). 
Prior to the book’s publication, however, attorneys for Dr. Shabazz expressed con-
cerns that Carson should severely limit the amount of original material lifted 
by the FBI from Malcolm X’s orations, writings, and wiretapped conversations. 
Thus, the book that was comprised of letters and transcribed tape recordings 
already heavily censored by the FBI was, in effect, censored a second time for the 
purposes of not violating copyright infringement. When black studies scholar 
Abdul Alkalimat prepared a primer text, Malcolm X for Beginners, Dr. Shabazz 
threatened a lawsuit based on the unusual legal claim that anything ever uttered 
by her late husband was her “intellectual property.” Alkalimat finally consented 
to surrender any and all claims to royalties from the book to the Shabazz estate.
I then confronted the enigma of Alex Haley. Haley was the highest-selling 
author of black nonfiction in U.S. history. His greatest achievement had been 
the 1976 Roots, which, like the coauthored Autobiography, had become a cele-
brated, iconic text of black identity and culture. Yet statements about Malcolm X 
made by Haley shortly before his death seemed, to me, strangely negative. Haley 
had even asserted that both Malcolm X and Dr. King were going “downhill” 
before their deaths.
4 Haley had placed his papers at the University of T ennessee’s 
archives in January 1991. Yet there remained unusual restrictions on scholarly 
access to his personal records. I personally visited his archives in Knoxville twice. 
No photocopying of any document in the Haley files is permitted without the 
prior written approval of his attorney, Paul Coleman of Knoxville, T ennessee. My 
letters to Coleman were unanswered. When in Knoxville during my second visit, 
I persuaded the archive’s curator to phone Coleman directly on my behalf. Attor-
ney Coleman then explained to me over the telephone that he needed to know 
the precise pages or documents to be photocopied, in advance! In practical terms, 
scholars are forced to copy passages in pencil, by hand, from Haley’s archives. This 
laborious model of information transferral worked well for monks in the Middle 
Ages but seems inappropriate for the age of digital technology.
As luck would have it, several years before Haley’s death, he had named 
researcher Anne Romaine as his “official biographer.” Romaine was a white folk-
singer, trained neither as a historian nor as a biographer. Yet she was apparently 
diligent and serious about her work. Between the late 1980s until her death in 
1995, Romaine had conducted audiotaped interviews with over fifty individuals, 
some of whom covered the background to Haley’s role in producing the Autobiog-
raphy. The great bulk of Romaine’s papers and research materials pertaining to the 
Autobiography were also donated to the University of T ennessee’s archives. T o my 
delight, there were absolutely no restrictions on Romaine’s papers—everything 
can be photocopied and r eproduced. One folder in Romaine’s papers includes 
the “raw materials” used to construct Chapter 16 of the Autobiography. Here, I 
found the actual mechanics of the Haley-Malcolm X collaboration. Malcolm X


--- PAGE 318 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 311
apparently would speak to Haley in “free style”; it was left to Haley to take hun-
dreds of sentences into paragraphs and then appropriate subject areas. Malcolm 
also had a habit of scribbling notes to himself as he spoke. Haley learned to pocket 
these sketchy notes and later reassemble them, integrating the conscious with 
subconscious reflections into a workable narrative. Although Malcolm X retained 
final approval of their hybrid text, he was not privy to the actual editorial pro-
cesses superimposed from Haley’s side. Chapters the two men had prepared were 
sometimes split and restructured into other chapters. These details may appear 
mundane and insignificant. But considering that Malcolm’s final “metamorpho-
sis” took place in 1963 through 1965, the exact timing of when individual chap-
ters were produced takes on enormous importance.
These new revelations made me realize that I also needed to learn much more 
about Haley. Born in Ithaca, New York, in 1921, Alex Haley was the oldest of 
three sons of Simon Alexander Haley, a professor of agriculture, and Bertha 
George Palmer, a grade school teacher. Haley had been raised as a child in Hen-
ning, T ennessee. As a teenager, in 1939, Haley enlisted in the U.S. Coast Guard as 
a mess boy. During World War II, he had come to the attention of white officers 
for his flair as a talented writer. During long assignments at sea, Haley had ghost-
written hundreds of love letters for sailors’ wives and sweethearts back at home. 
While Haley’s repeated efforts to gain print publication for his unsolicited manu-
scripts failed for eight long years, his extracurricular activities gained the approval 
and admiration of his white superiors. By the late 1940s, Haley was advanced 
into a desk job; by the mid-1950s, he was granted the post of “chief journalist” 
in the Coast Guard. After putting in twenty years’ service, Haley started a career 
as a professional freelance writer. Politically, Haley was both a Republican and 
a committed advocate of racial integration. He was not, unlike C. Eric Lincoln 
or other African American scholars who had studied the NOI’s activities during 
the late 1950s, even mildly sympathetic with the black group’s aims and racial 
philosophy.
T o Haley, the separatist Nation of Islam was an object lesson in America’s 
failure to achieve interracial justice and fairness. As Mike Wallace’s controversial 
1959 television series on the Black Muslims had proclaimed, they represented 
“The Hate That Hate Produced.” Haley completely concurred with Wallace’s the-
sis. He, too, was convinced that the NOI was potentially a dangerous, racist cult, 
completely out of step with the lofty goals and integrationist aspirations of the 
Civil Rights Movement. Haley was personally fascinated with Malcolm’s charisma 
and angry rhetoric but strongly disagreed with many of his ideas. Consequently, 
when Haley started work on the Autobiography, he held a very different set of 
objectives than those of Malcolm X. The Romaine papers also revealed that one 
of Haley’s early articles about the NOI, coauthored with white writer Alfred Balk, 
had been written in collaboration with the FBI . The FBI had supplied its infor-
mation about the NOI to Balk and Haley, which formed much of the basis for 
their Saturday Evening Post article that appeared on January 26, 1963, with the 
threatening title, “Black Merchants of Hate.”
5


--- PAGE 319 ---
Black Routes to Islam312
I then began to wonder, as I poured through Romaine’s papers, what Malcolm 
X really had known about the final text that would become his ultimate “testa-
ment.” Could I not discover a way to find out what was going on inside Haley’s 
head, or at Doubleday, which had paid a hefty $20,000 advance for the Autobi-
ography in June 1963? And why, only three weeks following Malcolm X’s killing, 
had Doubleday canceled the contract for the completed book? The Autobiography
would be eventually published by Grove in late 1965. Doubleday’s hasty decision 
would cost the publisher millions of dollars.
The Library of Congress held the answers. Doubleday’s corporate papers are 
now housed there. This collection includes the papers of Doubleday’s then-execu-
tive editor, Kenneth McCormick, who had worked closely with Haley for sev-
eral years as the Autobiography had been constructed. As in the Romaine papers, 
I found more evidence of Haley’s sometimes-weekly private commentary with 
McCormick about the laborious process of composing the book. These Haley 
letters of marginalia contained some crucial, never previously published intimate 
details about Malcolm’s personal life. They also revealed how several attorneys 
retained by Doubleday closely monitored and vetted entire sections of the con-
troversial text in 1964, demanding numerous name changes, the reworking and 
deletion of blocks of paragraphs, and so forth. In late 1963, Haley was particu-
larly worried about what he viewed as Malcolm X’s anti-Semitism. He therefore 
rewrote material to eliminate a number of negative statements about Jews in the 
book manuscript, with the explicit covert goal of “getting them past Malcolm X,” 
without his coauthor’s knowledge or consent. Thus, the censorship of Malcolm X 
had begun well prior to his assassination.
A cardinal responsibility of the historian is to relate the full truth, however 
unpleasant. In the early 1960s, the Nation of Islam had been directly involved 
with the American Nazi Party and white supremacist organizations—all while 
Malcolm X had been its “national representative.” This regrettable dimension of 
Malcolm’s career had to be thoroughly investigated yet few scholars, black or 
white, had been willing to do so. In 1998, in my book Black Leadership (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1998), I had described Farrakhan’s anti-Semitic, 
conservative, black nationalism as an odious brand of “Black Fundamentalism.” 
Farrakhan had been Malcolm’s prime protégé, and the question must now be 
posed whether Malcolm X was partially responsible for the bankrupt political 
legacy of black anti-Semitism and Black Fundamentalism. The whole truth, not 
packaged icons, can only advance our complete understanding of the real man 
and his times.
The Romaine papers also had provided clear evidence that the lack of a clear 
political program or plan of action in the Autobiography was no accident. Some-
thing was indeed “missing” from the final version of the book as it appeared in 
print in late 1965. In Haley’s own correspondence to editor Kenneth McCor-
mick, dated January 19, 1964, Haley had even described these chapters as having 
“the most impact material of the book, some of it rater lava-like.”
6 Now my quest 
shifted to finding out what the contents of this “impact material” were. The trail


--- PAGE 320 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 313
now led me to Detroit attorney Gregory Reed. In late 1992, Reed had purchased 
the original manuscripts of the Autobiography at the sale of the Haley Estate for 
$100,000. Reed has, in his possession in his office safe, the three “missing chap-
ters” from the Autobiography, which still have never been published. I contacted 
Reed and, after several lengthy telephone conversations, he agreed to show me 
the missing Autobiography chapters. With great enthusiasm, I flew to Detroit and 
telephoned Reed at our agreed-upon time. Reed then curiously rejected meeting 
me at his law office. He instead insisted that we meet at a downtown restaurant. I 
arrived at our meeting place on time and a half hour later, Reed showed up, car-
rying a briefcase.
After exchanging a few pleasantries, Reed informed me that he had not brought 
the entire original manuscript with him. However, he would permit me to read, 
at the restaurant table, small selections from the manuscript. I was deeply disap-
pointed but readily accepted Reed’s new terms. For roughly fifteen minutes, I 
quickly read parts from the illusive “missing chapters.” That was enough time for 
me to ascertain, without doubt, that these text fragments had been dictated and 
written sometime between October 1963 and January 1964. This coincides with 
the final months of Malcolm’s NOI membership. More critically, in these missing 
chapters, Malcolm X proposed the construction of an unprecedented, African 
American united front of black political and civic organizations, including both 
the NOI and civil rights groups. He perhaps envisioned something similar in style 
to Farrakhan’s Million Man March of 1995. Apparently, Malcolm X was aggres-
sively pushing the NOI beyond Black Fundamentalism into open, common dia-
logue and political collaboration with the civil rights community. Was this the 
prime reason that elements inside both the NOI and the FBI may have wanted to 
silence him? Since Reed owns the physical property, but the Shabazz estate retains 
the intellectual property rights of its contents, we may never know.
With each successive stumbling block, I became more intrigued. The compli-
cated web of this man’s life, the swirling world around him, his friends, family, 
and intimate associates, became ever more tangled and provocative. The tensions 
between these at-times feuding factions, the innuendos, the missed opportunities, 
the angry refusals to speak on the record, the suppression of archival evidence, the 
broken loyalties, and constant betrayals all seemed too great. It required of me a 
difficult journey of many years, even to possess the knowledge of how to untangle 
the web, to make sense of it all. What I acquired, however, by 2003 and 2004, 
was a true depth of understanding and insight that was surprising and much more 
revelatory than I had ever imagined. I finally learned that the answer to the ques-
tion—why was this information about Malcolm X so fiercely protected—because 
the life, and the man, had the potential to become much more dangerous to white 
America than any single individual had ever been.
Malcolm X, the real Malcolm X, was infinitely more remarkable than the per-
sonality presented in the Autobiography. The man who had been born Malcolm 
Little, and who had perished as El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz, was no saint. He made 
many serious errors of judgment, several of which directly contributed to his


--- PAGE 321 ---
Black Routes to Islam314
murder. Yet despite these serious contradictions and personal failings, Malcolm 
X also possessed the unique potential for uniting black America in any unprece-
dented coalition with African, Asian, and Caribbean nations. He alone could have 
established unity between Negro integrationists and black nationalists inside the 
United States. He possessed the personal charisma, the rhetorical genius, and the 
moral courage to inspire and motivate millions of blacks into unified action. Nei-
ther the Autobiography nor Spike Lee’s 1992 movie revealed this powerful legacy 
of the man or explained what he could have accomplished. What continues to 
be suppressed and censored also tells us something so huge about America itself, 
about where we were then and where we, as a people, are now. Malcolm X was 
potentially a new type of world leader, personally drawn up from the “wretched of 
the earth” into a political stratosphere of international power. T elling that remark-
able, true story is the purpose of my biography.
Notes
 1. Immediately following Malcolm X’s assassination, several individuals who had worked 
closely with the fallen leader sought to document his meaning in the larger black freedom 
struggle. These early texts include Leslie Alexander Lacy, “Malcolm X in Ghana,” in Mal-
colm X: The Man and His Times, ed. John Henrik Clarke (New York: Macmillan, 1969), 
217–55; Ossie Davis, “Why I Eulogized Malcolm X,” Negro Digest 15, no. 4 (February 
1966): 64–66; Wyatt T ee Walker, “On Malcolm X: Nothing But A Man,” Negro Digest
14, no. 10 (August 1965): 29–32; and Albert B. Cleage, Jr., “Brother Malcolm,” in The
Black Messiah, ed. Albert B. Cleage, Jr. (New York: Sheed and Ward, 1968), 186–200. 
The advocates of Black Power subsequently placed Malcolm X firmly within the black 
nationalist tradition of Martin R. Delany and Marcus Garvey, emphasizing his dedication 
to the use of armed self defense by blacks. Amiri Baraka’s essay, “The Legacy of Malcolm 
X, and the Coming of the Black Nation,” in LeRoi Jones, Home: Social Essays (New York: 
William Morrow, 19966), 238–50, became the template for this line of interpretation. 
Following Baraka’s black nationalist thesis were Eldridge Cleaver, “Initial Reactions on the 
Assassination of Malcolm X,” in Soul on Ice , ed. Eldridge Cleaver (New York: Ramparts, 
1968), 50–61; James Boggs, “King Malcolm, and the Future of the Black Revolution,” 
in Racism and the Class Struggle: Further Pages from a Black Worker’s Notebook, ed. James 
Boggs (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1970), 104–29; Cedrick Robinson, “Malcolm 
Little as a Charismatic Leader,” Afro-American Studies 2, no. 1 (September 1972): 81–96; 
and Robert Allen, Black Awakening in Capitalist America (Garden City, NY: Anchor/Dou-
bleday, 1970), esp. 30–40.
 2. The best available studies of Malcolm X merit some consideration here. Although origi-
nally written more than three decades ago, Newsweek editor-journalist Peter Goldman’s 
The Death and Life of Malcolm X  (New York: Harper and Row, 1973) still remains an 
excellent introduction to the man and his times. Well-written and researched, Goldman 
based the text on his own interviews with the subject. Karl Evanzz’s The Judas Factor: 
The Plot to Kill Malcolm X (New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1992) presents a persua-
sive argument explaining the FBI’s near-blanket surveillance of the subject. Evanzz was 
the first author to suggest that NOI National Secretary John Ali may have been an FBI 
informant. Louis A. DeCaro has written two thoughtful studies on Malcolm X’s spiritual 
growth and religious orientation, On the Side of My People: A Religious Life of Malcolm X
(New York: New York University Press, 1996) and Malcolm and the Cross: The Nation of


--- PAGE 322 ---
Rediscovering Malcolm’s Life 315
Islam, Malcolm X and Christianity (New York: New York University Press, 1998). DeCaro 
graciously agreed to be interviewed in 2001 for the Malcolm X Project at Columbia. The 
field of religious studies has also produced other informative interpretations of Malcolm 
X. These works include Lewis V . Baldwin, Between Cross and Crescent: Christian and Mus-
lim Perspectives on Malcolm and Martin (Gainesville: University of Florida, 2002); a sound 
recording by Harnam Cross, Donna Scott, and Eugene Scals, “What’s Up with Malcolm? 
The Real Future of Islam” (Southfield, MI: Readings for the Blind, 2001); Peter J. Paris, 
Black Religious Leaders: Conflict in Unity (Westminster: John Knox Press, 1991).
 3. Philip Brian Harper, in his book, Are We Not Men? Masculine Anxiety and the Problem 
of African-American Identity (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), argues that the 
simplistic stereotypes of King and his courageous followers as being “non-masculine” and 
“effeminate” and leaders such as Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael as “super-mascu-
line, Black males” became widely promulgated. “The Black Power movement,” Harper 
observes, was “conceived in terms of accession to a masculine identity, the problematic 
quality of those terms notwithstanding” (68).
 4. In an extraordinary interview with writer Thomas Hauser, Alex Haley stated that he had 
“worked closely with Malcolm X, and I also did a Playboy interview with Martin Luther 
King during the same period, so I knew one very closely and the other a little.” Based on 
his knowledge of both men, he had concluded that they had “both died tragically at about 
the right time in terms of posterity. Both men were . . . beginning to decline. They were 
under attack.” In Haley’s opinion, Malcolm, in particular, “was having a rough time trying 
to keep things going. Both of them were killed just before it went really downhill for them, 
and as of their death, they were practically sainted.” See Thomas Hauser, Muhammad Ali: 
His Life and Times (New York: T ouchstone/Simon and Schuster, 191), 508.
 5. Alfred Balk had contacted the FBI in October 1962, seeking the bureau’s assistance in 
collecting information about the Nation of Islam for the proposed article he and Haley 
would write for the Saturday Evening Post. The bureau gave Balk and Haley the data 
they requested, with the strict stipulation that the FBI’s assistance not be mentioned. The 
bureau was later quite pleased with the published article. See M. A. Jones to Mr. DeLoach, 
FBI Memorandum, October 9, 1963, in the Anne Romaine Papers, Series 1, Box 2, folder 
16, University of T ennessee Library Special Collections. See also Alfred Balk and Alex 
Haley, “Black Merchants of Hate,” Saturday Evening Post, January 26, 1963.
 6. On January 9, 1964, Haley wrote to Doubleday Executive Editor Kenneth McCormick 
and his agent, Paul Reynolds, that “the most impact material of the book, some of it rather 
lava-like, is what I have from Malcolm for the three essay chapters, ‘The Negro,’ ‘The 
End of Christianity,’ and “T wenty Million Black Muslims.’” See Alex Haley to Kenneth 
McCormick, Wolcott Gibbs, Jr., and Paul Reynolds, January 19, 1964, in Annie Romaine 
Collection, the University of T ennessee Library Special Collection.


--- PAGE 323 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 324 ---
About the Contributors
Hishaam D. Aidi is a lecturer at Columbia University’s School of International 
and Public Affairs and a contributing editor of Souls: A Critical Journal of Black 
Culture, Politics and Society. A 2008–9 Carnegie Scholar, he is the author of Rede-
ploying the State (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009) and has written for The New African,
Africana, Colorlines, and Middle East Report.
Zain Abdullah is an assistant professor in the Religion Department at T emple 
University where he also teaches in the Department of Geography and Urban 
Studies. His research interests include Islam-American culture and religion, Afri-
can diaspora studies, film production and photography, globalization, and trans-
nationalism. His forthcoming book Black Mecca: The African Muslims of Harlem
(Oxford University Press, 2009) explores how West Africans navigate their pres-
ence in New York City by negotiating their black, African, and Muslim identities. 
He served as an advisor for the documentary Dollars & Dreams: West Africans in 
New York (2007), which screened at the FESPACO Pan-African Film Festival in 
Burkina Faso, West Africa.
Vivek Bald is a documentary filmmaker and an assistant professor of writing and 
digital media at the Massachusetts Institute of T echnology. His films include T axi-
vala/Auto-biography (1994), about South Asian immigrant taxi drivers in New 
York City, and Mutiny: Asians Storm British Music (2003), about South Asian 
youth, music, and antiracist politics in 1970s through 1990s Britain. His current 
work, which focuses on the desertion and settlement of Indian Muslim merchant 
sailors in U.S. port cities in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, 
is the basis for a forthcoming book, Bengali Harlem and the Hidden Histories of
South Asian New York, and a documentary film, In Search of Bengali Harlem.
Moustafa Bayoumi is an associate professor of English at Brooklyn College, City 
University of New York (CUNY). He is the coeditor of The Edward Said Reader
(Vintage) and the author of How Does It Feel to Bea Problem? Being Young and Arab 
in America (Penguin, 2008). His essays have appeared in The Best Music Writing
2006, The Nation, The London Review of Books, The Village Voice,The Yale Journal
of Criticism,Transition,Interventions,Arab Studies Quarterly, and other places.


--- PAGE 325 ---
About the Contributors318
Edward E. Curtis IV is Millennium Chair of the Liberal Arts and professor of 
religious studies at Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI). 
He is the author or editor of several books on Muslim American and African 
American history, including Muslims in America: A Short History and The Colum-
bia Sourcebook of Muslims in the United States , which was selected by Choice as 
an outstanding academic title of 2008. A former NEH Fellow at the National 
Humanities Center, he has also been awarded Carnegie, Fulbright, and Mellon 
fellowships. Most recently, Professor Curtis has completed work as general editor 
of the two-volume Encyclopedia of Muslim-American History.
Sohail Daulatzai is an assistant professor in African American Studies and Film 
and Media Studies at the University of California, Irvine. His current book proj-
ects include Born to Use Mics (with Michael Eric Dyson), which is a meditation 
on Nas’s 1994 album Illmatic; and Return of the Mecca, a project that explores 
the connections between Muslim diasporas and black radicalism through social 
movements, cinema, sports, literature, and hip-hop culture. He is also currently 
in production on a graphic novel on the 1965 film Battle of Algiers, and is an 
executive producer and creator of the forthcoming hip-hop album titled Free Rap,
a benefit album for imprisoned Muslim leader Imam Jamil Al-Amin (formerly 
known as H. Rap Brown).
Keith P . Feldman is an assistant professor of Comparative Ethnic Studies at the 
University of California, Berkeley. His current book project, Racing the Ques-
tion: Israel/Palestine and U.S. Imperial Culture , takes a comparative racializa-
tion approach to reading a range of cultural production circulating between the 
United States, the Middle East, and North Africa. He has published in CR: New 
Centennial Review, MELUS, postmodern culture, and in the edited collection Arab 
Women’s Lives Retold: Exploring Identity through Writing  (Syracuse University 
Press, 2007), as well as in encyclopedias of ethnic, African American, and post-
colonial literatures.
Zareena Grewal is an Ethnicity, Race, and Migration Scholar at Yale’s Center for 
International and Area Studies and a lecturer in American Studies at Yale. She 
received her PhD in anthropology and history from the University of Michigan, 
has taught at the University of Michigan and Vassar College, and was awarded the 
Fulbright’s prestigious Islamic Civilization Grant. She also directed and produced 
a documentary on patriotism, racism, and Muslims in the United States, titled 
By Dawn’s Early Light: Chris Jackson’s Journey to Islam (2004), which is distributed 
by Cinema Guild and was recently featured on ABC News Now and the Docu-
mentary Channel.


--- PAGE 326 ---
About the Contributors 319
Alex Lubin is an associate professor and chair in the Department of American 
Studies at the University of New Mexico. He is the author of Romance and Rights:
The Politics of Interracial Intimacy, 1945–1954 (University Press of Mississippi, 
2005) and the editor of Revising the Blueprint: Ann Petry and the Literary Left
(University Press of Mississippi, 2007). He is currently working on a manuscript 
on African American intellectual and political history concerning the question 
of Palestine.
Sherman A. Jackson is presently a professor of Arabic and Islamic Studies, a visit-
ing professor of law, and a professor of Afro-American Studies at the University 
of Michigan. He is author of Islamic Law and the State: The Constitutional Juris-
prudence of Shihâb al-Dîn al-Qarâfî (Brill, 1996), On the Boundaries of Theological
T olerance in Islam: Abû Hâmid al-Ghazâlî’s Faysal al-T afriqa (Oxford University 
Press, 2002), Islam and the Blackamerican: Looking T owards the Third Resurrection
(Oxford University Press, 2005), and Islam and Black Theodicy: Classical Islamic 
Theology in Modern America (Oxford University Press, forthcoming).
Jamillah Karim is an assistant professor in religious studies at Spelman College. 
She obtained her PhD in Islamic studies at Duke University. She specializes in 
Islam in America, women and Islam, and race and immigration. She is author of 
the book American Muslim Women: Negotiating Race, Class, and Gender within 
the Ummah, which explores relations between African American and South Asian 
immigrant Muslims in the United States.
Su’ad Abdul Khabeer is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Anthro-
pology at Princeton University. Su’ad’s dissertation research explores the ways 
American Muslim youth negotiate their religious, racial, and cultural identities 
through hip-hop. Su’ad is also a research affiliate with the Center for Arts and 
Cultural Policy Studies at Princeton University and Senior Project Advisor for the 
documentary New Muslim Cool. Her publications include “Rep that Islam: The 
Rhyme and Reason of American Muslim Hip Hop” in the January 2007 issue of 
The Muslim World and “A Day in the Life,” poetry that appeared in the anthology 
Living Islam Out Loud: American Muslim Women Speak.
Samir Meghelli is a Richard Hofstadter Fellow and PhD candidate in history 
at Columbia University. He is coauthor of Tha Global Cipha: Hip Hop Culture 
and Consciousness (Black History Museum Press, 2006) and has organized public 
history programs throughout the New York and Philadelphia areas. He received 
his BA (magna cum laude) from the University of Pennsylvania and his MA and 
MPhil from Columbia University. Meghelli’s research interests include U.S. and 
African American cultural and political history, histories and theories of citizen-
ship, and African diasporic cultures in the Atlantic and Francophone worlds.


--- PAGE 327 ---
About the Contributors320
Rami Nashashibi is a doctoral candidate in sociology at the University of Chi-
cago and is working on a dissertation exploring the encounter of Islam with hip-
hop and black street gangs in the postindustrial ghetto. He is a recipient of the 
Robert Park Fellowship, for which he developed and taught the course “Theoriz-
ing the Global Ghetto” at the University of Chicago. He is the author of “Ghetto 
Cosmopolitanism: Making Theory at the Margins,” in a book edited by Saskia 
Sassen titled Deciphering the Global: Its Scales, Spaces, and Subjects (Routledge, 
2007). Rami is also a full-time community organizer and Executive Director of 
the Inner-City Muslim Action Network (IMAN), a nonprofit organization that 
provides direct services while organizing around social justice issues affecting 
inner-city communities. Rami and IMAN were featured in a BBC Radio docu-
mentary, on the cover of the Chicago T ribune, and in a recent PBS documentary.
Richard Brent T urner, PhD, Princeton University, is the coordinator of the Afri-
can American Studies Program and an associate professor in the Department of 
Religious Studies at the University of Iowa. He specializes in African American 
religious history and has been an associate at the W . E. B. Du Bois Institute 
at Harvard University. His books include Islam in the African-American Experi-
ence (2nd ed., Indiana University Press, 2003) and Jazz Religion, the Second Line, 
and Black New Orleans, which will be published by Indiana University Press in 
2009. Dr. T urner is also the author of Islam and Black Americans (a volume in the 
Schomburg Studies on the Black Experience) and numerous journal articles and 
book chapters on African American and New World African religions.


--- PAGE 328 ---
Abdul-Karim, Yahya, 55
Abdul-Rauf, Mahmoud (Chris Jackson), 
191–204
Abduraheem, Omar (Iman Ocasio), 124, 
288
Abou Jahjah, Dyab, 128
Abu Ghraib, 208, 209, 212–16
African-American Muslims, 150, 287
Ahmad, Mirza Mahmud, 70
Ahmadiyya community, movement, 70–72, 
74, 230, 242
Ahmad, Ghulam, 70, 73
al-Amin, Jamil (H. Rap Brown), 55, 212, 
218, 219–21
Alford, T erry, 5
Algeria, 87, 99–116, 126–28, 130, 135, 284, 
286
al-Ghazali, 43, 183
Algiers, 8–9, 80, 99, 103–16
Ali, Muhammad (Cassius Clay), 93, 144, 
200–202, 285
Alkalimat, Abdul, 310
al-Murabitun, 123
al-Qaeda, 217, 284
Amara, Fadela, 129
American Society of Muslims, 147
Arab European League (AEL), 128
Arabic, 2–6, 10–12, 24, 37, 42, 43, 72, 73, 
76, 111, 125, 126, 128, 131, 133, 136, 
149, 167–86, 195, 256, 261, 273, 274, 
275, 277, 279, 281, 284–86, 291–93
Asante, Molefi Kete, 41–43, 61
Asian-African Conference, Bandung (1955), 
17, 84
Autobiography of Malcolm X, The, 146, 195, 
300, 301, 303
Azzam, Abd al-Rahman, 57
Bagley, Carolyn, 28
Baldwin, James, 82, 85, 88, 92, 126
Battle of Algiers, The (film), 100, 104–6, 110, 
207
Ben Bella, Ahmed, 101–3, 105, 286
Bilali, 3–5
bin Laden, Osama, 127, 132, 135, 283
bint, 182–83
Black Panther Party, 80, 88, 104–5, 113, 
115, 167
Blackamericans, 34–38, 41–44
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 11, 21–24, 27, 83, 
285–86
Bratton, William, 216
Brooks, William Sampson, 26, 27
Bunche, Ralph, 30, 88
Butler, Norman 3X, 305
Carmichael, Stokely (Kwame T uré), 82, 83, 
87, 89, 105, 109, 112, 275
Christian, Christianity, 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 21, 
22, 24–27, 33, 35, 41, 44, 54, 62, 71, 
72, 123, 124, 126, 130, 143, 144, 148, 
156, 175, 176, 192, 196, 210, 220, 
241, 254, 264, 284, 285, 288, 294
Christian Zionists, 19, 20, 25
Civilization Class (CC), 162
Cleaver, Eldridge, 82, 86, 87, 104–8, 112, 
113, 115
Clinton, William (Bill), 291, 303
Conrad, Georgia, 3
critical race theory, 220
Darul Islam, 55, 173
Diallo, Amadou, 216, 220, 249
Dorr, David, 20–22, 24
Drew, Timothy, 70
Index


--- PAGE 329 ---
322    Index
Du Bois, David Graham, 91
Du Bois, Shirley Graham, 87
Du Bois, W . E. B., 18, 19, 21, 30, 80, 
82–84, 88, 91, 210, 302, 304
Dyson, Michael Eric, 212, 220
Faisal, Shaikh Daoud Ahmed, 50, 53–55
Fanon, Frantz, 37, 87, 89, 100, 101, 104–5, 
112, 113, 220, 221
Farrakhan, Louis, 64, 127, 132, 144, 276, 
286, 289, 290, 294, 303, 305, 309, 
312, 313
fitna, 172–73, 175, 177, 183, 185
Five Percenters, 131, 147, 288, 292, 293
Foucault, Michael, 80, 81, 212
Fulbe, 2, 4–7
Fuller, Hoyt, 99, 100, 112
Garvey, Marcus (Garveyism, Garveyites), 27, 
69, 72, 83, 86, 230, 286
Guantánamo, 126, 132, 207–9, 212–16, 
218–19, 285
hadith, 50, 63, 133, 174
hajj, 42, 57, 73, 144, 149, 280, 306
Haley, Alex, 1, 146, 307, 310–13
Hamitic thesis, 4
Harris, Joel Chandler, 3, 5
Hayer, Talmadge, 305
Herzl, Theodore, 21, 24, 86, 89
hip-hop, 116, 129–34, 136, 142–47, 
149–51, 220–21, 285, 291–94, 301–3, 
306
Homeland Security (Department of), 211, 
212, 216, 217
hooks, bell, 161
Hopkins, Samuel, 8, 10
India, 70, 71, 231–33, 235, 237, 243
Israel, 18–19, 27, 30, 79, 81–85, 88–89, 
91–92
Jama‘at-i Islami (Islamic Party), 52, 62
Jew, 23, 28, 85, 87
jihad, 55, 63, 131, 284, 286, 287, 293
jinn, 175
Johnson, Thomas 15X, 305
Jones, W . L. (Rev.), 25–26
Kenyatta, Jomo, 59
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 39, 40, 88–89, 
102–3, 105, 115, 201, 299–310
King, Yolanda, 299
Levant, 20, 23
Liberia, 10, 11, 22, 23, 26, 27, 253
Lincoln, C. Eric, 36, 76, 141–42, 151, 290, 
311
Madhubuti, Haki (Don Lee), 111
Mahbub, Hafis, 55
Mahmood, Saba, 157
Malcolm X, 50, 51, 55–59, 69, 70, 73, 74, 
76, 89, 102, 103, 111, 115, 123, 128, 
135, 144, 145, 146, 148, 149, 195, 
213, 218, 219, 221, 239, 244, 286, 
299–314
majnoon, 172, 173, 175, 176, 183, 185
Mande, 2, 4
Masjid Malcolm Shabazz, 254, 255, 256
migration, 136, 186, 208, 228–30, 232, 
233, 243, 245, 253, 254, 263, 265
Moudjahid, El, 108
Muhammad, Akbar, 51, 294
Muhammad, Elijah (the Honorable), 35, 36, 
41, 51, 56, 58–61, 63, 69, 73, 74, 144, 
155, 156, 286, 290, 294, 309
Muhammad Speaks, 59, 60, 102, 106
Muhammad, W . D., 63, 150
Muslim Girls T raining (MGT), 162
Muslim Students Association (MSA), 53
Muslim World League, 52, 57, 59, 62
Myrdal, Gunnar, 83
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 51–52, 57, 58, 84, 
93, 286
Nation of Islam (NOI), 34, 41, 50, 51, 
55–64, 69, 73, 74, 89, 93, 102, 115, 
128, 131, 132, 134, 141, 144, 145, 
147, 155–56, 173, 198, 213, 230, 242, 
255, 276, 286–94, 302, 304, 307, 309, 
311–13
National Liberation Front (FLN), 101
Negro Digest (Black World), 100, 112
Newton, Huey P ., 80, 82, 88
Nkrumah, Kwame, 59, 83, 87
orientalism, 18–20, 22–24, 30, 33–35, 37, 
38–45, 61
Pakistan, 52, 54, 55, 72, 132, 208, 238, 241, 
242, 243, 284, 287
Palestine, 17–29, 45, 63, 79, 80, 82–86, 
88–92, 94, 128, 279, 293


--- PAGE 330 ---
Index 323
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 
135
“Palestine Problem,” 79, 88–93
Pan-African Festival (1969), 101, 107, 
109–11
Pan-Africanism, 21, 22, 30, 64, 83, 87, 112, 
121, 136, 285, 294
Perez, Aureliano, 123
Phillips, Ulrich Bonnell, 5
Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr., 28–30, 103, 257
qibla, 42
Quran (Qu’ran, Koran), 2, 3, 24, 54, 60, 
145, 195, 197, 198, 217, 274, 275, 
277, 279, 293
Rahman, Ibrahima Abdal, 5–6, 10
Rahman, Omar Abel, 287
Ramadan, 130, 133, 147, 149, 167, 172, 
176, 183, 185, 241, 275
Ramadan, Said, 52, 58
Rap DNA, 212, 220, 221
Robeson, Paul, 19, 30, 83, 88, 210
Roots, 1, 2
Sadiq, Mufti Muhammad, 70–72, 230
Said, Edward, 18, 33, 43, 87
Sapelo Island, 3–6
Seaton, Daniel P ., 24–26
Senegambia, 2, 4
Shabazz, Attallah, 299
Shabazz, Betty, 304, 307, 308, 309, 310, 
313
Shabazz, Maliakah, 308
Shawarbi, Mahmoud Youssef, 56
Shiite, 130, 133, 287
Singh, Nikihl, 30
Spaulding, Thomas, 3
Spaulding, Wylley, 3
St. Simon’s Island, 3
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Commit-
tee (SNCC), 79–82, 88, 89, 91–93, 
219
Sufi, 35, 64, 76, 123, 253, 254, 256, 283, 
294
Sunni, 34, 37, 45, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 
62, 63, 64, 132, 133, 141, 142, 144, 
145, 147, 148, 155–65, 167, 255–57, 
263, 264, 275, 287–90, 292, 293, 294, 
306
Taliban, 129, 283
T urner, Lorenzo Dow, 3, 4
T utsis, 4
Wacquant, Loïc, 85, 86
“War on T error,” 121, 122, 125, 131, 135, 
136, 150, 202, 209, 211, 213, 215, 
216, 217, 220, 221, 283–94
World Community of al-Islam in the West, 
63, 286
Wright, Richard, 17, 18, 30, 82
Zimbabwe, 109
Zion (Zionism, Zionists), 19–30, 82, 84, 87, 
89–92, 122
Zongo, Ousmane, 249

