=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Black-Brown-and-Beige-Surrealist-Writings-From-Africa-and-the-Diaspora.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 416
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:26.148236
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Black, Brown, & Beige


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Surreali ST revoluTion SerieS
Franklin Rosemont, Editor
a renowned current in poetry and the
arts, surrealism has also influenced
psychoanalysis, anthropology, critical
theory, politics, humor, popular culture,
and ever
yday life. illuminating its
diversity and actuality, the Surrealist
revolut
ion Series focuses on translations
of original writings by participants in
the international surrealist movement
and on critical studies of unexamined
aspects of its development.


--- PAGE 4 ---
lack,
Brown,
& Beige
Surreali St Writing S from
africa and the diaSpora
edited by Franklin rosemont
and robin D. G. Kelley
university of Texas Press austin
B


--- PAGE 5 ---
© 2009 university of Texas Press
all rights reserved
Printed in the united States of america
First edition, 2009
requests for p
ermission to reproduce material from 
this work should be sent to:
 Per
missions
 university of Texas Press
 P .o. Box 7819
 austin, TX 78713-7819
 www.utexas.edu/utpress/about/bpermission.html
♾ The paper used in this book meets the minimum 
requir
ements of anSi/niSo Z39.48-1992 (r1997) 
(Permanence of Paper).
library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Black, brown, & beige : surrealist writings from
 africa and the diaspora / edited by Franklin
 r osemont and robin D. G. Kelley. — 1st ed.
  p. cm. — (The surrealist revolution series)
 i ncludes bibliographical references and index.
 iSBn 978-0-292-71997-2 (cloth : alk. paper)
  1. Surrealism (literature) 2. Surrealism.
 3. 
literature—Black authors. i . rosemont,
 Franklin. ii . Kelley, robin D. G. iii. Title: Black,
 brown, and beige.
 Pn6071.S915B63 2009
 809′.91163—dc22 2009006978
Dedicated to aimé Césaire, Ted Joans, & Franklin rosemont


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
list of illustrations xvii
acknowledgments xix
introduction:  invisible Surrealists 1
1. The First Black Surrealists 21
Martinique 35
Etienne Léro 35
l
égitime Défense Manifesto 36 • Civilization 38 • and the  
ramps 3
9 • abandon 39 • Put 39
Simone Y oyotte 40
P
yjama-Speed 40
Pierre Y oyotte 40
T
heory of the Fountain 41 • antifascist Significance of Surrealism 42
Maurice-Sabas Quitman 45
P
aradise on earth 45
Jules Monnerot 46
on Certai
n Traits Particular to the Civilized Mentality 47 •  
indispensabl
e Poetry 49
Y va Léro 49
l
ittle Black Divers 50


--- PAGE 7 ---
vi Black, Brown, & Beige
Aimé Césaire 51
négreries 52
Jamaica 54
Claude McKay 54
Do
wn to the roots 54
Cuba 55
Juan Breá 55
My 
life is a Sunday 56 • Thoughts 57
Juan Breá and Mary Low 58
n
otes on the economic Causes of humor 58
Trinidad 59
C. L. R. James 59
in
troduction to Red Spanish Notebook 59
2. Tropiques: Surrealism in the Caribbean 61
Martinique 74
Aimé Césaire 74
P
anorama 74 • i ntroduction to Black american Poetry 75 • i n the 
Guise of a literary Manifesto 76 • Keeping Poetry alive 77 •  
isidore D
ucasse, “Comte de lautréamont” 78
Suzanne Césaire 79
Poverty of a Poetry 79
Aimé Césaire, Suzanne Césaire et al. 80
voice of the 
oracle 80
René Ménil 81
in
troduction to the Marvelous 82 • The orientation of Poetry 82 •  
Wha
t Does africa Mean to us? 83 • Poetry, Jazz & Freedom 84
Lucie Thésée 85
Pr
eference 86


--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents vii
Georges Gratiant 87
extinct volcano 87
Aristide Maugée 89
a
imé Césaire, Poet 89 • r eview of reviews 90
Georgette Anderson 91
Sym
bolism, Maeterlinck & the Marvelous 92
Stéphane Jean-Alexis 93
a
 note on Chance 93
Cuba 94
Wifredo Lam 94
P
icasso 96 • a rrows in rapid Flight 96
Agustín Cárdenas 98
one
, T wo, Three 99
Jacques Roumain 99
When the T om-T om Beats 100
hait
i 101
Clément Magloire-Saint-Aude 10 1
utterances 101 • Talismans 102 • not the l egend 102 • Three 
Poems 102 • The Surrealist record 103 • o n Poetry 105
René Bélance 10 5
awareness 106 • noise 106 • encounter with life 106
Hervé Télémaque 10 7
Why are Y ou Performing, Jean? 108
Dominican republic 108
Aída Cartagena Portalatín 10 8
Moon and Marble 109
Tr
inidad 110
John Jacob Thomas 11 0
Creole Proverbs 110
John La Rose 112
Connect
ing link 113


--- PAGE 9 ---
viii Black, Brown, & Beige
Puerto rico 113
Luis A. Maisonet 11 3
Freedom of expression for Y oung Children 114
3. South America 115
Brazil 120
João da Cruz e Souza 120
Black 
rose 120 • Tenebrous 121
Rosário Fusco 122
W
ind in the Woods 122
Sosígenes Costa 123
T
he Golden Papyrus 123 • The red Peacock 124
Fernando Mendes de Almeida 125
P
hantom Carrousel 125
Jorge de Lima 126
ho
wling Dogs 127
Guyana 128
Léon-Gontran Damas 128
F
or Sure 128 • Good Breeding 129 • a Caribbean view on 
Sterling a. Brown 129 • a Single i nstant of Belief 130 • negritude 
and Surrealism 130
Wilson Harris 132
voo
doo, Trance, Poetry and Dance 132
Colombia 133
Heriberto Cogollo 13 3
The World of a nohor 133


--- PAGE 10 ---
Contents ix
4. Africa 135
egypt 148
long live Degenerate art! 148
Georges Henein 14 9
Manifesto 150 • a rt and Freedom 151 • h ot Jazz 152 • Between the 
eagle’s nest and the Mouse-Trap 152 • Perspectives 153 • Jacques 
vaché 154 • The Plain Truth 156 • a Tribute to andré Breton 157
Ikbal El Alailly 157
P
ortrait of the author as a Y oung rabbit 158 • Post-Scriptum 159
Anwar Kamel 16 0
The Propagandists of reaction and us 160
Ramses Y ounane 16 1
What Comes after the logic of reason? 161
Victor Musgrave 16 2
voices in the T wilight 162
Albert Cossery 16 3
The house of Certain Death 163
Joyce Mansour 16 5
Floating islands 165 • Fresh Cream 166 • Forthwith to S 166 •  
nor
th express 167 • r esponse to an inquiry on Magic art 167
Morocco 168
Robert Benayoun 16 8
no rhyme for reason! 168 • The obscure Protests 169 • l etter to 
Chicago 169 • The Phoenix of animation 171 • T oo Much is T oo 
Much 172 • Comic Sounds 172
Abdellatif Laâbi 17 3
rue du retour 173
Tunisia 174
Farid Lariby 17 4
Pome Brut 174


--- PAGE 11 ---
x Black, Brown, & Beige
algeria 175
Henri Kréa 17 5
never Forever once More 175 • o h Y es 176
Jean-Michel Atlan 17 7
The Time has Come to Call up a World 177
Baya 178
T
he Big Bird 178
Habib T engour 179
Maghr
ebian Surrealism 179
Senegal 18
0
Cheikh Tidiane Sylla 180
Sur
realism and Black african art 180 • The Spirit of unity— 
For Freedom 181
Congo
 181
T chicaya U T am’si 181
a
gainst Destiny 182
Mozambique 182
Inácio Matsinhe 182
Pai
nting as a Contribution to Consciousness 183 • i Became a 
T ortoise to resist T orture 183 • The Snake 183
angola 184
Malangatana V alente Ngwenya 184
Sur
vivor among Millions 185
Amílcar Cabral 186
n
ational liberation and Culture 187
Antonio Domingues 187
The 
influence of aimé Césaire in Portuguese-Speaking africa 188
Madagascar 188
Jean-Joseph Rabéarivelo 188
a Pur
ple Star 189


--- PAGE 12 ---
Contents xi
South africa 189
Dennis Brutus 189
T
he Sun on This rubble 190 • Poet against apartheid 191
5. Surrealist Beginnings in the  
United States, 1930s–1950s 193
Fenton Johnson 21 1
The Phantom rabbit 211 • Tired 212
George Herriman 212
P
ositivilly Marvillis 212
Jean T oomer 21 3
essentials 213
Zora Neale Hurston 21 4
how the Gods Behave 214
Richard Wright 21 5
lawd T oday 215
Ralph Ellison 21 6
The Poetry of it 216 • Bearden & the Destruction of the accepted 
World 217
Russell Atkins 21 7
upstood upstaffed 218
6. The 1950s Surrealist Underground  
in the United States
 219
T ed Joans 228
T
ed Joans Speaks 229
Bob Kaufman 23 0
abomunist Manifesto 231 • $$ abomunus Craxioms $$ 232 •  
ab
omunist election Manifesto 232


--- PAGE 13 ---
xii Black, Brown, & Beige
T om Postell 233
Gertrude Stein rides the T orn Down el to nYC 233 • h armony 234
Percy Edward Johnston 23 4
variations on a Theme 234
7. Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 237
T ed Joans 252
Prop
osition for a Black Power Manifesto 252
Hart Leroy Bibbs 25 3
hurricane 253 • Black Spring 253
Jayne Cortez 25 4
national Security 254 • Making it 256
St. Clair Drake 25 6
negritude and Pan-africanism 257
Edward A. Jones 257
T
he Birth of Black awareness 258
Ishmael Reed 25 9
Boxing on Paper 259
Katherine Dunham 26 0
Ballet nègre 261 • notes on the Dance 261
Melvin Edwards 26 3
lynch Fragments 263
Joseph Jarman 26 4
odawalla 265
Oliver Pitcher 26 7
Jean-Jacques 267
Frank London Brown 26 8
Jazz 268
Pony Poindexter 270
J
azz is More French Than american 270


--- PAGE 14 ---
Contents xiii
Anthony Braxton 271
earth Music 272
Thelonious Monk 27 3
Three Score 273
Cecil T aylor 27 4
The Musician 274
Ornette Coleman 27 6
harmolodic = highest instinct 277
Sun Ra 277
Cosm
ic equation 278 • The endless realm 278
Babs Gonzales 279
i
 Paid My Dues 280
A. B. Spellman 28 0
The new Thing in Jazz 281
Dizzy Gillespie 28 1
Gertrude abercrombie 282
Amiri Baraka 28 3
The Changing Same 283
 8. Toward the New Millennium:  
The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 285
Aimé Césaire 29 8
My Joyful acceptance of Surrealism 298 • h omage to  
Frantz Fanon 299
Jayne Cortez 30 1
There it is 301 • What’s ugly 301 • Poetry Music  
Techn
ology 302 • e verything Can Be Transformed 302 •  
Taki
ng the Blues Back home 303 • léon Damas 304 • Mainstream 
Statement 305 • l arry’s Time 306
James G. Spady 30 7
larry neal never Forgot Philly 307


--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv Black, Brown, & Beige
Charlotte Carter 308
on Film 308
Robin D. G. Kelley 30 9
reflections on Malcolm X 309
Norman Calmese 31 1
My Discovery of Surrealism 311
T ed Joans 312
Kaufman 
is a Bird Called Bob 312 • Cogollo 312
9. Looking Ahead: Surrealism  
Today and Tomorrow 315
Aimé Césaire 322
i
 Do not agree to receive the Minister 322
Robin D. G. Kelley 322
Sur
realism 322
Ayana Karanja 324
Con
templation 324
Melvin Edwards 325
T
hinking about Surrealism 325
T . J. Anderson III 327
at 
last roundup 328 • v audeville 1951 328
Michael Stone-Richards 329
Sur
realist Subversion in everyday life 329
Ron Allen 333
rev
elation 333 • Conversation between eye and Mouth 335
Anthony Joseph 336
ho
w Surrealism Found Me 336 • e xtending out to Brightness 337
Patrick T urner 33 8
unrestricted images 339


--- PAGE 16 ---
Contents xv
Adrienne Kennedy 339
People Who led Me to My Plays 339
T yree Guyton 34 1
There is a True Magic here 341
Henry Dumas 342
W
ill the Circle Be unbroken? 343
Deusdedit de Morais 34 4
Café de Cherbourg 344
Jayne Cortez 34 5
Poetry Coming as Blues and Blues Coming as Poetry 345 • Free Time 
Friction 346
af
terword: Surrealism and the Creation of a Desirable Future,  
by 
robin D. G. Kelley 349
Bibliography 363
index 381


--- PAGE 17 ---
This metal sculpture by Gabriel 
Bien-aime was shown in the  
Worl
d Surrealist exhibition held  
in Chicago in 1976.


--- PAGE 18 ---
List of Illustrations
xvi Gabriel Bien-aime, metal sculpture
xviii Tyree Guyton, House as Surrealist Object
xxii
 Patrick Turner, Lindsay Park
20
 Cover of Légitime Défense
68 Milo rigaud, sketch of Clément Magloire-Saint-aude
70 Jacinto Minot, ink drawing
71 Jacinto Minot, drawing from Arsenal
95
 Wifredo lam, cover illustration for Médium
97 P
atrick Turner, Mind, Body and Soul
10
4 Milo rigaud, cover illustration for Déchu
11
1 Cover of Froudacity: W est Indian Fables Explained
13
9 Jean Benoît, cover of Rapaces
14
0 Cover of Anthologie du nonsense
142
 Cover of Drawings
14
5 i gnácio Matsinhe, drawing
145 Cheikh Tidiane Sylla, drawing
164 Cover of The Lazy Ones
185
 Malangatana valente ngwenya, drawing
192 Krazy Kat, by George herriman
2
24 Cover of Abomunist Manifesto
236
 Katherine Dunham
255 Melvin edwards, cover of Firespitter
31
3 heriberto Cogollo, cover of Flying Piranha
321
 Ted Joans, collage
330 Cover of Race T raitor, no. 9 (Summer 1998)
33
4 Shaqe Kalaj, cover of Neon Jawbone Riot


--- PAGE 19 ---
Acknowledgments
Thanks above all to Penelope rosemont, whose Surrealist W omen: An International 
Anthology was not only the first book in this series, but also provides the model 
for the present volume.
 T o 
my surrealist friends in Paris, amsterdam, Prague, Madrid, leeds, lon-
don, São Paulo, Chicago, and other places, for thoughtfully sending publica-
tions and information.
 and to the many translators: Myrna Bell rochester, Marjolijn de Jager, Celia 
Cymbalista, Guy Ducornet, Judy Cumberbatch, rachel Blackwell, Connie 
rosemont, Cynthia hahn, robert launay, Melanie Kemp, Danielle Jouët-
Pastre, neil Pischer, Jennifer Bean, nancy Joyce Peters, Philip lamantia, laura 
Corsiglia, Gay rawson, Marcus Salgado, natalia Segarra, Wingo Smith, Dale 
T omich, and alex Wilder.
 T o longtime friends John Bracey, Dennis Brutus, Jayne Cortez, Don laCoss, 
David roediger, Tamara Smith, Gibbsy Tarnaud, Joseph Jablonski, and others, 
for sharing ideas and information.
 Due 
to limitations of space and time, many of the texts represented are ex-
cerpted from a longer original.
Franklin Rosemont, Chicago


--- PAGE 20 ---
Lindsay Park (photomontage, 1999) by Patrick Turner,  
surrealist artist and blues musician.


--- PAGE 21 ---
Tyree Guyton’s art was a center of controversy in Detroit where he transformed 
abandoned houses into surrealist objects. in 1992 the surrealists issued a statement 
in his defense. (Photo by Maurice Greenia, Jr.)


--- PAGE 22 ---
introduc tion
Invisible Surrealists
only poets, since they must excavate and recreate history,  
have ever learned anything from it.
—James Baldwin
in the vast critical literature on surrealism, all but a few black surrealists have 
been invisible. Despite mounting studies of aimé Césaire, Wifredo lam, Ted 
Joans, and, more recently, Jayne Cortez, academic histories and anthologies 
typically, but very wrongly, persist in conveying surrealism as an all-white 
movement, like other “artistic schools” of european origin. occasional token 
mentions aside, people of color—and more particularly those from africa or 
the Diaspora—have been excluded from most of the so-called standard works 
on the subject.1
 i n glaring contrast, the many publications of the international surrealist 
movement—periodicals, books, pamphlets, exhibition catalogs, and antholo-
gies produced by the surrealists themselves—regularly feature texts and re-
productions of works by black comrades from Martinique, haiti, Cuba, Puerto 
rico, South america, africa, the united States, and other lands. These pub-
lications, moreover, are readily available to researchers at numerous libraries. 
inaccessibility, therefore, is not a legitimate excuse for exclusion.
 i t is the aim of this book to introduce readers to the black surrealists of the 
world; to provide sketches of their lives and deeds as well as their important 
place in history, especially the history of surrealism; and, not least, to present 
a selection of their writings and art.
* * *
T
he surrealist movement began as a spontaneous association, based on elective 
affini
ties, and that is what it has always been and still is. abjuring, on principle, 
all proselytizing and recruitment, it has never entertained the aim of being a 
mass mo
vement. indeed, surrealism has always been determinedly minoritary: 
French poet andré Breton—its cofounder, author of the Surrealist Manifestoes, 
and first major theorist—described surrealism as a minority always “tending


--- PAGE 23 ---
2 Black, Brown, & Beige
toward greater human emancipation,” and went on to add that it is “ceaselessly 
renewable” and “acts as a lever.”2
 Surrealism’s worldwide membership has rarely if ever exceeded two hundred 
at any given time. as the present volume demonstrates, well over fifty individu-
als of a
frican descent, from the early 1930s on, have participated actively, at 
one time or another, in what its adherents often call the Surrealist international. 
These individuals not only have considered themselves surrealists, but also have 
regularly taken part in Surrealist Group discussions and other collective activi-
ties such as collaborating on surrealist books and periodicals, planning surrealist 
exhibitions, and in any number of ways publicly affirming their involvement in 
surrealism and their support for its aims and principles. a large majority, more-
over, have proved to be truly distinguished figures, noted for their originality 
and expansion of the surrealist cause. Within the ranks of the international 
movement, surrealists black, brown, and beige have long been recognized as 
outstanding poets, theorists, critics, spokespersons, painters, sculptors, collag-
ists, story writers, filmmakers, playwrights, dancers, and all-around agitators.
 i n 
addition to these fifty-plus participants in surrealism as an international 
movement, the present anthology also includes a number of surrealism’s black 
forerunners as well as close allies, among them freelance writers and indepen-
dent 
scholars, some with university connections. aware that insight and imagi-
nation are not anyone’s private property, surrealists over the years have readily 
welcomed many thoughtful and sympathetic associates who, often without 
even knowing it, have helped surrealism move in new directions.
 a  third category, also represented in this volume, includes individuals 
who, though neither adherents of the surrealist movement nor formally allied 
with it, have nonetheless proved by their exemplary attitude and activity—as 
poets, writers, artists, or activists—that they have fully qualified as objectively 
surrealist.
the oppo Site of a Bureaucracy
Poetry has an aim: absolute human freedom.
—Malcolm de Chazal
in the spirit of first things first, this is probably the place to tackle the question, 
“What is surrealism?”
 e arly on, surrealist painter andré Masson called it “the collective experi-
ence of individualism,” and poet antonin artaud, “a new kind of magic.”3 Such 
pla
yful definitions still ring bells today. as a movement, however—and one still 
very much in motion—surrealism has always resisted the efforts of critics to


--- PAGE 24 ---
Invisible Surrealists 3
confine it to any static definition. Surrealists themselves have always preferred 
to speak of surrealism in terms of dynamics, dialectics, goals, and struggles. 
one of the clearest and most succinct presentations of its fundamental aims was 
provided by David Gascoyne, the sixteen-year-old cofounder of the Surrealist 
Group in england in 1936: “it is the avowed aim of the surrealist movement to 
reduce and finally to dispose altogether of the flagrant contradictions that exist 
between dream and waking life, the ‘unreal’ and the ‘real,’ the unconscious and 
the conscious, and thus to make what has hitherto been regarded as the special 
domain of poets, the acknowledged common property of all.”4
 i t 
cannot be emphasized too strongly that surrealism is not and never has 
been a school or a style or an ideology but, rather, “a community of ethical 
views,” as the Czech surrealist painter T oyen called it in the early 1950s.5 The 
spirit of solidarity is its essence. The opposite of a bureaucracy, surrealism in-
volv
es no forms to fill out, no pledges, no membership cards to sign. unlike so 
many artistic or literary cliques or political sects, whose narrow-minded dog-
mas are reflected in a stifling organizational conformity, surrealist groups have 
always encouraged and exemplified the widest diversity and open-endedness, 
not only in their collective interventions in the larger society, but also and 
especially in their internal affairs. in a 2005 talk at loyola university in Chi-
cago, poet Jayne Cortez remarked that “surrealists, even those who haven’t met 
before, always tend to recognize each other.”6
 a
bove all, hack journalists notwithstanding, surrealism does not signify un-
reality, antireality, the nonsensical, or the absurd. on the contrary, surreal-
ism—an open realism—signifies more reality, and an expanded awareness of reality, 
including aspects and elements of the real that are ordinarily overlooked, dis-
missed, excluded, hidden, shunned, suppressed, ignored, forgotten, or other-
wise neglected.
 Surrealism from the start differed radically from the many “avant-gardes” 
that preceded it. Post-impressionism, Futurism, Cubism, Fauvism, and Dada 
were focused almost exclusively on art—or, as in Dada, art and antiart—and 
to a lesser extent on literature. These avant-gardes were not only white and 
european, but also, with the partial exception of Dada, openly eurocentric. 
Surrealists, however, even before the publication of andré Breton’s first Surrealist 
Manifesto in 1924, were emphatically anti-euro centric.7 even during their brief 
period as Dadaists (roughly 1919–1922), they were calling everything euro-
pean and american into question, including Dada. They openly scorned white 
supremacy, patriotism, religion, colonialism, prudish morality, and respect for 
the law. For the pious bourgeois artists and intellectuals most promoted by the 
commercial press, they had nothing but contempt.
 i n the same rebellious spirit, the contemporaries they most admired were


--- PAGE 25 ---
4 Black, Brown, & Beige
noted for their fierce repudiation of the commercialism and conformism that 
sustained euro-american values: Jacques vaché, “past master in the art of attach-
ing little or no importance to everything,” and arthur Cravan, the “deserter of 
seventeen nations.” The humorous 1929 “Surrealist Map of the World”—drawn 
by 
artist Yves Tanguy—omits almost all of europe (except Paris) and leaves out 
the entire united States as well.8 all of this was part of what filmmaker luis Bu-
ñuel called the surrealists’ “obstinate dedication to fight everything repressive 
in the conventional wisdom.”9
 Surrealism’s emancipatory, direct-action approach was emphasized by 
French surrealist alain Joubert in 1969: “The essential of the surrealist project 
is to dismantle all sclerotic categories and inhibiting authority, all forms of 
alienation (internal as well as social), and to open—largely, definitively, and for 
all—the field of the possible.”10
 a
nyone who takes the trouble to study the aesthetic avant-gardes prior to 
surrealism will soon recognize that the surrealists’ concerns are incompara-
bly broader, audaciously ranging far beyond traditional literary and artistic 
categories. Surrealists were—and still are!—interested in philosophy, magic, 
myth, history, heresy, the exploration of objective chance, sleep and dream, 
the interplay of dialectics and analogy. in their search for ways to liberate the 
unconscious, they practice hypnosis and dream interpretation as well as auto-
matic writing and drawing. They have discovered new techniques, from frot-
tage and collage to cubomania and prehensilhouette, and have invented games 
that result in collective poetry. “Drawing correspondences between our real 
and imaginative experiences”—in the words of poet and anthropologist ayana 
Karanja—helps resolve the contradictions between dreaming and waking, sub-
jective and objective.11
 r eject
ing all forms of domination and the dichotomous ideologies that go 
with them—intolerance, exploitation, bigotry, exclusiveness, white supremacy, 
and all race prejudice—surrealists make the resolution of contradictions a high 
priority. in surrealist games, for example, play is regarded not as a matter of 
power, winning, and losing, but, rather, as a joyful collective dialogue and a 
source of insight, discovery, beauty, and laughter. Passionate defenders of the 
Marvelous, the unfettered imagination, poetry as a way of life, mad love, long 
walks, a revolution of the mind—and indeed, world revolution, the surrealists’ 
basic platform may be summed up in a few words: creation of a truly free so-
ciet
y and the realization of lautréamont’s watchword, “Poetry must be made 
by all!”12
 again in contrast to the older avant-gardes, most of which faded away in less 
than a decade, surrealism not only has endured for eighty-plus years, but also 
happens to be enjoying a global resurgence in the new millennium. Surrealism


--- PAGE 26 ---
Invisible Surrealists 5
today—in poetry, theory, art, and action—offers an unparalleled panorama. 
long-established and highly productive groups in Paris, Prague, amsterdam, 
Chicago, Madrid, london, leeds, Stockholm, and São Paulo are still going 
strong, and several more recently formed groups—in athens, lisbon, Santiago 
de Chile, and Buenos aires, as well as Portland, oregon, and St. louis, Mis-
souri—are quite active. in addition, important surrealist nuclei exist in new 
Y ork, Baltimore, Detroit, harrisburg, vancouver, Brussels, Berlin, Düsseldorf, 
Belgrade, Bucharest, and Tunis.13
 Far 
from “art for art’s sake” and the “art market,” surrealists—now as always—
champion freedom, revolt, love, humor, play, creativity, nonconformity, and 
wild nature. andré Breton and his comrades inherited and expanded the revolu-
tionary romantic disdain for Progress, Modernity, and the ecocidal technologi-
cal devastation that smugly persists in calling itself “development.” Surrealists 
have always been unrelenting critics of late capitalism, its mind-numbing con-
sumer culture, and its systematized misery, exemplified by the military, prison, 
and adv
ertising industries as well as the billionaires’ meretricious media. it was 
certainly not by accident that the first surrealist journal, started in 1924, was 
titled La Révolution Surréaliste.
 o ne of the key elements of surrealist methodology, inherited from the 
nineteenth-century French utopian socialist Charles Fourier, is absolute Di-
vergence—divergence above all from the dominant ways of thinking and be-
having. indeed, the radical utopian tradition, from the seventeenth-century 
Port-royalists to such nineteenth-century figures as enfantin, Flora Tristan, 
and Saint-Yves d’alveydre, has left a strong impact on the surrealist outlook. 
Combining utopian, revolutionary, and poetic thought, andré Breton’s mature 
views on social betterment—as expressed in Arcane 17, for example—corre-
spond 
closely to some of the key ideas of the pioneering african american 
feminist anna Julia Cooper, who, in her 1892 book, A V oice from the South, calls 
for nothing less than the collective creation of a true democracy founded in 
universal reciprocity.
 Br
eton’s agreement with Cooper on such an essential issue reminds us that 
surrealism’s anti-eurocentrism also involves a vigorous opposition to all mas-
culinist ideology. Women have been active in surrealism from the movement’s 
earliest days, and their activity has increased greatly over the years. From the 
start, too, surrealists attacked the institutions of patriarchal oppression: church, 
state
, capital, the fatherland, the military, and all authoritarianism. in addition 
to challenging gender stereotypes and rejecting the prevailing models of 
maleness (soldier, cop, boss, hoodlum, officeholder, and bureaucrat), they de-
nounced such masculinist preoccupations as punishment, imprisonment, and 
conquering nature.


--- PAGE 27 ---
6 Black, Brown, & Beige
 a later surrealist concept—miserabilism—is also crucial, for it gives a name 
to the ruling ideologies of our own time, as epitomized in the new World 
order, the World Trade organization, and all the McMiseries of globalization. 
in a 1956 essay, “away with Miserabilism!” Breton defines this new plague as “the 
depreciation of reality instead of its exaltation” and links it historically to the 
combined toxic legacies of fascism and Stalinism. as “the rationalization of the 
unlivable,” miserabilism is the major enemy of the Marvelous.14
forWard to africa
africa challenges the West in a way that the West has not been 
challenged before.
—r
ichard Wright
Surrealism’s solid grounding in poetry—in the practice of poetry as a way of life 
and, indeed, a social force—is directly related to its openly revolutionary posi-
ti
on. and that in turn is directly related to the crucial but rarely acknowledged 
fact that surrealism is the only major modern cultural movement of european 
origin in which men and women of african descent have long participated as 
equals, and in considerable numbers.
 african influence on the founders of surrealism was evident even before they 
called themselves surrealists—that is, before the formation of the movement in 
1924. as early as 1919 the appearance of african american jazz in France was a 
notable historic event for andré Breton and his friends and was duly recalled as 
such thirty-one years later in the group’s Surrealist Almanac (1950).15 The works of 
alexandre Dumas were also important. Dumas is not only France’s best-known 
author of african descent, but also France’s best-known author, period. Breton, 
louis aragon, Philippe Soupault, and Jacques vaché—major players in the for-
mation of the movement—were known for a time as the Three Musketeers (in 
Dumas’ novel the trio was also in fact a quartet).16 Significant, too, was Dumas’ 
Count of Monte Cristo. as 
 a story of escape, struggle against injustice, and ultimate 
revenge, it has never been surpassed.
 v ictor h
ugo was another influence on the first surrealist generation—espe-
cially hugo 
the poet and romantic radical. a militant abolitionist, outspoken 
admirer of John Brown, and the only prominent european writer to defend 
the 1859 attack on harper’s Ferry, hugo was an early source of the Surrealist 
Group’s vehement opposition to white supremacy. “ if insurrection be ever a 
sacred duty,” he wrote in 1860, “it is against slavery.”17
 The French revolutionary Jacobin tradition also had its impact. Saint-Just


--- PAGE 28 ---
Invisible Surrealists 7
and Marat, vigorous opponents of the slave trade, were early surrealist heroes 
and remained so through the years. Marat’s December 1791 declaration defend-
ing the right of slaves to revolt in the colonies was reprinted in the summer 1959 
issue of the Milanese surrealist journal Front Unique (united front), at the height 
of 
France’s war in algeria.18 a Chicago Surrealist Group tract issued on Bastille 
Day 1989 celebrates the French revolution’s bicentennial and denounces the 
increasingly bloated u.S. prison industry.19
 The 
surrealists’ first black hero was undoubtedly T oussaint l’ ouverture, the 
liberator of haiti. he was an especially important figure for andré Breton. in 
his first new Y ork interview as a refugee from nazism in 1941, Breton told of a 
dream in which he was Zapata, “making ready with my army to receive T ous-
sain
t l’ouverture the following day and to render him the honors to which he 
was entitled.”20
 Closer st
ill to the specifically surrealist project and, indeed, one of its major 
inspirers, was the poet arthur rimbaud (1854–1891), whose militant scorn for 
european values and institutions the founders of surrealism heartily adopted. 
rimbaud’s defiant dissociation from the authoritarianism and hypocrisy of white 
society—as evidenced by his bold cry, “Je suis nègre!” (i am a negro!)—made 
a deep impression on the nascent surrealist group, as it would a few years later 
on aimé Césaire and his comrades from Martinique, Guyana, and Senegal.21 
even stronger was the impact of uruguayan-born isidore Ducasse, who called 
himself the Comte de lautréamont. his astonishing book, Les chants de Maldoror 
(Songs of Maldoror, 1869), is poetry at its most luminous and ferocious—and 
at the same time a merciless indictment of Western civilization’s “legislators of 
stupid institutions” and “narrow morality.”22
 o ther important precursors of surrealism are Francis viélé-Griffin and 
Stuart Merrill, brilliant u.S.-born French Symbolist poets. The former, son of 
a union army general during the Civil War, frequented the anarchist milieu in 
1890s Paris. Merrill, a revolutionary socialist, was the author in 1905 of a series 
of ar
ticles entitled “The Black Question in the united States” in the newspaper 
L’Européen.23
 Because 
organized surrealism began in France, its initial adherents in other 
countries tended to be French-speaking artists and intellectuals. at that early 
stage, only scattered attention was given to forerunners of surrealism whose 
native language was not French. Breton’s Surrealist Manifesto, for example, simply 
lists Shak
espeare (“in his finer moments”), edward Y oung, Jonathan Swift, and 
edgar allan Poe. By the mid-1930s, however, a sizeable Surrealist Group had 
formed in london, and several of its most active collaborators—including 
David Gascoyne, hugh Sykes Davies, and herbert read—had begun to study


--- PAGE 29 ---
8 Black, Brown, & Beige
the movement’s english precursors. Their tentative quest, and its later in-depth 
pursuit by surrealists in the united States, greatly expanded our knowledge of 
surrealism’s historical roots.
 i t is surely no mere coincidence, for example, that John Milton—widely 
recognized as the Western world’s first all-around revolutionary intellectual, 
second to none in his outspoken ardor for human freedom—also bestowed 
upon us the splendid expression “unpremeditated verse,” that is, a spontaneous 
and wholehearted eruption of the imaginary, clearly prefiguring the practice of 
surrealist automatism.
 i ndeed
, all the poets and writers of the past that the surrealists have come to 
recognize as the movement’s specifically english-language precursors—includ-
ing Cowper, Blake, Burns, Wordsworth, Shelley, Byron, Keats, emily Brönte, 
emerson, Thoreau, Margaret Fuller, and the whole transcendentalist gang—
Whitman, Melville, hardy, Sterling Brown—are, like their French equiva-
lents, characterized by their passion for freedom, their vehement opposition 
to slavery, and their rebellion against all forms of oppressive authority and 
conformity.
 as the direct and living heir of the revolutionary traditions in poetry, sur-
realism has also been—and remains to this day—attuned to what the Sicilian 
am
erican surrealist Philip lamantia calls a “surrealist afrocentrism”: a more or 
less “underground” tradition that extends back to the Gnostics and alchemists 
and includes renaissance mages Pico della Mirandola and John Dee, as well 
as such later figures as Martínez Pasqualis, louis Claude de Saint-Martin, and 
philologist Fabre d’olivet (whose play, Idamore, or the African Prince, has been de-
scribed as a severe critique of colonialism and slavery).24 Their collective effort 
was n
ot merely to deemphasize the mainstream enlightenment obsession with 
Greco-roman civilization, but also and especially to revalorize the wisdom of 
ancient egypt. in their various ways, the Polish revolutionary romantic hoene-
Wronski, French occultist eliphas lévi, and the african american Paschal B. 
randolph also participated in this project. among the surrealists, andré Breton, 
Jorge Camacho, ithell Colquhoun, Élie-Charles Flamand, Joseph Jablonski, Gé-
rard legrand, Pierre Mabille, and Kurt Seligmann have written extensively on 
various aspects of this heterodox tradition.25
 african art also had a strong impact on emerging surrealism. Surrealists 
were in fact among the first to defend tribal sculptures, not in traditional aes-
thetic terms—that is, not as merely decorative commodities suitable for dis-
play in museums or other “art Detention Centers”26 (in ishmae l reed’s apt ex-
pression)—but rather as manifestations of visible poetry, objects imbued with 
spiritual energy and therefore vital elements in daily life. rejecting also the 
ethnologists’ bad habit of categorizing such works as mere artifacts, Breton and


--- PAGE 30 ---
Invisible Surrealists 9
his friends went as far as to hail this art as an active and creative force in the 
development of a new and revolutionary sensibility. in the so-called primitive 
art of africa, oceania, and the americas surrealists recognized a new kind of 
beauty, which Breton later called “convulsive”: a subversive, liberating beauty—
the beauty announced by lautréamont, free of the aesthetic inhibitions of the 
West.27
“traitor S to everything that iS not freedom”
Passionately attracted to africa though they were, few of the young men and 
women who took part in the early years of the world’s first Surrealist Group had 
more than a very modest knowledge of africa and africans. The sole exception 
seems to have been Maurice heine, who lived in algeria for six years. a forceful 
critic of colonialism, he was editor-in-chief of La France Islamique, a regular col-
labora
tor on other Franco-arabic papers, and an ardent defender of the rights 
of the indigenous population.28
 The first surrealists’ strong pro-africanism, accompanied by denunciation 
of european and u.S. imperialist politics and pretensions, made it clear that 
the new movement’s “race politics” were unequivocally on the side of people 
of color. as Paul Éluard puts it in “ la suppression de l’ésclavage”: “The su-
premacy of europe is based only on militarism and the cross—the cross in the 
service of militarism. . . . The white man is nothing but a corpse—a corpse who 
dumps his garbage under the natives’ noses.”29 addressing students in Madrid 
that same month (april 1925), louis aragon emphasized that surrealists not 
only supported colonial insurrections, but also recognized their own role, as 
surrealists, in this world revolution: “First of all we shall ruin this civilization 
. . . in which you [bourgeois students] are molded like fossils in shale. Western 
world, you are condemned to death. We are the defeatists of europe, so take 
care—or, rather, laugh at us. We shall make a pact with all your enemies.”30 in 
short, surrealists openly defined themselves as “traitors to everything that is not 
freedom.”31
 The 
impressive extent to which surrealist eyes and ears were drawn toward 
africa in this early period is most dramatically demonstrated by their enthu-
siasm for the revolt of and el-Krim and the rif tribespeople of Morocco in 
the summer of 1925.32 in a July 15 statement they declared their solidarity with 
the r
iffians and affirmed “the right of peoples, of all peoples, of whatever race” 
to self-determination. This statement was followed a few weeks later by the 
collective tract “ revolution now and Forever!”—the Surrealist Group’s first 
important political declaration, in which members elaborated not only their 
at
titude toward the war in north africa, but also their critique of Western


--- PAGE 31 ---
10 Black, Brown, & Beige
civilization and their growing awareness of themselves as traitors to the white 
race and avowed enemies of eurocentrism: “We want to proclaim our total de-
tachment from, in a sense our uncontamination by, the ideas at the basis of a 
sti
ll-real european civilization. . . . Wherever western civilization is dominant, 
all human contact has disappeared, except contact from which money can be 
made. 
. . . The stereotyped gestures, acts, and lies of europe have gone through 
their whole disgusting cycle.”33
 i n 
the steadily burgeoning critical and historical literature on surrealism in 
recent years, too little has been made of the striking fact that it was an African 
rev
olt that precipitated the Surrealist Group into revolutionary politics. impor-
tant, too, is the fact that the surrealists’ anti-imperialism never wavered. More 
than five thousand copies of their vehement denunciation of the 1931 Colonial 
exhibit
ion were distributed in Paris, mostly in working-class areas.34 Simulta-
neously, 
in collaboration with vietnamese students, the Surrealist Group orga-
nized a well-attended anti-colonialist exhibition titled “The Truth about the 
Colonies.”35 in 1932 Jacques vi ot, a former collaborator on La Révolution Surréa- 
liste who still had close ties to the Surrealist Group, published a novel, Déposition 
du blanc (White man’s deposition), a scathing exposé of the sinister role played 
by missionaries in dominating colonized populations.36
 Surrealists in France were also active in garnering support for the u.S. 
Scottsboro defendants.37 and in 1934 the group’s “ appeal to Struggle” sounded 
the tocsin against the first fascist provocations in Paris.38
 The surrealists’ reading of hegel and Marx had hastened them toward 
an antidogmatic, open-ended Marxism, rather like that of Walter Benjamin, 
herbert Marcuse, and others of the Frankfort School. never Stalinist, the Sur-
realist Group was in fact severely critical of Soviet Marxism and especially of 
the French Communists’ vacillating policies.39 They strongly opposed, for ex-
ample, the unprincipled political blunder known as the “Popular Front.”40
 i n the united States today this lamentable maneuver is scarcely remem-
ber
ed, except for the laughable slogan “Communism is T wentieth Century 
americanism,” but the disastrous politics involved left africa—and embattled 
colonies everywhere—more vulnerable than ever to european exploitation. 
The Surrealist Group tract Neither Y our W ar Nor Y our Peace!, issued at the time 
of the Munich talks (September 1938), rightly accuses the imperialist democ-
racies 
and their staunch ally, Stalin’s Soviet union, of having “permitted italy 
to annihilate ethiopia, notably because any successful resistance to the white 
invader would encourage the colonial peoples to free themselves from the grip 
of imperialism.”41
 i n their vehement opposition to white supremacy, the surrealists were in fact 
far to the left of the Socialist and Communist parties, in France and elsewhere,


--- PAGE 32 ---
Invisible Surrealists 11
most of which regarded the issue of race as decidedly less important than that of 
class. in the collective statements quoted above, the Surrealist Group was very 
much at odds with those parties but in close agreement with such renowned 
black revolutionary internationalists as George Padmore, Garan Kouyaté, and 
C.l
.r. James.
 i n an insightful essay, historian Sidra Stich has described surrealism as “a 
rebellion against . . . racist attitudes” and further explains that this rebellion, 
from the beginning,
adamantly disputed an exclusionist conception of culture that took 
Western civilization as the preeminent model and set it above and apart 
from all others. 
not only did they [surrealists] reject certain aspects 
of Western civilization, but they also recognized that its rigid, often 
elitist conceptions tended to obscure or deny both critical similarities 
with and significant differences from other civilizations. Their interest 
in 
african, oceanic, north american, asian, and prehistoric cultures 
asserted a will to expand beyond the confines and closure of Western 
culture while revealing the flux and variety of human expression.42
 all through the 1920s and 1930s, French newspapers and other periodi-
cals rout
inely printed malicious caricatures of africans and asians. a major 
offender in this regard was the journal Documents (not to be confused with the 
later Belgian publication of the same name). edited by Georges Bataille, the 
French Documents was basically an academic review with a strong anti-Marxist, 
ant
isurrealist slant. in regard to jazz, its favorites included Paul Whiteman and 
other white imitators of the genre. Much worse, however, each issue featured a 
large, highly offensive smiling “Sambo” advertisement.
 i n 
contrast, the surrealists in their journals ran images and texts ridiculing 
white pomposity, including photographs of the French bourgeoisie, generals, 
clergy, and colonial agents—all accompanied by mercilessly mocking head-
lines or captions. in articles, too, and their “ review of the Press,” and even in 
their poetry, games, and tales, surrealist disdain for white supremacy was loud 
and clear.
 i n 
the surrealist game exquisite Corpse, each player writes a word or phrase 
and then folds the paper so that the next player cannot see what has been 
written so far. The results, always surprising, sometimes hilarious, were often 
printed in La Révolution Surréaliste. her e is one from the october 1927 issue: “The 
oyster from Senegal shall eat the tricolored bread.”43 Surrealist automatic writ-
ing also produced more than a few passages with comparable antiestablishment 
ov
ertones. in Benjamin Péret’s 1920s tale, “ in a Clinch,” we are told of “a host 
of little pigs similar to the flag of the united States”44—an image that suggests,


--- PAGE 33 ---
12 Black, Brown, & Beige
some forty years early, the work of artist and cartoonist emory Douglas in the 
1960s Black Panther newspaper.
 The barbed and bitter humor directed by surrealists against white su-
premacy and the entire “white mystique” surely must be recognized as part of 
the broader project of revalorizing blackness that Breton and his friends shared 
with 
the protagonists of Pan-africanism and negritude. What the surrealists in 
the 1930s began to call black humor—a direct descendent of hegel’s objective 
humor—was precisely defined as “the highest revolt of the mind and spirit,” 
always and everywhere regarded as an unequivocally liberating factor. it is not 
by chance that the Dictionnaire du surréalisme et ses environs (1982)—by far the best 
reference work on the subject—asserts, in the entry for “noir,” that “black has 
always been the color of surrealism.”45
 i t 
is only fair to add that Georges Bataille not long afterward mended his 
ways and indeed, by mid-decade had joined andré Breton and the surrealists 
in the formation of an explicitly revolutionary group, Counter-attack.46
Surreali Sm and pSychoanaly SiS
Think of the things you could be by now if Sigmund Freud’s  
wife was your mother.
—Charles Mingus
Surrealists shared with their Marxist and anarchist friends an abiding inter-
est in social issues and supported collective action—and for that matter, class 
action—to change society. unlike most Marxists and anarchists, however, sur-
realists were also passionately concerned with the individual, the inner self, the 
life of the mind, the world of dreams, and chance encounters. Such, indeed, was 
the terrain of much of the most fruitful surrealist research. What ayana Karanja 
has called “the efficacy of dreams as a credible epistemological apparatus” ex-
tends back to surrealism’s very beginnings, and beyond.47
 The 
surrealists early on took a serious interest in the theories of Freud and 
his coworkers regarding internal reality: the unconscious, libido, dreams, day-
dreams, slips of the tongue, and so on. They were attracted to psychoanalytic 
inquiry not as therapy, but, rather, as a subversive activity, a form of criticism, 
and an aid to humankind’s liberation from repression. They were also impressed 
by the applications of psychoanalysis to folklore, jokes, the arts, and the whole 
field of culture.
 h
ere, too, as with Marxism, the surrealists’ attitude was antidogmatic and 
open-ended. While defending Freud against reactionary criticism, Breton none-


--- PAGE 34 ---
Invisible Surrealists 13
theless points out that surrealists “reject the greater part of Freudian philosophy 
as metaphysics.”48
 Despi
te Freud’s own unsympathetic view of surrealism, and an even greater 
hostility on the part of the psychoanalytic establishment, most surrealists con-
sidered their encounters with Freudian thought—and with the work of such 
thinkers as Sandor Ferenczi, otto Fenichel, edward Glover, edith Jacobson, 
and Geza röheim—to be provocative, stimulating, and beneficial.
 Many surrealist writers—Breton, Benayoun, Calas, Crevel, effenberger, 
Garon, luca, Mabille, Pailthorpe, Seligmann, and Teige, to name a few—have 
drawn fruitfully on psychoanalytic insights in various articles and books.
Surreali Sm’S enemie S
Wherever you find injustice, the proper form of politeness is attack.
—T-Bone Slim
like all revolutionary movements, surrealism from the start had enemies, and 
the fulminations of these enemies are often revealing. Journalists, militarists, 
clergy, litterateurs, and other upholders of the nation’s “glory” were especially 
hostile. in the 1920s the racist and proto-fascist paper Action Française frantically 
implored the French press never even to mention the Surrealist Group or any 
individual surrealists.49 in that same decade, in a book on contemporary Paris 
life, a gossip columnist chose to ignore the surrealists’ aims, principles, and 
accomplishments and instead portrayed the group as a rowdy street gang “vio-
lently opposed to bourgeois conceptions. . . . They are aggressive. They are as 
ready to express their dislikes with fists as with words. Their manifestoes always 
create an uproar. Their magazine announced [itself] as ‘the most scandalous re-
view in the world.’ [Frequently, in the course of their demonstrations] the police 
were called in. it is dangerous to offend the surrealists. They are hysterically 
explosive against their age.”50
 Such simple-minded blatherings may seem little more than amusing, but 
other enemies of surrealism had ways of enforcing their bigotry. in hitler’s 
Germany, for example, surrealism in painting and poetry was reviled as de-
generate art and officially forbidden, as it was in Franco’s Spain and hirohito’s 
Japan. The Soviet union under Stalin took a similar view. Y ears later, under 
Khrushchev, a 1961 Dictionary of T erms Used in the Plastic Arts  still defined sur-
realism as a “reactionary tendency in the art of contemporary capitalist coun-
tries,” and went on to state that “the perverted imagination of the surrealists 
concerns itself only with the world of dreams denuded of all sense. . . . The


--- PAGE 35 ---
14 Black, Brown, & Beige
surrealists combine allusions to real forms in the ugliest succession, with the 
aim of destroying logic and healthy human perception.”51 Clearly, surrealism’s 
self-declared enemies also tended to be supporters of colonialism, imperialism, 
white supremacy, and other forms of chauvinism, racism, and reaction.
 i n 
an interview in New Directions 1940 the Greek surrealist nicolas Calas sums 
up the surrealists’ attitude toward their critics:
The aggressiveness of surrealism, like all movements that are in pursuit 
of definite objects (realizations of desires) must lead to attack. . . . The 
anti-conventional attitude of surrealism breaks through all manner of 
good taste and prudery. Surrealism after all is shocking for the people 
who are shocked by dreams. . . . The poet fights for surprise. . . . Sur-
realism looks for a transformation of the world. . . . Poetry is the an-
tithesis of prayer. Poetry is an exigency and leads to revolution, which 
is a concrete force by means of which obstacles are overturned, further 
desires set free.52
african american S in pari S
There is more freedom in a square mile of Paris than in the entire 
united States.
—richard Wright
Surrealism in the 1920s and early 1930s was much in the news, not only in Paris 
but worldwide. The group’s many insulting letters to bourgeois celebrities, its 
numerous 
militant tracts (such as “open the Prisons! Disband the army!” and 
“hands off love!”) and direct action—“The Truth about Colonies,” for ex-
ample, and many other boisterous disruptions of official literary and political 
affairs—scandalized the philistines but also, and more important, attracted the 
interest of rebellious youth all over the globe. Surrealist groups, modeled on 
the Paris original, blossomed in argentina, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Japan, 
Yugoslavia, and eventually in many other lands.
 The first black encounters with surrealism in Paris tended to involve afri-
can am
ericans seeking respite from u.S. racism. Most of these meetings were 
casual, brief, and—as the saying goes—without conclusion. henry ossawa 
Tanner, the preeminent african american artist in Paris from the 1910s until 
his death in 1937, had met Picasso and admired some of his work, but does not 
seem to have had any association with the surrealists. his preference for bibli-
cal themes would not in fact have attracted the vehemently atheist surrealists, 
but many of his works are very striking. This is true especially of the series in-


--- PAGE 36 ---
Invisible Surrealists 15
spired by a trip to north africa, and those in which the predominant element 
is a bright, shimmering glow—a strange light from outside—suggesting what 
his son called Tanner’s mystical fourth dimension.
 Tanner’s influence on young black artists was considerable. his studio on the 
Boulevard Saint-Jacques was something of a shrine for visiting african ameri-
cans, and he is known to have encouraged the artists among them, including 
the modernists.53
 The great painter archibald Motley, from Chicago, spent much of 1929–
1930 in Paris on a Guggenheim Fellowship. Some of his finest works—bright 
portrayals of Paris jazz nightspots and cabarets—were painted at that time. 
although not a surrealist painter, strictly speaking, Motley’s passionate, warm 
color, combined with the vital rhythm of his lights and shadows and his lyrical, 
indeed musical, intensity—as in his marvelous Blues of 1929, and Casey and Mae 
in the Street (1940)—radiates a hauntingly beautiful a
 frican american surrealist 
atmosphere.54
 among the early expatriates was anita Thompson, described as “a pretty, 
young harlem socialite” who had left the united States “to enjoy the social 
freedom of life” in Paris, and who was for a time the companion of the Dutch 
surrealist painter Kristians T onny.55 Writers, artists, and other participants in 
the harlem renaissance, including the Jamaican Claude McKay, the Puerto 
rican scholar and book collector arthur Schomburg, and african americans 
Countee Cullen, Jessie Fauset, Gwendolyn Bennet, nella larsen, alain locke, 
Jean T oomer, and langston hughes also visited Paris. hughes became a good 
friend of louis aragon and probably met other surrealists at demonstrations, 
cafes, and parties. Surrealist Georges limbour was one of the first to translate 
hughes’ poems into French.56
 Paris-based african american entertainers, most notably the eccentric 
dancer Josephine Baker and the singer and nightclub operator ada “Bricktop” 
Smith, counted more than a few surrealists among their friends. Georgia-born 
jazz pianist henry Crowder, for several years the companion of nancy Cunard, 
not only frequented the surrealist milieu, but also had the pleasure of having 
a book of his jazz compositions published by The hours Press, with front and 
back cover designs by surrealist photographer Man ray.57
 Such encoun
ters may suggest a curiosity about surrealism rather than a seri-
ous interest, but they surely helped spread the word that an exciting new radi-
cal force—rooted in poetry and revolt—was in the wind. Surrealists, at the 
same time, learned of the new dynamism and rebellion in black america.
 a decisive forward leap was made in 1932: year one of black surrealism.


--- PAGE 37 ---
16 Black, Brown, & Beige
Notes
 1. The following books, listed in chronological order, were well reviewed, 
widely circulated, and for many years regarded as key works on surreal-
ism; none of them, however, mention any black surrealists: Georges 
lemaîtr
e, From Cubism to Surrealism in French Literature; a nna Balakian, Sur-
realism; Matthew Josephson, Life among the Surrealists; l ucy lippard, ed., 
Surrealists on Art; Mary ann Caws, The Poetry of Dada and Surrealism; Wayne 
andr
ews, The Surrealist Parade; ruth B randon: Surreal Lives. examp les of 
tokenism include Wallace Fowlie, Age of Surrealism, with one passing refer-
ence to a
imé Césaire; Patrick Waldberg, Surrealism; h erbert Gershman, 
The Surrealist Revolution in France, with a shor t paragraph on Wifredo lam; 
roger Cardinal and robert Short, eds., Surrealism, three brief mentions 
of lam and one of J
oyce Mansour; Susan Suleiman: Subversive Intent, with 
brief mentions of Mansour; Dickran Tashjian, A Boatload of Madmen, one 
passi
ng reference to aimé Césaire; and Jack J. Spector, Surrealist Art & 
Writing, 1919–1939, two p assing references to aimé Césaire and a footnote 
mentioning Ted Joans.
 2.
 andré Breton, “Prolegomena to a Third Manifesto of Surrealism or not,” 
282.
 3.
 Masson, quoted in robert Short, “The Politics of Surrealism,” 33; an-
toni
n artaud, A la grand nuit ou le bluff surréaliste, 368.
 4. G
ascoyne, viii.
 5. T oyen, in Médium: Communication Surréaliste 4 (1955), quoted in Penelope 
rosemont
, ed., Surrealist W omen, 81.
 6.
 “an evening with Poet Jayne Cortez,” april 7, 2005.
 7. on surrealism’s anti-eurocentrism, see Sidra Stich’s introduction to Anx-
ious Visions, and the special “Sur realism: revolution against Whiteness” 
issue of the journal Race T raitor, no. 9 (Summer 1998).
 8.
 See David roediger’s essay “Plotting against eurocentrism,” 169–176.  
an earli
er, shorter version appeared in the journal Race T raitor, no. 9 
(Summer 1998).
 9.
 luis Buñuel, My Last Sigh, 123.
 10
. alain Joubert, Le mouvement des surréalistes, 172.
 11
. ayana i. Karanja, Zora Neale Hurston, 7.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Invisible Surrealists 17
 12. lautréamont, Poèsies, vol. 2.
 13
. on surrealism in the 2000s, see ron Sakolsky, ed., Surrealist Subversions.
 14.
 Breton’s “away with Miserabilism!” is included in his Surrealism and Paint-
ing, 347–348. See also David ro ediger, History against Misery.
 15
. The almanac, originally a special issue of the journal La Nef, nos. 63–64 
(1950), was reissued in book form by Éditions Plasma, 1978. The refer-
ence to jazz appears on p. 215.
 16
. on the Three Musketeers, see Breton’s Entrétiens, 35–46.
 17
. in James redpath, Echoes of Harper’s Ferry, 99.
 18.
 Marat, “Du droit qu’ont nos colonies de secouer le joug tyranique de la 
métropole,” 15.
 19.
 “it is Time to Destroy all the Bastilles in the World,” a two-sided tract, 
July 14, 1969.
 20
. interview with andré Breton, View Magazine, nos . 7–8 (october–novem-
ber 1941).
 21
. a. James arnold, Modernism and Negritude, 42–43.
 22
. lautréamont, Les chants de Maldoror, 194.
 23
. See reinhard Kuhn, The Return to Reality; Marj orie louise henry, Stuart 
Merrill.
 24.
 Fabre d’olivet’s Idamore is reprinted in Miscellanea Fabre d’Olivet.
 25
. andré Breton and Gérard legrand, L’Art magique; Pierre Mabille, Eg ré- 
gores, ou la vie des civilisations; idem, Le miroir du merveilleux; ithe ll Colquhoun: 
Goose of Hermogenes; Kurt Seligmann, The History of Magic; Gérard leg rand, 
Preface au système de l’eternité; Élie-Charl es Flamand, “introduction”; Joseph 
Jablonski, “Millennial Soundings”; Bernard roger, A la découverte de 
l’alchimie; Sarane a lexandrian, Histoire de la philosophie occulte; Jorge Cama-
cho, Le mythe d’Isis et d’Osiris; and Phi lip lamantia, Bed of Sphinxes. on the 
imp
act of this tradition in the united States, see Franklin rosemont, 
foreword, in John Patrick Deveney, Paschal Beverly Randolph.
 26
. ishmael reed, Mumbo Jumbo. in an early and too rarely discussed essay 
(“Distances,” 142–147), Breton reflects on the problems artists have in 
bri
nging their work to the attention of the public. highly critical of the 
fact that art had fallen “under the control of businessmen,” he goes on to 
denounce those “bad places” called “galleries.”


--- PAGE 39 ---
18 Black, Brown, & Beige
 27. in Nadja (1928), Breton had written: “Beauty will be convulsive or will 
not be at all.” The concept was also developed in his L’Amour fou (1937) 
and Le surréalisme et la peinture (definitive edition, 1965).
 28
. See Gérard legrand’s entry on Maurice heine in adam Biro and rené 
Passeron, Dictionnaire général du surréalisme, 203–204.
 29
. La Revolution Surréaliste, no. 3 (1925), 19.
 30
. louis aragon, “Fragments d’une conférence,” 23–24.
 31. Breton, “revolution now and Forever,” 424.
 32. For background on the rif war, see David S. Woolman, Rebels in the Rif.
 33
. Breton, “revolution now and Forever,” 423.
 34. Surrealist documents on the Colonial exhibition and extensive com-
mentary are included in José Pierre, ed., T racts surréalistes et déclarations 
collectives (1922–1939). For f
 urther background, see also herman lebovics, 
T rue France. er ik orsenna’s novel, L’Exposition coloniale, was awarded that 
year’s Prix Goncourt.
 35
. on the anticolonial exhibition, in addition to the references cited in 
the preceding note, see andré Thirion, Revolutionaries without Revolution, 
289–290.
 36.
 on Jacques viot, see Patrice allain’s introduction to viot’s Poèmes de guerre.
 37.
 The Scottsboro case is noted by Breton and Péret in “revue de la 
presse,” 24; by etienne léro in Légitime défense; and in other surrealist 
wr
itings. nancy Cunard was especially energetic in the campaign and 
devotes much space to it in the Negro Anthology.
 38
. The “appeal to Struggle” is included in Pierre, T racts surréalistes, 263–264.
 39
. as early as october 1927, Breton roundly criticized the French Commu-
nist P
arty and one of its central figures, henri Barbusse, in the pamphlet 
Légitime défense. (n ote: The title of this pamphlet was adopted by etienne 
léro and his Martinican friends for their one-shot journal in 1932.)
 40. See Breton’s “Sur l’échec du front populaire,” 1259–1260.
 41. “neither Y our War nor Y our Peace!” is included in Breton, What Is Sur-
realism?, 446–447.
 42.
 Stich, Anxious Visions, 15.


--- PAGE 40 ---
Invisible Surrealists 19
 43. From issue no. 9–10, p. 11
 44. Péret, in eugene Jolas, ed., T ransition W orkshop, 368.
 45
. Biro and Passeron, Dictionnaire, 301.
 46.
 The relevant documents on Counter-attack are included, with commen-
tary, in Pierre, T racts surréalistes. See also ro bert Stuart Short, “Contre-
attaque,” 144–176.
 47
. Karanja, Zora Neale Hurston, 10.
 48
. Breton, What Is Surrealism?, 23.
 49
. Action Française (July 6 , 1925). See Maurice nadeau, The History of Surreal-
ism, 114.
 50.
 Sisley huddleston, Paris Salons, Cafes, Studios, 228–229.
 51.
 From a Dictionary of T erms Used in the Plastic Arts (Moscow, 1961), printed in 
russian and French t
ranslation in L’Écart absolu, catalog of the 1965–1966 
inter
national Surrealist exhibition (Paris, 1965). The english translation 
is quoted in full in Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, no. 1 (1970), 20.
 52
. Calas, New Directions 1940, 390, 392.
 53
. Wayne Cooper, Claude McKay, 254, 273–277.
 54.
 Faith Berry, Légitime Défense before and beyond Harlem, 190.
 55
. Cooper, Claude McKay.
 56
. See, for example, “Guitare,” in Bifur, no. 6 (July 1930), 59.
 57.
 henry Crowder and hugo Speck, As W onderful As All That?, 11–12.


--- PAGE 41 ---
in 1932, etienne léro, a young Martinican poet and philosophy student with 
eight fellow students—all between twenty and twenty-five years old—formed  
a group call
ed légitime Défense (Self-Defense), and published a journal of  
that name.


--- PAGE 42 ---
1. The First Black Surrealists
i do not believe poetry is on the decline. i cannot think that money-
getting is the whole business of man. rather am i convinced that the 
world is approaching a poetical revolution.
—a
lbery a. Whitman
in 1932, from his small apartment on the rue T ournon in Paris, etienne léro, 
a young Martinican poet and philosophy student, planned a revolution. he 
began by rallying eight of his fellow scholarship students—all between twenty 
and twenty-five years old—into a group called légitime Défense (Self-defense) 
and kept things moving by immediately starting a journal of that name. Whole-
heartedly 
surrealist from cover to cover, with a strong backup of Far left Marx-
ism, Légitime Défense sounded a lot of unheard-of new notes, and even a whole 
new tone, in Caribbean literature and thought.1 not in the least parochial, its 
twenty-four pages covered an astonishing range of material: a hot mix of sur-
realist 
manifesto, poetry, revolutionary theory, and sharp criticism of the antil-
lean bourgeoisie, its docile politics and complacent culture.
 a ccordi
ng to some accounts, the journal was banned by the authorities in 
Martinique. The details of the suppression are not clear, but rené Ménil, in 
his preface to the 1979 reprint, points out that the journal provoked an angry 
response from the petit-bourgeoisie and the government and was largely 
unknown on the island for four decades.2 a 
second, much larger, issue was 
planned, but never appeared.
 as Cameroonian scholar lilyan Kesteloot was the first to emphasize, Légi-
time Défense was notable for its refreshing youthfulness, originality, and daring—
qualit
ies that rené Ménil later summed up as “the sensual joy of writing.”3 The 
group further distinguished itself with its bold internationalism. Proclaiming 
their admiration for hegel, Marx, lautréamont, and Freud, as well as Breton, 
Crevel, Péret, Tristan T zara, and other surrealists, léro and his comrades also 
hailed “the rising wind from america” (the poetry of langston hughes and 
Claude McKay), published a long excerpt from McKay’s controversial novel 
Banjo, and expected great things from the younger generation of poets in 
haiti. Social revolution was very much on the minds of these young poets. as


--- PAGE 43 ---
22 Black, Brown, & Beige
 Ménil recalled many years later, they thought of themselves as the “intellectual 
spokespersons of the West indian working class.”4
 e
nthusiastic and full of fire, the légitime Défense group created a stir en-
tirely out of proportion to its size. Despite the fact that the journal’s press 
run did not exceed five hundred copies, and may have been as small as three 
hundred—the red-and-black-covered journal is now known to have exerted an 
influence 
far greater than most historians have been willing to concede. in the 
1960s, looking back on those days, léon-Gontran Damas called Légitime Défense 
“the most insurrectional document ever signed by people of color.”5 in much 
the 
same spirit, an aging rené Ménil called it “Fanonist”—hinting, perhaps, at 
its unexpected realization half a century later.6
 not least, the légitime Défense group scandalized plenty of French colonial 
administrators and journalists. More significant in the long run, the group and 
its journal reinforced and expanded surrealism’s revolutionary project and drove 
home the crucial point that surrealism, far from being a mere art or literary cur-
rent, was in truth a movement concerned above all with freedom, equality, and 
rev
olutionary transformation. Most important, etienne léro and the others in-
spired a whole generation of young blacks from Martinique, Guyana, Senegal, 
and no doubt many other places on the black world map.
 a ccording to henri Pastoureau, in those years a young French surrealist 
who was also a close friend and schoolmate of léro and his group, the immedi-
ate periphery of légitime Défense also included fellow philosophy student 
raymond T chang (b. Beijing, 1912), the first surrealist of Chinese descent, and 
the noted historian of West indian slavery, leonard Sainville.7 an
other friend 
and fellow student of Pastoureau’s—the algerian Jewish painter and poet Jean-
Michel atlan—was also acquainted with at least some members of the léro 
group.8
 as andré Breton told lilyan Kesteloot in a 1960 interview, the légitime 
Défense Group—as an autonomous entity with its own Martinique-oriented 
agenda—was warmly welcomed by the Paris surrealists as a parallel movement 
and ally.9 it so happened, however, that most of those who were involved in 
légitime Défense were also active in the Surrealist Group. Despite rigorous 
school schedules they frequently attended the surrealists’ daily café meetings, 
where they discussed vital issues of the day, played surrealist games, and helped 
plan the contents of Surrealist Group publications. léro and his friends also 
went to gatherings at Breton’s apartment at 42 rue Fontaine. at Breton’s, the 
discussions often focused on the relationship between politics and art and on 
the general problem of anticolonialism.10
 alas, the whole légitime Défense saga is not easily told, for much of the 
basic data appears to be wanting and may even be irremediably lost. Manu-


--- PAGE 44 ---
The First Black Surrealists 23
scripts, correspondence, minutes of meetings, photographs, interviews, diaries, 
memoirs—all kinds of documentation needed to detail the internal history of 
a group—are, for now at least, beyond our reach. Fortunately, we have Légitime 
Défense itself, as well as a good number of other articles and poems by l
 égitime 
Défense members—including léro, Ménil, Jules Monnerot, Pierre Y oyotte, and 
Simone Y oyotte—that appeared in Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution,  the 
Belgian Documents, and Minotaure.
 a
 crucial link between the nardal sisters’ eclectic Revue du Monde Noir (1931–
1932) and L’Étudiant Noir (1935–1936), which in turn helped stimulate the great 
T ropiques (1941–1945), the almost subterranean Légitime Défense  played a part 
in 
promoting the new tremors in the black intellectual atmosphere. it chal-
lenged the colonialist status quo, provoked thought, fomented dreams, and 
liberated the imagination. By no means least, it inspired—via poetry as well as 
polemic—the spirit of refusal and active revolt. in the history of the negritude 
movement no less than in the history of surrealism, this little magazine marks 
an epoch.
 l
éro himself was an important and fascinating character. léon Damas de-
scribed him as a man who deftly combined the spirit of poetry and the critical 
spir
it. The sheer scope of léro’s interests is impressive. author of a scholarly 
essay entitled “The Bourgeois Family in the Work of Balzac,” he has also been 
proclaimed (by Damas) “the first to give a surreal form to creole poetry.”11 in-
credibly
, no one has yet attempted to write his biography. apart from lilyan 
Kesteloot’s pioneering study, most academic books and articles on surrealism, 
neg
ritude, Marxism, modern poetry, and race politics barely mention him.
 léro’s legacy, however, was never forgotten. Damas and Senghor—who 
knew him well—both featured léro prominently in their anthologies of black 
poetry. Damas and léopold Senghor disagreed on many matters, but both 
regarded léro as a major historical figure, a great innovator in Caribbean cul-
ture, a true genius. Decades later, the african american surrealist poet Ted 
Joans—who knew the founder of Légitime Défense only by word of mouth and 
his published work—proudly counted léro among his heroes and devoted a 
splendid poem (“Smoke Sleep”) to his memory. First published in the journal 
Présence Africaine in the 1960s, it was reprinted in his 1999 T education.12
 Po
et, revolutionary, theorist, organizer, editor, critic, and ardent jazz enthu-
siast, e
tienne léro, the first black surrealist, was a many-sided man. a figure of 
great courage, boldness, insight, and imagination, it was he—more than any-
one else of his time—who related surrealism and its revolutionary program to 
the di
fferent but not-so-very-unrelated ideas of such varied thinkers as W.e.B. 
Du Bois, Claude McKay, Marcus Garvey, langston hughes, Katherine Dun-
ham, Z
ora neale hurston, Sterling Brown, and C.l.r. James.


--- PAGE 45 ---
24 Black, Brown, & Beige
 The decisive new awareness that Légitime Défense  exemplified was, indeed, 
one of the central elements that united—at least in spirit—léro’s group with 
the far-flung harlem renaissance, Cuban afro-negrism, and the chaotic  
h-Group (el Grupo h, also in Cuba), as well as the diverse indigènes ferment 
in haiti, which included individuals as different as Jacques roumain and Clé-
men
t Magloire-Saint-aude. While old-line Marxists persisted in the belief that 
“the revolution” somehow involved a choice between poetry or politics, social 
or cultural change, légitime Défense rejected that dreary dichotomy and dia-
lectically demanded poetry and politics, social and cultural revolution.
Simone yoyotte and her Brother pierre
The murmuring makes me change place and ink to my own measure.
—Simone Y oyotte
léro was the organizer, but the entire légitime Defense Group was remarkable. 
Simone Y oyotte, for example, was by all standards a strikingly original figure. 
her poems, included by léro in Légitime Défense and by andré Breton in Le Sur-
réalisme au Service de la Révolution, reflect the density of hurricanes and gleam with 
a dark charm all their own.13 What critic r égis antoine has called her “hyper-
individualistic lyricism” distinguishes her poems not only from Martinique’s 
legion of sentimental versifiers, but also from the much larger legion of europe’s 
wannabe “modernists” of those years.14 at once energetic and subversive, her 
colorful antirational imagery gives her work a unique and disturbing quality, 
radically unlike any other Francophone Caribbean poetry of the time. only 
the very small number of her surviving poems, and her early death (probably in 
1933) can explain the fact that Simone Y oyotte has remained so little known.
 n
o less original was her brother Pierre, tireless in his devotion to surrealist 
research, particularly games and inquiries. his highly imaginative excursions 
into the realm of critical analysis—in Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution, Docu-
ments 34, and Minotaure—significan tly enrich the corpus of surrealist theory. his 
best-known essay—on the significance of surrealism in the struggle against fas-
cism—is comparable in many respects to the work of maverick psychoanalyst 
Wi
lhelm reich (then unknown in France).
 Surrealist criticism, especially of culture (in the largest sense of the term) 
was also the specialty of rené Ménil, whose essays in the 1930s, and later in 
T ropiques, were much admired by Breton.
 o f 
the eight individuals in léro’s 1932 group, the most prolific writer—and 
the one who eventually became by far the best known—was Jules Monnerot. 
a 
valued collaborator on surrealist publications and, later on many others, in-


--- PAGE 46 ---
The First Black Surrealists 25
cluding several anti-surrealist publications, Monnerot became a distinguished 
and well-respected intellectual in France. unfortunately, his militant partici-
pation in surrealism did not extend beyond 1935. The following year he co-
edited, with aragon and T zara, the Communist Party journal Inquisitions, and in 
1938 cofounded with Georges Bataille, roger Caillois, Michel leiris, and others 
the short-lived College of Sociology, a collective focused largely on religion. 
although scholars have minimized his role in the College, Monnerot always 
claimed to have been its true originator, adding that he had “conceived the idea, 
found its participants, [and] named the project.”15
 after the war, however, Monnerot’s book La poésie moderne et la sacré  (Mod-
ern poetry and the sacred, 1945)—a study of surrealism and its relationship 
to “primitive” thought and Gnosticism—was welcomed by the surrealists as 
a significant work; Breton called it “absolutely convincing.”16 T wo years later 
Monnerot contributed an interesting essay on the imaginary to the exhibition 
catalog Le surréalisme en 1947.
 Monnerot
’s dismaying move to the Far right, as evidenced in his Sociology of 
Communism, inevitably alienated him from surrealism. in his later years he often 
rudely dismissed students and researchers who were interested in his surrealist 
days.
 h o
wever disappointing Monnerot turned out to be in the end (he was for 
several years a vigorous supporter of neofascist national Front leader Jean-
Marie le Pen), the fact remains that his early contributions to surrealism were 
by no means negligible, and indeed are his best work.
Juan Breá and mary loW: a Surreali St duo on the go
in 1933–1934, sometime between the unexpected appearance of Légitime Défense 
and the equally sudden advent of L’Étudiant Noir, yet another important mani-
festation of surrealism and black insurgency burst on the Paris scene with the 
arr
ival of Cuban poet and revolutionary Juan Breá and his australian compan-
ion
, Mary low.
 i n the late 1920s Juan ramón Breá (whose nationality he specified as Sibo-
ney) had been a key figure in Cuba’s first poetic avant-garde, the h-Group. 
Severely critical of the island’s retrograde literary and artistic scene, the  
h-Group had more than a little in common with surrealism. While its poetry 
challenged an entrenched academic complacency and scandalized a conserva-
tive public, its disruptive “actions”—sometimes involving vandalism—brought 
the g
roup to the attention of the police. nonconformist to the hilt, members 
favored their own special blend of poetic and political radicalism, welcoming 
all kinds of prankishness, innovation, and audacity.17


--- PAGE 47 ---
26 Black, Brown, & Beige
 The h-Group, however, was only one of Breá’s many spheres of activity. 
he also played an important role in the 1933 overthrow of dictator antonio 
Machado in Cuba and cofounded the Cuban Trotskyist movement. in Mexico 
he conferred with nicaraguan anti-imperialist guerrilla fighter augusto César 
Sandino.
 i n 
Paris, Breá and low quickly found their way to the Surrealist Group, and 
in no time their good friends included andré Breton, Benjamin Péret, Marcelle 
Ferry, Jacques herold, Meret oppenheim, Yves Tanguy, and Óscar Domín-
guez. Somewhat later in the 1930s they met Wifredo lam (also from Cuba), 
who became a particularly close comrade. it would seem likely that they were 
also acquainted with etienne léro and his friends, but details are lacking. This 
surely merits further research, especially in view of régis antoine’s argument 
that légitime Défense was actually closer, in spirit and program, to 1930s Cuban 
negrismo than to what later became known as negritude.18 as it is, however, 
Breá’s biography, and especially data on his acquaintances, is very sketchy. in 
a 1990s interview Mary low recalled that she met aimé Césaire only “much 
later,” probably in the mid- or late 1940s.19
 o ne 
of surrealism’s great couples, the multilingual Breá and low were a dy-
namic force, well known and admired throughout the movement for their in-
spired combination of poetry and action, their fearless nomadism, and their ex-
traordinarily broad culture, which embraced a thorough grasp of Marxism and 
psychoanalysis along with a profound knowledge of the history of philosophy, 
world literature, and the arts. Their boundless enthusiasm, energy, and bold-
ness in developing new ideas had a lasting impact not only on the Paris Group 
but also in many of the movement’s other vital centers. They visited the Sur-
realist Group in Brussels, where their dearest comrade was poet and collagist 
e.l.T. Mesens, who would later play an important role in surrealism in england. 
in Bucharest, the couple were welcomed by victor Brauner; his brother, harry 
(a folklorist and musicologist); Gherasim luca; antonia rasicovici; and Jules 
Perahim; and took part in the romanian group’s activities, poetic and political. 
Decades later rasicovici vividly recalled that Breá, a serious student of lan-
guages, was especially impressed by the Bucharest ghetto, whose inhabitants 
spoke a Spanish/Jewish dialect virtually unchanged since the sixteenth century. 
an elated Breá declared: “This is the language of Cervantes!”20
 Their 
eight months in Prague in 1939 were especially fruitful, for they en-
jo
yed almost daily rendezvous with Karel Teige, T oyen, Jindrich heisler, Bohu-
slav Brouk, and others in the Prague Surrealist Group. The couple also managed 
to publish a booklet of their own poems in Prague—La saison des flûtes (The flute 
season)—under the Éditions Surréalistes imprint.
 Spai
n in 1936 found the intrepid twosome on the front lines of the revolu-


--- PAGE 48 ---
The First Black Surrealists 27
tion, as members of the Partido obrero e unificación Marxista (Party of Marx-
ist un
ification, PouM). Breá served in the workers’ militia; low helped orga-
nize 
the women’s militia, edited the PouM’s english-language paper, Spanish 
Revolution, and gave regular broadcasts on r adio PouM. The PouM’s broad 
educational program featured several of Breá’s and low’s public lectures on 
surrealism. They were pleased to meet several surrealist comrades in Spain, 
most notably Benjamin Péret, a fellow militiaman. They also met several ameri-
can radicals 
who became their good friends, including Charles and lois orr, 
russell Blackwell, leon Green, and hugo oehler.
 With the defeat of the Spanish revolution by Franco’s fascist Falange—
aided and abetted by Stalin’s counter-revolutionary political police—Breá and 
low sought refuge in Paris and began writing their Red Spanish Notebook: The First 
Six Months of the Revolution and the Civil W ar. Published in london in 1937, with an 
introduction by C.l.r. James, the book was hailed in Time and Tide by George 
orwe
ll, whose own book on Spain, Homage to Catalonia, appeared a year later. 
Despi
te virulent attacks by Stalinists, Social-Democrats, and the Far right—
not to mention a voluminous bourgeois critical literature over the past seventy 
years—Red Spanish Notebook is still regarded by experts as one of the best eye-
witness accounts of one of the twentieth century’s greatest struggles to create 
a truly free society.21
 Br
eá and low remained active in the surrealist and Trotskyist movements all 
through the late 1930s and into the 1940s, notably in Paris, london, new Y ork, 
and havana.
 i n april 1941 Breá died suddenly, at the age of thirty-five. in a letter to andré 
Breton, Mary low wrote:
Y ou were acquainted with him. Y ou know what a living miracle he was. 
Surely few men as brilliant have had his depth and solidity of thought. 
Surely also few men as capable of understanding historical materialism, 
and of applying the Marxist methodology, have known the inspired 
bursts of lyricism that characterized him. . . . Y ou know that in an inner 
landscape such as his, filled with abruptnesses, the slopes must have 
been steep and dangerous. But you know also that his heart was laid on 
springs of steel, and that his courage had no frontier. . . . T o tell you the 
whole t
ruth, i had never envisaged the possibility that my life with Breá 
would come to an end.22
 l ow later prepared a collection of their surrealist and Marxist essays, La 
verdad contemporánea (Contemporary truth, havana, 1943). The 107-page book, 
with a preface by Benjamin Péret, includes “The Social Function of reproduc-
ti
on and nutrition” and “The economic Causes of humor.”


--- PAGE 49 ---
28 Black, Brown, & Beige
 a later book of Mary low’s, Alquimia del recuerdo ( alchemical remembrance) 
assembles poems inspired by memories of her great companion. Published in 
havana i
n 1946, it features a cover and illustrations by Wifredo lam.
 l am and low were, indeed, the mainstays of surrealism in havana during 
and after the war. in a 1990s interview, low recalled that “lam dropped by at 
least once a week for years.” although they had many friends who assisted in 
various collective activities—most notably, folklorist lydia Cabrera—there was 
no organized Surrealist Group in Cuba. low’s residences, however, and lam’s 
studio, were sites of numerous rendezvous of friends from all over. Breton, 
Péret, aimé Césaire, and Pierre Mabille were just a few of their visitors.
 i n the 1950s low was closely linked to the underground 26th of July move-
ment and helped in the overthrow of dictator Batista. She remained active in 
surrealism in later years and was especially close to old and new friends in Paris 
and the group in Chicago.
the triumvirate of negritude and l’Étudiant noir
Sorcerer, release the dreams born here.
—anne Spencer
among the most attentive readers of Légitime Défense in Paris were the students 
aimé 
Césaire from Martinique, léon-Gontran Damas from Guyana, and the 
Senegalese léopold Sédar Senghor. They may not have agreed with every de-
tail of léro’s program—especially his particular version of Freudian/l eninist 
Marxism—but they could hardly have failed to discuss his critical reflections on 
current race matters. all three, moreover, were poets and shared léro’s interest 
in surrealism. as residents of the latin Quarter, they frequently ran into robert 
Desnos, rené Crevel, Paul Éluard, Michel leiris, Benjamin Péret, Tristan T zara, 
and other surrealists in the course of everyday life.
 i t 
was this remarkable trio—Césaire, Damas, and Senghor—who in March 
1936 started the paper L’Étudiant Noir, long renowned as one of the monuments 
in 
the history of negritude. indeed, it was in the pages of L’Étudiant Noir that the 
word “
negritude” (coined by Césaire) first appeared in print. The paper’s aim 
was not only to bring students from Martinique, Guadeloupe, other Caribbean 
islands, 
and africa under one banner, but also to provide the entire youthful 
black community in Paris an open forum for discussion and debate on race-
related issues. as Damas commented years later, “L’Étudiant Noir saw itself both 
as a fighting and as a unifying body,” and he went on to point out that the 
group was significantly helped by such French friends as Breton, Desnos, and 
leiris.23


--- PAGE 50 ---
The First Black Surrealists 29
 not Césaire nor Damas nor Senghor—nor, for that matter, Birago Diop or 
aristide Maugée, who also collaborated on the paper—became members of 
the Paris Surrealist Group, but they were all friendly toward it, kept abreast 
of surrealist activities and publications, and were avid readers of the works of 
surrealism’s precursors—rimbaud and lautréamont above all. in their very dif-
ferent ways, all three could be said to have carried on léro’s surrealist race-rebel 
legacy.
 alas, the story of L’Étudiant Noir is even more obscure than that of Légitime 
Défense. although five or six issues are known to have been published during the 
second half of the 1930s, only one copy seems to have survived—discovered in 
the 1970s by u.S. historian Dale T omich in an old police file at the Bibliothèque 
nationale in Paris.24
 Wha
t happened to the other issues?
 When Franklin and Penelope rosemont visited aimé Césaire at the Présence 
Africaine bookstore in Paris during the fall of 1970, this very question came up. 
in r
eply, Césaire shrugged, shook his head, and said he had no idea where they 
might find a full set. his own copies, he explained, had been borrowed a few 
years earlier by a researcher who had never returned them.
Jamaican interlude
Much admired by léro and his comrades, and a notable influence on Césaire, 
Damas, and Senghor, the Jamaican poet and novelist Claude McKay seems 
to have had no direct association with the Paris surrealists. neither surrealism 
nor the aforementioned admirers appear in his autobiography, A Long W ay from 
Home (1937), and his biographer, Wayne Cooper, ignores surrealism entirely, 
mentioning léro and the others only in passing.
 i t is hard to believe that the aggressively antirational McKay—as described 
by Joseph Freeman—was really indifferent or hostile to a group of poets whose 
principal aims included the total freedom of the imagination and “poetry made 
by 
all.” McKay was, after all, a friend and admirer of one of new Y ork’s most 
notorious eccentrics, the German Baroness elsa von Freytag-l oringhoven, 
militant Dadaist poet, artist, and comrade-in-arms of Marcel Duchamp and 
Man ray. indeed, it was thanks to McKay that her poems had appeared in The 
Liberator in the early 1920s. it would seem likely that anyone attracted to the 
wildly nonconformist poetry of the baroness would also take the trouble to see 
what the surrealists were doing.
 i ronically, it appears to have been politics that led the author of Banjo to 
keep his distance from surrealism. as it happened, the Surrealist Group’s rela-
tively brief combat alliance with the Communist Party coincided with Mc-


--- PAGE 51 ---
30 Black, Brown, & Beige
Kay’s rapidly growing disillusionment with it. his own experience with the 
freewheeling leftist bohemianism of The Masses and its successor, The Liberator 
(of which he was associate editor) was perhaps a factor here, for it turned out 
badly in the end, with manipulative Communists firmly in control.
 l
ike the surrealists, but unlike many other writers and painters of the time, 
McKay instinctively rejected the Stalinist notion of “socialist realism.” What is 
more, he insisted—again like the surrealists—that true art had to be wholly free 
of any sort of political directives.25
 Many 
readers today may find much of McKay’s poetry old-fashioned, too 
restricted by the sonnet form. in his best work, however, the old form gives 
way to the poet’s boisterously adventurous imagination, offering us a defiant 
and colorful collage, not unlike the art of his close friends romare Bearden 
and Jacob lawrence. in Harlem Shadows (1922), the recurring themes include a 
romantic mistrust of “Progress,” fiery anger at injustice, love of wild nature, and 
uncompromising devotion to freedom, no matter what.
negro anthology
The mid-1930s also brought forth that monumental book Negro Anthology, 
edited 
by nancy Cunard. Praised by her friend Marcus Garvey as one who 
“thinks sympathetically black,” Cunard had been deeply involved in surrealism 
since the mid-1920s; many surrealist gatherings were held at her apartment.26 
Several years in the making, Negro Anthology is a massive volume of 864 large and 
profusely illustrated pages. it brings together a stunning array of black poets, 
writers, and thinkers: Zora neale hurston, Sterling Brown, henry Crowder (to 
whom the book is dedicated), W.e.B. Du Bois, langston hughes, arna Bon-
temps, a
lain locke, George Padmore, and Jacques roumain, to name a few—
and surrealists, including rené Crevel, raymond Michelet (Cunard’s chief col-
labora
tor on the book), Benjamin Péret, the Belgians ernst Moerman and raoul 
ubac, and British painter John Banting, who would soon become an important 
figure in the Surrealist Group in london.
 Cunard’s central aims were to right the record on black history and to cele-
brate the creative richness and diversity of black culture around the world. 
Cunard also devoted much space to articles condemning white supremacy, im-
perialism, and racial discrimination in all its forms. Particularly important in this 
regard is the surrealist tract “Murderous humanitarianism,” signed by the entire 
Paris Surrealist Group, including the Martinicans Jules Monnerot and Pierre 
Y oyotte. Negro Anthology is also notable for its abundance of original material 
on the West indies, with features on Jamaica, haiti, Cuba, Barbados, Trinidad, 
Grenada, and Puerto rico.


--- PAGE 52 ---
The First Black Surrealists 31
 no publisher would accept the book, so Cunard had it printed at her own 
expense. Considering the magnitude and quality of the project, it received as-
tonishi
ngly little attention by reviewers in england or the united States. it was 
favorably noticed in the British Daily W orker, but boycotted by Stalinists in the 
un
ited States, where its most important review appeared in the Amsterdam News. 
one of 
the few significant english reviews was written by herbert read, a co-
founder 
of the Surrealist Group in london.
Wifredo lam
They erupt and swirl like baby tornadoes. . . . They merge and  
melt into other forms.
—Jayne Cortez
another profoundly energizing development in surrealism during the second 
half of the 1930s was the advent of the brilliant young Cuban painter Wifredo 
lam, who had come to Madrid to further his study of painting. initially at-
tracted by the seventeenth-century Spanish baroque painters, in the late 1920s 
he discovered Cubism, and particularly Picasso. other significant influences 
included the work of Gauguin, Matisse, and the first generation of surrealists. 
Firmly rejecting the “social realism” then in vogue, he was passionately devoted 
to an imaginative and revolutionary art.27
 l ike Breá and low, lam served in the workers’ militia against Franco’s 
Falange and as a militiaman had met eugenio F. Granell in Madrid. in Paris in 
1938 he met Picasso, who not only facilitated his acquaintance with the Surreal-
ist G
roup, but also became one of lam’s best friends and most ardent champi-
ons. 
The strong african elements in lam’s work, already evident in the 1930s, 
are sometimes credited to Picasso’s influence, but in truth they owe more to his 
own a
fro-Cuban upbringing. in any event, much of Picasso’s work was inspired 
by african sculpture.
 i n 1940 the enthusiastic newcomer joined andré Breton and most of the Sur-
realist Group in Marseilles, where they had gathered as refugees from the nazi 
invasion. immediately recognized as an outstanding painter and surrealist com-
rade, lam 
readily took part in the group’s games and discussions at the Chateau 
air-Bel in Marseilles. While waiting for a ship to take him and his friends to the 
new World, he helped invent a new surrealist game—known as the Marseilles 
Game—which involved the creation of a new deck of cards. lam designed 
two of the cards (alice in Wonderland and lautréamont) and also provided a 
series of splendid ink drawings for Breton’s long poem Fata Morgana, which was 
promptly banned 
by the vichy government’s censor. it was later published in


--- PAGE 53 ---
32 Black, Brown, & Beige
Spanish in Buenos aires. an english translation by Clark Mills first appeared in 
New Directions 1941.28 ov er the years lam also illustrated books by many other 
surrealists, including aimé Césaire, rené Char, alain Jouffroy, Gherasim luca, 
Pierre Mabille, Clément Magloire-Saint-aude, Claude Tarnaud, and François 
valorbe.
 l am and his wife, helena, sailed on the Pierre Lemerle  with Jacqueline and 
andré Breton and their young daughter, aube. also aboard were victor Serge, 
his son, vladi, and Claude lévi-Strauss. after a mutually stimulating encounter 
with aimé Césaire and the T ropiques group in Martinique, lam spent the war 
years in Cuba. at war’s end, in the company of andré Breton and Pierre Mabille, 
he visited haiti, particularly to pursue his study of the art and lore of voodoo.
 v oodoo and its mythology had in fact long interested him in Cuba. in-
deed, it has often been pointed out that lam’s family legacy—as the son of an 
afro-Cuban mother and a Chinese father—prefigured the emphatically non-
Western direction of his art. Such a foundation, expanded and deepened by 
his playful adventures with the varieties of post-Cubist painting, inspired him 
to develop a dramatically new creative spirit under the tropical sun. Defiantly 
ant
iexotic but pulsating with true africanité, lam’s work—an impassioned em-
bodiment of enchantment, revolt, and freedom—in more ways than one is a 
pictor
ial equivalent of the poetry of his contemporary, aimé Césaire.
 From the start lam was recognized as one of surrealism’s finest painters. 
unfortunately, his greatness as an artist has somewhat overshadowed his ap-
preciabl
e stature as a writer and thinker. although his published writings are 
far from bulky, they are notable for their serious commitment, philosophical 
depth, and poetic wisdom.
 nonsurrealist critics have also tended to slight lam’s long-standing social 
radicalism. he was not in fact a “joiner,” but his political views were not far 
from the Trotskyism and other forms of Far left Marxism espoused by his close 
friends Juan Breá, Mary low, Pierre Mabille, and Benjamin Péret. as his friend 
Michel leiris explains in his 1972 monograph on lam, referring to one of the 
artist’s most celebrated works:
it is on several l
evels that we must read a painting like “The Jungle” 
[1943] which, set in a typical antillean landscape, unites four figures 
more significant than the sugarcane harvesters they might appear to 
be on first sight. Giving free rein to his imagination, their creator has 
not only outlined the four elements of classical cosmology . . . but has 
shown the great source of hope that these figures incarnate in confront-
ing the horrors of war. That source, though still incomplete, is, in the 
social r
ealm, the four successive Communist internationals.29


--- PAGE 54 ---
The First Black Surrealists 33
 after the fall of Cuban dictator Batista in 1959, the Castro government rec-
ognized lam 
as the island’s national painter. he also continued to participate 
in international surrealist exhibitions.
Notes
 1. The major sources on Légitime Défense remai n lilyan Kesteloot’s pio-
neering study, Les ecrivains noirs de langue française; Jean-Claude Michel Les 
ecrivains noirs et le surréalisme; and r égis antoine, Les ecrivains français et les 
Antilles. We have also drawn on various texts by rené Mén il and léon-
Gontran Damas, who knew léro well. Michael richardson, Refusal of the 
Shadow, contains useful details.
 2.
 Ménil, preface to the Légitime Défense reprint, 1979.
 3.
 in antoine, Les ecrivains français et les Antilles, 363.
 4. 
ibid.
 5. Damas, in Continuities (a utumn 1974), 263. See also Daniel racine, Léon-
Gontran Damas (1979), 186.
 6.
 Ménil, reprint of T ropiques, 1979.
 7.
 henri Pastoureau, letter to Franklin rosemont, July 30, 1989.
 8. henri Pastoureau, letter to Franklin rosemont, June 18, 1989. See also 
Pastoureau’s Ma vie surréaliste.
 9.
 Kesteloot, Les ecrivains noirs de langue française, 44.
 10
. antoine, Les ecrivains français et les Antilles, 363.
 11
. Damas, Continuities, 262.
 12.
 Ted Joans, T education, 210–211.
 13
. T wo poems by Simone Y oyotte, with commentary on her work, are 
included in Penelope rosemont, Surrealist W omen, 66–68.
 14.
 antoine, Les ecrivains français et les Antilles, 374
 15
. Michel Surya, Georges Bataille, 536.
 16
. Breton, Entrétiens, reprint, 235.
 17
. unless otherwise indicated, the information in this section on Breá, 
low, and surrealism in Cuba is derived from Franklin rosemont’s inter-


--- PAGE 55 ---
34 Black, Brown, & Beige
views and correspondence with Mary low, mostly in the 1980s and 
1990s.
 18.
 antoine, Les ecrivains français et les Antilles, 374.
 19.
 Mary low, conversation with Franklin rosemont, early 1990s.
 20. annie rasicovici, conversation with Franklin rosemont, Chicago, June 
1993.
 21
. George esenwein, “Testament of a revolution,” 176–177.
 22. View (1941).
 23
. Damas, in racine, Léon-Gontran Damas, 186–188.
 24.
 in the early 1970s Dale T omich contributed several articles on Carib-
bean culture and politics to the SDS (Students for a Democratic So-
ciety) journal Radical America, one of which (“aimé Césair e and negri-
tude
”) is reprinted in ron Sakolsky’s Surrealist Subversions, 411–414. T omich 
has since published Slavery in the Circuit of Sugar and Through the Prism of 
Slavery.
 25
. in his autobiography, A Long W ay from Home, McKay discusses his friend-
ship 
with Freytag-loringhoven as well as his growing distrust of Com-
munists. See also Cooper, Claude McKay, 138, 197.
 26
. on Cunard’s involvement in surrealism, and surrealist involvement in 
the Negro Anthology, see Pene lope rosemont, Surrealist W omen, 21–28, 61–
68; and idem, Surrealist Experiences, 147–152.
 27
. on lam, see Pierre Gaudibert and Jacques leenhardt, Wifredo Lam; 
leiris
, Wifredo Lam.
 28
. on the Marseilles Game, see andré Breton, “le jeu de Marseilles,” 
66–68. For background on the surrealists in Marseilles, see varian Fry’s 
Surrender on Demand, and Ber nard noel, Marseilles/New Y ork.
 29
. leiris, Wifredo Lam, 11.


--- PAGE 56 ---
m a r t i n i q u e
Etienne Léro
etienne léro (1910–1939) was the first person of african descent to 
publicly identify himself as a surrealist. Born and raised in lamentin, 
Martinique, and a graduate of the lycée Schoelcher, he went to France 
as a young man to pursue his education. after a brief association with 
the nardal sisters and their eclectic Revue du Monde Noire, he and several 
of his revolution-minded friends went on to declare their wholehearted 
support for surrealism and Marxism in a journal of their own, Légitime 
Défense (1932).
 The chi
ef organizer of this influential group, léro also edited the 
journal. although it was almost immediately banned in Martinique by 
the French colonial authorities, it circulated widely underground and 
even a
ttracted a sympathetic response from South america. a second 
issue was planned, but never appeared.
 l
éro and most of his comrades were also active in the Paris Surrealist 
Group; collaborators on Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution, they fre-
quently m
et for discussions at the home of andré Breton.
 Poet, theorist, and critic, léro was a dynamic figure and a power-
ful i
nspiration to many younger black poets, artists, and radicals. his 
poetry was arrogantly dismissed by white critics such as Jean-Paul Sartre 
(in Black Orpheus) and Jahnheinz Jahn, but was warmly admired by poets 
as dif
ferent as léon-Gontran Damas, léopold Sédar Senghor, and Ted 
Joans.
 Sever
ely wounded early in the war with Germany, léro died in a 
French military hospital in 1939.
 The texts published her
e open with the group’s Manifesto, followed 
by a selection of léro’s poems and articles. “Civilization” and most of 
the poems are from Légitime Défense; Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolu-
tion, and Documents 34, pages 1
 5–18. other sources are identified after the 
texts.


--- PAGE 57 ---
36 Black, Brown, & Beige
lÉgitime dÉfen Se manife Sto
This is only a preliminary warning. We consider ourselves totally committed. 
We are sure that there are other young people like us who could add their 
signatures to ours and who—to the extent that it is compatible with remaining 
alive—refuse to adjust to the surrounding dishonor. and we are against all 
those who attempt, consciously or not, by their smiles, work, exactitude, pro-
priety, speech, writings, actions and their very persons, to pretend that every-
thing can continue as it is. We rise up here against all those who are not suffo-
cated by this capitalist, Christian, bourgeois world to which, involuntarily, our 
protesting bodies belong.
 i n 
every country the Communist Party (Third international) is in the pro-
cess of playing the decisive card of the Spirit—in the hegelian sense of the 
word. its defeat, impossible as we think it to be, would be for us the definitive 
Je ne peux plus.  We believe unreservedly in its triumph because we accept the 
dialectical materialism of Marx, freed of all misleading interpretation and vic-
tori
ously put to the test of experience by lenin. We are ready, on this plane, to 
submit to the discipline that such convictions demand.
 o n 
the concrete plane of modes of human expression, we equally and unre-
servedly accept surrealism to which, in 1932, we relate our becoming. We refer 
our readers to the two Manifestoes of a
 ndré Breton, to the complete works of 
aragon, andré Breton, rené Crevel, Salvador Dali, Paul Éluard, Benjamin Péret 
and Tristan T zara. it must be said that it is one of the disgraces of our time that 
these works are not better known everywhere that French is read. and in the 
works of Sade, hegel, lautréamont, rimbaud—to mention only a few—we 
seek everything surrealism has taught us to find. as for Freud, we are ready to 
utilize the immense machine that he set in motion to dissolve the bourgeois 
family. We are moving with sincerity at a furious pace. We want to see clearly 
in
to our dreams and we listen to their voices. and our dreams permit us to see 
clearly into the life that has been imposed on us for so long.
 a
mong the filthy bourgeois conventions, we despise above all the humani-
tarian hypocrisy, this stinking emanation of Christian decay. We loathe pity. 
We don’t give a damn about sentiment. We intend to shed light on human 
psychic concretions—a light related to that which illuminates Salvador Dali’s 
splendid, convulsive, plastic works, where it seems sometimes, suddenly, that 
love-birds could be ink-bottles or shoes or little bits of bread, taking wing from 
assassinated conventions.
 i f this little journal, a temporary instrument, breaks down, we shall find 
other instruments. We accept with indifference the conditions of time and 
space which, by defining us in 1932 as people of the French West indies, have


--- PAGE 58 ---
The First Black Surrealists 37
thus settled our boundaries without at all limiting our field of action. This first 
collection of texts is particularly devoted to the West indian question as it ap-
pears to us. (The following issues, without abandoning this matter, will take 
up many others.) and if, by its content, this collection is addressed primarily 
to young French West indians , it is because we think it is a good idea that our 
first effort finds its way to people whose capacity for revolt we are far from 
underestimating. and if it is aimed especially at young blacks, this is because we 
be
lieve that they especially have had to suffer from capitalism (outside africa, 
witness Scottsboro) and that they seem to offer, in that they have a materially 
determined ethnic personality, a generally higher potential for revolt and for 
joy. For want of a black proletariat, to whom international capitalism has not 
given the means to understand us, we speak to the children of the black bour-
geoisie; we speak to those who are not already killed established fucked-up 
academic successful decorated decayed endowed decorative prudish decided 
opportunist; we speak to those who can still accept life with some appearance 
of truthfulness.
 h aving decided to be as objective as possible, we know nothing of each 
other’s personal lives. We want to go a long way, and if we expect much from 
psychoanalytic investigation, we do not underestimate (from those acquainted 
with psychoanalytic theory) pure and simple psychological confessions which, 
provided that the obstacles of social conventions are removed, can tell us 
a great deal. We do not admit that one can be ashamed of what he suffers. 
The u
seful—social convention—constitutes the backbone of the bourgeois 
“reality” that we want to break. in the realm of intellectual investigation, we 
pit against this “reality” the sincerity that allows man to disclose in his love, for 
example, the ambivalence which permits the elimination of the contradiction 
decreed by logic. according to logic, once an object with an affective value 
appears, we must respond to it either with the feeling called love or with the 
feeling called hate. Contradiction is a function of the useful. it does not exist 
in love. it does not exist in the dream. and it is only by horribly gritting our 
teeth that we are able to endure the abominable system of constraints and re-
strictions, the extermination of love and the limitation of the dream, generally 
known by the name of western civilization.
 e m
erging from the French black bourgeoisie, which is one of the saddest 
things on this earth, we declare—and we shall not go back on this declara-
tion—that we are opposed to all the corpses: administrative, governmental, 
parliamentary, industrial, commercial and all the others. We intend, as traitors 
to this class, to take the path of treason as far as it will go. We spit on everything 
that they love and venerate, especially those things that give them sustenance 
and joy.


--- PAGE 59 ---
38 Black, Brown, & Beige
 and all those who adopt the same attitude as we, no matter where they 
come from, will be welcome among us.*
etienne lÉro, Thélus lÉro, rené MÉnil, Jules-Marcel MonneroT, Michel 
PiloTin, Maurice-Sabas QuiTMan, auguste ThÉSÉe, Pierre YoYoTTe. 
1932
First published i
n english in 1973; translated by alex Wilder
civilization
The most developed of all so-called civilized countries, the united States, is 
getting ready to murder eight young blacks who are accused, contrary to all 
evidence, of raping two white prostitutes. The French press—with the excep-
tion of Humanité—is unanimous in maintaining a significant silence. The colored 
press in america, in the pay of the whites and prisoner of its class interests 
and political dealings, has played down the affair. The association for the ad-
vancemen
t of Colored People, tiptoeing around american capitalism’s criminal 
justice system, admits that it is unable to assume the victims’ defense. The local 
branch of the international red aid has taken up the cause of the accused, 
and has proved quite successful in rousing world opinion against the sadism of 
alabama’s executioner-judges.
 Will the voices of the adolescents they want to burn on the other side of 
the atlantic, in spite of everything, break through the european nations’ web 
of selfishness and prejudice? until now, only the working class has cried out its 
indignation at its meetings. The blacks of the whole world owe it to themselves 
to be in the forefront of the struggle in favor of their brothers who are unjustly 
menaced with the electric chair by Yankee sexual neurosis.
 When 
will american blacks recognize in an effective way that the only way 
out of the american hell lies in communism?
Légitime Défense (1932); translated by alex Wilder
 * if our critique is purely negative here, if we do not propose any positive 
efforts in place of that which we mercilessly condemn, we excuse our-
selves on the grounds that it was necessary to begin—a necessity which 
did not enable us to await the full development of our ideas. in our next 
issue, we hope to develop our ideology of revolt.


--- PAGE 60 ---
The First Black Surrealists 39
and the ramp S
and the ramps of imprisoned flesh
The obsequious chance of honey’s own saddlebows
in a morn
ing devoured by sweat
i have lost only my feet useless for traveling
in the wind’s railroad stations
The gloved shell of a ship without sails
and 
i speak with your voice
at the hour when all sand-paths block their own way
at the hour indicated by burned sycamore lighthouses
in the humid wound of a wingless bird
The summer breaker of shipwrecks takes a plunge
T ranslated by Alex Wilder
aBandon
abandon to electrical dentitions
our hands and the birds
The elevator carries off
The trees and the photographs
The river keeps our heads of hair
The night strangles itself to the banging of doors
and you begin the adventure again.
T ranslated by Alex Wilder
put
Put the earrings under the chair
and the flowers of the carpet
and all the old woman’s bouquets
so that the sweat of the breezes
may survive at the precipice.
T ranslated by Alex Wilder


--- PAGE 61 ---
40 Black, Brown, & Beige
Simone Yoyotte
Simone Y oyotte (ca. 1910–1933), the first black woman surrealist, was 
born and grew up in Martinique. next to nothing is known of her life. 
The only woman in the légitime Défense Group, she was also active 
in the Surrealist Group in Paris and contributed poetry to the group’s 
journal, Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution. in P
 aris she married Jules 
Monnerot, but died after only a few months.
 h
er surviving poems, though few in number, mark a significant turn-
in
g point in Francophone West indian literature.
 an example of automatic writing arranged as a poem, “Pyjama-
Speed” was published in Légitime Défense. n
 ote: “Bois-Colombes,” in the 
first line, refers to the county seat of the haute-de-Seine district, in the 
northwest Paris suburbs. literally it means “doves’ wood.”
pyJama-Speed
My pyjamas gilt with azure and Bois-Colombes
Tranquil atmospheres—and dance
The p
avane of silence and Jew. — i am moved
—so be it—but no and if i departed softly
and the river country of my self lightly
and i
 smile. — My pyjamas gilt and embroidered
with myself (spear) and worst of all gilt with azure
my pyjamas balsam hammer gilt with azure
so-called Bois Colombes and Jew and you’ve made it.
T ranslated by Myrna Bell Rochester
Pierre Yoyotte
unlike his sister, Simone, Pierre Y oyotte (19??–1940) did not contrib-
ute a text to Légitime Défense, but the articles he published elsewhere 
assured him a sign
ificant place in the history of surrealism. his delirious 
“Theory of the Fountain” in Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution, no. 5 
(1933), is a wild phenomenological analysis, similar in many respects to


--- PAGE 62 ---
The First Black Surrealists 41
Salvador Dalí’s paranoiac-critical method (interestingly, Y oyotte around 
that time frequented a Dalinian faction within the Surrealist Group). in 
contrast, his essay on surrealism’s antifascist significance (in the “inter-
vention Surréaliste” issue of Documents 34) is rigorously Marxist as well 
as Freudian and is generally regarded as his most important article. 
Finally, his brief response to the inquiry on encounters in Minotaure 3–4 
(December 1933)—however different from his other writings in style 
and tone—nonetheless conveys the author’s serious approach to surreal-
ist research.
 Yo
yotte’s biography remains a mystery. even henri Pastoureau, a 
close friend in the Paris Surrealist Group, did not know exactly where or 
when he was born.
 a
 French army volunteer (1939), Y oyotte became a corporal in the 
colonial infantry. he was killed in May 1940 during a reconnaissance 
mission in the war with Germany.
theory of the fountain
The fountain constitutes a sexual provocation of a very simple type, when the 
water or the liquid that this fountain procures flows brusquely in small quanti-
ties, i would say gurgling, as if by a submerged trigger provoking the impression 
that the water which is generally hard, is at that moment soft, it is a question 
of tin or silver foil which generally share the same physical nature, dissolved 
in liquefied ambrosia. The water is limpid metallic, it is soft, mingling within 
itself not through currents but through textures a smiling bond of mercury and 
gelatin, all marinated in the silver elixir provoked by alchemists’ boiling: it is a 
beverage.
 a
 simple and easily observable phenomenon can illustrate by example what 
i say: faucet poorly turned off, mysterious and brutal outpouring of a late-
coming body of water.
 o n the other hand, the fountain is the mouth: the fountain following like 
the body of an automobile in the hollow of the hand, from the basin its tow 
arms joined, falling in silence, you have only to convince yourself to place your 
two hands under the faucet and to observe the ebullition of the water. Fountain 
closed mouths fountain.
 Y ou will find the man, his arms bare up to the elbow, washing himself in 
blood. he will have discovered, in one of the corners opposite the daylight, 
two or three paralyzed rats, hanging by their tails.
Surréalisme ASDLR (1933); translated by robert launay


--- PAGE 63 ---
42 Black, Brown, & Beige
antifa SciSt Significance of Surreali Sm
1. Psychological Consequences of Capitalism among the “Middle Classes.”
in order to do justice to capitalism, it is urgent to insist on the economic poverty 
produced by it, as well as its other consequence—a psychological misery that 
must be differentiated from the first in its essence, as well as in its processes.
 Capitalism has received and maintained the poverty that Christian feudalism 
knowingly sustained and transmitted. That is the antagonism between the sup-
pressed human emotions of ego-based materialistic desires—sexual love, desire 
for supremacy, etc.—and idealized collective emotions such as group “attach-
men
ts”—family or fatherland, and abstract passions—religion or art. nothing 
was changed here, the financiers succeeded the nobles. Wherever a minority 
seizes the upper hand in the satisfaction of its own desires, psychological con-
straints are imposed to moderate the desires of the majority of individuals.
 and not only the majority because under the watchful eye of the powerful but 
oppressed majority, the advantages gained by oppressors such as the nobility, 
the clergy or the bourgeoisie, can only be preserved in relative secrecy; this 
requires a modicum of self-restraint. Sometimes consciously, and more often 
simply objectively, a hypocrisy both painful and degrading imposes itself on 
the suplus-value profiteers, and the repression of desires by psychological con-
straints creates an equally shared emotional misery in capitalist society.
 i n 
the higher classes, however, wealth offers desire such abundant opportu-
nities that it often overrides constraints. . . . But below a certain level, one not 
easy to define, at the level of those whose “small properties” distinguish them 
from the pure proletarians, the misery of desire is usually greater than economic 
poverty.
 For 
each individual, in capitalist society, the elaboration of misery of desire is 
established by an instrument that is the brilliant legacy of Christian feudalism 
and which characterizes its civilization—the family.
 Wha
t results is the original and paradoxical contradiction of capitalism—a 
form that, on the one hand, develops sublime sentiments and on the other, re-
presses and irritates them, thus preparing a psychological misery as intense as the 
misery of desire.
 e xcept 
within the proletarian class where both are separated from economic 
misery since for the average individual, they are luxuries quite out of proportion 
to his limited financial means.
 Therefore, if the proletarian minority wants a revolution to solve the eco-
nomic misery to which emotional misery is linked, the majority of the French 
middle classes, burdened as they are with a moral guilt—reinforced against 
desire and mocked by money—are absolutely ripe for a counterrevolution of emo-


--- PAGE 64 ---
The First Black Surrealists 43
tions and ideals that is to be directed against both money and desire, a revolution in which a 
few material demands will come about hypocritically hidden by repressed emotions. Such a 
counterrevolution has already occurred in two large european countries by 
using effectively the local and historical aggravations of psychological misery. 
This is what i was driving at. naturally, i am speaking of fascism.
2. Fascism.
When these sentiments were provoked by military defeat, they produced a 
national inferiority complex, and the beginnings of a proletarian movement.
 The only way out was satisfaction. But compared to material satisfactions, 
the emotional or mystical ones (or those of the horde) have the advantage of 
a long history. Their infantile victories over primary desires endow them (as in 
war) with the appearance of a paradise. This is how, through such a displacement, they 
have managed to contain all the affective aspirations of successive generations. This was the 
in
vention of hitlerism and Mussolinian fascism—it was just a matter of masks 
to forget the money battles after the kisses, and to hide—as if it was dirty—the 
necessit
y of love and pleasure. emotions survive on masks, not realities. What 
hitler and Mussolini gave in terms of material satisfactions amounts to very 
little, but that is exactly the point. Capitalist inequality is in reality not the 
enemy of the hysterical exaltation of the hordes in black and brown shirts. 
The young fascists find it exciting to despise easy living—at the same time, the 
easy life of the bosses, their parasites and their inheritors continues in broad 
daylight.
 i f 
fascism is not an economic revolution, the fact is that the essentially emo-
tional and ideational revolution it represents prevents the coming of the eco-
nomic revolution, that was seemingly imminent because of the material situa-
tion of the masses, the petit bourgeoisie, the peasantry and the proletariat—the 
majority, that is! The great discovery and the essential originality of fascism is 
its utilization of the irrational as autonomous and important factors in the politi-
cal domain.
 What must also be admitted is that communist propaganda, exclusively 
based on Marxist teachings, has failed to understand, to denounce and to attack 
the political importance of collective emotions. Marxism only fights against the 
domination of money in material and definitive ways. The communists have 
always been officially (and obtusely) suspicious of the discoveries of psycho-
analysis that would have helped them fight knowledgeably against the irratio-
nal processes of family, religion, fatherland, etc.
 Fundamentally, the communists never really fought against emotional re-
pressions for two reasons (which are but one): the first one is subjective: it was


--- PAGE 65 ---
44 Black, Brown, & Beige
considered only a matter of secondary importance, tightly dependent upon the 
economic regime; the second was objective: for the proletarian thinking that is 
responsible for the orientation of the Marxist intellectual stream, problems of 
emotional repression were really secondary in view of the proletariat’s material 
situation. For those of us who must prevent that salvation, the task is clear.
3. Antifascism.
it is extremely significant that during the myth-building post–WWi period, 
while the fascist hordes were forming, a group of young men got together in 
France in order to systematize the poetic tradition of revolt—which also happens 
to be a moral one—one that was handed down from the previous century by 
the f
ew rebels who objected to the monstrous invasion of money. if these few 
cases seem “limited,” they are by no means exceptional, as the success of surreal-
ism tends to demonstrate. Starting with emotional repression (still poignantly 
part of today’s reality), the surrealists immediately addressed themselves to the 
defense of desire, to individual inspiration, to solutions that were diametrically 
opposed to the Mussolinian or racist militarization of their time.
 When 
fascism was still very far from its present hyper-actuality, these men 
born in the bourgeoisie were amazingly flouting their moral revolt, contrary 
to the fascist ideals. Their joining the communist revolutionary action has put 
an end to it, as has the intellectual recognition of psychoanalysis and historical 
mater
ialism. This is revealed in andré Breton’s Communicating V essels. a specifi-
cally surrealist ethical position was formulated—to discredit all ideals and re-
veal the material reality of desire behind their appearances.
 The united antifascist action in France depends upon a wide moral unity. 
The program of action will proceed from it.
 The concept of the destruction of ideals should be intelligently under-
stood—it is contradictory for a society to be without any collective exaltation. 
as a revolutionary, i like the idea of creating a tolerable society. The ethics of 
the future will not consist of suppressing the irrational emotions; instead we 
shall master them and subordinate them to desire.
 i n the face of a generalized deficiency of ideas, the attitude of the surrealists 
and a few others represents the beginning of what must be done.
Documents 1934; translated by Guy Ducornet (original emphasis)


--- PAGE 66 ---
The First Black Surrealists 45
Maurice-Sabas Quitman
The author of this informative article is one of the less-well-known fig-
ures of the Légitime Défense Group, and this text may well be his only pub-
lished work. 
in any case, unlike léro, Ménil, Monnerot, Pierre Y oyotte 
and his sister Simone, Quitman was not active in surrealism after 1932.
paradi Se on earth
anyone interested in current affairs will agree that it is just as difficult to man-
age sev
en or twelve francs as it is to manage a billion. obviously the burden is 
not heavy enough. The “negro” does not kill himself. Such is langston hughes’ 
“Beggar Boy”:
and yet he plays upon his flute a wild free tune
as if fate had not bled him with her knife!
 What is the upshot of this situation? The worker in the fields, “that wretched 
lump of black clay with breath of life,” is barely able to feed himself on his 
“wages.” he does not, however, wander around naked. Clothes? Sure, but 
not from clothing stores. Their european style notwithstanding, the worker’s 
clothes are cut from stolen guano sacks; in some places their hemp bears the 
name “a
ubery khaki.”
 Without overlooking this economic situation, let us take into account the 
case of the worker who establishes a family. life becomes even harder. The par-
ents increase their sacrifices until the day comes when the children reach the 
age of six or eight and can join the struggle for existence. They are hired, with-
out sexual distinction, into the job category known officially as “little workers,” 
and collectively as the “little gang,” adding a few more francs to the family’s 
“wages.”
 and here is the reason: The negro works while the white man gets rich at 
his expense—rich to the extent that he can easily deposit a million in the near-
est bank when “Mll
e. his Daughter” is born. Who is to blame?
 “The Governor!”
 “no,” as one of them—a passenger from the Lamotte-Picquet, author of Civilian 
among Sailors—said to his hosts: “Their certainty of not staying in the colony 
means that they are not inclined to govern.”
 The 
blame lies with those who, refusing to regard these outcasts as compa-
triots, should at least regard them as human beings. The blame lies with those


--- PAGE 67 ---
46 Black, Brown, & Beige
who put their intelligence at the service of the factory owners, skillful exploit-
ers of their false pride, which consists in denying their origins and deprecating 
“blacks” who, despite them, are nonetheless their compatriots.
 The remedy, therefore, does not require the creation of primary schools 
in the rural areas. They are already there. What is necessary is to make it pos-
sible for the poor to attend these schools, and that means improving working 
people’s situation. Three-quarters of the island belongs to five or six families 
of factory owners whose cupidity is equaled only by their workers’ patience. 
however, this patience should not be counted on. a people cannot remain 
oppressed forever. no government, even of the “left,” has ever limited feudal 
power through laws concerning the relations between owners and workers, or 
has had the power to even supervise the application of those laws.
 i n 
the absence of such an intervention, the day will come when the workers 
will revolt. and the doctors whom Chance has not classified among the ranks of 
the “lazy and uncultivated” will perhaps attempt—in imitation of those French 
doctors examining some trivial problem—to explain this revolt as the triumph 
of some “medullary automatism” over the will.
Légitime Défense; translated by Franklin rosemont (original emphasis)
Jules Monnerot
Born in Fort-de-France, Martinique, Monnerot (1909–1995) went to 
Paris to pursue his education. unlike his father, Jules Senior—the prin-
cipal founder of the island’s Communist Party—the son lived most of 
his lif
e in Paris. a cofounder of the légitime Défense Group, he con-
tributed texts and poems to its journal and, like his comrades, went on 
to take part in the activities of the Paris Surrealist Group. Monnerot’s 
art
icle “on Certain Traits Particular to the Civilized Mentality” demon-
stra
tes his competence as a surrealist theorist. his involvement in the 
movement, however, proved sporadic. in 1938, he was briefly associated 
with Georges Bataille, roger Caillois, and other former surrealists in the 
ill-fated College of Sociology.
 Monnerot
’s best and most influential book, La poésie moderne et le sacré 
(1945), in large part a study of the parallels between surrealism, Gnosti-
cism, and “
primitive” thought, was much admired by andré Breton and 
others in the Surrealist Group.
 Most of M
onnerot’s later books have little to do with surrealism,


--- PAGE 68 ---
The First Black Surrealists 47
but at least two of them—Les faits sociaux ne sont pas des choses (1946) and 
even Inquisitions (1974), with its remarkable critique, “Television: Birth of 
a Po
wer”—include deeply interesting material. his contribution to the 
exhibition catalog Le surréalisme en 1947 was his last direct participation in 
surrealism.
on certain trait S particular to the civilized mentality
What i especially can’t stand are things that are half-dead but still living, such 
as current fads that are the backbone of everyone’s thinking—all that is dis-
gusting—those things that i just glance at during an easy, but distant stroll 
through their slip-shod constructions, fields of rust, the cancerous vegetation 
of “collective consciousness” (at least we can stop worrying about the end; the 
rear 
exit actually does open to the outside).
 That capitalism finds certain ways of thinking or not thinking necessarily 
complementary to itself, ways of thinking that by definition are likely to assure 
its effective survival, is an odd idea that is understood by us only in the few 
moments of our lives in which we are awake. Conventional thinking corrodes 
slowly even the most rigorous concepts circulating like blood, and thanks to 
this the poison of conventional thinking becomes permanent and definite; this 
is the immobilizing environment where the minds of those concerned with 
spirituality flounder.
 These specialists in morality, like everyone else, maintain constantly a fun-
damental dichotomy between their official self and their actual self—obvi-
ously, they would be struck with a fatal case of vertigo if they tried to picture 
themselves outside these necessary conventions—largely professional, military, 
family—connections that are the coat-hangers they use to hang up their selves 
every night before they go to sleep. it will truly not be easy to take these 
“selves” away from a considerable number of people. Worse yet, their “real lives” 
are just as phony as their “selves” are. Their positivism, a submission to what 
existed before they were born, is a trick of ideology that the bourgeoisie uses to 
keep itself in power. Positivism sees facts as given, discarding the dialectical law 
of their development—the only way that they can actually acquire meaning. 
The denial of this “reality” is a denial of the development of society by active 
negation and becomes likewise a denial of the reality which it claims to oppose. 
Civilized thinking, when it applies its own standards to itself and sees itself in 
its own notorious “facts” comes upon a vicious circle. Truly, positivism nurses 
an infant covered with pox, one that would be better to beat to death—that 
is, realistic art which consists solely of “what one sees” and which will never be


--- PAGE 69 ---
48 Black, Brown, & Beige
able to contribute to any real progress, because there can never be any true 
discoveries unless they are antithetical to this world.
 i f one shakes the main principles of bourgeois morality, they jingle like 
money. i state flatly that every word that expresses these principles has or has 
had a financial or business-related meaning. if one gives even the most flimsy 
consideration to the meaning of these words, the “moral” fraud becomes clear 
instantly. Duty means Debt, a clearly Christian idea of a loan that one has not 
yet finished repaying. This duty, which benefits those who hold the loans in the 
first p
lace is called obligation. its repayment, according to books on morals, 
confer value on the subject. (The word “value” is found more often in that 
kind of literature than the word “good.”) The slickest “philosophers” manage 
to disguise these ideas only imperfectly; they visibly remain in the service of 
monstrous military and industrial exploitation.
 i n 
the Civilized Mind the basic idea of value or wealth, i.e. property, sup-
poses the correspondingly basic idea of a person or persons who own that value 
or wealth. in France, for instance, there is absolutely nothing in existence about 
which one cannot ask the question (at the same time indispensable, ignoble, 
and sacr
ed): “Who owns it?” not even consciousness itself can be conceived of 
except as a property of the subject. Publications and books of all types discuss 
always the ideas of Mr. So-and-so or the thought or spirituality of this or that 
individual, state, business, family, or countryside.
 Surr
ealism, a dialectical continuation of Dada, brought poetry to such levels 
that it no longer belonged to literature. Situated at the far limits of the poem, 
poetry now only needs to make a leap. But even today its form in literature can 
only be explained by social conditions which are the antithesis of poetry and 
which will not be destroyed until a while after the victory of workers’ revolution 
on a world scale.
 h ow we will gain possession of the controls that govern the changes of 
State, we do not know. one can only affirm the dialectical necessity of finding 
them—the dialectical progression of surrealism consists in closing the gap that 
separates the word from the prime matter it represents. This means a dialectical 
reinvention of magic. The poet will see himself as a technician of this transition 
from word to world. But don’t rest assured by these thoughts on poetry; the 
surrealists are devoting the greater part of their time to the most practical of 
thoughts—revolutionary theory and propaganda—so much for now. What was 
once the poet, will then become the magician who will liberate the dream, the 
magician in a world in which bad faith’s moral conscience has necessarily been 
abolished, in which the pleasure principle is identical to the reality principle, 
the unreal to the real, united in an alchemical marriage. Morality devours psy-
chology, poetry devours verse, actions devour individuals, humankind devours


--- PAGE 70 ---
The First Black Surrealists 49
the i, the world devours all things. But the clear streams carry forward their 
ever-changing diamonds.
Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution 5 (1933); translated by rachel Blackwell
indi Spen SaBle poetry: reSpon Se to an inquiry
amoebalike, poetry invades us from every direction. it is life itself. it is present 
in the secrets of a coolie suffering from elephantiasis at the foot of Mont-Pelé. 
in egot
istical movies where the urge to climb the social ladder, to descend or to 
re-situate oneself is fulfilled at any cost. in certain so-called detective novels. in 
the slander, calumny and defamation, at times brilliant, of so many concierges 
and n
on-combatants. in the luminous and subtle homage Parisian dressmakers 
offer up to vanished civilizations, to outdated feelings, and to colonial races, 
whil
e exploiting the curves of the female body. in the daily grind of delirious 
justifications and absurd claims. Socialization of the marvelous slowly con-
sumes itself under our eyes. Man, whether in his cathedrals, his bistros, or his 
Paramounts, is clearly an animal in which the need for poetry exists naturally.
Cahiers G.L.M. (March 1939); translated by Myrna Bell rochester
Yva Léro
Most academic studies of the negritude movement have surprisingly 
little to say about Yva léro. a direct descendant of Michel de Mon-
taigne, she 
was married to etienne léro’s brother, Thélus (a mathemati-
cian by profession and a cosigner of the 1932 Légitime Défense manifesto). 
Yva and T
hélus léro and Suzanne and aimé Césaire lived in Paris at the 
same time and were often together; in later years, too, back in Marti-
ni
que, Yva and Suzanne remained close friends. although Yva did not 
contribute to T ropiques or take part in surrealist activity as such, she did 
write poetry of striking originality, such as the examples published here, 
from her chapbook, Peau d’ébène (1979).


--- PAGE 71 ---
50 Black, Brown, & Beige
little Black diver S
There were six little divers
six lively little divers
six undersized little divers . . .
Whenever a boat came into view,
on the blue waves of the Caribbean,
tossing off their games and their rags
offering their naked bodies to the sun
they leapt in, splashing each other
fighting for first place.
and the blue 
waves took them in . . .
But just like corks
they popped up, disappeared
reappearing, jostling each other
in a sometimes violent struggle
ignorant of reefs and sharks
each had a single goal . . . just one
to get closer to the big boat.
Their empty bellies urged them on
whispered touching words to them,
words that opened purses . . .
and all the cur
ious passengers
ventured one coin and even two . . .
he really did deserve all those bravos
the winning little diver!
They lusted after the shining coin
ignoring reefs and sharks . . .
for they had but a single goal . . . just one,
to possess that coin
and wi
thout so much as suspecting the danger
threatening the little divers
the passengers had fun watching . . .
There were six little divers
six lively little divers
six undersized little divers . . .
T ranslated by Myrna Bell Rochester


--- PAGE 72 ---
The First Black Surrealists 51
Aimé Césaire
Martinique-born aimé Césaire (1913–2008) is beyond question the most 
world renowned black surrealist. his poetry and plays as well as his 
theoretical and polemical works have been translated into many lan-
guages and have inspired a large critical literature.
 a
fter graduating from the lycée Schoelcher in Fort-de-France in 
1931, Césaire studied in Paris, notably at the École normal Superieure, 
an advanced training school for teachers. in Paris, with his childhood 
friend léon Damas and the Senegalese léopold Senghor, Césaire 
studied african history, read Légitime Défense, and immersed himself in the 
wr
itings of the surrealist poets and their precursors (especially rimbaud 
and lautréamont). With Damas, Senghor, and others, he also started 
the newspaper L’Étudiant Noir and cofounded the negritude movement, 
which exerted a strong influence throughout the black world.
 a
s a teacher in Martinique in the 1940s, Césaire—with his wife, 
Suzanne, and a former coeditor of Légitime Défense, rené Mén il—founded 
the journal T ropiques, a special bl end of negritude and surrealism that 
continued publication for five years. Throughout the war years, T ropiques 
was recognized as international surrealism’s principal vehicle.
 at war
’s end, Césaire was elected mayor of Fort-de-France and 
deputy to the French national assembly. often called the “surrealist 
mayor,” he continued to participate in surrealist activity, particularly 
duri
ng the 1947 international Surrealist exhibition in Paris. Politically, 
he focused on the central problems of colonialism and racism. his Dis-
course on Colonialism (1955) had a worldwide impact. Momentous, too, was 
his in
tervention at the First international Congress of negro Writers 
and artists (1956) in which he calls for the revolutionary overthrow of 
colonialism and the creation of a new culture.
 Césaire’
s interviews from the 1960s and later show that his identifica-
ti
on with surrealism, and his admiration for andré Breton, remained in-
tact, alon
g with his anticolonialism. in 2006, at the age of ninety-three, 
he publicly rebuked the French minister of culture, who had proposed 
that Martinican textbooks feature a less critical view of colonialism and 
slavery.


--- PAGE 73 ---
52 Black, Brown, & Beige
nÉgrerie S: Black youth and aSS imilation
What is difficult is not to ascend, but in ascending to remain oneself.
—Michelet
one day, the Black seized hold of the White’s neck-tie, grabbed a bowler hat, 
dressed up in them, and left laughing . . .
 i t 
was only a game, but the Black did not let himself take it as a game. he 
became so accustomed to the neck-tie and the bowler hat that he ended up be-
lievi
ng he had always worn them. he made fun of those who didn’t wear them 
at all and disowned his father whose name is Spirit of the Bush . . . This is a bit 
of the history 
of the pre-war negro, who is only the negro before reason. he 
sits down at the school of the Whites. he wants to be “assimilated.”
 i would gladly say that it is madness, if i didn’t remember that, in a certain 
sense, the madman is always “the man who has faith in himself,” and because of 
that saves himself from madness.
 i f 
assimilation is not madness, it is certainly foolishness. T o want to be as-
simi
lated is to forget that nothing can change animal nature. it is to misunder-
stand “other
ness,” which is a law of nature.
 This is so true that the People, elder brothers of nature, warn us of it 
every day: a decree says to the Blacks: “Y ou are similar to the Whites. Y ou are 
assimilated.”
 The P
eople, wiser than the decree because they follow nature, shout to us:
 “Begone! Y ou are different than us! Y ou are only aliens and negroes.” They 
deride the “Black man with a bowler,” bully the “poorly whitened,” and blud-
geon the “negro.”
 i
 confess that it is justice, though unfortunate for the one who needs to be 
convinced by means of a cudgel that he can only be himself.
 Mor
eover, it is enough to reflect on the notion of assimilation to see that it 
is a dangerous business for the colonizer as well as the colonized.
 The 
colonizing nation that “assimilates” another quickly becomes disgusted 
with its own work. Copies only being copies, the prototypes have the contempt 
for them that one has for apes and parrots. For if man is afraid of “the other,” 
he also has an aversion for the similar. it is the same for the colonized. once 
similar to the one who has molded him, he no longer understands the contempt 
of the latter, and he hates him. in a like manner, i have heard it said that some 
disciples hate the master because he still wants to remain the master when the 
disciple has ceased being a disciple.
 Thus it is true that assimilation, born of fear and timidity, always ends in


--- PAGE 74 ---
The First Black Surrealists 53
contempt and hatred. it carries within it the germs of struggle. The struggle of 
self against self, that is to say, the worst of struggles.
 For this r
eason, Black youth turns its back on the tribe of the old.
 The tribe of the old says, “assimilation.” We respond, resurrection!
 Black youth of today want neither enslavement nor assimilation. They want 
emancipation.
 The
y will be called “men,” because only man walks without a tutor on the 
great roads of thought. enslavement and assimilation resemble one another. 
Both are forms of passivity.
 During these first two periods, the negro has been equally sterile.
 e mancipation, on the other hand, is action and creation.
 Black youth want to act and create. it wants to have its poets and its novelists 
who will speak to it. it wants to have its misfortunes and its greatness. it wants 
to contribute to universal life, to the humanization of humanity. For that, it 
must preserve itself or find itself once again. it is the primacy of the self.
 But to be oneself, it is necessary to struggle. First struggle against the mis-
guided brothers who are afraid of being themselves, the senile mob of the 
assimilated.
 Then struggle against those who want to inflate their egos, the legion of the 
assimilators.
 Fi
nally, to be oneself, it is necessary to struggle against oneself. it is neces-
sary to destroy indifference, extirpate obscurantism, strike sentimentalism at its 
root, and Meredith tells us what, above all, must be cut:
 Black Y
outh, it is hair that keeps you from acting. it is the desire to conform, 
and it is you that carry it.
 Crop y
our hair close so that this desire may escape.
 Cut your hair.
 i t is the first condition of action and creation.
 a long head of hair is an affliction.
L’Étudiant Noir, no. 1 (March 1935); translated by Dale T omich


--- PAGE 75 ---
J a m a i c a
Claude McKay
although McKay (1890–1948) took no part in surrealist activity, his 
influence on the movement was both significant and enduring. Jamaica-
born, he had already published two books of poems when he left for the 
un
ited States in 1912. Settling down in new Y ork a few years later, he 
quickly became a forceful presence in the city’s radical cultural and po-
lit
ical scene, and particularly in what would later be called the harlem 
renaissance. a member of the industrial Workers of the World and 
coeditor of The Liberator, he was also well known as a poet.
 in P
aris in the 1930s he was something of a liaison between the 
harlem poets, the Martinican nardal sisters (who published his poems 
in their Revue du Monde Noir), and other po ets from africa and the Carib-
bean
. his poetry was much admired, but it was his explosive 1929 novel 
Banjo: A Story without a Plot, that made everybody sit up and take notice. 
a r
ealistic novel of blues-loving working-class black dockworkers, 
largely set in Marseilles, the book was as much a scandal to the “respect-
able” as it was a joy and revelation to young black radicals looking for 
answers. Banjo was a decisive inspiration for Césaire, Damas, and Sen-
ghor. (
interviewed by Senegalese scholar lilyan Kesteloot in the 1960s, 
all three were still able to “cite entire chapters” of the book.) Most sig-
nificantly, in regard to surrealism, the journal Légitime Défense—as an act 
of defiance—published a long excerpt from the book, reprinted here.
doWn to the root S
“i believe in a racial renaissance,” said the student, “but not in going back to 
savagery.”
 “Getting down to our native roots and building up from our own people,” 
said ray, “is not savagery. it is culture.”
 “i can’t see that,” said the student.
 “Y ou are like many negro intellectuals who are bellyaching about race,” said 
ray. “What’s wrong with you-all is your education. Y ou get a white man’s educa-
tion and learn to despise your own people. Y ou read biased history of the whites 
conquering the colored and primitive peoples, and it thrills you just as it does 
a white boy belonging to a great white nation.


--- PAGE 76 ---
The First Black Surrealists 55
 “Then when you come to maturity you realize with a shock that you don’t 
and can’t belong to the white race. all your education and achievements cannot 
put you in the intimate circles of the whites and give you a white man’s full op-
por
tunity. however advanced, clever, and cultivated you are, you will have the 
distinguishing adjective of colored before your name. and instead of accepting 
it proudly and manfully, most of you are soured and bitter about it, especially 
you mixed-bloods.
 “Y
ou’re a lost crowd, you educated negroes, and you will only find yourself 
in the roots of your own people. Y ou can’t choose as your models the haughty-
minded educated white youths of a society living solid on its imperial con-
quests. Such pampered youths can afford to despise the sweating white brutes 
of the lower orders.
 “if y
ou were sincere in your feelings about racial advancement, you would 
turn for example to whites of a different type. Y ou would study the irish cultural 
and social movement. Y ou would turn your back on all these tiresome clever 
european 
novels and read about the russian peasants, the story and struggle 
of their lowly, patient, hard-driven life, and the great russian novelists who de-
scrib
ed it up to the time of the russian revolution. Y ou would learn all you can 
about Gandhi and what he is doing for the common hordes of india. Y ou would 
be interested in the native african dialects and, though you don’t understand, 
be humble before their simple beauty instead of despising them.”
 The 
mulatto student was not moved in his determination not to go to the 
african Bar, and so ray went alone.
c u B a
Juan Breá
More or less simultaneously the havana-born Juan Breá (1905–1941) 
was an important figure in the 1933 Cuban revolution, cofounder of the 
Cuban Trotskyist organization, and a major player in the island’s first 
surr
ealist-oriented cultural current, the h-Group. in Paris in 1933 he met 
Mary low, an english-born poet of australian parents, and the couple


--- PAGE 77 ---
56 Black, Brown, & Beige
soon joined the Surrealist Group. During the next eight years they were 
international surrealism’s most notable nomads, active in the Surrealist 
Groups of P
aris, Brussels, Bucharest, and Prague. in 1936 the indomitable 
pair went to Spain to fight for the revolution as members of the workers’ 
militia and also aided the cause with radio broadcasts and by editing the 
en
glish-language paper Spanish Revolution. Their record of that struggle, 
Red Spanish Notebook (1937), was praised b y George orwell and is con-
sidered a classic. Their chapbook of poems, La saison des flûtes, appeared 
under the Éditions Surréalistes imprint in 1938, and a collection of their 
theoretical essays and lectures on surrealism and politics, La verdad con-
temporánea, was published in 
 havana in 1943.
my life iS a Sunday
My life is a Sunday,
a Sunday when one doesn’t work
or play,
when one is merely tired.
a Sunda
y just as stupid
and as strange
as a statue of Jesus walking on the sea.
i still have
a little lustful horse-power left,
and ten calories in my heart—
in this heart that dreams
of a soft, sweet, cowardly death,
like all those who haven’t the courage to meet it face to face.
he 
who has not enough courage to live on the edge of the law
has always enough cowardice to live
on the other side of life.
alr
eady the heat is going away
in the short skirts it wears on summer nights;
but i
 don’t want to die in winter—
not because it would be very cold,
but because it would be very soon.
o the sweet co
wardice of dying
just a little!


--- PAGE 78 ---
The First Black Surrealists 57
in every afternoon that rains,
in every love that ends,
T o die a little, in every being and in every thing.
La saison des flûtes (1937); translated by Mary low
thought S
The only sacrifice of individual freedom that society has a right to demand
of the individual is courtesy.
* *
 *
Throughout written history, all the prejudices that accompany thought—
be it scientific, political, or philosophical—are the same as private
property: an original sin that has merely been altered.
* *
 *
in the final analysis, the concept of quality is nothing but the
divinization of human behavior at the expense of the broad dehumanization 
of
other behaviors. What is deemed great and what is deemed small in no way
implies goodness or badness: the first is a size, the second a bias.
* *
 *
Civilization, culture, progress. These are no more than the written history
of manual labor.
* *
 *
laws are no more than the portion of the truth that suits us.
* * *
The age-old error of philosophy—the error that explains its only reason
for being—consists of having taken as absolute or eternal a relative or
temporal truth: the existence of private property, the expression of a type
of production and mother of all the philosophical “isms”: unanism, dualism,
egotism, etc.


--- PAGE 79 ---
58 Black, Brown, & Beige
* * *
Poetry is above all a great premonition, hence, its supernatural tone. When
this poetic value begins to be or ends up being understood by everyone, the
poem loses its very essence: its prophetic power. Poetry ends when it stops
being a hypothesis; from then on its life consists precisely of that lapse
in hypothetical reality; and finally, truth transforms it either into an
axiom or into the absurd.
all from La saison des flûtes (1937); t ranslated by Myrna Bell rochester
Juan Breá and Mary Low
note S on the economic cauSeS of humor
But first, what is humor, in general? n o one up till now has been capable of 
replying satisfactorily to this question. But if we cannot offer a concrete defini-
tion, why not try for an impression of what humor is? This is the modest preten-
sion that has brought us to write these lines.
 o ne aspect of this sentiment is a certain sense of judgment, a critical ten-
dency which humor expresses more or less openly. We might define its general 
function as a regulator between the exaggerated and the average, between the 
ideal and 
the everyday. humor would therefore be the psychological expres-
sion of the essential reality of a specific epoch or people.
 r educed 
to its simplest terms, we see that humor has a vital critical func-
tion. in its best form, and apparently its most disinterested form—the non-
tendentious joke—it seems rather like a spontaneous judgment, disinterested 
and without reservations. This kind of joke, devoid of personal motives, resent-
ment, or envy, resembles a critical judgment motivated by a noble and natural 
manifestation of the spirit of justice.
 Deve
loping its role as critic, humor exercises a constructive influence. as a 
form of criticism, it is a creative activity; its nature is to restrict and comment, 
and in this there is a humanizing factor. Why is there laughter when the fat 
and self-important Colonel slips on a banana-peel in the street? and why don’t 
we laugh when a working-girl opens a torn umbrella? humor embodies an 
equalizing influence, and in this—as in its unconscious rebellion—it reveals its 
revolutionary role.
La verdad contemporánea (1943); translated by Mary low


--- PAGE 80 ---
t r i n i d a d
C. L. R. James
“renaissance man” though he was, James (1901–1989) somehow never 
got around to participating in surrealism, and indeed, despite the inter-
ests he and the surr
ealists shared—hegel, Marx, Melville, Freud, Wilson 
harris, poetry, anti-imperialism, and social revolution, to name a few—
he does not seem to have made a special study of the movement’s aims, 
pri
nciples, and achievements. however, as a revolutionary interested in 
culture, he inevitably encountered people active in surrealism, such as 
Pi
erre naville in 1930s Paris (a decade later naville translated James’ The 
Black Jacobins in to French), and andré Breton in 1938 in Mexico, where 
Breton, James, and Diego rivera cofounded the international Federation 
of independent revolutionary art (Fédération internationale de l’art 
revolutionnaire independent, Fiari). These were mostly fugitive meet-
ings in any case, and surrealism was rarely the main topic of discussion.
 a
s it happens, James’ closest direct link to surrealism in those years 
was his short introduction to the book Red Spanish Notebook, a firsthand 
account b
y two young surrealists, Juan Breá and Mary low, published in 
london in 1937.
 i n later years, it is true (from the mid-1960s on), many individuals 
associated with the international surrealist movement—including Ted 
Jo
ans, Jayne Cortez, Paul Buhle, David roediger, Dale T omich, and 
Franklin rosemont—met or corresponded with James and sometimes 
brought up the subject of surrealism. Significantly, James’ 1962 appendix 
to The Black Jacobins devotes sev
 eral beautiful pages to aimé Césaire’s 
Return to My Native Land, excerpted here from Red Spanish Notebook. a nd in 
the 1980s he contributed a number of articles to Paul Buhle’s surrealist-
oriented Cultural Correspondence and to Free Spirits: Annals of the Insurgent 
Imagination.
introduction to red Spani Sh note Book
When the bourgeois parties with this powerful aid had strangled the first phase 
of the socialist revolution, Breá and Mary low left Barcelona. and yet this is 
not a depressing book. Far from it. Catalonia leads Spain, and for some few 
months at least the workers and peasants of Catalonia, politically inexperi-


--- PAGE 81 ---
60 Black, Brown, & Beige
enced, thought that the new world had come. The flame has been lit and Fas-
cism can pour on it the blood of thousands of workers, can stamp upon it, and 
even stifle it for a time. But it will burn underground, is imperishable, and will 
blaze again. For Breá and Mary low, despite their eye for picturesque per-
sonalities, are proletarian revolutionaries, and their little book shows us the 
awakening of a people.
 The bootblack who good-humoredly but firmly refuses a tip, showing his 
union-card; the peasant who will not be kept waiting as of old because equality 
exists now; the hundreds of women stealing away from their husbands to join 
the women’s militia and attend Marxist classes, throwing off the degrading sub-
servience of centuries and grasping with both hands at the new life: They will 
conquer. They must. if not today, then tomorrow, by whatever tortuous and 
broken roads, despite the stumblings and the falls. There is no room for the 
democratic republic in Spain today. either Spain must go back to a nightmare 
of reaction infinitely worse than the old feudalism, or on to the social revolu-
tion. and the guarantee of their victory is that for the eager thousands who 
march through these pages, smashing up the old and tumultuously beginning 
the new, workers’ power emerged half-way from books, became something that 
they could touch and see, a concrete alternative to the old slavery.


--- PAGE 82 ---
2. Tropiques: Surrealism  
in the Caribbean
cuBa, martinique, haiti, dominican repu Blic, 
trinidad, puerto rico
everywhere—in new Y ork, in Brazil, in Mexico, in argentina, in Cuba, 
in Canada, in algiers—voices echo that would not be what they are . . . 
without surrealism.
—Suzanne Césaire
martinique
Did you know that Martinique fully qualifies as one of the vital centers of the 
surrealist universe? it is not exactly common knowledge, but in the eighty-
odd-year history of surrealism, this tiny volcanic island has played—again and 
again—a hugely volcanic role. etienne léro and his Légitime Défense comrades 
were Martinicans one and all, and although most of them settled in Paris, it is 
obvious from their writings that their homeland remained very much in their 
hearts and minds. in 1939 appeared one of the greatest, most volcanic, and 
most internationally celebrated surrealist poems: aimé Césaire’s Return to My 
Native Land, largely inspired by the island. andré Breton himself, deeply moved 
by his three-week visit with Suzanne and aimé Césaire in the spring of 1941, 
wrote one of the most beautiful and enchanting surrealist books of the 1940s—
Martinique: Snake Charmer,  supplemented with texts and illustrations by andré 
Masson.
 especially impressive was the indigenous surrealist activity in Martinique 
during the Second World War. in 1941, nine years after Légitime Défense appeared, 
Martinicans Suzanne and aimé Césaire, together with former Légitime Défense 
collaborator rené Ménil, began publication of a new periodical—T ropiques—on 
the island itself.1
 a shoestring operation from start to finish, T ropiques was initially presented as 
a modest and eclectic journal of culture. From its third issue on, however, it was 
unequivocally surrealist. indeed, andré Breton and others regarded T ropiques 
as the movement’s best, most exciting, and most relevant vehicle during the 
war years. nazi invasion had made it impossible for the Surrealist Groups in 
Paris, Prague, Bucharest, Brussels, and Copenhagen to function openly, and


--- PAGE 83 ---
62 Black, Brown, & Beige
most european surrealists sought refuge in new Y ork, london, havana, Buenos 
aires, or Mexico.
 For five long years, then, 1941–1945, Fort-de-France—the capital of Mar-
tinique—was recognized as one of the liveliest points on the world surrealist 
map. as the Greek surrealist nicolas Calas noted in View magazine (octo ber–
november issue) in new Y ork in 1941:
When the detestable writings of so many famous authors of our day 
will have been forgotten and when critics and poets will begin to look 
for the creative writing of the war period, they will then dig out and 
reprint, with all the honors due to them, the early numbers of T ropiques. 
i kn
ow of no review which can boast of the high quality of this small 
quarterly French review of Martinique. The fact that such a review can 
be published is enough to put to shame those artists and poets who 
today feel discouraged and abandon all struggle, either because the 
public is not interested in their work, or because they are afraid of the 
poli
tical consequences of their efforts. it is difficult to imagine that 
conditions anywhere outside nazi-dominated europe could be worse 
than they are in the vichy colony of Martinique; as to the cultural 
conditions of a colony that France has always neglected, from all one 
hears they 
are abominable. Y et, aristide Maugée does not hesitate to 
defend in T ropiques the case of obscurity in poetry, in an article which 
we hope som
e day to see published in english. rené Ménil writes about 
“Directions in Poetry,” a most inspired and inspiring article, while aimé 
Césaire published a fragment of an admirable poem.
 a striking fact about the T ropiques Group—rarely noted in the critical litera-
ture—is that nearly all of its adherents, including the Césaires, were of working-
class background. indeed, most of them—again including the Césaires—were 
employed as schoolteachers. Their work on T ropiques was a spare-time volunteer 
activity, and very much a labor of love.
 The 
journal’s increasingly surrealist character was doubtless influenced by 
the visits to the island by Breton, his wife, Jacqueline, and the painters andré 
Masson and Wifredo lam. its surrealist inclinations, however, were evident 
from the beginning. The debut issue—the one Breton found by chance at the 
Fort-de-France variety store—already radiated a surrealist sensibility and a sur-
realist 
tone, in aimé Césaire’s two-and-a-half-page “Presentation,” for example, 
and rené Ménil’s “Birth of our art.”
 That sensibility and tone were sustained and amplified in issue after issue, 
for five years. Sad to say, we know next to nothing about the T ropiques Group’s 
internal workings—its meetings, for example. We do not even know how often


--- PAGE 84 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 63
the group met, or where, or how many attended. everything leads us to believe, 
however, that these were lively occasions for discussion and debate—full of 
ideas, criticism, creativity, humor, inspiration, and play. looking through the 
journal itself and noting its broad range of topics and lack of repetition, it is 
clear that the T ropiques writers, each in his or her own way, gladly and boldly 
took up the defense and illustration of surrealism’s emancipatory project.
 Suzanne Césaire’s texts are particularly outstanding in this regard—not only 
her deeply moving commentary on andré Breton’s poetry, but also her hard-
hitting critique of Martinique’s bourgeois literature, and above all her “1943: 
Surrealism and us,” a veritable manifesto on surrealism in the service of inter-
nat
ional black revolution. a brilliant writer with a strong grasp of theory and 
an audacious imagination, Suzanne Césaire was one of the major surrealist 
thinkers and dreamers of her time.2 her assessment of leo Frobenius’ work on 
africa is likely to strike current-day readers as overly generous, but in truth it 
reflects the paucity of sources available in those days, and in any case repre-
sents a view shared by more than a few others at that time. Decades later, in-
deed, readers—especially young readers looking for answers—continue to be 
thrilled by Suzanne Césaire’s still-up-to-the-minute revolutionary insights and 
exhortations.
 a imé Césaire’s wonderful poems—featured in almost every issue of 
T ropiques—are enhanced and expanded by his trenchant surrealist essays: on 
po
etry and knowledge, on african american poetry, and on lautréamont. 
rené Ménil’s many contributions—his “introduction to the Marvelous,” for ex-
ample, and his essay on humor, in which he notes the affinities between Duke 
ellington’s music and Benjamin Péret’s surrealist tales—added appreciably to 
the movement’s already incredibly wide-ranging perspectives.
 and so it was with the others involved in T ropiques: Georgette a
 nderson on 
the Marvelous; aristide Maugée on the practice of poetry; Georges Gratiant 
on dreams; and S. Jean-alexis on chance: each and all were determined to do 
their part to illuminate aspects of surrealism’s ongoing quest, and thereby to 
illuminate the actuality of surrealist revolution in Caribbean life.
 T ropiques made no secret of its surrealism, and its editors and writers were 
passionately internationalist. But it is also important to emphasize that its sur-
realism 
was decidedly Martinican. its Martinique-centeredness was in fact one 
of its most glorious features. in the midst of a world war, with much of europe 
overrun by fascism and in utter disarray, here was an inspired group on a tiny 
island in the Caribbean, bravely upholding life’s true priorities: poetry, free-
dom, and the Marvelous.
 Far from being an import, therefore, the surrealism of T ropiques was plainly 
an indigenous cultural eruption. The journal’s fourteen issues include a total of


--- PAGE 85 ---
64 Black, Brown, & Beige
seventeen texts by surrealists from other lands: Breton, Pierre Mabille, Jeanne 
Megnen, and Charles Duits from France; the romanian victor Brauner; and 
the Chilean poet Jorge Cáceres. The great majority of the content, however—
well over sixty texts—was authored by the T ropiques group: the Césaires, Mé-
ni
l, lucie Thésée, aristide Maugée, Georges Gratiant, and Georgette ander-
son. The journal also featured many reprints: several texts by and about the 
nineteenth-century French abolitionist victor Schoelcher; excerpts from lau-
tréamont, villiers de l’isle-adam, Mallarmé, and lafcadio hearn; a tale by lydia 
Cabrera; and some scholarly essays on Martinican flora, fauna, and folklore. a 
two-page presentation of surrealist games, a collective project, was a highlight 
of the fifth issue.
 The 
reciprocal influences of andré Breton and aimé Césaire have been ex-
haustively debated by critics, and there is no reason to reopen the debate here 
except to note that, in the heat of argument, the reciprocity has been too often 
overlooked.3 it is obvious and beyond argument that Breton’s impact on the Cé-
saires was significant and lasting, as they readily and repeatedly acknowledged, 
but it is also evident that the impact of the Césaires—aimé’s and Suzanne’s—on 
Breton was (as he acknowledged) at least as great, and in certain respects even 
greater.
 For 
Breton, and by extension for other european surrealists, his encounter 
with the Césaires and their friends was a profound educational experience. The 
author of The Communicating V essels n o doubt had learned much from etienne 
léro and others in the légitime Défense Group about the “negro Question” 
(as it was then called in leftist circles) and, more generally, about “life in the 
coloni
es.” his sojourn in Martinique, however, involved the direct and intense 
experience of a black community and its repressive colonial context. after dis-
embarking, he was immediately put in a concentration camp, and throughout 
his stay on the island he was under constant police surveillance. one vichy 
official even warned him that Martinique had no need for surrealism!
 Thanks to the comradeliness and hospitality of the T ropiques Group, with 
whom he enjoyed many long walks and discussions—supplemented by serious 
study on his own (he is known to have read, while in Martinique, a two-volume 
economic history of the island)—andré Breton’s awareness of black history, 
politics, and culture expanded immeasurably.
 although it has received almost no attention from critics, one of the many 
consequences of Breton’s 1941 visit to Martinique had an immediate practical 
effect: in the surrealist spirit of mutual aid, he introduced the Césaires and their 
fri
ends to the international surrealist network. Prior to Breton’s visit, aimé Cé-
saire had bemoaned the fact that Martinique was completely cut off from the 
world. T ropiques at first had a small, almost entirely local circulation, with little


--- PAGE 86 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 65
prospect of expansion. Breton changed that. Soon, the poetry of aimé Césaire, 
writings by Suzanne Césaire, reproductions of works by Wifredo lam, and 
significant notices of T ropiques began to appear in surrealist publications in such 
farawa
y places as new Y ork, london, Santiago de Chile, havana, Cairo, and 
eventually in many other surrealist outposts.
 a s T ropiques became more surrealist, surrealism in effect became more 
black.
 although the Martinique Group, as such, broke up after 1945, its five years 
of activity left strong traces on the history of the island, on Francophone litera-
ture, and on the history of surrealism. later generations of creative Martinicans 
have drawn of course, in various ways, on this rich tradition. Those who, with-
out having actually taken an active part in the surrealist movement, nonetheless 
have shared some of the mood and spirit of T ropiques, include a imé Césaire’s 
brilliant student, Frantz Fanon, poet, critic, and theorist Édouard Glissant, and 
filmmaker euzhan Palcy, to whom we owe the admirable documentary Aimé Cé-
saire: A V oice for History.
haiti
The greatest effects are often caused by the smallest causes.
—lautréamont
The world’s first black republic—independent since 1804—has played a con-
siderable 
role in the history of surrealism. although plagued by a succession 
of dictators and numerous military coups, including a couple of uninvited and 
extended u.S
. occupations, the second-largest island in the Caribbean has re-
tained its just renown as a vibrant, passionate, freedom-loving land, celebrated 
for its art, poetry, music, and dance.
 andré Breton regarded haiti as one of those “privileged places” that are 
at once “a permanent temptation” and a “resting-place for poetic thought.”4 
his 1945 visit there, however, allowed him little time for rest. his modest yet 
significant role in bringing down the dictatorship was surely a mighty event 
for all who happened to be on the scene. a French journalist asked him in an 
interview: “it appears that you played a role in the haitian revolution. Could 
you comment on precisely what took place there?” and Breton replied:
let us exaggerate nothing. T oward the end of 1945, the poverty—and 
therefore the patience—of the haitian people had reached their limit. 
Bear in mind that, on the large island of Gonova on the haitian coast, 
men received less than an american cent for a full day’s work. even the


--- PAGE 87 ---
66 Black, Brown, & Beige
more conservative newspapers readily acknowledged that children on 
the outskirts of Port-au-Prince lived on tadpoles scooped from sewers.
 The si
tuation is all the more poignant in view of the fact that the 
haitian spirit, more than any other, miraculously continues to draw its 
strength from the French revolution, and that haitian history shows us 
some of humankind’s most moving struggles to abolish slavery and to 
attain freedom.
 i n an i
nitial lecture on “Surrealism and haiti” i tried—not only for 
clarity’s sake, but also out of deference to the underlying spirit of the 
island’s history—to align surrealism’s aims with the centuries-old goals 
of the hai
tian peasantry. in conclusion, i felt obliged to condemn “the 
imperialism that the war’s end not by any means averted, as well as 
the ruthlessly maintained game of cat and mouse between proclaimed 
ideals and endless egotisms,” and to reaffirm my trust in the motto on 
the hai
tian flag: “union Makes us Strong.” The newspaper La Ruche 
[The hive], the voice of the younger generation, which dedicated the 
next day’s issue to me, declared my words electrifying, and decided to 
adopt an insurrectionary tone. The paper’s immediate confiscation and 
suspension led to a student strike, followed within forty-eight hours by 
a general str
ike. a few days later, the government was held hostage. [in 
the turmoil, dictator lescot fled the island—ed.] unions were being 
organized everywhere, and free elections were promised. even without 
yet knowing the final results—for the outcome of the haitian revolu-
ti
on has been heatedly debated—i would add that i expect real benefit 
to come of it, particularly since the learned ethnologist, Dr. Price-
Mars—one of the most respected men, intellectually and morally—has 
been elected to a key post in the new government.5
 i n the course of his meetings with rené Bélance, rené Dépestre, Paul 
laraque, and others, Breton discovered that haiti’s young poets not only were 
generally receptive to surrealism, but to a large extent had already received it 
and made 
it their own. Jacqueline leiner, in her entry on haiti in the Dictionnaire 
general du surréalisme, m entions rené Philoctete, Francketienne, anthony Phelps, 
Jacqueline Bauge, Jean-richard laforest, “and others” in this regard.6
 n
one of these poets, however, with the partial and very brief exceptions of 
Bélance, Dépestre, and laraque, ever involved themselves in surrealism as an 
organized movement. Few of them, in any case, seemed to agree with any of the 
others on important matters, and the island’s political chaos exacerbated their 
disagreements. Several, for example—notably Dépestre and laraque—opted 
for Stalinism, at least for a time.


--- PAGE 88 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 67
 T wo major developments for surrealism did occur in haiti during the im-
mediate postwar years. in poetic matters the big news was the surrealists’ dis-
cov
ery of Clément Magloire-Saint-aude, who was promptly hailed by Breton 
and the Surrealist Group as one of the greatest surrealist poets.7
 and in painting, the big news was hector hyppolite, a self-taught artist 
immersed in the lore of vodun, whose works were prominently featured at the 
194
7 international Surrealist exhibition in Paris.8
 l a
ter haitian participants in surrealism include the painter and poet hervé 
Télémaque, active in the Paris group in the 1960s, and the poet Gérard Janvier, 
in Chicago.
dominican repu Blic
in the Dominican republic during the 1940s, the group around the periodical 
La Poesía Sorprendida (Surprising poetry) included several individuals who were 
stron
gly oriented toward surrealism. in truth, La Poesía Sorprendida was probably 
as close as one could get to a surrealist publication under a regime such as Tru-
ji
llo’s. exemplifying the importance of this small but passionate and persistent 
group, alberto Baeza Flores, in his authoritative 748-page La poesía dominicana en 
el siglo XX, devotes 217 pages to La Poesía Sorprendida and its contributors.9
 r ecept
ive to diverse currents of poetry, and opposed to all orthodoxy, the 
group was emphatically international minded and published numerous trans-
lat
ions from French, english, German, Catalan, egyptian, and Chinese. espe-
cially prolific 
were translations of surrealist poems: from the French of artaud, 
Baron, Breton, Crevel, Desnos, Magloire-Saint-aude, and Mesens; from the 
english of T oni del renzio; and from the Turkish of Feyyez Fergar, who for a 
time was associated with the Surrealist Group in london. La Poesía Sorprendida 
maintained particularly close relations with Jorge Cáceres and the Surrealist 
Group in Santiago de Chile.
 Poets from foreign lands were always welcome. Surrealist painter and writer 
eugenio Fernández Granell, a refugee from Francoist Spain, served for four 
years as one of the periodical’s directors and editors. a refugee from nazi Ger-
many, erwin Walter Palm, from Frankfort, was well known as the German trans-
lator of Federico García lorca. in 1946 andré Breton’s visit concluded with a 
big La Poesía Sorprendida celebration at Granell’s home.
 Multicult
ural long before the term was coined, La Poesía Sorprendida was also 
resolute
ly multiracial. Several of its “militants” were of african descent, includ-
in
g aída Cartagena Portalatín, Manuel llanes, Manuel valerio, and J. M. Glass 
Mejía, who also happen to have been among the group’s most zealous champi-
ons of surrealism.


--- PAGE 89 ---
This portrait sketch of Clément Magloire-Saint-aude by Milo rigaud appears on 
the cover of Magloire-Saint-aude’s V eillée.


--- PAGE 90 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 69
 not surprisingly, the group led a precarious existence. While upholders 
of the oppressive dictatorship suspected the group of harboring “intolerable 
rebels,” Stalinists denounced it as “bourgeois,” “an evasion of Dominican reality,” 
and even—shockingly!—“transcendentalist evasion.”
 Between october 1943 and May 1947, sixteen issues of La Poesía Sorprendida 
were 
published. andré Breton hailed the “noble quality” of this modest publi-
cation, which, in exceptionally grim and difficult conditions, defiantly kept the 
promise of poetry “alive and kicking.”
puerto rico
Despite a rich heritage of anarchism, syndicalism, feminism, and other revo-
lutionary currents—and a rich poetic tradition as well—surrealism in Puerto 
rico has been sporadic.
 The Spanish surrealist painter eugenio F. Granell, a refugee from Franco’s 
fascism and from Stalinism in Guatemala, settled in Puerto rico in 1950. Wel-
comed 
as professor of art and painting to the faculty of the university in río 
Piedras, he met many colleagues in exile, including Juan ramón Jiménez, and 
Federico de onís, Manuel García Pelaya, and collaborated on the magazine 
Universidad. During his eight years on the island, Granell met many young 
Puerto rican painters and writers, several of whom shared his deep commit-
ment to surrealism. T ogether, in mid-decade, they formed a surrealist group 
called el Mirador azul (the blue bay window), which organized a large and 
important exhibition in 1956, as well as several smaller solo shows. The group, 
however, had only a brief existence. When Granell departed for new Y ork in 
1957, organized surrealism in Puerto rico virtually disintegrated.
 The best known of the Mirador azul surrealists was luis a. Maisonet, a 
painter and art teacher whose instructors’ manual, Art for Elementary School, was 
for many years the standard work on the subject throughout the island.10
 i n 
the early 1990s a young Puerto rican poet, collagist, and photographer, 
Daniel del valle hernández, started a surrealist bulletin, Lagarto V erde (Green 
lizard). F
ive issues appeared, along with a couple of chapbooks of poems. inter-
estingly, Lagarto V erde’s only collaborator was the British writer louise Cripps, 
who was then living on the island. Cripps, who had been a close friend and co-
worker 
of C.l.r. James’ during the 1930s, was the author of more than a dozen 
books, including a study of James’ life and work and several on Puerto rico and 
its struggle for independence.11


--- PAGE 91 ---
ink drawing (1970s) by Cuban american artist Jacinto Minot.


--- PAGE 92 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 71
trinidad
one of the more deplorable afflictions of large countries, and especially those 
that consider themselves “superpowers,” is their ignorance of, and indifference 
to, the histories and cultures of “small” countries and islands. Such ignorance 
and indifference is evident not only among the general population, but also, 
and more glaringly, among the ruling elite, including the “intelligentsia.”
 Those whose “knowledge” of Trinidad is limited to exotic tourist propa-
ganda are only cheating themselves, for the island has a fabulous history. in-
deed, Trinidad is particularly interesting for its long and valorous political and 
cultural resistance to oppression. From the 1881 amboulay riots—a pitched 
battle between police and Carnival masqueraders involving entire communi-
ties—to the General Strike of 1970, a veritable insurrection against capitalism 
and the state, the working people of this small island have again and again 
offered the world object lessons in mass direct action and collective defiance 
of the status quo. anyone interested in mass uprisings and other forms of social 
upheaval would do well to study these historic events.
 Doubtless 
in large part precisely because of this heritage of radicalism and 
internationalism, Trinidad is also renowned for its rich intellectual tradition: 
“That Trinidad has produced a disproportionate number of unusual men [and 
This drawing from the surrealist journal Arsenal (vol. 4 [1989]) is a good example 
of Jacinto Minot’s humorous style.


--- PAGE 93 ---
72 Black, Brown, & Beige
women, we might add—ed.] is a truism; that so many of them have been for-
gotten 
is a scandal.” Thus spake J. r. hooker, biographer of the great Trinida-
dian Sylv
ester Williams, “the Father of Pan-africanism.”12
 The list is i
ndeed impressive, including, among many others, the following:
Maxwell Philip, attorney and novelist, whose Emmanuel Appadocca, or, Blighted 
Life: A T ale of the Buccaneers, was provoked in large part by the passage of 
the 1851 Fug
itive Slave law in the united States;
eugene Chen, who served as minister of foreign affairs in Sun-Yat-Sen’s 
government in China;
no
velist vidia naipaul;
ornithologist antoine leotaud;
elma François, a leader of the negro Welfare association, and an impor-
tant fig
ure in the 1937 General Strike and insurrection;
George Weekes, the island’s major independent radical labor leader from 
the 1960s through the 1980s;
George P
admore, Pan-africanist and prolific writer;
Marxist theorist and journalist Claudia Jones;
eric 
Williams, historian and premier;
oliver Cromwell Cox, whose Caste, Class and Race has long been recog-
nized as a Marxist classic;
Susan Craig, historian, author of Smiles and Blood: The Ruling Class Response to 
the W orkers’ Rebellion in T rinidad and T obago;
and on and on
, into the night.
 also in this grand tradition are the four Trinidadians represented in this 
section:
John Jacob Thomas, a nineteenth-century forerunner whose work antici-
pated the surrealist exploration of folklore and, more generally, popular 
culture;
C.l
.r. James, the great Marxist thinker who prefaced the Red Spanish 
Notebook by Juan Breá and Mary lo w, associated with surrealists in the 
Fiari, and later wrote movingly on the poetry of aimé Césaire;
John la rose, poet, bookseller, and activist, who always recognized sur-
realism as a significant force in radical social and cultural change and 
was a longtime friend of the Chicago Surrealist Group;
an
thony Joseph, author of two volumes of poetry, Desafinado and T era-
gaton, poet, theorist, activist, teacher, a longtime friend of Ted Joans. 
Josep
h—currently active in the Surrealist Group in london—is one of 
the quickening forces in international surrealism today.


--- PAGE 94 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 73
Notes
 1. “interview with aimé Césaire,” by Jacqueline leiner, introduction to the 
two-volume Éditions Jean-Michel Place reprint of T ropiques (Paris, 1978).
 2.
 For further details on Suzanne Césaire, and a selection of her writings, 
see Penelope rosemont, Surrealist W omen, 126–137.
 3.
 robin D. G. Kelley, Freedom Dreams, 166–170.
 4. “in
terview with rené Bélance” and “Speech to Y oung haitian Poets,” in 
Breton, What Is Surrealism?, 335–342.
 5.
 Breton, “interview with Jean Duché, Entrétiens, 343–347.
 6.
 Jacqueline leiner, “haiti,” in Biro and Passeron, Dictionnaire, 198.
 7.
 Breton’s tribute to Magloire-Saint-aude is included in his La clé des 
champs, 131–132. See also François lep erlier, “la solution poétique.”
 8. Breton, “hector hyppolite,” in Surrealism and Painting, 308–312.
 9.
 For the chapters on La Poesía Sorprendida and “suprarealismo,” see 441–748. 
Breton’s praise of La Poesía Sorprendida is noted i
 n e. F. Granell, “la aven-
tura sur
realista en las antiles,” 95–100.
 10. Thanks to natalia Fernández Segarra for details on luis Maisonet and 
surrealism in Puerto rico in the 1950s.
 11. louise Cripps’ work includes Puerto Rico and C.L.R. James.
 12.
 on Trinidad, we have relied chiefly on conversations with John la rose 
in london, 1970; correspondence with anthony Joseph in the 2000s; 
and on the following printed sources: the two introductions to the new 
Beacon reprint of John Jacob Thomas’ Froudacity (Donald Wood’s bio-
grap
hical sketch and C.l.r. James’ essay “The West indian intellectual”); 
James Millette’s essay, “The Black revolution in the Caribbean”; and 
scattered issues of Millette’s newspaper, Moko.


--- PAGE 95 ---
m a r t i n i q u e
Aimé Césaire
panorama
This land is suffering from a repressed revolution. our revolution has been 
stolen from us.
 The worst mistake would be to believe that the West indies devoid of strong 
political parties are devoid of powerful will. We know very well what we want.
 l
iberty, dignity, justice, Christmas torched.
 What has the youth been offered during these last fifty years? Positions. 
Trades. Words. nothing. not one idea.
 i f the great and healthy anger of the people does not (as it did a century ago) 
stand in its way, we will march straight ahead to the logical conclusion of three 
centuries of Caribbean history: the triumph of total flunkeyism.
 When the essential problems (the weight of facts) discourage the mind’s 
elation, a society is at a pre-revolutionary stage.
 The Martiniquan revolution will be made in the name of bread, of course; 
but also in the name of fresh air and poetry (which comes to the same thing).
 i
 tell you we are choking.
 The principle of a healthy Caribbean politics: open the windows. More air. 
More air.
 Thus 
i condemn any idea of Caribbean independence.
 . . . But this is not in order to bark with the dogs.
 . . . But this is not so as to cast my pearls before swine. Martiniquan depen-
dency—willed, calculated, reasoned as much as sentimental—will be neither 
dis-grace nor sub-grace.
 i  only know one France. That of the revolution. That of T oussaint 
l’ouverture. T oo bad for the gothic cathedral.
 We want to be able to live passionately.
 and in the last resort the resolution will come from the blood of this land. 
and this blood has its tolerances and its intolerances, its patiences and its im-
patiences, its resignations and its brutalities, its whims and its forbearances, its 
stillnesses and its tempests, its calms and its whirlwinds.
 a
nd this is what, in the end, will act.


--- PAGE 96 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 75
 This kind of blood doesn’t cast votes.
 This kind of blood reinvigorates or strangles.
T ropiques, no. 1 (april 1941); translated by alex Wilder
introduction to Black american poetry
We recognize man by his cry. By the cry that is life’s eldest son, or rather life 
itself embodied without any let-up, without wavering, in the immediacy of the 
voice i
n a free and unforeseen movement. here is the black poet crying out:
We cry among the skyscrapers
as our 
ancestors
Cried among the african palm trees,
For we are alone
and we ar
e afraid.
 i t means that the primary feeling of the black poet is a feeling of uneasiness, 
better yet, of intolerance. intolerance of the real because it is sordid; of the 
world because it holds him caged up; of life because he is robbed of it on the 
highway of the sun:
 “i sp
eak in the name of the black millions.”
 and against the harsh background of anguish, of returning disgrace, of de-
spair long unvoiced, a rage rises and shrieks here, and america, on the bed 
unhinged by its conformities, is anxious to know of what atrocious hatred this 
cry is the deliverance:
 “i sp
eak in the name of the black millions.”
 The black waiting room has risen. all that was here of humanity suffering 
in the slums of harlem, the cornfields of Maryland, the cotton plantations of 
the Carolinas. and helter-skelter they file by, men, women, and children, and 
the stubborn dirt of wretchedness and hunger clings to their ankles. There 
are those who belong to the chain gang, there are the embittered, the opti-
mists, the resourceful, the fools, those who come from Mississippi, from new 
orleans, and from atlanta; musicians with their syncopated rhythms, bare-
foot urchins, prostitutes with their rouge-embellished chocolate complexion, 
epileptic trombone players, jazz musicians who throw their drumsticks at the 
moon. 
an entire horde passes, cries, sings, gesticulates, and dies.
 another humility of the black poet is equally precious to us, that of fidelity. 
how many opportunities to escape! he has been given access to the civilized 
world with a thousand exits, and these exits are called science, morality, culture. 
he refuses them all. and he accepts religion itself only when it is demoted from


--- PAGE 97 ---
76 Black, Brown, & Beige
the rank of subject to the rank of attribute: an attribute of the only subject 
around which the world henceforth gravitates: mankind.
 he makes a hero of the ordinary black man, the everyday black man, about 
whom an entire literature has set itself the task to unearth the grotesque or the 
exotic; he depicts him seriously, passionately, and through the miracle of love 
the limited power of his art succeeds, his art to which more bountiful means 
have been denied, even one might suggest—the personal strengths that control 
destiny.
 i s it a small thing to create a world? T o make a world emerge where the 
exotic inhumanity of a junk shop was displayed; where we were only drawing 
forth the vision of grotesque puppets, gathering a new way to suffer, die, be-
come resigned, in a word to bear a certain human load?
T ropiques, no. 2 (1941); translated by Marjolijn de Jager
in the guiSe of a literary manife Sto
For André Breton
let us count:
the madness remembering
the madness howling
the madness seeing,
the madness unleashed
Who and wha
t are we? admirable question! haters. Builders. Traitors. 
hougans. especially hougans. For we want all the demons
Those of yesterday, those of today
Those of the yoke, those of the hoe
Those of the forbidden, of prohibition, of marronnage
and we mustn’t forget those of the slave trader . . .
and so 
we sing.
We sing of poisonous flowers bursting across furious prairies; skies of love 
slashed with embolism; epileptic mornings; the white blazing of abyssal 
sands, the descent of wreckage in the course of nights struck by wild 
scents.
Wha
t can i do about it?
Y ou must begin.
Begin what?


--- PAGE 98 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 77
The only thing in the world worth beginning.
The end of the world, my God!
Make room for me. i will not get out of your way.
Sometimes i am seen, in a grand toss of the hat, to snatch an overly red cloud, 
or a caress of rain, or a prelude of wind,
don’t sedate yourselves too much:
i f
orce open the yolk sac keeping me from myself.
i force open the great waters which gird me with blood
i, only i check my place on the last train of the last surge of the tidal wave,
i, only i
take up the tongue in the final anguish
i, oh! only 
i
ensure that i receive from the straw
for you who one morning will hoard my words in your beggar’s pouch and 
will take, as the children of fear while they sleep,
the oblique path of flights and monsters.
T ropiques, no. 5 (april 1942); translated by Cynthia hahn
keeping poetry alive
Protect yourself from the social world by the creation of a zone of incandes-
cence. it 
is here, inside this zone, wherein flourishes in a terrible security the 
unprecedented flower of “i”; scrutinize all of material existence in silence and 
in tall fires frozen with humor; let this be by the creation of a zone of fire; let 
this be by the creation of a zone of icy silence, conquering by revolt the frank 
portion where one incites oneself, wholly; such are some of the demands which 
for nearly a century have aimed to impose themselves upon all poets.
 as a result of an implacable evolution, which henceforth we shall call poetry, 
this strength, ready-made and obvious in nature and in the individual, opposes 
the just-so-ness of life and of the person. or again, put more analytically, it is 
the generalized system of maladjustment which tends to substitute hallucina-
tion for sensation, illogic for logic, an image for argument, the arbitrary for 
the proven, the discontinuity of present moments for the continuity of blind 
memory.


--- PAGE 99 ---
78 Black, Brown, & Beige
here, poetry equals insurrection.
it is Baudelaire.
it is rimbaud, vagrant and visionary.
it is our great andré Breton.
Damned poetry.
This thing is the command.
 Damned, because it is knowledge and no longer entertainment. Damned 
because of the caravan of far-off interiors. Damned because of the lifting of the 
ban of black seas. Damned in the wake of Prometheus the thief, oedipus the 
assassin. Damned in the wake of world discoverers. Damned, because in the 
ears of the poet is re-attempted the same voice which haunted Columbus: “ i 
will found a new heaven and a new earth so wonderful that one will no longer 
think of who is to be first.”
 a
nd we listen faithfully to poetry, keeping it alive; like an ulcer, like a panic, 
like images of catastrophes, liberty, the fall and deliverance, consuming without 
end the liver of the world.
T ropiques, no. 8–9 (october 1943); translated by Connie rosemont
iSidore duca SSe, “ comte de lautr Éamont”
The poetry of lautréamont, beautiful as a decree of expropriation.
he invented modern mythology.
he discovered the hysterical freezing power of Parody.
he delivered logic from the absurd, and the grotesque from logic.
he is the first to have understood that poetry begins with excess and 
extravagance.
he set p
oetry back on its feet. “Poetry must have practical truth for its aim.”
humor is a liberating force.
This literary Flamel resolves the delicate problem  
of the transmutation of metals.
he r
eplaces the dictatorship of the object with the dictatorship of the spirit.
By means of the image, we reach the infinite.
T ropiques (February 1943); translated by laura Corsiglia


--- PAGE 100 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 79
Suzanne Césaire
an important surrealist theorist and polemicist, Jeanne aimée Marie 
Suzanne roussy was born in Trois-islets, Martinique, in 1913. in the 
1930s she studied philosophy at the lycée henri iv in Paris under the 
then-famous Émile Chartier, known as alain, the subject of one of her 
T ropiques articles. emp loyed in the bookbinding department of a small 
private press, harrison of Paris, roussy was also active in the early 
negritude milieu, which included léon Damas, rené Ménil, Yva léro, 
and aimé Césaire, whom she married in 1937.
 Back in Martinique in 1941, Suzanne Césaire with her husband and 
rené Ménil constituted the editorial triumvirate of T ropiques. one of the 
most i
nfluential West indian periodicals of all time, T ropiques was also a 
major voice of the international surrealist movement.
poverty of a poetry
Martinican Bards.
Talent? of course, for those who are interested in that sort of thing.
But what a pity!
They pass by. They look. But they don’t see.
it occurs to them to p
ity the negro. But they do not know the negro soul.
They evoke the bluffs.
But the marvelous bluffs?
Their sorcerous, malignant aura?
Their courageous promise? Their dynamite?
instead of all that
, they give us swooning, nuances, style, words, sentiment, 
the color blue, shades of gold, pink.
it’
s pretty, and nice, and overdone.
is it literature? oh yes! literature of the hammock.
literature of sugar and vanilla.
literary tourism. The Blue Guide.
Poetry? not a bit of it!
enough! Poetry is elsewhere!
Far from rhymes, complaints, trade-winds, and parakeets.
Martinican literature will be cannibalistic or will not be at all!
T ropiques, no. 4 (January 1942); translated by alex Wilder


--- PAGE 101 ---
80 Black, Brown, & Beige
Aimé Césaire, Suzanne Césaire et al.
voice of the oracle: Surreali St game, april 1942
Do you want to hear the great voice of the oracle? The explosive voice of life?
 Sit down around a table. Take a sheet of paper and boldly write down what 
it is you want to know. Fold the paper, pass it to your neighbor who will write 
an answer without r
eading your question. and so on.
 open the paper and read. Y ou will hear echoes that come from very far away, 
farther than yourself; and you will finally have the most beautiful conversation 
you have ever had with anyone and with yourself.
 Tak
e a look.
What
Q: W
hat is night?
a: it is eternally breaking the same heart.
Q: What is hating?
a: hiding behind one’s face, very far away.
Q: What is poetry?
a: it is the bell tolled by the sky’s great wind.
Q: What is being in despair?
a: it is getting out of a masterful mess.
Q: What do you desire?
a: it is to hear the romance of romance.
Q: What is death?
a: Traveling across the world with closed eyes.
Q: What is a dream?
a: a great flash of light right in the heart.
Q: What is desire?
a: an exciting catastrophe.
Q: What am i?
a: Scrupulously separating day from night.


--- PAGE 102 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 81
Q: What is loving?
a: Being able to sleep peacefully.
Q: What then is thought?
a: Walking dangerously on tiptoe on the line of fire.
Q: What is boredom?
a: it is a dreadful sea monster.
Q: What is speaking?
a: it is to fly off swiftly into the great fog.
Q: What is harmony?
a: it is that which sees the eye.
Q: What is a child?
a: it is movement.
Q: What is life?
a: it is the desire that eats the world.
etc. etc.
T ropiques, no. 5 (april 1942); translated by Myrna rochester
René Ménil
a professor of philosophy in his native Martinique as well as in Paris, 
rené Ménil (1907–2004) was, next to etienne léro, the key figure in the 
légitime Défense Group; so, too, a decade later he was Suzanne and 
aimé Césaire’s chief collaborator on T ropiques. n
 oted above all for his 
essays as theorist and polemicist—much admired by andré Breton—
Ménil was also a far from negligible poet. in later years, however, his 
persistent support for an increasingly nonrevolutionary Communist 
Par
ty separated him not only from his longtime friend aimé Césaire, 
but also from the international surrealist movement.
 Many 
of Ménil’s critical essays were collected in the 1981 volume 
T racées.


--- PAGE 103 ---
82 Black, Brown, & Beige
introduction to the marvelou S
The marvelous is the image of total freedom.
—rené Ménil
history invariably transforms an era that is ending into a travesty of itself. each 
event is turned into the opposite of itself, each act becomes a farce, all the lines 
are jokes. The spirit of life deserts the living, and the actors are no longer any-
thing but ghosts who hang around an empty stage. and myth, the highest truth 
of a vital people, can’t be distinguished from tidbits in the daily newspapers.
 This century, selecting practical reason as its highest virtue, has been un-
afraid to insist that we adore merchants as heroes, soldiers of fortune as saints, 
and ordinary commentators on known facts as philosophers. But if we stray too 
far from the forces of nature in order to domesticate them, we risk missing their 
reality and in fact missing an aspect of our own destiny.
 The 
truly great historical eras are not the outcome of the results of human 
understanding. They are gifts that are the result of mankind’s reaction to the 
powerful shocks of life. Peoples and individuals as they merge their lives with 
history through their passivity to their times no longer hold back their destiny, 
but instead their passions and their times move together with the secret com-
plicity of the world.
 The 
true task of mankind consists solely in the attempt to bring the mar-
velous into real life, so that life can become more encompassing. So long as the 
mythic imagination is not able to overcome each and every boring mediocrity, 
human life will amount to nothing but useless, dull experiences, just killing 
time, as they say. humanity, to be worthy of its name, must not accept such 
complacency.
T ropiques, no. 3 (october 1941); translated by rachel Blackwell
the orientation of poetry
The imagination though an abstraction is what becomes real or is in some way 
realized.
 The 
experience of objective reality would only be hypothetical if it wasn’t 
necessary to resort to illusion just to continue to be. it is impossible for human 
b
eings to experience reality directly.
 When 
the awful stark power of the real world reveals itself to us (a bolt of 
lightning, perhaps) we feel the powerlessness and precariousness that is an 
instinct to all living beings. The touch of fear, the touch of death. We cannot 
exist in such a hostile environment.


--- PAGE 104 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 83
 all reality as it is experienced is so distilled that it comes to us transformed, 
masked or embellished, its very strength is proportional to our capacities for 
passion and dream.
 a s we live we elaborate the capacity of the world, the power of our 
imaginations.
 nothing is more real than the imaginary especially when it is considered 
only imaginary.
 r eality and the imagination are not opposites the way that being and nothing-
ness are, but rather the way being and what will be are.
 o f 
our dreams we ask questions, to their answers we listen, and we act in the 
light of their advice.
 o n this motionless voyage, that we call dreamlike, we are the movers at 
the center of the world but it is life itself that will feel the footprints of our 
imagination.
 a strange luminescence is emitted by the poetic image that is difficult to 
resist. So long as it continues, the mind’s activity delights in disrupting the 
everyday sense that is simply utilitarian.
 We are released from the domination of objects and able to create true goals 
for life; the pursuit of this truth is no longer to be laughed at.
 Tha
t moment is the moment of the mind’s liberation.
T ropiques (July 1941); translated by Juliet Pétremont
What doeS africa mean to uS?
We are at the crossing. The crossing of races and cultures.
 i t is obvious that all our conscious reactions are determined by european 
culture, arts, sciences, technical methods. and we have indeed decided to make 
use of these precision armaments with their latest improvements. But in our 
veins flows a blood that demands from us an original stance in the face of life. 
under penalty of failure (let the word be understood in a non-commercial 
sense), we must respond to the poet, more than to any other, regarding the 
special dynamics of our complex biological reality. Moving back across one of 
our lines of force, we encounter this immensity—africa. africa with its unique 
poetic gifts, its unique artistic and above all sculptural production. africa and 
its noble abandonment to life, contemptuous of learned industrial robbery.
 a
n essential work, of the great european ethnographer leo Frobenius, will 
permit the reader, if he is not lazy, to understand the unprecedented cultural 
richness 
that will result for us from the comprehension of african reality. is it 
not our task to attain our total humanity? We believe that we can attain it—


--- PAGE 105 ---
84 Black, Brown, & Beige
imbeciles and cowards should expect no concession on this from us—only 
through the expression, made possible thanks to valuable european techniques, 
of all that is asked of us concerning our negritude.
T ropiques, no. 5 (april 1942); translated by Melom Peacock
poetry, Jazz & freedom
it is the existence in itself of jazz, of major importance to us, that has more than 
any critical thinking caused us to understand the stylistic character and content 
of a work in its historic context and even its limitations and to grant the value 
of spontaneity to these works only.
 i n 
its essence jazz is improvisation. if one created a theory of esthetics using 
jazz as a basis, it would mean creating it using as a means the invention of the 
marvelous as one went along. Because jazz itself is the result of a process using 
the very contradictions of being and its style consists of forming by means of 
music or any other means (note this also applies to poetry)—emotions and 
images in progression, as they occur in the mind’s eye. any blockage, any lazi-
ness, any rigidification of life threatens the true development of this delicate 
crystallization.
 n
o rhythm is set before beginning.
 no meaning is conceived before hand.
 no rhythm, no meaning except a passion for being—a being dedicated to 
a desire that demands its realization–or its substitution in the sublimation of 
“song.”
 The musician doesn’t know, cannot know, what his next note will be, nor will 
he know his next phrase, or the next possible adventure.
 But he leaps like a rope-dancer on the tight-rope of chance.
 a work of beauty is a work of chance.
 h owever, how many agree with Goethe when he says that the only works 
of lasting value are works of chance?
 a t 
this point our existence is drugged by the poison of eternity. Jazz is one 
of the best antidotes to that poison, creating in us the feeling of the moment, 
of transition.
 For 
us, we do not hesitate to view the moment, whatever it is called, as the 
arena where all the problems that are common to humankind must be resolved 
from the 
world of music or any other. in the moment is found all the previous 
instants to a particular action in the process of becoming—since, in any thing 
that exists “that which has been superceded [sic] is at the same time also pre-
served, and in losing its immediate and apparent existence, is not destroyed.” 
(h
egel)


--- PAGE 106 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 85
 The moment of being exists in the present, however, the present itself exists 
in a particular existence that is the outcome of its extension through duration 
in time.
 Thus, for things that exist, there is no contradiction that cannot be rec-
onciled between the past and the present except the one that exists in the 
minds of those who attempt to abstract its essence. likewise in society there is 
no contradiction between the creations that are contemporary and those that 
are past, between new works (not yet accepted) and the existing culture; the 
new creation although it may not be “valued” or regarded presently as valu-
able—combines all the resources of that particular social group that is being 
considered.
 a
 poet is not contemporary because he is familiar with the past or has re-
jected it, but because he exists as a dialectical outcome of those stages of past 
existence. Thus at the same time, he is a living negation and a living preserva-
ti
on of all the old cultural forms. his contemporary aspect will be broader and 
of greater value because of the fact that it is a totality formed of the past.
 Cultural 
traditions that are reflected by the poet cannot serve as a model, 
there is no model for what has not yet come into existence. it will exist, how-
ever, as a pillar of the past and thus situates the poet in his time inflexibly; it 
makes him a poet who is modern in a time that is modern.
 So much for the fr
eedom of poetry: before us the future, yet unformed.
T ropiques, no. 11 (1944); translated by Juliet Pétremont
Lucie Thésée
Thésée was an important participant in the T ropiques Group from the 
spring of 1942 on, but historians and memoirists of the period have, 
stran
gely, ignored her. it has been impossible to locate even basic bio-
graphical information about her. This neglect is all the more curious in 
that 
léon Damas, in his Poètes d’expression française (1947), highlights Thé-
sée’s critical importance in T ropiques (no. 10) and more particularly hailed 
the abundance and excellence of her poetic imagery.


--- PAGE 107 ---
86 Black, Brown, & Beige
preference
an obsessive sound of steps behind the screen, an obsessive sound of steps in-
side the 
screen: the viewers shiver in the half light. an obsessive sound of steps 
before the screen, the obsessive steps descend into the entrails of the mute 
crowd, pressing in on the old wide-lathed barricade displayed by the barely lit 
screen . . . The obscure ambience chirps with inaudible, tufted sounds while the 
obsessive step materializes further: two long legs covered in grey wool crossed 
the full width of the screen, and probably walked all around the barricade for 
they wandered over, among the crowd, the shadow, hardening space, is far too 
opaque to let them be counted . . .
 The 
two legs stop into two wide sawteeth, halfway up to the thigh. upright 
in the valley, they spell out a name _____. She rises, stretches, and goes out 
quietly. She’s a young dark-haired woman whose aerial gait heralds beauty.
 outside, the chilly breeze smells of dried sap, the bright moon climbs, 
climbs as far as the eye can see.
 The dark-haired woman pregnant with the name revealed at the show 
stops at the seashore: the sea glistens like a painting, garfish leaping here and 
there . . .
 “. . 
. later, you know, he touched my throat for a moment with his hand, his 
open hand.”
 “all right. This morning in the foliage a joyful face smiled, with flashing teeth 
and prodigiously sparkling eyes.”
 The dark-haired woman continues calmly, “however, i would have preferred 
him to give me my blood.”
 “Didn’t the milk dry up?” the other woman answers languidly.
 our December’s breeze has incrusted the green leaf cut and broiled by the 
sun within their sensitized beings.
 Still facing the sea, they inch forward toward a gate, leaving behind the 
bulky white building on their left.
 Dull sounding male voices burst forth, . . . the gate suddenly opens. The 
woman from the show goes through the door, stretching her long neck: “ it’s 
not that i’m curious, i could have already gone to look.”
 “it’s two players, they’re still attached, they’ve already played a great deal 
tonight and their shirts are still totally white,” says the other woman.
 Suddenly the 
screen’s step, the obsessive step plunged into its tongue, ap-
pears
, first at a distance and from the side, way beyond the players . . . he draws 
near and the dark-haired woman points him out. The two legs become whole: 
“it is 
he . . . he’s become terribly elongated,” she avidly extends her index finger 
towards his head, “just look how purple his face is!” she observes.


--- PAGE 108 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 87
 angrily he rushes toward her, the long barrel of a strange weapon on the 
dark-haired woman’s index finger.
 “Y
ou robbed me!” he says. Shaking her head no over and over, she answers, 
“no, i didn’t steal.” . . . and then continues, “Why are you aiming exactly at the 
tip of my index finger?”
 h
e pursues this thought with a ferocious muttering, “So that the bullet will 
slip into your heart.”. . . “i want it completely broiled, woman of my blood.” her 
only reply to him, a brilliant smile.
 The other woman remains at the shore, her glance stubbornly turned toward 
the sea, sadly objects, “but . . . the whole house was dusted this morning.”
T ropiques, no. 10 (February 1944); translated by Myrna Bell rochester
Georges Gratiant
Born into a mulatto family in Martinique, Gratiant (1907–1992) attended 
the lycée Schoelcher, received a bachelor’s degree, and then went to 
Paris to study law. returning to Martinique, he opened a law office in 
Fort-de-France. a militant communist, in the early 1930s he founded 
the short-lived Common Front group with rené Ménil and Thélus léro 
(etienne’s brother). in the years 1941–1943, he helped the Césaires and 
Ménil edit T ropiques and contributed several texts of his own.
 a
s it turned out, his active involvement in cultural matters did not 
last long. after the liberation (1946), he was elected the first president 
of the General Council of the new Department of Martinique, a term 
lasti
ng one year. later, for thirty years (1959–1989), he was mayor of 
lamentin, the island’s “second city.”
extinct volcano
Flamboyant’s vomits
Carrousel of the red border at the Great Copper Palace
The cassia fieuzals of reddish-brown honey give rise to the long black 
silhouettes of opiated molasses
White laurels facing the sea
Mottled hooves of glowing din
hooves of fire and of blood


--- PAGE 109 ---
88 Black, Brown, & Beige
shreds of fire that descend
into the ruined flanks full of blood that descends
and that flows and that rolls
ball of fire
black sparkling hoof
ball of fire and of black clotted blood
and the cassias cr
umbling with golden honey run along the long burned flesh
From the marine cup abruptly overturned from the din of thunder
here it is recreated
Son of molasses brown flesh father of this molasses with the grains of gold 
dust
gilded grains whose eyes shine
from this molasses that grabs your throat
thirst for milk gorged with alcohol
from this molasses that grabs your gut
Gastralgic nights to dreams of silvered belladonna
and from the blisters on fir
e runs your living flesh
and from your exacerbated plant grinds the young turf of varied locusts.
Y outh gilded with gilded edges
of smoke and of ashes
Y outh of blue wreaths of extinct trails
of dead ashes
Mortals and crucibles under your ebony heel
where to the four winds the indolent white latex throws
terr
ifying exudation to the october sun
flamboyant tempest of the eruptive snows
crimson 
euphorbia crackle with anger
and everywhere
and always
in the blood in the turf
the heavy noise of the heel full of mud full of turf
the deaf noise of heels in the turf that ends.
T ropiques, no. 8–9 (october 1943); translated by Gay rawson


--- PAGE 110 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 89
Aristide Maugée
a collaborator on L’Étudiant Noir in mid-1930s Paris, Maugée went on to 
assist the Césaires in the publication of T ropiques in 1940s Martinique. 
alb
eit few in number, his contributions to the journal reveal a lively 
critical intelligence. The text reprinted here is surely one of the earliest 
appr
eciations of Césaire’s great work. regrettably, little is known about 
Maugée beyond the fact that he married Césaire’s sister, Mireille, an 
en
glish teacher.
aimÉ cÉSaire, poet
The poet is really stealing fire if what he brings from there has shape,  
he gives shape, if it is shapeless, he gives shapelessness.
—r
imbaud
* * *
a poet is born to us. after a century of conformity and poetic nothingness. So 
much for those who could not perceive the change as we passed from countless 
rhapsodies to authentic poetry.
 Mo
dern poetry, starting with rimbaud, locates the secret of creation in the 
dream. Triumph of the Marvelous: the poet is seer, the poet is prophet.
 a
imé Césaire is the heir to such poetry. an irresistible burst of inspiration, 
anxious to express feeling in its infinite complexity, to measure the unfathom-
able
, and impatient to seize the absolute.
 For him, the word is both object and sign. in other words, the poet cares 
less about communicating his ideas than about creating an atmosphere. an en-
vironment, an unreal setting in which, strangely but certainly, we can feel the 
poignant drama of Man alone; terrifyingly alone, standing up against the world 
and the prohibitions of his Destiny.
 Po
et of the highest, most dizzying metaphysics. But also a negro poet. a 
negro poet, though not in the manner of a T oomer or hughes or Johnson, 
whose lyrical qualities are simpler and more direct. here Césaire reveals an-
other depth, a different formal richness, the expression of an effortlessly flam-
ing art.
 n
ot that he chooses the image for image’s sake, or music for music’s sake. 
his work is decanted in the crucible of the unconscious. rather, it is a prodi-


--- PAGE 111 ---
90 Black, Brown, & Beige
gious force of enchantment, the magic of sound, which compels the poet and 
embodies his soul.
 Mor
e variety too, in the rhythm.
 rhythm—a negro element par excellence !
 r
hythm of the tom-tom, in the enchantment of the forest, magic incanta-
tions to the God of Death.
 a
n orchestra where bright sounds alternate with flat sounds, like trumpets 
and cymbals, and the melody is kept up by the airy sweetness of liquids.
 Césaire 
is a negro poet also in terms of feeling: love of his race. love with-
out treason or weakness, doubtless and limitless
 r
acist? not in the least.
 neither bitterness, nor contempt of other races. nor blindness: vices, de-
fects, he sees it all. he knows his race to be “riddled with stains,” “which no 
ablution of hyssop and lilies combined could purify.”
 he surveys the whole spectrum of mean, cowardly and perfidious acts. and 
yet, what pride! Sublime hope. Confidence in the future: such is the meaning 
of this 
prophetic song. now is the time to turn the soil in order to fertilize it. 
now is the time for sowing. Do you hear this invitation?
* * *
one man has stood up to say no.
 Y es, there is one poet able to discover a true humanity, on our beautiful 
island of torment.
 Poetry of vertigo and love, of blood and courage.
 aimé Césaire is at the point of a new dawn.
T ropiques, no. 5 (april 1942); translated by Jeanne hageman
revie W of revie WS
“no city. no art. no Poetry. not a germ, or even a sprout. or else the hideous 
leprosy of counterfeits. in truth, a land sterile and mute.”
 Thus T ropiques saw the West indi es in 1941. no longer is it a question of “fold-
ing arms, in the sterile attitude of a spectator,” but rather of modifying our des-
ti
ny. our mission? T o participate—yes, we too—in the concert of the world.
 We do not want to be the Saprophytes of culture.
 The welcome T ropiques has received has not surprised us. n ot believing in 
immediate conversions, we expect nothing from docile shadows.
 i n the meantime, our voice has not remained without echo. Seeing hope 
reborn in the youth brings forward the promise of new beginnings.


--- PAGE 112 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 91
 and seeing that T ropiques has received from strangers an even larger audience 
than it has in the islands.
 and seeing that great and friendly voices from afar have assured us of their 
affection and their sympathy, beyond the Caribbean Sea: in Cuba, Curaçao, 
Mexico, new Y ork.
* * *
Mexico: Benjamin Péret is preparing an anthology of myths, legends, and popular 
tales from the americas, a project deserving of the greatest interest. it is myth 
that explains humankind. and legend is the mysterious thread that leads us, by 
means of the imagination and fantasy, to the very heart of the Marvelous.
 Cuba: From Cuba we are informed of the imminent publication of a imé 
Césaire’s poem, Notebook of a Return to My Native Land,  translated into Spanish 
by lydia Cabrera, illustrated by Wifredo lam, and preceded by a preface by 
Benjamin Péret.
 New Y ork: last octob er, the new Y ork exhibition of gouaches by Wifredo lam 
had the great success that it deserved.
 New Y ork: a magnificent realization: the new journal directed by andré 
Breton. and Breton’s capital article: “Prolegomena to a Third Manifesto of Sur-
realism 
or not.” a doubly important article because of the author, and because 
of the new horizons now opening for surrealism.
 a
fter the present cataclysm, the value of traditional knowledge must be re-
examined in the light of a new day.
T ropiques, no. 6–7 (February 1943); translated by Franklin rosemont
Georgette Anderson
Many of the contributors to T ropiques—like the Césair es and rené  
Ménil—were teachers by profession, and this was probably also true  
of Georget
te anderson. in the vast literature on negritude and aimé 
Césaire, anderson is rarely more than mentioned. her study of Mal-
larmé and Debussy appeared in the debut issue of T ropiques (a
 pril 1941), 
and the text published here in the third issue.


--- PAGE 113 ---
92 Black, Brown, & Beige
SymBoli Sm, maeterlinck & the marvelou S
We will not hide here the weaknesses of symbolism, its puerility, its tics, its 
taste for refined sentences but also, what witnesses for its defense! and if, from 
among these, one should retain only the marvelous, the position of Mallarmé‚ 
and his group, it would still remain one of the key literary movements.
 l et us pass over the great masters and let us stop at Maeterlinck. and more 
precisely at Pelléas and Mélisande.
 Fi
nally, the orchestration. is i t a question here of introducing destiny’s precur-
sors? Debussy conveys the theme with a whole subtle mixture of superimposed 
melodic fragments, underpinned by a cello pattern, which give a sad color to 
the simple air heard previously.
 But then ho
w is it that we resist Maeterlinck?
 Because it’s true that we resist him.
 The reason, the main reason, can be found in the author of Pelléas’ 
pessimism.
 h ow can one be pessimistic when the revenge of the marvelous on the world 
remains?
 But then Maeterli
nck is a pessimist.
 We remember the words of Pelléas:
 “i played like a child with a thing i did not suspect. . . . i played in my dreams 
with destiny’s traps.”
 Traps
. Why traps? Fate, adventure, and dreams which set traps for you on 
the road of life?
 l et us r
eread Giraudoux’s Intermezzo:
 “T
hat which we call human knowledge is at best human religion, and it is a 
terrible selfishness.
 i ts 
dogma is to make every relationship with anyone else but humans impos-
sible or sterile, to unlearn all the languages a child already knows, except for 
human language. With this false modesty . . . what marvelous overtures from 
all stages of the world, from all its kingdoms have we not rejected?”
 a
ll the languages. Those that the child inevitably knows. all the roads. all 
the entrances.
 But 
woe to the one who, before giving it a try, does not get rid of his heavy 
mind. Maeterlinck is one of them.
T ropiques, no. 3 (october 1941); translated by Marjolijn de Jager


--- PAGE 114 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 93
Stéphane Jean-Alexis
T ropiques, no. 8–9 (october 1943), features an interesting article by Sté-
phane J
ean-alexis on chance, concluding with andré Breton’s definition 
of “objective chance.” The question arises: Who is (was) S. Jean-alexis, 
who made no other contributions to T ropiques and does not figure in 
scholarly studi
es or memoirs of negritude? Was the name perhaps an 
early nom de plume for Jacques Stephen alexis, who in 1945 was editor 
of the haitian paper La Ruche (The roach) when the students in Port-
au-Prince—and La Ruche itself—welcomed Breton to hai
 ti? in view of 
the fact that Jacques Stephen alexis was later a well-known Communist 
politician and novelist—indeed, a hard-line Stalinist—he would seem 
an unlikely suspect as author of a text sympathetic to the fiercely anti-
Stalin
ist Breton. in the present state of our knowledge, the identity of 
“S. Jean-alexis” remains unknown.
a note on chance
While the world seen through causality or through finality appears to us to be 
a lucid system, the world seen through luck appears as an inextricable chaos 
where events are produced according to their whims, and before these the only 
attitudes possible are waiting, self-abandonment to the forces about which it is 
impossible to have more than a vague intuition, and of which it is not possible 
to modify the outcome.
 We 
must, however, note that a coincidence cannot take on the value of a 
stroke of luck if it is not endowed, at least in our eyes, with a certain impor-
tance, or else if it cannot be considered the possible end of a series of final 
causes.
 Thus, eventually one finds included in the notion of chance, this idea that 
what appears in the form of a mechanical necessity, is, in reality, the manifesta-
tion of an intelligent will, a will that would overturn happiness, bad luck or the 
surprising in circumstances that we find troubling. Doesn’t one see the athlete, 
just after winning, prepared to thank his luck? That is his good luck, as if it was 
a question of an intelligent power that had intentionally favored him.
 Which 
explains the halo of wonder that encircles manifestations of luck. T o 
say that something happens by luck is to lend it attributes that only belong to 
mankind 
or to regret not finding these attributes. it unconsciously affirms this 
idea that “all that is within us, is as all that is outside of us and constitute a single 
reality.”


--- PAGE 115 ---
94 Black, Brown, & Beige
 i n reality, the determining factor is not in things, it is in us that it lives—in us 
the anxieties, in us the desires, in us the aspirations. it is here that the Kantian 
term end in itself has all of its value.
 For all these reasons, we believe that the most acceptable definition of 
chance is the one that andré Breton proposes in L’Amour Fou—the meeting of 
an internal necessity and an external end, or “the manifested form of an exterior 
necessity that clears a path in the unconscious.”
T ranslated by Wingo Smith (original emphasis)
c u B a
Wifredo Lam
universally recognized as one of the greatest surrealist painters, lam 
(1902–1982) was born in Sagua la Grande, Cuba, of an afro-Cuban 
mother and Chinese father. in 1924, after studying painting at the 
School of Fine arts in havana, he left for Madrid, where he immersed 
himself in the spirit of Spanish baroque and studied “primitive” art. in 
Spain, too, he came in contact for the first time with surrealists, most 
notably 
eugenio F. Granell, who, like lam, was a combatant in the revo-
lutionary war against Francoist fascism.
 Wi
th the defeat of the revolution, lam went to Paris, where he 
met Picasso, an ardent admirer of lam’s work, and soon also met andré 
Breton and others in the Surrealist Group. Faced with the threat of the 
nazi 
occupation of Paris, lam joined the surrealists in Marseilles, helped 
invent the Marseilles Game (a surrealist card game), illustrated Breton’s 
long poem Fata Morgana, and took par
 t in other surrealist activities. lam 
joined elisa and andré Breton (as well as anthropologist Claude lévi-
Strauss) on a ship for Martinique, where they met Suzanne and aimé 
Césaire and others of the T ropiques Group. lam soon wen
 t on to Cuba. 
one of his closest friends in havana was Juan Breá’s widow, Mary low; 
in 1946 he illustrated her volume of poems, Alquimia del recuerdo. in 19 45 
he visited haiti and studied the rituals and symbols of vaudou. lam l eft 
Cuba in 1952 and spent the next several years in new Y ork, Paris, and 
albisola Mare, italy, where he established a studio.


--- PAGE 116 ---
Cover drawing by Wifredo lam for the French surrealist journal Médium (n ew 
Series, January 1955).


--- PAGE 117 ---
96 Black, Brown, & Beige
 l am’s work was featured in every international surrealist exhibition 
from the 1942 new Y ork show through the 1976 show in Chicago and 
was reproduced in numerous surrealist journals, including Minotaure, Lon-
don Bulletin, VVV , Médium, Le Surréalisme, même, BIEF , La Brèche, Brumes Blondes, 
L’Archibras, A Phala, Analogon, Dies und Das, and Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion.
pica SSo
everybody felt this influence, for Picasso was the master of our times. even 
Picasso was influenced by Picasso! But when i first painted bulls in Spain, i had 
not seen his bulls. and i had done my own paintings in a synthetic style, in an 
attempt to simplify my forms, before discovering his. our plastic interpreta-
tions simply coincided. i already knew the Spanish temperament, for i had lived 
it, suffered it, in the country itself. rather than an influence, we might call it a 
pervasion of the spirit. There was no question of imitation, but Picasso may easily 
have been present in my spirit, for nothing in him was alien or strange to me. 
on the 
other hand, i derived all my confidence in what i was doing from his 
approval.
* *
 *
i decided that my painting would never be the equivalent of that pseudo-Cuban 
music for nightclubs. i refused to paint cha-cha-cha. i wanted with all my heart 
to paint the drama of my country, but by thoroughly expressing the negro 
spirit, the beauty of the plastic art of the blacks. in this way i could act as a 
Trojan horse that would spew forth hallucinating figures with the power to sur-
prise
, to disturb the dreams of the exploiters. i knew i was running the risk of 
not being understood either by the man in the street or by the others. But a true 
picture has the power to set the imagination to work, even if it takes time.
Max-Pol Fouchet, Wifredo Lam
arroWS in rapid flight
arrows in rapid flight that leave behind them the perfume of their primitive 
essence: oya (goddess of dreams who dictates our destiny and watches over 
us in death), and that other god with hair of water, ogue-oriza (herb of the 
gods). These beliefs, similar to the fires burning in our curiosity, keep alive the 
idea of animated stone, elegua in the languages of our black brotherhoods. like 
wounded birds they spread across my canvases the myth forged by primitive 
man.


--- PAGE 118 ---
Mind, Body and Soul, by Patrick Turner, collagist. This early work was printed in the 
surrealist journal Arsenal (vol. 4 [1989]).


--- PAGE 119 ---
98 Black, Brown, & Beige
* * *
What’s so curious is that these dramas so close to us seem like distant appari-
tions—. Knives—become in turn vigilant, disquieting, ready to open mortal 
wounds. Wings of evasion, omens of birds in flight skimming the surface of our 
eyes in contemplation of their fleeing, their exodus, like tongues of fire in an 
anxious 
infinity—. elsewhere the sound of tom-toms, in obsessive rhythm, is 
materialized by light and shadow: sexes as tender or cruel as flashes of light-
ning, in the shape of flame, detaching their luminous appearances from the 
impenetrable darkness of night in the background.
Dies und Das
Agustín Cárdenas
Widely regarded as surrealism’s greatest sculptor, Cárdenas (1927–2001) 
was born in Matanzas, Cuba, the son of a tailor. in 1943 he enrolled in 
the San alejandro academy of Fine arts and pursued his studies there 
until 1949.
 in 19
55 he moved to Paris, settled in Montparnasse, and met andré 
Breton and the Surrealist Group. The following year he participated in a 
Surr
ealist Group show, “l’Étoile Scellée” (the sealed star), at the gallery 
and was later well represented in international surrealist exhibitions in 
Par
is (1959) and new Y ork (1961). his work has also been featured in 
dozens of solo shows and over a hundred collective exhibitions. Based 
in France for years (his five sons were all born there), he also worked in 
Canada, 
austria, Japan, and especially italy, where he enjoyed sculpting 
in marble. after 1994 he lived mostly in Cuba.
 The best literature on his sculpture was written by his surrealist 
friends, including andré Breton, Édouard Glissant, and José Pierre.
 Well-educated and articulate, Cárdenas nonetheless appears to have 
done very little if any writing. Bibliographies of the extensive literature 
on his work are si
lent on the subject. in lieu of an article by him, or an 
interview, he is represented here by a short list of some of the titles he 
gave his sculptures: strong images, a true found poem.


--- PAGE 120 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 99
one, tWo, three
one, two, three
The big Bird
li
fe and earth
never-ending alliance
Column of Fire
The Music Box
Woman with Chewing-Gum
orp
heus at rest
The Window
The Doorway
Family Jewels
Dogon
The T ortoise
Fir
e-eater
My Shadow after Midnight
indian Flower
u
nknown Girl
antillean root
Fruit of Memory
Dialogue
T o
ward the light
history is not Finished
T ranslated by Mary Low
Jacques Roumain
in his December 1945 “Speech to Y oung haitian Poets”—an audience 
that included rené Bélance, rené Depestre, Paul laraque, and Clé-
men
t Magloire-Saint-aude, among many others—andré Breton quoted 
a beautiful passage from Jacques roumain’s (1907–1944) revolutionary 
novel Masters of the Dew and concluded by sa ying: “i salute you, gentle-
men
, in the example of Jacques roumain that stands for haiti and the 
world.” These words are especially moving in view of Breton’s general 
dislike of novels, but of course Masters of the Dew was no ordinary novel,


--- PAGE 121 ---
100 Black, Brown, & Beige
and roumain no ordinary novelist. on other occasions Breton also af-
firm
ed his admiration for roumain’s poetry and ethnological studies.
 Poet, journalist, revolutionary, short-story writer, ethnologist, and 
professor, roumain was one of the most remarkable men of the last 
century. Sent by his family to Switzerland for schooling, he pursued his 
educat
ion for the next six years in France, Germany, and Spain. return-
in
g to haiti, he joined the resistance movement against u.S. occupa-
ti
on, and was soon elected president of haiti’s Patriotic Y outh league, 
the group that eventually forced the withdrawal of the hated troops.
 in 
the 1920s and 1930s, he collaborated on La Revue Indigène, a forerun-
ner of 
negritude and noted also as the journal that introduced modern 
poetry into haiti.
 he died in Mexico; Masters of the Dew was published posthumously. 
an 
english translation of Gouverneurs de la rosèe by langston hughes and 
Mercer Cook was published in new Y ork in 1947.
 The poem reprinted here dates from the 1920s.
When the tom- tom Beat S
Y our heart trembles in the shadows, like the reflection  
of a face in troubled water
The old mirage rises from the hollow of the night
Y ou know the sweet sorcery of memory
a r
iver carries you far from the banks,
Do you hear those voices: they’re singing love’s heartache
and i
n the mournful darkness, hear the tom-tom panting  
like a young black girl’s breasts.
Y our soul is the reflection in the murmuring water where your ancestors  
bent their dark faces
and the 
white man who made you a mulatto is this bit of sea spume cast out, 
like spit, upon the shore.


--- PAGE 122 ---
h a i t i
Clément Magloire-Saint-Aude
long regarded by surrealists as one of the movement’s greatest poets, 
the work of the haitian Clément Magloire-Saint-aude (1912–1971) is 
still not well known to the larger public. Born Clément Magloire, he 
adopted the name Magloir
e-Saint-aude around 1940. a contributor to 
the journal Les Griots in the 1930s, his 1941 pamphlet of poems, Dialogue 
des mes lampes, confirm
 ed his definitive adherence to surrealism. asked 
in a letter for his curriculum vitae, he replied, with characteristic sim-
plici
ty: “Born in Port-au-Prince in 1912. no university title. no voyages. 
anticonformist. have turned my back on society, and live—retired—in 
the southern outskirts of Port-au-Prince. have collaborated on all the 
newspapers in the capital.”
 a
lthough his involvement in the surrealist movement was above all 
via poetry and correspondence, personal association also played a role. 
in June 194
4 he met aimé Césaire, who was in haiti for a conference, 
and in December of that year and early 1945 he enjoyed several meet-
in
gs with andré Breton, Pierre Mabille, and Wifredo lam.
 Breton and his friends consistently proclaimed Magloire-Saint-
aude’s poetry to be one of the essential works of the twentieth century. 
here, as Breton put it, “language and the poetic attitude are constantly 
brought to their supreme point.”
utterance S
of my lamp and my emotion
provoked along the way
and of my truth
on the surface of the cloak of mourning
and the ponderous dignified rings
of the horseman with the bell
ringing from his elbow
artful, the pastel
of sun and soot on my wall.
Paroles; translated by Franklin rosemont


--- PAGE 123 ---
102 Black, Brown, & Beige
tali Sman S
T o Vincent Bounoure and to Jorge Camacho
Surging hours
in a fiery façade
Sparks echo
toward the mirror of time
li
ttle bells child’s rattles
a wild mop of hair
sound a halt
to the messenger’s song
T aboo, in Dialogue de mes lampes et autres textes; transla ted by Franklin rosemont
not the legend
This is not the legend
Which rouses me from sluggishness
at the Chinese man
’s tomb
in the bard’s tent
Sleeps the gold of my lamp
Weighing upon me, in this world, my grimoire
and also m
y old lashes
if, in a loose tone,
longer than my shadow,
in the magician’s mirrors
i confuse uproar and silence,
i am here for five
and the lure of humus
has no hold on me
T aboo, in Dialogue de mes lampes et autres textes; transla ted by Franklin rosemont
three poem S
i
For my burned-out lights.
Safe passage, pilgrim.


--- PAGE 124 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 103
ii
T o the weary poet’s exploits,
My stained-glass window, shattered
on the me
lody’s rails.
For my beautiful girl, ruined
lik
e the street urchin’s harmonica.
T oward the cracked web
of broken stanzas
.
on the blind blotter
of my extinct talents.
v
Prisoner’s poem
T o the tolling of remembered suns.
ra
ttles buried
in the pilgrim’s heart.
Déchu (1956); translated by Franklin rosemont
the Surreali St record
T o accept the easily palatable is the fate of the mob. For most people, to be is 
merely a matter of rumination. For the poet, however, to exist is to marvel. The 
po
et is the one who pursues the strange and unfamiliar. unwilling to surrender 
to mob formulas, or to seek the logic of mundane rhythmical phrases, the poet 
plun
ges into the darkest, most hidden corners of the unconscious. The world 
of the Marvelous is the very source of the creations that in turn engender the 
unfettered images of wonder and the impossible.
 Symb
olists and surrealists celebrate the dream and the unconscious. Mal-
larmé was a “master of the dream.” Saint-Pol-roux declared: “We are the pioneers 
of the Beyond,” and e.l.T. Mesens said: “even when asleep we are tireless.”
 a counteraction to Parnassus and naturalism, Symbolism freed the possi-
bilities of internal reality (“There was no way,” wrote Jean Cassou, “to stop the 
spirit that had already started moving toward the dream and temptation in its 
construction of splendorous worlds”).
 “in essence,” according to Pierre Montal, “surrealism is a poetry liberated 
from critical sense. it is a quest for freedom.”


--- PAGE 125 ---
Déchu, an early book of poems by Clément Magloire-Saint-aude, with cover 
illustrated by Milo rigaud, an artist noted for his study of voodoo, was printed 
and published in haiti.


--- PAGE 126 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 105
 Surrealism has never found any sympathy among superficial minds. it at-
tracts rebels, Baudelaireans, those who have not been coerced into behaving 
themselves.
 The stylistic exaggerations indulged in by surrealism’s parasites do not in 
any way invalidate the radiance of a poetical/political current whose masters 
are venerated by disciples of every race.
Haiti-Journal (april 25, 1941); translated by Franklin rosemont
on poetry: a 1970 intervie W
Q: What made you choose surrealism?
a: instinct.
Q; T o whom did you show your first surrealist poems?
a: in the journal Les Griots, i published a poem in prose titled Dialogue of My 
Lamps. The same title was taken up again for my first collection of poems. 
Perhaps unconsciously there are some hesitations and pale reflections of 
the prose-poem in the collection. i have therefore published it without a 
specifically surrealist intention.
Q: how did the public react to this hermetic tablet?
a: at first, there was a general outcry of indignation. People were not familiar 
with this genre of poetry, which was a veritable revolution. Dialogue of My 
Lamps attracted partisans, adversaries, commentators. . . . They were intent 
on finding a meaning in the poems.
Q: 
how do you see the future of surrealism?
a: Jean Schuster, in the first issue of L’Archibras: Le Surréalisme, apr il 1967, has 
stated our position on this question.
T ranslated by Franklin Rosemont
René Bélance
Bélance (1915–2004) as a young man was among the group of rebel 
poets who welcomed andré Breton to Port-au-Prince in 1945, thereby 
precipitating a student upheaval which in turn led to the collapse of the


--- PAGE 127 ---
106 Black, Brown, & Beige
brutal lescot regime. The young poet’s interview with Breton appeared 
in the Haiti-Journal (December 12–13) and was reprinted in Breton’s 
Entrétiens.
 Bélance’s v
olume of poems, Épaule d’ombre—published around the 
same time—was promoted in the press as a surrealist work, in part be-
cause of the author’s association with Breton, but above all because of 
its o
wn remarkable poetic quality. indeed, it was for his stature as a poet 
that Bélance was acclaimed as the doyen of haitian literature. later, 
however, for political reasons, he had to leave haiti. in the united 
States, where he found refuge, he made his living as a professor of 
literature.
aWarene SS
hopelessly, i left perception behind
under a bay of rooftops
Crimson dawn no longer spreads a path
to welcome our weary footsteps
our silver voices
i hol
d a memory of mists, past times
torches lit our way
i dr
ink deeply of the sands of oblivion
Chemins critiques (1989); translated by rachel Blackwell
noiSe
What’s right, what’s wrong, i don’t know
they’re just wavering mysteries
i swe
ll with the ocean swell, open to desire
all day long i disdain the ordinary
i despise the church’s threats and punishments
because i want beautiful Sundays
and celebrations instead of smoothed-over fears.
Chemins critiques (1989); translated by rachel Blackwell
encounter With life
i started to be labeled a surrealist after the publication of Luminaires in 1942. 
at tha
t time i didn’t know anything about surrealism. in school, i had read


--- PAGE 128 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 107
rimbaud, verlaine, and a few modern poets. i think it was with rimbaud that i 
started orienting my style without knowing it toward what they call surrealism. 
in other 
words, i started writing a kind of poetry which was not romantic or 
purely symbolic. i started entering into myself and expressing the inner world 
i could contemplate. That inner world was directly linked to my personal ex-
per
ience, to my encounter with life, and with other people and with myself. i 
wrote about what i felt and how i reacted.
 The poet for me is a man of the world. he/She is a witness, someone who 
partakes in the human experience and has a vision he/she tries to communicate 
to the world. The poet is comparable to Moses leading a whole tribe to the 
promised land. he/She is someone who is going to try at some point to find a 
way of abandoning the corpse he/she is imprisoned in, so as to go farther, so as 
to go higher, in order to see more than the others could see and to reveal the 
voice he heard indicating the way to paradise for the other men to hear.
 a
imé Césaire puts it better when he says: “Make me the voice of those who 
have no voice.” That’s what the poet is for me: he who speaks for those who  
can’t speak; he who expresses the dream that the others fail to express; he  
who encourages people to go beyond themselves in order to bring some kind 
of relief to human suffering; he who lives in his flesh all human sufferings and 
is ready to give his life and energy to change the world.
Callaloo 15, no. 3 (Summer 1992)
Hervé Télémaque
Born and raised in Port-au-Prince, Télémaque (1937– ) studied with 
painter Julien lévi at the art Students league in new Y ork, 1957–1960. 
after moving to Paris in 1961 he met the surrealists and was soon at-
tending their daily meetings and other events. The first reproductions 
of his works app
eared in the fifth issue (october 1963) of the Surrealist 
Group’s La Brèche (The breach)—the same issue that introduced Ted 
Joans (writing from Timbuktu) and the nascent Surrealist Group in 
Chicago. 
he also collaborated on such later surrealist periodicals as 
L’Archibras and the Bulletin de Liaison Surréaliste. h is paintings have been 
featured in individual and group shows all over the world, including 
three international surrealist exhibitions: Paris, 1965; São Paulo, 1967; 
and Prague
, 1968. he has illustrated books by Clément Magloire-Saint-
aude and Gérard legrand.


--- PAGE 129 ---
108 Black, Brown, & Beige
Why are you performing, Jean?
a hand slipped through the window frame, grasping the plant with its long, 
slightly malleable leaves that resembled those of the leek.
 “Stop thief!” the muffled voice of the sleeping man cried out.
 “Why are you performing, Jean?”
 Jean began to laugh; he knew he was going to answer in that emphatic tone 
so characteristic of black intellectuals in radio interviews.
 h
e was overcome by a frightening doubt. everything evened out. The hon-
est man started to look like a bastard, intelligence was becoming systemic. 
everything always had to start over again; ideas disintegrate as they are used 
and man presents man. accepting the movement of things, placing one’s note 
with the required distance. But to do so, should one have to enter the fight 
again, take sides, and in the end come back to one’s doubt?
 Y ou were invited here to attend a birth rather than a death, in such a way 
that the “obstacle-casing” can be thrown to the wolves with the ambiguous 
indulgence of the other budding mariners.
 The jar of white paint ejaculated as an ink stain on the painter’s fly!
L’Archibras 2 (october 1967); translated by Marjolijn de Jager
d o m i n i c a n  r e p u B l i c
Aída Cartagena Portalatín
Poet, novelist, critic, scholar, and teacher—a major figure in the litera-
tur
e of the Dominican republic—aída Cartagena Portalatín (1918–1994) 
was a regular contributor to the island’s most renowned surrealist-
oriented periodical, La Poesía Sorprendida (1943–1945), a mimeographed 
revi
ew edited by the exiled Spanish surrealist poet and artist eugenio F. 
Granell.
 resolute i
n her surrealist solidarity—she was one of the group that 
welcomed elisa and andré Breton to the island in 1945—Portalatín was 
very much a militant in poetic matters as well as social issues. a radical


--- PAGE 130 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 109
feminist, she was outspoken in her opposition to all exploitation, op-
pressi
on, and injustice. She was also a lifelong supporter of negritude in 
the T ropiques tradition, to the end deeply interested in africa, africans, 
and their st
ruggles. The last book published in her lifetime was Culturas 
africanas: Rebeldes con causa (a frican cultures: rebels with a cause, 1986).
 Portalatín was the author of more than twenty books. apart from 
Y ania Tierra, however—her 1982 documentary poem—almost none of 
her work has app
eared in english translation.
moon and marBle
Sadness will roll over the violated light
of metals.
a channe
l of expectations trails behind this song.
a tear dropped from the moon
let us seek a new understanding.
Burn night, make ash of the sky
Strip naked moon, abandon your green body.
let us sil
ence your silence!
Marbles are dreamless;
i shall race ages
to g
ive them my song.
Speak tongueless shadow this night of space;
i wai
t for the new dawn awakening fields of grain.
La Poesía Sorprendida (1943); translated by Myrna Bell rochester


--- PAGE 131 ---
t r i n i d a d
John Jacob Thomas
Born in Trinidad two years after the abolition of slavery, Thomas (1840–
1889) was a major nineteenth-century Caribbean intellectual whose 
works are st
ill influential. a schoolteacher who became secretary of the 
Board of education, he was first and foremost a philologist, noted for his 
pioneering study, The Theory and Practice of Creole Grammar (186
 9). in 1873 
he read a paper on the subject before the Philological Society in lon-
don and was later elected a member, thereby receiving the recognition 
of the most emi
nent body in his field in the english-speaking world. his 
later volume, Froudacity, is an example of merciless criticism at its most 
powerful: a point-by-point refutation of the misunderstandings, distor-
tions, and outright lies written by the British racist and apologist for 
imper
ialism, James anthony Froude.
 Thomas’ status as a precursor of surrealism rests primarily on his 
deep interest in—and his superb collection of—Creole proverbs. he 
was influenced by Jean Price Mars in haiti and Fernando ortiz in Cuba. 
an offshoot of his philological research, these folkloric treasures, in his 
view, were valuable not only as expressions of human wisdom, but also 
and above all because among them were beautiful sayings that ornament 
afr
ican discourse. as the examples here amply demonstrate, surrealist 
imagery, proletarian humor, and a strong awareness of the Marvelous 
are at the core of these wonders of oral literature. When Froudacity was 
reissued i
n 1969, C.l.r. James declared that “Thomas is more important 
[now] than he was in his own time.”
creole prover BS
Conversation is the food of the ear.
every glow-worm sheds light for its soul.
The ox is never weary of carrying his horns.
Y ou have not yet crossed the river; do not curse the crocodile’s mother.


--- PAGE 132 ---
Froudacity: W est Indian Fables Explained, by J. J. Thomas, is a classic originally 
published in 18
69. This edition was published in 1969 by london’s famous 
Caribbean publisher, new Beacon Press, with an introduction by scholar and 
political theorist C.l.r. James.


--- PAGE 133 ---
112 Black, Brown, & Beige
Teeth never laugh at things that are good.
Y ou shall bite finger when it is too late.
ox nev
er tells the pasture, “thank you.”
What business have eggs in the dance of stones?
Sleep your sleep.
John La Rose
Trinidad-born and raised, la rose (1927–2006) was a schoolteacher, 
journalist, essayist, poet, filmmaker, publisher, and labor activist. in the 
late 1950s he settled in london, where he soon became a central figure 
in the black community. in 1966, with Sarah White, he established new 
Beacon Books, a bookstore and publishing house specializing in West 
indian and Pan
-african literature. new Beacon reprinted such classics 
as C.l.r. James’ 1936 novel, Minty Alley and J. J. Thomas’ Creole Grammar 
and Froudacity. it also brought out man y new titles, such as Susan Craig’s 
important monograph on the Trinidad workers’ insurrection of 1934.
 la 
rose was a cofounder of both the Caribbean artists movement 
and the international Book Fair of radical Black and Third World Books. 
Secretary of the West indian independence Party in Trinidad in the 
1950s, he later became the european representative of the Trinidad oil-
fiel
d Workers Trade union.
 l a rose’s surrealist connections began in 1967, when he encountered 
surrealists from Paris at the Cultural Congress of havana. Three years 
later his meeting with surrealists from Chicago, and his reading of the 
special “
surrealist issue” of the american Students for a Democratic 
Society journal Radical America, greatly expanded his interest. Thereafter, 
new B
eacon was among the few london bookshops to stock surrealist 
publications.
 The p
oem reprinted here is from Foundations.


--- PAGE 134 ---
Tropiques: Surreal ism in the Caribbean 113
connecting link
The lineal connection
Between space and time
Tangles like ship’s rope
no coi
ls unwind
But stretch their stench
T o unobtained oblivion
T orment,
T wined in an underbrush
of corro
ding custom,
unwinds itself in inky blood lettings
unstatisticated.
Memory
Mounts its past
in muddled pr
ide
p u e r t o  r i c o
Luis A. Maisonet
Born and raised in hatillo, Puerto rico, luis Maisonet (1924– ) in the 
early 1950s met the Spanish surrealist painter, poet, and writer eugenio 
Granell, a refugee from Franco’s Spain who was teaching on the island 
at the time. Maisonet became Granell’s student and good friend, and 
a mem
ber of the Surrealist Group in Puerto rico, el Mirador azul. he 
took part in the group’s solo and collective shows and helped organize 
the 195
6 surrealist exhibition on the island, for which andré Breton 
wrote a comradely salutation.
 Follo
wing his studies at the university of Puerto rico and later in 
Mexico, Maisonet returned to Puerto rico and became well known as a 
painter, photographer, filmmaker, and teacher. his best-known film, the 
strongly feminist Modesta (1956), won first prize for the Best Short Film


--- PAGE 135 ---
114 Black, Brown, & Beige
at the venice Film Festival. Maisonet also wrote a textbook, Arte para la 
escuela elemental (ar t for elementary school, 1953), introduced by Granell, 
who praised it highly: “i believe this book will prove to be very useful. 
. . . its value lies above all in the author’s basic aim: to ‘exalt the purity 
and freedom of the child’s rich expressive essence.’” The brief text pub-
lished here is excerpted from that book.
freedom of expre SSion for young children
This freedom of expression allows children to explore the profundities of their 
existence, their experience, real or imaginary, and whatever else they wish to 
express, no matter where it comes from—school, the street, the home or the 
countryside. When i speak of this freedom, i mean that children should be 
granted the privilege to express that which they consider significant and of 
the highest interest. This freedom is what is called Dewey self-expression, that 
is to say, a type of expression able to enlighten the highest ideals of integrity 
and sincerity.
 a t 
times, the exercise of this freedom is so abundant and enthusiastic that 
to the careless observer, it can appear to be child’s play. That which seems like 
a game or folly is, at its root, work, concentration, reflection, the capacity to 
overcome the impossible and arrive at a new beginning, with a new determi-
nation that satisfies the desperate need to surpass that which is insecure and 
incoherent in their world.
T ranslated by Alex Wilder


--- PAGE 136 ---
3. South America
Brazil, guyana, colom Bia
all the revolutions in the world succeed chiefly by the message  
of the poets.
—l
éon-Gontran Damas
Brazil
as this section should make plain, contemporary surrealism in Brazil has a long 
and impressive ancestry, especially among poets of african descent.1 at odds 
wi
th the trendy nationalist “modernisms” of their time, brave poets such as João 
da Cr
uz e Souza in the late 1800s, rosário Fusco and Sosígenes Costa in the 
1920s, and Fernando Mendes de almeida in the 1930s pursued distinctive and 
solitary paths of their own. T oday they are recognized by the Surrealist Group 
in São Paulo as their principal forerunners.
 Y et another facet of surrealist prehistory in Brazil revolves around the 
French surrealist poet Benjamin Péret, who, as a militant in the Brazilian Trot-
skyist movement, lived in rio de Janeiro in the years 1929–1931. Péret’s wife, 
elsie houston, regarded as one of Brazil’s all-time greatest singers, also figures 
prominently in the story.
 as an organized movement, however, surrealism in Brazil began in 1967, with 
the formation of a Surrealist Group in São Paulo. in the mid-1960s, the poet, 
collagist, and theorist Sérgio lima had visited Paris, where he met with andré 
Breton and the younger generation of surrealists in France. inspired by the Paris 
Group’s diverse activities as well as its camaraderie and encouragement, lima 
returned to São Paulo and, with the assistance of leila Ferraz, raul Fiker, Paulo 
de Paranagua, and others, immediately set about organizing a group.
 This first step was soon followed by the publication of a hefty 150-page 
lavishly illustrated journal, A Phala (The lighthouse), with contributions not 
only b
y Brazilians but also by robert Benayoun, Jean Benoît, aimé Césaire, 
alain Joubert, annie le Brun, artur do Cruzeiro Seixas, Wifredo lam, Joyce 
Mansour, Mimi Parent, and others from the Paris Group and elsewhere.
 a
 large part of A Phala served as the catalog for yet another manifestation


--- PAGE 137 ---
116 Black, Brown, & Beige
of the young Surrealist Group in Brazil: an international surrealist exhibition, 
featuring a wide selection of works by many surrealist painters, sculptors, col-
lagists, and photographers, plus a showing of Paulo de Paranagua’s film Nadja.
 A Phala also published the Brazilian surrealists’ first collective declaration, 
which reads in part:
Throughout its historic evolution, surrealism has been and continues to 
be the most acute point of the Marvelous in the human world. . . .
The nocturnal trajectory of the erotic and the magical join together, 
with sudden splendor, the reality of Poetry in all its works. . . .
in the majestic br
each of the future, surrealism is the rising flower.
 The Surrealist Group has remained active through the years and has pro-
duced a large number of important books and pamphlets of surrealist poetry 
and theor
y, as well as occasional bulletins and tracts. one of international sur-
realism
’s outstanding poets, Sérgio lima, is also the author of A aventura surrea-
lista (The surrealist adventure), in four volumes of 500-plus pages each, surely 
one of the most massive, insightful, and detailed studies of surrealism in any 
language. lima is also the author of other important works in the surrealist 
canon, including Amore (1963), Collage (1974), and O corpo significa (1976).
 other participants in the São Paulo Group have also published books or 
contributed widely to periodicals. Michael löwy, a major figure in the Paris 
Surrealist Group today—and author of many outstanding books on surrealism, 
philosophy, and politics—is of Brazilian origin and in close communication 
with the São Paulo comrades.
 i n the late 1990s and early 2000s, the Brazilian group had the distinction of 
being the only surrealist group in which women were a substantial majority.
 Brazi
l to this day remains one of international surrealism’s key places. The 
São Paulo Group, recently reorganized under the name Decollage, has proved 
to b
e very active. in the summer of 2006, the group issued a joint statement 
with the surrealists in Portugal and announced plans for other events and 
publications.
colom Bia
an academic writer in Bogotá once remarked that the word “surrealism” was as 
infrequently heard in Colombia as the word “assyriology,” and that no surrealist 
movement existed—or had ever existed—in that country. There was, however, 
he continued, a nadaista movement, indigenous to Colombia, in the 1950s and 
1960s. nadaistas considered themselves an offshoot of Dada and surrealism, 
but were more negativistic, as the term “nada” (nothing) implies. eviden tly, the


--- PAGE 138 ---
South America 117
nadaistas produced several books and many pamphlets, which are almost im-
possible to find today.
 i n 1970 a lone nadaista, armando romero, visited the Chicago Surreal-
ist Group. he explained that the movement in Colombia, after many police 
battles, had practically disbanded. one member was said to be in prison in 
nebraska for trafficking in cocaine.
 T wo Colombian poets in the earlier part of the twentieth century appear to 
have had a strong “passional attraction” (to use Charles Fourier’s expression) 
for surrealism: luis vidales, author of Suenan timbres  ( reverberating ringing, 
1926); and andrés holguín, whose work includes many translations of surreal-
ist poetry.2
 v astly 
more important, however, not only in regard to the cultural life of 
Colombia, but more particularly in the recent history of surrealism, was the 
explosive 1960s arrival on the world scene of the great afro-Colombian painter 
heriberto Cogollo. immediately and enthusiastically welcomed by surrealist 
writers—including Ted Joans, José Pierre, and Joyce Mansour—Cogollo was 
soon recognized throughout the world as one of the important artists of our 
time.
 For
tunately for us all, he is still very active. May his magical and magisterial 
work long continue to make our world a better and more enchanting place!
guyana
Several Guyanese poets and writers, starting as long ago as the 1930s with 
léon-Gontran Damas, have had a strong and enduring impact on the surrealist 
movement.
 Damas was a schoolboy chum of aimé Césaire in Martinique, and later a 
comrade and admirer of etienne léro in Paris. other Paris friends included sev-
eral harlem renaissance 
poets, especially langston hughes, and the surreal-
ists. a
 coeditor of L’Étudiant Noir, Damas was a lively presence in the black and 
surr
ealist milieux of 1930s Paris. as raconteur and “man about town,” he seems 
to have known everybody and to have been everywhere—rather like Ted Joans 
a generation and a half later.
 a
bove all Damas was a first-rate poet, indeed, one of the major poets of his 
generation. Mallarmé was an early influence, but Damas’ discovery of Baude-
laire (and particularly his translations of Poe) had a much greater impact and 
in turn led him to the works of rimbaud, lautréamont, and the surrealists. 
another major influence was the poetry of Sterling Brown, whose Southern Road 
(1932) was an illuminating force in the lives and thought of the entire negritude 
movement.


--- PAGE 139 ---
118 Black, Brown, & Beige
 notably, among the original triumvirate of negritude—Césaire, Senghor, 
Damas—it was Damas who first readied a book for publication (Pigments, 1937), 
with 
a preface by French surrealist poet robert Desnos. T wo years later, fol-
lowing long and grueling interrogations by the French police, the book was 
banned by the government.
 Damas was well known as a lifelong surrealist sympathizer, but he was also 
something more: an ardent defender of surrealism’s revolutionary aims and 
principles. in his later years his friendship with (and influence on) younger 
black poets and artists was an important part of their development, as Ted 
Joans, Jayne Cortez, and Mel edwards have not hesitated to affirm.3
 Walter ro
dney also influenced surrealism, quite possibly without knowing it 
(he was assassinated in 1980). his pamphlet, The Groundings with My Brothers, was 
early on an important text for the Chicago Surrealist Group and was quoted, 
significantly, in what became one of the most frequently reprinted and trans-
lated u.S. surrealist tracts of later years: Three Days That Shook the New W orld 
Order: The Los Angeles Rebellion of 1992. and in a 1994 minimanifesto, “Sure, really 
We are,” Ted Joans urged that “all young and youthful-thinking surrealists 
should read Walter rodney’s book, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.”
 The first issue of the journal Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion  (Chicago, 1970) 
salutes “the demoniacal, compelling lyricism of the Guyanese writer Wilson 
harris,” and from The Palace of the Peacock on, surrealists have followed his novels 
and cr
itical essays with the greatest interest. here again John la rose’s won-
derful london 
bookshop has proved to be an invaluable source. in 1982 texts 
by harris and by C.l.r. James appeared in the surrealist publication Free Spirits: 
Annals of the Insurgent Imagination.  and in 2000, thanks largely to James scholars 
Paul Buhle, Selwyn Cudjoe, and Paget henry, some of the writings by James 
on harris, and by harris on James, were brought to wider attention in a special 
issue of The C.L.R. James Journal (Winter 1999–2000).
 The 
works of Jan Carew—poet, novelist, playwright, and historian—have 
also been important for surrealism, and especially for the Chicago Group. in 
1985, during the prolonged Free nelson Mandela and Divest now demonstra-
ti
ons at northwestern university in evanston, illinois—protests in which the 
surrealists were very active—South african poet and activist Dennis Brutus 
introduced Carew to the surrealists. a lively discussion over lunch ensued, 
joined by Ted Joans, who had just arrived in town.
Notes
 1. My principal source on surrealism in Brazil has been an extensive corre-
spondence 
with Sérgio lima, extending over a period of many years. i


--- PAGE 140 ---
South America 119
also benefited from discussions with Brazilian poet robert Ponge during 
his 2001 visit to Chicago, and more particularly with Célia Cymbalista 
during her 2006 visit.
 2.
 letter to Franklin rosemont from armando romero, February 1972. 
The details on Colombian poets appeared in the Chantilly-based French 
anarchist journal Le Puits de l’Ermite (The hermit’s cave), in a special 1978 
issue ti
tled “la domaine poétique international du surréalisme” (Surreal-
ism’s international poetic domain).
 3.
 on Damas, see racine, Léon-Gontran Damas; Keith Q. Warner, ed., Critical 
Perspectives on Léon-Gontran Damas; and Damas’ interview in the journal 
Jeune Afrique, no. 532 (March 16, 1971), 57–65.


--- PAGE 141 ---
B r a z i l
João da Cruz e Souza
Marginalized in his own time, not only for his extraordinary anticipa-
ti
on of negritude but also for his unsparing protosurrealism, Cruz e 
Souza (today’s critics often prefer to spell it “Sousa”) (1861–1898) was 
reduced to the status of a pariah in the bourgeois “modernist” estab-
lishmen
t of rio de Janeiro, the literary capital of Brazil during the Belle 
Époque. French scholar roger Bastide—author of important studies of 
afro-Brazilian culture—scandalized this narrow-minded white intelli-
gentsia when he declar
ed Cruz e Souza the equal of Mallarmé. indeed, 
Cruz e Souza’s amazing work—above all his Evocações (1898), charac-
terized above all by eroticism, the Marvelous, and its “subversive and 
rev
olutionary spirit” (Sérgio lima)—was truly rediscovered only in the 
1950s and 1960s, when the first organized Surrealist Group in Brazil was 
beginning to take shape.
 For Sérg
io lima and his friends in the São Paulo Surrealist Group, 
the work of Cruz e Souza in the history of surrealism in Brazil is compa-
rable to tha
t of lautréamont in France—the major precursor.
 “Black rose” and “Tenebrous” were first published in the late 1880s or 
early 1890s.
Black roSe
imperious, restless, flesh-devouring flower
Flower of Death’s dream and shadow
Tramm
eled, i try to escape
vexed by your soul’s icy depths
Y our night-clad byword, as good as Dante,
trag
ic irony drenched in hell
and i, eye-witness of your anguish
and the ruthless torment of your heart
Delirious flower steeped in blood
erupting floodlike wave after wave
Such voluptuousness makes me dizzy
Black rose of night, flower of oblivion


--- PAGE 142 ---
South America 121
offer me your acrid, incendiary kiss
which i shall cherish vastly more
than any endearment
from pallid lips
Evocações; translated by Celia Cymbalista
tene BrouS
i wish i could possess your love—your love that must be like a leafy blood tree 
with tenebrous fruits. Y our love of impetus of beast, in the dense woods and 
jungles, over the thick and granitic scars, in the caustic solarity of exotic warm 
weathers of races tropicalized in emotion, because you are made of burning sun 
and of dusky sands, of the warm soil that deserts are made . . .
 i
 wish i could possess your love—complete, strange, eternal this love! and 
i wish i could—if i possessed and enjoyed it—possess and enjoy the Sea and 
have inside myself the curdled ocean—as my soul is curdled of dreams—ships, 
yachts, schooners, galleons, vessels and galleys, through a vassalizing tempest 
in which formidable thunders and electrical frisks of phosphorescent rays, 
cracking the firmament, would shake, in a harsh stormy shiver, the frizzy, tumid 
and wailing neck of the Waves.
 i wish i could love you like that! and in this stormy Sea, under the anguish-
ing pressure of the elements, reacting to a cabalistic sign of mine—as if absolute 
power had granted me the terrible and supreme God of the earth—yachts, 
ships, schooners, vessels and galleys, leading the whole of humanity towards 
several regions of the monstrous world, would suddenly sink into the gaping 
gorge of the wide-open Sea, astounding, quivering . . .
 i
 wish i could love you like that! vibrating to the sun of your blood, burned 
by your flaming skin, whose most penetrating savage aroma arouses me, dazzles 
me, narcotizes me.
Evocações; translated by Marcus Salgado


--- PAGE 143 ---
122 Black, Brown, & Beige
Rosário Fusco
although an organized surrealist movement did not develop in Brazil 
until the 1960s, the history of Brazilian poetry and art is rich with ob-
jective surrealists, individuals who, indifferent to the many trendy “mod-
ernisms,” boldly exemplified—in their lives as well as their works—sur-
realism’s revolutionary and emancipatory spirit.
 in 192
6, in the small town of Cataguazes, near São Paulo, rosário 
Fusco (1910–1977) edited a one-shot poetry magazine called Jazz-Band, 
followed by an aggressively polemical journal, V erde, which featured 
some of the first explicitly surrealist texts to appear in Brazil. Modernist 
critics, then as now hostile to surrealism’s total nonconformism, dis-
missed Fusco’s work as mental gymnastics and accused him of introduc-
in
g european irrationalism into the national literature.
 The two poems translated here are from his 1928 book, Poemas 
cronológicos.
Wind in the Wood S
1.
The wind soothed the fountain
and the fountain in the park sang
—all night long—
the broken-glass music
on the mosaic-bottomed basin.
2.
. . . and this wind that comes from the woods in the moist night is a kiss
long and resinous fragrant of ripe fruits
suspended and swaying . . .
This wind from the woods fills our heart with wild wilderness!
This wind from the woods fills our heart with desire for the exhilaration of 
life!
all the 
voluptuousness pulsing in the bulging womb
of the wind from my woods
T ranslated by Celia Cymbalista


--- PAGE 144 ---
South America 123
Sosígenes Costa
a poet completely outside Brazil’s modernist mainstream, Sosígenes 
Costa (1901–1968) pursued an unparalleled path of his own. he had 
friends in the so-called academy of rebels in Bahia, but even they 
found his work too radically different to publish. he in turn rejected 
their nationalist regionalism and stuck to his own peculiar style. Close in 
spirit to Brazil’s rural songsters and their improvisations, he was indeed 
a prim
itive poet, or, in the words of Sérgio lima, a Brazilian Douanier 
rousseau in poetry. his poems are an explosion of wild colors and odd 
words—a veritable cornucopia of the unexpected, the Marvelous, the 
flora and fauna of the popular imag
ination. he is the poet of talking 
animals and the world turned upside down—a world in which the Mar-
velous is no longer the opposite of the everyday, and in which the most 
ordinary objects are imbued with strangeness.
 Much of his work can be descr
ibed as mythic and frolicsome, but 
he is not a narrow or one-sided poet. indeed, he is also the author of 
inspired fulminations against racism and impassioned dreams of a true 
social utopia of equality and freedom for all.
the golden papyru S
as a matter of fact, in the next day
the Serpent came after me
i got crazy
.
hopeless.
Sleepless
as i
 had never been.
i took a medicine, ingested poison,
finally fell asleep and had a dream
but alas!
i dr
eamed about the snake.
The snake came and pushed me
into the river,
killed the fish that wanted to see me
killed the fish-eyed sphinx


--- PAGE 145 ---
124 Black, Brown, & Beige
killed the fish that read a papyrus
killed a snake with a flower around its tail
hurt 
osiris and osiris died.
Suddenly the kingdom of green ooze
and the puma r
ubbed its tongue all over the fish
in order to check if the little fish would give the ruby.
and the 
incan threw a fishnet on the lake
and the king who owned the ruby threw a fishhook,
and the sun that swam at the bottom of the lake
passed by the sleeping fish
and the fishnet fell over the sun.
The snake told me:
our son wi
ll be Tupac-amaru,
snake of the sky
scale-mouthed snake
celestial snake that casts the ray,
and the snake opened its mouth full of scales.
i scr
eamed and the snake got angry.
The fish woke up over the rock
and the lake that was like rainbow
now was trembling and its water muddy.
Morro do desterro; translated by Marcus Salgado
the red peacock
Well now, happiness, this red peacock,
is presently living in my backyard.
he com
es to land like a sun on my knee
When the dawn is piercing my backyard.
Scarlet morning-glory,
This red peacock
rises above the peacocks outside.
it is a par
ty of purple and i liken him
T o dawn’s flaming flag.
he is the 
very doge looking in the mirror.
and the red color waxes sonorous
with this pompous horned peacock.


--- PAGE 146 ---
South America 125
lilac peacocks i once possessed.
after i loved this peacock,
My other peacocks went away.
Morro do desterro; translated by Danielle Jouët-Pastre and neil Pischner
Fernando Mendes de Almeida
another “outsider” in the history of Brazilian poetry—to this day denied 
a place in the nation’s official literary pantheon—Fernando Mendes 
de a
lmeida is nonetheless a landmark figure, for his Phantom Carrousel 
(1937) was the first b
ook in Brazil to be identified as surrealist. ignored 
by Brazil’s conservative (and nationalist) modernists, the seventy-six-
page collection of poems was praised by more perceptive readers for its 
alarming originality and its revelation of a different sensibility, reflecting 
the chaos that reigns in the tumultuous life of our time.
phantom carrou Sel
let Saturn wait for me in the avenue
oh heart wrapped in untruth!
look at the city of the street cries!
rita! vessel! victory! Shelter!
love is a big red bread
and i had a multicolored garland for lunch
night promises me worthless separation
From unpaired lovemaking to amazons
i f
eel a finger coming into my mouth
quick abyss of the body!
oh agoni
es of harmful resources!
i am narcissus yet no one understands me
and the hot afternoons wrap me with secrets,
With sports hidden by the past
let me en
ter these labyrinths


--- PAGE 147 ---
126 Black, Brown, & Beige
i am not civilization and god already knows it
oh, regular love does not cut away my thirst!
i want the Sea Sierra for myself!
and i feel so small what i’ve already done
That the pain of suicide invites me
Where is it Baghdad?
i wan
t the tormentous Cape horn
T o kill my love.
i wan
t the Sea Sierra!
i want the Sea Sierra!
Phantom Carrousel; translated by Celia Cymbalista
Jorge de Lima
Surrealism did not exist as an organized movement in Brazil until 1967, 
when Sérgio lima and his comrades organized a major international 
surrealist exhibition in São Paulo and founded a dynamic group there. 
earlier
, however, many individual Brazilians—poets, artists, dancers—
had, in varying degrees, identified themselves with surrealism’s aims and 
pri
nciples. one of the first, in the 1930s, was Jorge de lima (1893–1953), 
later hailed as one of the nation’s greatest poets. he grew up in an area 
made famous by Zumbi, the great seventeenth-century black resistance 
leader who established a refuge for escaped slaves, and the legends and 
lore he l
earned as a child were decisive in shaping his life. as he recalled 
in 1945, it was then and there that he had first felt touched by poetry.
 Jorge de 
lima’s career was breathtakingly diverse. author of novels, 
essays, biographies, and at least one film script, he was also a noted 
pai
nter, sculptor, and collagist. he was a physician by profession (with 
a 1914 degree in medicine from rio de Janeiro’s medical school) and 
deeply involved in politics, serving at different times as state deputy, 
director 
of public education, and president of the rio de Janeiro city 
council.
 a
bove all, he was a poet, and here too his diversity was notable. his 
work includes Parnassian sonnets, religious and regionalist verses, vari-
ous forms of Brazil’s highly eclectic modernism, and, in 1952, the ten-
canto Invenção de Orfeu. h
 is specifically surrealist moments were sporadic


--- PAGE 148 ---
South America 127
but powerful. in many scattered poems, and the album of collages, A pin-
tura em pânico (Pai nting in a panic, 1943), the surrealist Jorge de lima left 
us much of his finest work.
hoWling dogS
howling dogs howl longer in a long night
and the woman turns the corners in a long night.
lingering drunkards disperse, dizzy,
and let the long woman pass.
a solitary woman, she turns the corners.
The drunkards stop!
The howling dogs pursue her, the long solitary woman,
in the streets, as she turns the corners.
She must have phosphorescent vision.
She must have very cold hands.
She must be the muse of suicides.
Someone digs in the night. Who is digging?
The long woman turns the corners.
Someone digs in the night. What are they digging?
T oo long is the dogs’ howling.
The long woman turns the corners.
Do not look at her, brother poet.
The solitary woman has a mad vision.
She must be the muse of the drowned.
The long woman goes down the street.
The street is longer now,
and the dogs’ ho
wling is longer, too.
Stop, drunkards! Y ou may come down now,
Down, oh down!
Scattered Poems; translated by Celia Cymbalista


--- PAGE 149 ---
g u y a n a
Léon-Gontran Damas
“if i have become the man that i am,” léon Damas (1912–1978) said in 
1973, “i owe it to surrealism.” one of the major poets of negritude, he 
was born into a middle-class family in Cayenne, French Guyana. his 
father was a mulatto of partly european ancestry, his mother, african 
and native american. after attending the local school in Cayenne he 
enrolled in the lycée Schoelcher in Martinique. While studying phi-
losoph
y there he met aimé Césaire, who became his lifelong friend. 
later, in France, he studied law and anthropology, got involved in 
radical politics, and spent a lot of time with Michel leiris and robert 
Desnos. in Paris he and Césaire, together with their Senegalese friend 
léopold Senghor, founded the short-lived but influential paper titled 
L’Étudiant Noir—an early voice of wha t soon became known as negri-
tude
. later he published his first book of poems, Pigments, with a preface 
by Desnos.
 Damas’ p
oetry, with its hard-driving rhythms, staccato repetition, 
and disquieting images, was influenced not only by surrealism but also 
by 
african song, the harlem renaissance poets, and Sterling Brown.
 he was an important inspiration for the Black Power and Black a rts 
movements.
for Sure
For sure i’ll get fed up
without even waiting
for things to ripen
like a good camembert
So unt
il then i’ll just go
and put my foot in it
or grab by the collar
ever
ything i can’t stand
in capital letters:
colonization
civilization


--- PAGE 150 ---
South America 129
assimilation
and all that
Meanwhile
you’ll often hear me
slam the door
Pigments; translated by Franklin rosemont
good Breeding
Where i come from they don’t yawn
the way they yawn around here
with their hand
on their mouth
i wan
t to yawn without hubbub
my body bent over
in the aromas that torment the life
that 
i’ve made for myself
out of their ugly cur of a winter
out of their sun that couldn’t even
warm up the coco juice
that bubbled in my stomach
when i
 woke up
let me yawn
with my hand
right here
on my heart
obsessed as 
i am with all those things
that in just one day one single day
i t
urned away from
Pigments; translated by Franklin rosemont
a cari BBean vieW on Sterling a. Bro Wn
i should like to say that this distinguished man has done much, and was among 
the first to open the road to negro consciousness through his first book, South-
ern Road, and afterwards Negro Caravan, which marked the beginning of the 
negro Movement and which so greatly influenced the negritude Movement of


--- PAGE 151 ---
130 Black, Brown, & Beige
the thirties. The new negro generation should never forget, and indeed always 
remember the significant literary contributions and personal struggles made by 
their forefathers, men with such rigorous intellectual and physical stamina. . . . 
accordin
g to the ancient proverb which asserts that poets are born, not made, 
Brown and i were born with a poetic gift which is not learned, but cultivated, 
and favored by a predestination. additional reasons have permitted Sterling 
Brown not only to develop himself and his works, but to extend his optic to 
embrace and treat the Black race in the united States and elsewhere.
 his stature has already secured him an important place in the tragic history 
of our race and indeed human history, which africans were not considered to 
be a part of.
Sterling Brown: A UMUN T ribute
a Single inStant of Belief
For a moment believe
in a hand without a glove
a hand luminous of springtime
naked in the birth of spring
springtime born from magic
magic of rhythm
the toothless
diseased mob
single-eyed and paranoid
cried all over
my insane heart without hate
Pigments; translated by alex Wilder
negritude and Surreali Sm
Startlingly, the negritude was not conceived by africans in the Motherland 
but by those influenced by the spirituals, blues and jazz of the united States of 
america; the sound and dance of Cubans; the batucada, samba, frevo, and capoeira 
of Brazil; the merengue and petro of hai ti; the merenque of the Dominicans and 
Puerto ricans; the calypso of Trinidad and Jamaica; and the casse-co of Guyana, 
not to mention the beguine of Martinique and Guadeloupe—all of which had 
their or
igins in africa.
 here negritude was born—not in africa, but in the West i ndies.


--- PAGE 152 ---
South America 131
 i t was not until the 1920s and 30s that there arose a generation of writers 
who, instead of voicing cries of complaint and hope, demanded justice, and 
were openly determined to make this known. They affirmed clearly their quality 
of Blackness as well as its entitlement to civil and cultural rights, as W.e.B. Du 
Bois defended so eloquently.
 i t 
was the birth of the harlem renaissance and the new negro in whose 
name langston hughes proclaimed a manifesto:
We younger negro artists who create now intend to express our indi-
vidual dark-
skinned selves without fear or shame. if the white folks 
seem pleased, we are glad. if they are not, it doesn’t matter. We know 
we are beautiful. ugly too. The tom-tom cries and the tom-tom laughs. 
if colored people are pleased, we are glad. if they are not, their pleasure 
doesn’t matter. We build our temples for tomorrow, strong as we know 
them, and we stand on the top of the mountain free within ourselves.
The 
profound sense of this manifesto was realized by the pioneers of negri-
tude: Césaire, Maugée, achille, Gratiant, Senghor, Diop, myself and others. 
We were determined to follow in the footsteps of langston hughes, Countee 
Cullen, Jean T oomer, Sterling Brown, and Claude McKay, the author of Banjo, 
who realized in 1930 (a date to remember) a much-deserved success. Césaire, 
Senghor and i helped as much as we could to make all of their works well 
known.
 The period between the 1920s and 30s was one of great fertility. The first 
Pan-negro Congress, due to the initiative of Du Bois, took place in Paris. The 
theories of Marcus Garvey were in the air. rené Maran published Batouala. it 
was the time of the Paris publication of the first Black journals: Les Continents, 
The Paria, The Dépêche Africaine, the Revue du Monde Noire,  f ounded by a haitian 
physician, Dr. Sajous, with the collaboration of Paulette nardal.
 The disappearance of Revue du Monde Noire in 1932 accelerated the historical 
mov
ement leading to the birth of negritude, with the appearance in 1934 of 
L’Étudiant Noir, a result of the initiative of Césaire, Senghor, and me.
 Somewhat before this (1932) Légitime Défense  had appeared—a Periodical of 
Struggle which survived only one issue, but was sufficiently packed with rich 
ideas and views to make it worthy of preservation. in Légitime Défense, et ienne 
léro and other West indians signed a manifesto which remains the most insur-
rectional document of French-speaking men of color.
 For léro, the exceptional mediocrity of French West indian poetry was 
clearly related to the existing social order. The majority of the population could 
not read, or write, or speak French. Starting with léro’s poems, a new West


--- PAGE 153 ---
132 Black, Brown, & Beige
indian poetry was born. T o léro and no other the poetry of the French West 
indies owes its first new blood. it is to léro that we owe the fact that, since 1932, 
French West indian poetry has taken the path of dreams.
Continuities (autumn 1974)
Wilson Harris
Poet, novelist, and essayist Wilson harris (1921– ) was born in Guyana 
(then British Guiana), but has lived most of his life in london. his first 
publication was a suite of audaciously experimental poems titled Eternity 
to Season, but it was his first novel, Palace of the Peacock (1960) that brought 
him wide at
tention. its free-floating oneiricism and ecstatic intensity 
at once lead perceptive readers to compare it to rimbaud’s “Drunken 
Boat.” even more amazingly, the oft-abused adjective surrealist has, in 
this case, been rightly applied—and not only to Palace but also to har
 ris’ 
other tales.
 Much less we
ll known are his critical essays, which are, however, 
every bit as imaginative and insightful as his poetry and novels. The text 
reprinted here, from his early collection, T radition: The Writer and Society, 
also appeared in the surrealist journal Free Spirits: Annals of the Insurgent 
Imagination in 1982.
voodoo, trance, poetry and dance
haitian vodun is one of the surviving primitive dances of ancient sacrifice, 
which, in courting a subconscious community, sees its own performance in lit-
eral terms—that is, with and through the eyes of space: with and through the 
sculpture of sleeping things which the dancer himself actually expresses and 
becomes. For in fact the dancer moves in a trance and the interior mode of the 
drama is exteriorized into a medium inseparable from his trance and invocation. 
he is a dramatic agent of subconsciousness. The life from within and the life 
from without now truly overlap. That is the intention of the dance, the riddle 
of the dancer.


--- PAGE 154 ---
c o l o m B i a
Heriberto Cogollo
Born in Cartagena, Colombia, Cogollo (1945– ) studied painting there 
(1957–1960) and later in Madrid. Since 1967 he has lived primarily in 
Par
is. his work has been shown in individual and collective exhibitions 
in Colombia, Spain, France, Germany, and other countries. Photo-
graphic reproductions of several of his paintings illustrate Ted Joans’ 
1999 volume of selected poems, T education.
 The ar
tist’s statement published here is taken from the exhibition 
catalog Cogollo: Le monde d’un Nohor (Gal erie Suzanne visat, Paris, 1973), 
which also includes a preface by Jose Pierre.
the World of a nohor
in Senegal and uganda, a nohor is a semi-sorcerer, that is to say a sorcerer 
through his father; he is someone endowed with “supernatural vision,” who is 
able to contemplate, at his leisure and in complete passivity, the viscera and en-
trai
ls of his peers. he would be incapable of killing a victim to feed on its flesh, 
which is the prerogative of the unqualified sorcerer.
 a
s much as i am a nohor, it doesn’t make me any less a man and my inner 
world is closely mingled with these projections so much so that it is sometimes 
difficult to make the distinction between what i see and what is actually my 
own.
 What i do know is that i would like to be able to also show the inner world 
i gaze upon.
T ranslated by Marjolijn de Jager


--- PAGE 155 ---
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK


--- PAGE 156 ---
4. Africa
cairo, north africa, the maghre B, Su B-Saharan 
africa, madaga Scar
the Surreali St group in cairo
The door swings open and the one no one expected
Makes his way through the costume ball
—n
icole espagnol
The mid- and late 1930s effloresence of Paris-based african and Caribbean 
surrealism appreciably strengthened surrealism as an international movement, 
expanding its horizons in the realms of poetry, theory, politics, and the arts. 
T ogether with the growing number of surrealist groups in europe and else-
where—from Buenos aires to Belgrade, from london to T okyo—the Martinic-
ans and Cubans also did much to rectify the widespread but erroneous belief 
that surrealism was somehow exclusively French.
 i n 19
37 the expansion of the Surrealist international received a major boost 
from a group in africa. The Cairo Surrealist Group, which flourished for well 
over a decade, was itself international. Most of its members were egyptian, but 
it also included the italian anarchist painter angelo de riz, the armenian pho-
tograp
her ida Kar, and english critic victor Musgrave.1
 The 
group’s chief instigator and organizer was Georges henein, who would 
soon become one of the best-known figures in world surrealism.2 Son of a Cop-
tic e
gyptian father and an italian mother, henein was a magnificent poet, per-
cepti
ve critic, brilliant strategist, and born agitator. he discovered surrealism 
as a student in Paris in 1934, at the age of twenty. Before becoming active in 
the mo
vement he took part in a Cairo group called les essayistes, which pub-
lished a monthly, Un Effort. The February 1935 issue features his manifesto “on 
ir
realism,” showing that he was well on his way to surrealism: “nothing is more 
useless than the real. . . . Why seek truth where it is not, in external things, 
when our internal resources have hardly been explored at all? The only true 
world is the one we create within ourselves; the only sincere world the one we 
create against others.” This manifesto was accompanied by an example of auto-
mat
ic writing, an irrealist tale titled “The noumena evaded and resuscitated.” 
The same issue, moreover, includes henein’s merciless critique of the former


--- PAGE 157 ---
136 Black, Brown, & Beige
surrealist aragon’s Stalinist novel, Les cloches de bâle (T he bells of Basil). henein’s 
opening line: “a literary work is not an election poster.”
 Thanks to henein, the essayistes moved steadily in the direction of pure 
provocation. in one of the group’s fugitive publications—an antibourgeois dic-
tionary—he offers such definitions as these:
Anarchy: victor y of the Spirit over certainty
Beauty: The power to act
Pantheon: a  place for the interment of men who might otherwise  
be forgotten
W ork: ev
erything that we don’t want to do
 i ncreasingly attracted to surrealism, he began a campaign to bring the new 
movement to wider attention. With tireless energy, he trumpeted the surrealist 
message 
all over Cairo. always controversial, his numerous articles and debates 
with the essayistes were much discussed. in october 1935 he gave a lecture 
on lautréamont and published an article on the suicide of rené Crevel. T wo 
months later, having decided to join the surrealist movement, he wrote his first 
let
ter to andré Breton, whom he met the following spring.
 By 1937 he had not only given his first public talk on surrealism in Cairo, but 
had also begun organizing an egyptian Surrealist Group, which later adopted 
the name art and Freedom. among the first adherents of the group were poet 
edmond Jabes and the painters Kamel Telmisamy, angelo de riz (a refugee 
from Mussolini’s italy), and ramses Y ounane. one of henein’s closest friends 
for many years, Y ounane—who came to be recognized as egypt’s foremost 
surrealist painter—was also an important surrealist theorist.
 While planning an egyptian surrealist publication, the question arose: 
Should it be published in French or arabic? henein’s friend Benjamin Péret 
urged him “to make every effort” to publish it in arabic, arguing that “however 
incomprehensible arabic may be here [in France], it is always good for a little 
truth to burst out elsewhere. eventually it will spread out widely.”3
 a
s it turned out, henein and his friends published three journals. Art et liberté 
appeared in French and arabic (two issues, March and May 1939), while Al-
T attawor (evolution) was entirely in arabic (eight issues in 1940). The third, Don 
Quichotte (two issues, December 1939 and March 1940) also appeared in French 
and arabic
.
 all three of these publications were concerned with political as well as cul-
tural matters. The high priority given to politics was not by chance. Stalinists 
were bitter enemies of surrealism—and of all true revolutionists—and so were 
the eg
yptian nationalists. But Cairo’s surrealists were also well aware of another


--- PAGE 158 ---
Africa 137
impending menace: fascism. With Mussolini’s troops stationed in nearby libya 
and in ethiopia, the fascist threat was very real in egypt.
 There is reason to believe—although the critical literature appears to be 
silent on the matter—that each of the Cairo Group’s periodicals was meant to 
serve a different purpose and was also directed to different readers. Art and Free-
dom, which included the participation of several nonsurrealist artists and writers, 
was primarily a bulletin of the arts and current intellectual life, deeply con-
cerned with pressing problems of the day and, more generally, with civil rights 
and free-speech issues. it was closely allied with the international Federation of 
independent revolutionary art (Fiari), formed in 1938 by andré Breton and 
Diego rivera (with the support of leon Trotsky and the additional participation 
of C.l.r. James) as a revolutionary alternative to the various Stalinist cultural 
fronts. The Fiari manifesto, For an Independent Revolutionary Art, signed by Breton 
and rivera, demands “complete freedom for art. no authority, no dictation, 
not the least trace of orders from above!” like the Fiari elsewhere, the Art and 
Freedom readership embraced socialists, Trotskyists, anarchists, syndicalists, and 
several artists and writers who thought of themselves as independent radicals.
 Al-T attawor, edited by a nwar Kamel, was an explicitly political and agi-
tat
ional organ, affiliated with the Fourth international. aimed principally at 
workers and radical students, it focused on local labor news, women’s struggles, 
and revolutionary news from around the world. unlike most agitprop publica-
tions, however, it also featured texts on modern poetry and art.
 Don Quichotte, on the contrary, emphasized high-caliber cultural criticism 
and polemic. henein contributed numerous articles on a wide range of sub-
jects: Jean Malaquais, Alice in W onderland, J acques vaché, the painter el Telmi-
sany
. his denunciation of such “classical” French authors as la Bruyère and la 
Fontaine appears under the title “ in regard to Some Slovenly Characters.” in 
short, Don Quichotte was a journal clearly intended for that sector of the popu-
lation that Marxists liked to call advanced intellectuals.
 The 
opening statement of the inaugural issue of Don Quichotte sums up the 
basic orientation and tone of all these journals: “We struggle against: indif-
ference, anachronism, facility, the use that people don’t make of freedom, all 
falsifications, and all euphemisms.”
 all through the late 1930s and the war years the Cairo Surrealist Group 
maintained an intense collective activity. in addition to its journals, books, pam-
phlets, tracts, lectures, and occasional radio appearances, it organized five large 
collective art and freedom exhibitions between 1940 and 1945, notable not 
only for the high quality of the work, but also for the large number of women 
participants. nonsectarian, the Cairo surrealists and their friends took part in


--- PAGE 159 ---
138 Black, Brown, & Beige
discussions and debates with other radicals, most notably at the gatherings of 
diverse artists and intellectuals at the home of henein’s friend Maria Cavadia. 
But the Cairo surrealists were also active in labor struggles, at workplaces, and 
in the streets.
 i nevi
tably, henein and his comrades had their troubles with the police, who 
more than once confiscated the group’s tracts and other publications. at least 
for a time, the group was also the target of a press boycott. Persecution not-
withstanding, the Cairo Group remained one of the most active and productive 
centers of the international surrealist movement.
the amazing Joyce manSour
The most important figure in egyptian surrealism from the late 1950s on was 
the great poet and fiction writer Joyce Mansour, who readily acknowledged the 
influence of henein and his comrades. Mansour, a longtime militant in the Sur-
realist 
Group, lived most of her life in Paris. her first book, Cris (Shrieks), was a 
sensat
ion when it appeared in 1953. its ferocious sexuality—unprecedented in 
French feminine literature—was a scandal to many. in egypt, too, many readers 
were shocked, but few books were more widely read and discussed.
 her later poems and tales seethe with the same violent eroticism, and a 
savage, ready-for-anything humor. Compared to her Jules César, it was said, the 
then-notorious Story of O  was mere rosewater. h er “women’s column” in the 
surrealist magazine BIEF offered readers hilarious détournements (puns) of clichés 
from fashi
onable women’s periodicals. an insatiable inventor of original ways 
of questioning what is, Joyce Mansour was above all a bright exemplar of poetic 
excess. a
ll her writing is characterized by ardent rebelliousness, daredevil anti-
conformity, and belligerent scorn for the conventional in all its forms.
 a
ndré Breton called her Les gisants satisfaits (The satisfied effigies), the twenti-
eth century’s Garden of Earthly Delights. Breton, indeed, admired Mansour’s work 
immensely and made it known that he considered her one of the finest postwar 
surrealist poets and writers in France.4
 a generous supporter of surrealist painters, to whom she dedicated apprecia-
tive articles and poems, Mansour helped organize the group’s many collective 
exhibitions. in 1960, with robert Benayoun, octavio Paz, and nora Mitrani, 
she represented the Surrealist Group on an important BBC radio broadcast, “in 
Defense of Surrealism.”
 The 
cigar-smoking Mansour was also a gutsy activist; in 1967, for example, 
she gave the notorious Stalinist Siqueiros a swift kick in the pants at the Cul-
tural 
Congress of havana. a large supportive crowd applauded and chanted: 
“¡Cuba, sí! ¡Siqueiros, no!”


--- PAGE 160 ---
Rapaces (1960), a book of poems by Joyce Mansour, one of the most important 
poets of the postwar period. The cover is by Jean Benoît.


--- PAGE 161 ---
140 Black, Brown, & Beige
 as poet, writer, spokesperson, organizer, and activist, Joyce Mansour always 
manifested a warm sense of international surrealist solidarity. Fluent in english, 
she maintained friendly ties with Ted Joans as well as the group in Chicago.
north africa: the maghre B
The northwest region of africa known as the Maghreb—consisting of algeria, 
Tunisia, and Morocco—has been home to several active participants in the 
surrealist movement, and also to writers and artists friendly to it. algiers, in 
particular, though never a locus of collective surrealist activity per se, never-
theless over the years served as a surrealist port of call. We know, for example, 
Cover of Anthologie du nonsense, by robert Benayoun, 1957.


--- PAGE 162 ---
Africa 141
that Georges Bessière, an early Paris surrealist who collaborated on La Révolution 
Surréaliste in 1925, and then dropped out of sight, published a book of his sur-
realist poems, S.O.S., in a lgiers in 1937. a pamphlet edition of Breton’s Situation 
du surréalisme entre les deux guerres appeared in the same city in 1945.
 Four 
of the eight individuals represented in this section—Baya, Benayoun, 
Kréa, and lariby—actively participated in collective surrealist activity: Baya’s 
1947 Paris exhibition catalog has a preface by andré Breton, and Benayoun, 
from 1949 on, was one of the most prolific and original writers in the Paris 
Group. Kréa took part in the Milan Group, and lariby in the short-lived arab 
Surrealist Movement in exile, headquartered in Paris (see below). atlan is 
something of a special case. his close friends included several surrealists, but 
his main activity centered on the Cobra movement.
 Khair-
eddine, Tengour, and laâbi had no direct involvement in organized 
surrealism. in the repressive regimes they lived under, the police would not 
have permitted a surrealist group to exist. however, their varied works exem-
plify a serious commitment to surrealism as a revolutionary means of disalien-
ation, a subversion of the language of commerce and power, and a passionate 
pursuit of the practice of poetry.
the araB Surreali St movement in exile
Freedom is the most persistently lingering of desires.
—haifa Zangana
The Paris-based arab Surrealist Movement in exile was formed in the mid-
1970s. its principal founder and spokesperson was the iraqi poet and agitator 
abdul Kader el Janaby (born in Baghdad in 1944). already a rebel in his teens, 
and constantly in trouble at school, el Janaby encountered surrealism in 1967 
in a u.S. paperback. in his early twenties he translated several dozen african 
american poems and blues songs, which were published in various iraqi jour-
nals. 
With the formation of the arab Surrealist Movement in exile his social-
ist political views evolved increasingly toward anarchism, and he developed 
close ties with surrealist groups in Paris and Chicago. The arab Group’s strident 
Manifesto—featured in english in Arsenal, no. 3—includes these lines:
We practice subversion twenty-four hours a day. We liberate language 
from the prisons and stock markets of capitalist confusion.
 o
ur surrealism, in art as in life: permanent revolution against the 
world of aesthetics and other atrophied categories; the destruction and 
supersession of all retrograde forces and inhibitions.


--- PAGE 163 ---
This book of drawings by uche okeke was published in ibadan in 1961.


--- PAGE 164 ---
Africa 143
 Subversion resides in surrealism the same way history resides in 
events.
its signatories, in addition to el Janaby (which he later spelled Janabi), were 
Maroin Dib (Syria), Faroq el Juridy (l ebanon), Fadil abas hadi (iraq), Farid 
lariby (algeria), and Ghazi Y ounes (lebanon).
 For six or seven years this group, aided by the english poet and translator 
Peter Wood, was a dynamic force in international surrealism. Marxist oriented 
at first, its decided turn toward anarchism is indicated by the title of its mimeo-
graphed magazine, Le désir libertaire (
 libertarian desire). Political and antipoliti-
cal tracts did not, however, dominate the magazine’s content. Le désir libertaire  
published poetry by most members of the group, as well as arabic transla-
tions of poems by Joyce Mansour, Benjamin Péret, and several american sur-
realists
. Considerable space was also given to theoretical texts. el Janaby was 
acquainted with Georges henein’s widow, ikbal el alailly, and with her help 
devoted a special issue to henein’s life and work. his other friends in Paris in-
cluded sur
realists Jean Benoit, Mimi Parent, Ted Joans, nicole espagnol, alain 
Joubert, Édouard Jaguer, and the Tunisian Situationist Mustapha Khayati.
 i n addition to the signatories to the manifesto quoted above, the arab 
Group attracted a number of other collaborators over the years, most notably 
the iraqi writer haifa Zangana, who was also active in surrealist activity in 
london. T ogether with the arab Group, Zangana also took part in the 1976 
World Surrealist exhibition in Chicago. author of a harrowing memoir, Through 
the V ast Halls of Memory (1991), she has more recently distinguished herself as an 
international journalist.5
 a
las, the arab group—always prey to bitter factionalism and schism—dis-
integrated in the early 1980s and completely disbanded not long afterward.
 i n 1998 a. K. el Janaby published a memoir in French: Horizon vertical. largely 
devoted to his youth in Baghdad and his involvement in the london hippie 
scene in the 1960s, the book is sketchy about surrealism generally, and about 
the arab group in particular.
northea St africa: ethiopia
ethiopia is noted for its many fine painters, but the only one directly asso-
ciated with surrealism was alexander (Skunder) Boghossian (1937–2003), who 
also happens to have been widely celebrated as one of the greatest twentieth-
century african artists. During his years in Paris (late 1950s, early 1960s) his 
friends included Sheikh anta Diop, andré Breton, Wifredo lam, and Ted Joans.


--- PAGE 165 ---
144 Black, Brown, & Beige
in later years he taught painting at howard university and eventually returned 
to ethiopia.
SuB-Saharan africa
hundreds of years before the advent of modern art in early-twentieth-century 
europe, africans were making art that not only inspired but actually prefigured 
such european movements as Cubism, Fauvism, Dada, and Surrealism.
 Fauvists and Cubists were chiefly attracted by the formal aesthetic values 
of african sculpture, and Dadaists by what they regarded as the weird or hu-
morous character of certain masks. The surrealists’ interest was substantially 
broader and deeper. Powerfully moved by the “convulsive beauty” of african 
art, they were also eager to know more about traditional african thought and 
ways of life—so very different from the ideologies and lifestyles of an increas-
in
gly decadent and imperialist-minded europe. above all, surrealists admired 
the african artists’ fervent grasp of the poetic spirit, or, in other words, their 
impassioned sense of the Marvelous.
 i n 
view of their long traditions of stonecutting, wood carving, painting, and 
other arts, it should not be surprising that african artists in more recent times, 
and in our time, have continued to produce works in which the triumph of 
“convulsive beauty” and the Marvelous are very much in evidence. nor should 
anyone be surprised by the fact that works by many of these artists—and also 
by 
african poets—are frequently recognized as surrealist.
 For the record, the first explicitly surrealist exhibition in sub-Saharan africa 
opened in luanda, angola, in october 1953. it was organized by the Portu-
guese painter and poet artur do Cruzeiro Seixas, who lived in africa for four-
teen y
ears. an accompanying two-sided flyer features quotations by aimé Cé-
saire
, andré Breton, Mário Cesariny, lautréamont, rimbaud, heraclitus, and 
Blaise Pascal.
 Despi
te geographical separation and language barriers, people find ways to 
communicate. Just as contemporary surrealists in Paris, Prague, São Paulo, and 
Chicago ha
ve been able to see and appreciate the art of contemporary africa, 
so too many of today’s african artists have had opportunities to see work by 
surrealists from all over the world. in short, the influences are more reciprocal 
than ever.
 h
umor in its most imaginative vein retains a strong place in african surreal-
ism. 
let three examples of practitioners suffice:
 1. The Ghanaian coffin builders who, not so long ago, reinvented the 
coffin by shaping them into brightly colored automobiles, airplanes,


--- PAGE 166 ---
Drawing (1970) by ignácio 
Matsinhe.
Drawing by Cheikh Tidiane Sylla in Arsenal (vol. 4 [1989]).


--- PAGE 167 ---
146 Black, Brown, & Beige
ships, and—at least once—a giant beer bottle. Smaller models of these 
coffins are also made as household sculptures;6
 2.
 The anonymous creators of a wonderful new literary genre, ferry boat 
literature: eight-page stapled pamphlets featuring wildly imaginative 
stories just long enough to read while crossing a river; and
 3.
 The introduction of Bugs Bunny as a motif on dashikis displayed at 
Chicago’s 2006 GhanaFest, as noticed by Surrealist Group member 
Tamara Smith.
 a
frican genius, as expressed in its boundless innovative propensities—in the 
visual arts as well as poetry—seems to have an intimate affinity with surrealism’s 
quest for a social order based on poetry, love, and freedom.
 Most of the poets and artists represented in this section have been directly 
involved in surrealism, as participants in surrealist exhibitions (Malangatana 
valente, inácio Matsinhe, Cheikh Tidiane Sylla) or collaborators on surrealist 
publications (Dennis Brutus). although the South african painter and sculp-
tor ernest Macomba did not take part in the surrealist movement, he was a 
cofounder, in Paris in 1948, of the surrealist-influenced european Cobra move-
ment—with asger Jorn, Jean-Michel atlan, Corneille, and others, including 
Macomba’s Danish wife, Sonja Ferlov.
 Poems by Jean-Joseph rabéarivelo, an important african surrealist forerun-
ner, have been included at the urging of Dennis Brutus and several surrealist 
friends.
Notes
 1. in addition to other sources noted in this section, i have drawn appre-
ciably on do
cuments on surrealism in egypt—and elsewhere in africa—
sent to me by Georges henein’s widow, ikbal el alailly; the iraqi writer 
abdul Kader el Janaby; Dennis Brutus of South africa; the French poet 
and critic Édouard Jaguer; the english painter Conroy Maddox; the 
Portuguese poet and painter arturo do Cruzeiro Seixas; and hédi abdul 
Jaouad.
 2.
 Sarane alexandrian, Georges Henein.
 3.
 David renton, “Georges henein,” 82–103.
 4. Breton, interview with Jacqueline Piatier, Le Monde, January 13, 1960.


--- PAGE 168 ---
5. haifa Zangana, Through the V ast Halls of Memory. Writings by Zangana, 
with comm
entary, are included in Penelope rosemont, Surrealist W omen, 
364–367, 416–419.
 6.
 “artists’ Killer Coffins Send Dead out in Style,” Chicago T ribune (May 8, 
2006).


--- PAGE 169 ---
e g y p t
long live degenerate art!
it is well known that modern society looks with aversion on any innovative cre-
ation in art and literature which threatens the cultural system on which that so-
ciety is based, whether it be from the point of view of thought or of meaning.
 Such f
eelings of repugnance are clearly visible in countries of a totalitarian 
nature, most particularly in hitlerian Germany, where free art has met with ex-
tr
eme hostility and is now termed “Degenerate art” by those ignoramuses. art-
ists from Cézanne to Picasso have been vilified, and the work that is the prod-
uct of modern artistic genius with its sense of freedom, energy and humanity 
has been abused and trampled under foot.
 We 
believe that the fanatical racialist, religious and nationalistic path which 
certain individuals wish modern art to follow is simply contemptible and 
ridiculous.
 We think that these reactionary myths will only serve to imprison thought. 
art is, by its nature, a constant intellectual and emotional exchange in which 
humankind as a whole participates and which cannot therefore accept such 
artificial limitations.
 i n vienna, which has now been abandoned to the barbarians, a painting by 
renoir has been torn into pieces and books by Freud have been burnt in the 
public squares. Works by great German artists such as Max ernst, Paul Klee, 
Karl hoffer, oskar Kokoschka, George Grosz and Wassily Kandinsky have 
been confiscated and replaced by worthless national Socialist art.
 Similarly in rome, a committee has recently been formed “for the purifica-
ti
on of literature”! it has taken up its duties and has decided to withdraw every-
thin
g that is “anti-italian, anti-racist, immoral and depressing.”
 i ntellectuals, artists and writers: let us stand together and accept the chal-
len
ge! We must align ourselves alongside this “Degenerate art,” for in such art 
reposes the hopes of the future. let us work to support it so that it will prevail 
against the new Middle ages which they are trying to resurrect within the 
heart of europe.
 This statement has been signed by artists, writers, journalists and lawyers. 
Their names are as follows: ibrahim Wassily; ahmed Fahmy; edouard Pollack; 
edouard levy; armand antebi; albert isra’il; albert Cosseri; Kamel al-
Telmisany; alexandra Mitchkovski; emil Simon; angelo Paulo; angelo de riz; 
anwar Kamel; annette Fadida; a. Politis; l. Galanti; Germaine isra’il; Georges 
henein; hassan Subhi; a. rafu; Zakariah al-azouni (from the union of law-


--- PAGE 170 ---
Africa 149
yers); Sami riyadh; Sami hanouka; Scalet; abdul Khaliq al-azouni; Fatima 
na’amat rashed; Fouad Kamel; Kemal Wiliam; laurent Salinas; Marcelle Bia-
gini; Marcel nada; Malanos; Muhammed Saif-al-Doen; Muhammed nur; nadif 
Selair; hassia; henri Dumani.
Cairo, December 22, 1938
London Bulletin 13 (1939)
Georges Henein
Son of a Coptic father and an italian mother, and French-speaking early 
on, henein (1914–1973) discovered surrealism as a student in Paris in the 
mid-1930s. he promptly joined the group and became one of its strong-
est and most innovative voices. During the next two decades his poems, 
articles, and stories appeared in London Bulletin, Clé, VVV , Phases, Edda, and 
many other surrealist and revolutionary periodicals.
 in 19
37 henein returned to Cairo and founded art and Freedom, 
which included surrealists and other radical artists as well as an assort-
ment of miscellaneous rebels and free spirits united by their militant 
opposition to imperialism and “traditional values.” The group, an affiliate 
of Fiar
i, organized several major exhibitions featuring the most original 
painting and photography in egypt at the time. an especially interest-
ing aspect of these well-attended shows is the fact that a large number 
of the artists were women.
 Meanwhi
le, henein, together with his companion, ikbal el alailly, 
the painter ramses Y ounane, and others, had also formed the Surreal-
ist Group of Cairo and started a surrealist journal, Le Part du Sable (two 
issues were published). 
art and liberty and the Surrealist Group were 
also active in strikes and other workers’ struggles and not infrequently 
involved in scrapes with the police.
 in 19
47 henein, along with Sarane alexandrian and henri Pastou-
reau, became part of the secretariat of Cause, a Paris-based international 
bureau of sur
realist information and liaison. unfortunately, various 
differences with some of the French members led henein to distance 
himself from the group around 1950. even in later years, however, he re-
mained true to his surrealist inclinations and maintained friendly contact 
with Breton and many others.
 Dur
ing the 1950s he lived mostly in Cairo; in 1960 he moved to 
rome, and then went back to Paris, where he edited the magazine Jeune 
Afrique for several years.


--- PAGE 171 ---
150 Black, Brown, & Beige
 henein was a major inspiration for the a rab Surrealist Movement 
in exile during the 1970s and early 1980s. Most of his books have been 
reprinted, previously unpublished writings have been issued at last, and 
much of his work has been translated into other languages.
manife Sto
i have sown dragons; i reap fleas.
—Karl Marx
at the very time when events are sanctioning the partition of the globe into 
two unyielding fronts, what should our position be towards Marxist doctrine, 
which one of these two antagonistic blocks would aim to put into practice?
 our position regarding Marxism is the inverted reflection of that adopted by 
Marxist groups towards the individual, freedom and the activities arising from 
literary or artistic creation in general. at the stage that is historically consid-
ered as that of the struggle for power, Marxists always pursue a policy of sys-
tematic opportunism that consists of taking power soon followed by a change 
in 
both tone and purpose, that assumes a character of blatant terror. indeed, 
it is of primary importance for the Marxist forces, during the difficult period 
of struggle for supremacy, to unite the most highly developed elements, the 
greatest minds, and the most representative intellectuals and writers under one 
flag. insidious propaganda and outrageous underhandedness have been put into 
effect for the sake of this plan, and it has been displayed to all that the rights of 
the individual, respect for mankind, and cultural heritage could be in no safer 
hands than that of Marxism in practice.
 i n 
short, the new society to whose edification they mean to contribute will 
provide ample leeway for critical judgment as well as inventiveness. Sad to say, 
the real facts are far from confirming such claims; indeed, they are nowhere 
near. let it suffice to mention that, one century after coming into being, Marx-
ism is the sole economic doctrine which immediately considers blasphemous 
any critical views or any attempt to criticize it, despite the major upheavals that 
have affected the face and structure of the modern world, whose interpreter 
Marxism would be. We do not hesitate to hold this type of “taboo,” which has 
become the “sign of the cross” of so many revolutionaries, as responsible for the 
foul smell of such wretched infallibility and “infallibilism” pervading the labora-
tories of both the right and the left and that acts as a common denominator for 
both Marxist and Fascist parties. The faults of Marxism strike us as being due 
to a kind of mental rigidity that is unable to adjust to the shifting reality of the 
world in motion.


--- PAGE 172 ---
Africa 151
 our grievance against Marxism lies not in its leaning towards revolution, but 
on the contrary, to its taking a starchy, stagnant, reactionary stance towards the 
revolutionary growth of science and thought. Karl Marx’s ideas may have en-
lightened the nineteenth century, but for us now, we must understand the crises 
of Western Civilization as a whole, and they are of no more help to us than the 
philosophies of nietzsche or Spengler, to name but two of those necessary ad-
ven
turers who have penetrated to the very depths of our age. and what can be 
said about the analysis and the forecasts that Marxists so generously conferred 
on us between 1920 and 1940? What can be said, indeed, other than that they 
are as far from our historical evolution as what Marxists in power have brought 
into being, a far cry from the original socialist ideal of the material and spiritual 
liberation of mankind.
 Faced 
with such an aberrant state of affairs where, every day, we are mired 
more and more in the ways of lies and “tactics,” and faced with such a huge 
detour from initial principles that we end up back at their beginning source 
and intention, we proclaim that we consider the individual as the only thing 
of worth, yet today, seemingly, it is under relentless fire from all sides. We de-
clare that the individual is in possession of largely unexplored inner faculties, 
the most important of which is imagination armed with the most marvelous 
powers, an untapped force of vigor and spirit.
 The individual against State-Tyranny.
 imagination against the routine of dialectical materialism.
 Freedom against terror in all its forms.
“l’enfance de la chose” (Cairo, 1945), signed Georges henein, hassan el 
Telmisany, adel amiu, Kamel Zehery, Fouad Kamel, ramses Y ounane
T ranslated by P . W ood
art and freedom
We salute with the greatest sympathy the constitution of the art and 
Freedom group in egypt. Just formed, its objectives are nearly identical 
to ours, as the following statutes indicate.
on January 19, 1939 a group was constituted, under the name art and Freedom. 
its objectives are:
 a) The affirmation of cultural and artistic freedom;
 b) T o promote awareness of works, individuals, and values, knowledge of 
which is indispensable to understand the present time;


--- PAGE 173 ---
152 Black, Brown, & Beige
 c) T o maintain a close contact between the youth of egypt and current 
literary, artistic, and social developments around the world.
Clé (February 1939); translated by Marjolijn de Jager
hot Jazz
Before saying what hot jazz is, we should first say what it is not. hot jazz is 
not dance music. it is not cacophony. it is not snobbery. it is not folklore. 
Thus, it is not any of what people suppose it to be and in the name of which 
denounce it.
 T o 
me it seems permissible to make the distinction between two kinds of 
musical creation. an arrested creation, a continuous creation.
 There is “arrested” creation when a composer finishes a given work that is to 
remain immutable within the established course.
 The 
composer’s work then begins to live according to his will and his will 
only. The performer or the orchestra that plays it does not interpret it but re-
constructs it the way its author thought of it. We are in the presence of a single 
creation, frozen in time at the moment that the composer finishes his work, and 
respected from that moment on.
 i n contrast, let us imagine a given musical theme. The theme itself already 
constitutes a first creation. Then an artist arrives who, instead of faithfully keep-
ing it as is, distorts, folds, multiplies, and improvises on it in such a way that 
he fuses his own active personality to that of the composer. here we have a 
continuous creation. Continuous because the score, which is an order, sees 
itself replaced by the freedom to improvise, that is to say the freedom to create 
as often as the different sensitivities, originalities, in a word, different tempera-
ments require it.
 h ot 
jazz is actually a direct assault that engages your senses and pulls them 
into an exquisite and furious embrace with the sound. it is a shortcut. We are 
left with the memory of an irresistible aggression after listening to louis arm-
stron
g’s “Tiger rag,” whose final chorus consists of a single plaintive note, alter-
nately repeated by the brass and the saxophones in a swelling rage.
Un Effort, no. 54 (May 1935); translated by Marjolijn de Jager
Bet Ween the eagle’ S neSt and the mouSe-trap
overcoming contradictions is our perennial problem and their existence seems 
precisely for the purpose of being overcome. in a time like ours which, i fear, 
will remain one of stasis, one must live with contradictions. and as if contra-


--- PAGE 174 ---
Africa 153
dictions inherited from the past weren’t enough, i’d swear main activity of our 
contemporaries is without purpose other than to create new ones.
 T o 
the world it seems as if “knowledge” and “freedom” were terms of oppo-
sition. The fantastic advances achieved in science and knowledge should give 
wings to humanity and its development, but a brief glance reveals the reverse 
is t
rue and mankind is rigid, standing chained in endless unhappy rows. ours is 
a strange century—part eagle’s nest and part mouse-trap; in this century man 
has finally persuaded himself that he knows too much to be free.
 u
topias wither in the shadows of manifestoes. recall the cover of La Révolu-
tion Surréaliste illust rating a quote of engels:
 “What these gentlemen lack is Dialectics!”
 T oday, it is possible to say, aragon and Sartre have truly abused Dialectics. 
The triple beat of this hegelian waltz seems designed to bring all strong per-
sons to the brink of catastrophe.
 i
 have already declared and i still maintain that surrealism should withdraw 
onto the aventine and leave the century’s hawkers to unload their trash in the 
world’s market.
 i
 believe that if a true closed and secret group is not possible, a discrete so-
ciety should be created, unpretentious and yet exclusive, which could forge its 
own desires.
 Through 
its use of the disrupted image, the image transformed, surrealism 
expanded seeing: seeing beyond the immediate, beyond words, beyond the 
blind-alleys where mankind stands rotting. it is this ability that we must aban-
don or exercise without limit. So much the worse if poetry is slow to be made 
by 
all. at least, let it be lived by some!
Cairo (Winter 1957); translated by rachel Blackwell
perSpective S
T o André Breton
why not encounter a woman with cantering eyes on a footbridge suddenly cast 
between two catastrophes who would give you her name that is more beautiful 
to plunge into than a precipice cloaked in black fabrics?
why not arrange immense sunsets of multicolored hair on the always-deserted 
stage of the horizon?
why not enhance mountain slopes with radium-sexed creatures who would be-
come one with the landscapes and burn them with each embrace and remain 
alone in a vertiginous limpidity?


--- PAGE 175 ---
154 Black, Brown, & Beige
why not in a single blow release the myriad of mirrors nailed to the bedside of 
the earth?
why not render life fit for habitation?
why not abandon customary flesh and sufficiently experienced destinies?
why not avert the eyelids from cursed roads and vanish into the most insoluble 
night taking along for all future time the body of an unknown woman chopped 
into minuscule bits by a dream to be honed without the risk of waking up?
Déraisons d’être; translated by Marjolijn de Jager
Jacque S vach É—not a run-of-the- mill adJutant
on Monday January 6th 1919, around 6 p.m., were discovered in a room of the 
hotel de France, in nantes, the completely naked bodies of two young people. 
They had succumbed to toxic poisoning through having taken an overdose of 
opium. one of the victims was called Jacques vaché, 23 years of age, an adjutant 
in the squadron of the army service corps.
 This man, who has left practically no written trace of his passing on earth, 
who, in fact, never had the opportunity of giving his full measure, he whose 
personality can be imagined only in a sense beyond measure, must be held as 
one of the most remarkable originators of the Surrealist spirit, of a keen humor, 
the car
eer of which is only just beginning. an unconscious originator, it goes 
without saying, since his death preceded by several years the publication of the 
First Manifesto of Surrealism, and since he always behaved as if nothing of himself 
was meant to survive and cast light. Some will speak of unpretentiousness and 
forget all the pride that such a difficult attitude implies.
 Ther
e is in Jacques vaché a great concern to keep himself pure while befoul-
ing the world.
 Ther
e is in Jacques vaché a grandiose contempt for self-satisfied literature 
and litterateurs satisfied with their literature.
 There is in Jacques vaché a taste, nurtured at great expense, for the gra-
tuitous act, a feel for the gratuitous which leaves lafcadio way behind in his 
railway carriage.
 This 
shooting-star suddenly stopped in motion by its immense reflection in 
modern poetry is Jacques vaché. This h-less one of pure blood superbly em-
bodied in a single being and remaining faithful to him until his death is Jacques 
vaché.
 o f 
his W ar Letters, published by Sans Pareil in 1919 through the personal at-
tention of his friends, must be spotlighted the admirable design for the future, 
which consti
tutes the famous letter of november 14th, 1918.


--- PAGE 176 ---
Africa 155
. . . i shall come out of the war slightly, or maybe quite doddering, just 
like those splendid village-idiots (and i do hope so) . . . or else . . . what 
a film i shall play in—with crazy motor-cars, you know what i mean, 
bridges collapsing, and outsize hands groping for i wonder which 
document . . . with such tragic dialogues, in evening-dress, behind the 
eav
esdropping palm.—and then, of course, Charlie, rictussing unblink-
ingly. The cop hiding in the trunk, forgotten.
and f
urther on this shimmering of un-encountered nostalgias.
i shall be just as well a trapper, or a robber, or a prospector, or a hunter, 
or a miner, or a driller. arizona Bar (Whisky-Gin and Mixed?) and 
lovely timber-forests, and you know those lovely riding-pants with their 
six-shooters, going together with being well-shaved, and such lovely 
hands weari
ng diamonds. it will all end up with a fire, i tell you, or in a 
saloon with fortune made.
Talki
ng of making fortunes, Jacques vaché once had the touching cynicism of 
speaking to andré Breton about being successful in the grocery business. But 
to this mock suicide, it was inevitable that he should come to prefer the real 
thin
g. his excess of Umour, for want of a foothold in a valid reality, could lead 
him nowhere else.
. . . My present dream is to wear a red sports-shirt, a red scarf, and high 
boots—and be a member of a Chinese secret society with no objective 
in 
australia.
 The daily spectacle of the war inspires Jacques vaché with short, dry com-
men
ts in which the richest vein of alfred Jarry turns up once more.
i am with the english soldiers—they have advanced on the enemy stair-
case a gr
eat deal around here. There is a lot of noise—i am very bored 
behind my glass-monocle, put on khaki and hit the Germans—The 
brain
-blowing machine cranks forward and i have, not far away, a tank-
stable—quite a unique but joyless animal.
and
, in conclusion, this categorical declaration:
i object to being killed in war-time.
 i t is not for no reason that in his “Confession of Contempt,” one of the most 
heart-felt texts that Surrealism has ever given us, andré Breton reserves for 
Jacques vaché pride of place, a high-lighted place.
i owe most of all to Jacques vaché . . . without him i should perhaps 
have become a poet; he thwarted in me this intrigue of dark designs


--- PAGE 177 ---
156 Black, Brown, & Beige
which has one believe in something as absurd as a vocation. i am for-
tunate, in turn, in not being blind to the fact that many young writers 
today do not have the slightest literary ambition. They “publish” to 
search out others, and nothing more.
 Jacques vaché 
was not inexperienced in drugs. he knew full well what he 
was doing on the evening of January 5th, 1919, when he took forty grams of 
opium at one go.
 a
nd now that, on both sides of certain sign-posts, the frailty of which will 
eventually yield to mankind’s desire for fraternity, now that men are once more 
beginning to serve causes they have not chosen, it is with pleasure that we 
hail in Jacques vaché the paragon of the objector per se, the apostle of moral 
obstruction in a chaos, as ignoble as it is uninhabitable,—the coolest and most 
elegant of the terrorists of the new persuasion.
Cairo, February 1940
Don Quichotte, no. 7 (January 1940); translated by Myrna Bell rochester (original 
emphasis)
the plain truth
For iqbal
i speak to you because the night
never falls all by itself
i sp
eak to you because the night
is an object found
coins of the stars
the trapeze missed
by the acrobat in a flowered dress
a mad object at your sensible feet
the finery of the woman passerby whom the police takes away
a mouth to be fed
a mouth to be hollowed out with a cry
the black glass screen in which the painter’s colors rise up
i sp
eak to you because the night
shimmers with a thousand disregarded balconies
some located on the threshold
others beyond any possible possessions
i sp
eak to you because the night
was created by dreams


--- PAGE 178 ---
Africa 157
and not just to dream
i speak to you from a booth that is deaf to all messages
the whitewashed receiver tows bedewed lianas
an existence more marvelously misunderstood than words
i sp
eak to you because the night
is at one and the same time
the black glass screen of magic
and the finery of that woman they take along in vain
and that phantom-booth stranded in the forest
and something more
than time to be deceived
and silence up for sale.
Le signe le plus obscure; translated by Myrna Bell rochester
a triBute to andr É Breton  
proSe
 that Shine S aBove all other S
andré Breton is dead. This poet who gave us the prose that shines above all 
others lived in the fragile and sorrowful intransigence of souls in love with the 
morn
ing dew. he ever refused to submit to the petty dictates of society. he 
never settled with the forces of decomposition. he was the last Druid, emerg-
in
g from the forest to declaim the brilliance of the world. in the rat’s maze of 
our present where only the cheesy psychology of the peddlers of leisure wins 
out, he appeared as the provocateur of accomplishments, as one who cease-
lessly demanded more; as one who tired only of slaves.
Jeune Afrique, no. 300 (october 7, 1966); translated by Myrna Bell rochester
Ikbal El Alailly
Known as “Boula” to her intimates, ikbal el alailly was one of the prin-
cipal figures of the Surrealist Group in Cairo. The granddaughter of 
ahmad Cha
wki, egypt’s “Prince of Poets,” she was born to Moslem 
parents but was already a nonconformist by her teens. her 1939 meeting 
with poet Georges henein was love at first sight. Despite the fact that 
their parents opposed their marriage, the couple was inseparable there-
after, though they were not legally married until 1954.


--- PAGE 179 ---
158 Black, Brown, & Beige
 a ctive in the Cairo surrealists’ daily meetings at T ommy’s Bar, she 
collaborated on the group’s publications and coorganized its collective 
exhibit
ions. her best-known work is the big anthology of German 
romantic and other presurrealist writings, V ertu de l’Allemagne (1945), to 
which she also contributed an important preface.
 a
fter henein’s death in 1979, Boula—then living in Paris—undertook 
the task of publishing his uncollected works and reprinting those that 
had gone out of print. She also encouraged and assisted the Paris-based 
arab Surr
ealist Group and (via correspondence) maintained friendly 
relations with the surrealists in Chicago.
 The text published her
e originally appeared in Le Part du Sable, pub-
lished by 
heinein in Cairo in February 1947.
portrait of the author a S a young raBBit
and the Bororos think they are blue macaws . . .
—l. lévy-Bruhl
What a stupid story! The more i think about it, the more i realize how difficult 
it is to have a peaceful life.
 o nly 
five years ago, i was a little white bunny, sporting big whiskers and the 
most beautiful pair of ears you can imagine.
 o nly five years ago, i had a friend; he had told me he was an influential 
member of the animal protection society. That friend knew i was a bunny. he 
was so aware of it, that without him, i never would have known it myself.
 i t was he who taught me the proper food for bunnies. They must eat carrots, 
he told me one day, without elaborating further. and since i wished to recipro-
cate 
the interest he took in me, i went ahead and ate carrots, i even learned to 
like carrots, me who hated them so.
 The next time, he summoned me for a very serious talk. i went willingly, 
because i liked him. T otally counter to my little bunny mentality, i abandoned 
a goodly number of my small pleasures to answer his summons. But that day, 
he used 
a voice i’d never heard before. it reminded me of my father’s, gruffly 
speaking about things that didn’t thrill me, but which i was obliged to face up 
to and to fulfill to live out my fate as a loyal little bunny. Saying, for example, 
“Y ou must stop dancing, you must stop laughing, you must let things go as they 
may
. a bunny is a bunny and if you try to explain this fact any other way, the 
very act turns you into a rebellious bunny.”


--- PAGE 180 ---
Africa 159
 So i obeyed and he rewarded me, caressing my whiskers, tickling my ears, 
and offering me a whole field of carrots.
 That honeymoon didn’t last long. after a few weeks of this grand bunnyness, 
he declared he was emperor of China. and, said he, an emperor, the emperor 
of China, could never compromise himself with a bunny. i absolutely had to 
change my skin, or else . . . woe is me!
T ranslated by Myrna Bell Rochester
poSt-Scriptum
“once upon a time there was someone who didn’t like the past and who found 
that once was not enough.” once there was a night. That night had strange 
noises. it was, perhaps, very beautiful . . . There were locusts, crickets, and the 
oh-so-gentle spirits that passed through, crying. a big star waited in the sky. 
all over the world there were also many men and many women. But those men 
and those women, and that night, and those crickets had stopped believing in 
the br
illiance, that is to say, in the madness of men. and that is why they were 
all so sad.
 The
y no longer wished to hear speak of Fervor, of love, or of Truth. The 
Madness of God left them indifferent; moreover, they no longer believed in 
God. and that is why they were all so mournful.
 Comfortably despairing, they had become very ugly; and as though to ex-
plain themselves, they repeated endlessly: “We are Good, we are Just . . .” and 
many 
other phrases we know too well . . . “oh my brothers, one day someone 
looked into the heart of the Good and the Just, and he said: ‘They are Phar-
isees.’ But no one understood him . . . The Good have always been the begin-
ning of the end.”
 God knew how to find Man’s path. But Superman shut himself off from 
God’s path. his refusal, the refusal to make himself into a man-god, is blasphe-
mous only 
vis-à-vis Man, not vis-à-vis God. exiled upon the heights of folly, 
nietzsche lost his earthly portion. But the patience of the stars is infinite . . .
 “and may every day one has not danced at least once be a wasted day—and 
may every truth that does not provoke a burst of laughter appear false.”
La part du sable; translated by Myrna Bell rochester


--- PAGE 181 ---
160 Black, Brown, & Beige
Anwar Kamel
an egyptian poet active in the Trotskyist movement, anwar Kamel 
(1919–1973) was one of the principal figures in the art and Freedom 
group, to which all the egyptian surrealists belonged. he was in fact the 
editor of the art and Freedom newspaper, Al-T attawor, which billed itself 
as “the pr
emier review of art and literature in the arab world.” empha-
sizing radical opposition to the “reactionary spirit,” that is, opposition 
to fascism, Stali
nism, and arab nationalism, the paper also promoted 
women’s rights, workers’ solidarity, modern art, and the short stories of 
alb
ert Cossery, a member of the group. We know that anwar Kamel 
was still issuing manifestoes in 1952, but his later activities do not seem 
to be chronicled.
the propagandi StS of reaction and uS
This magazine has been conceived as a cradle in which the free ideas of youth 
and their new transformative tendencies can grow and mature and pave the way 
for the development of this country.
 We roar in the face of those who call for a reactionary order and exploita-
tion. We shall continue on our path without attaching any importance to the 
obstacles that they seek to put in our way. We are convinced that we will sweep 
away all that exemplifies the most abominable manifestations of exploitation 
and abuse.
 as for those who still insist that we are corrupting people’s minds through 
our ideas, we now announce that if liberating minds from superstition and re-
actionary myths is corrupt, if liberating people from bondage and slavery is 
corrupt, then from hereon our mission and message in life is: to corrupt the 
minds of men.
 We desir
e, and we know what we desire.
Al-T attawor, no. 5 (May 1940); translated by Judy Cumberbatch


--- PAGE 182 ---
Africa 161
Ramses Younane
egypt’s most renowned surrealist painter, but also an important theorist 
and critic, Y ounane (1913–1966) from 1939 on was closely associated 
with G
eorges henein in the Surrealist Group in Cairo. a Trotskyist 
in the early and mid-1940s, Y ounane edited El Magalla El Guidda (1943–
194
5), a paper vehemently and fiercely opposed to english colonialism, 
hitler, and Stalin. in 1947 he took part in two international surrealist 
exhibitions: the huge show in Paris, and the somewhat smaller version 
in Prag
ue. although he cosigned the international statement “rupture 
inaugurale,” disagreements regarding certain positions of the French 
Group led him, and others in the Cairo Group, to pursue an indepen-
dent p
ath. returning to Cairo in 1956, Y ounane—long since a convinced 
anarchist-individualist—found the cultural and political climate increas-
ingly stifling. Still very much a surrealist at heart, he bravely persisted in 
his defiant nonconformism in highly unfavorable circumstances.
 The p
aintings of Y ounane’s last decade—which have a lot in com-
mon with the work of his Danish contemporary Wilhelm Freddie—are 
characterized by a nonfigurative spontaneity that Édouard Jaguer called 
abstract-impressionism.
What come S after the logic of reaSon?
on a cultural level, the bourgeoisie worked to replace blind faith with rational 
analytical reason. But the glorification of reason, insightfulness, and commer-
cial shrewdness molded life into a technological mechanical system that did 
not allow for the caprice of imagination and the pleasure of a free spirit. natural 
instincts and deep-seated affections whose nature it was to search for pleasure 
were exploited and distorted by commercial battle and competitive struggle 
or through the military anthems and hysterical cries which the dictatorial and 
colonial governments used to arouse their people.
 Bourgeois 
society now faces a greater crisis than that posed by the issue of 
consumption. it is not just a problem of bread, but a crisis of greedy hearts and 
hungry, crazed imagination; a crisis of poetry, enjoyment and delirium; a crisis 
of mov
ement, growth and openness. a crisis of life.
 The values of bourgeois rationalism are unable to rescue us from the crises of 
bourgeois civilization. in order to survive and be saved, we must rebel against 
these values, rebel against rationalism and go beyond it—not by returning to


--- PAGE 183 ---
162 Black, Brown, & Beige
servile and humble belief but rather by confirming the right of the liberated, 
rebellious spirit to triumph over the limits of reason and the chains of faith.
 Death is better than life in a world in which work is dissociated from 
dreams.
Al-T attawor, no. 5 (May 1940); translated by Judy Cumberbatch
Victor Musgrave
While stationed in Cairo during World War ii, young victor Musgrave 
(1919–1984) befriended Georges henein and others in the art and 
Freedom group and eventually married one of its active members, the 
arm
enian-born surrealist photographer ida Kar. in london after the 
war, he was particularly noted as an art gallery proprietor and one of the 
first in 
england to exhibit outsider art. This salute to the Cairo surreal-
ists appeared in the journal La Séance Continue.
voice S in the tWilight
(A T ribute to Art and Liberty)
Something is happening in the city; there are voices which make themselves 
heard above the cacophony of the crowd; they are the voices of ramses Y ou-
nane and Fouad Kamel, green, purple and sombre.
listen: the Cairo of the bourgeois is a magic square bounded by four main 
streets, ten cinemas and a million vulgar expletives but this is not egypt.
 l ook, the crowd continues to march towards a yawning abyss which re-
sembles in shape the bowl of a water-closet. Slowly, unable to save themselves 
they slide down into its depths, filling the spongy violet air with ludicrous cries 
and shouts until in a few minutes they have all disappeared and nothing remains 
except a few hair-pins, wooden legs, pawn tickets, cinema tickets, false teeth 
and hair, pages from intimate diaries, photographs of sweethearts, Christmas 
presents and children’s toys. Soon, however, these were all destroyed by an 
unexploded bomb which went off suddenly.
 o nce the crowd had disappeared it could be seen that the road they had 
been following was lined with huge reproductions of the works of Telmisany, 
ramses 
Y ounane, Fouad Kemal. . . . etc. . . . which had offered their mute mes-


--- PAGE 184 ---
Africa 163
sage unnoticed. had a solitary observer remained in the absence of the crowd 
it must have seemed to him that their eloquence was overwhelming.
 i n the distance the sound of another large crowd approaching could be 
heard.
Albert Cossery
a member of the art and Freedom group in Cairo, Cossery (1913–2008) 
cosigned the egyptian surrealist tract “long live Degenerate art!” 
(1938) and collaborated on the group’s various journals and newspapers. 
af
ter World War ii he moved to Paris and began writing in French. 
introduced to the english-speaking world by henry Miller, Cossery is 
best known for the short stories collected in Men God Forgot (1946), and 
his novels, including The Lazy Ones and The House of Certain Death. re-
pr
inted here is a selection from the latter book.
the houSe of certain death
They disappeared in the dust, as if they had been snatched away by the hands 
of invisible giants. automobiles, carriages and donkey carts sped pell-mell in 
every direction. People and things were urged on by a synthetic animation that 
pushed them toward the broad horizons of their daily misery. Kites, on the 
lookout for food, soared in the darkening air. a group of anemic children was 
playing near a grass plot which was hedged in by barbed wire. among them was 
the little naked boy who had come to fetch abdel al, the teamster. The unlucky 
child did not dare to go home. having come across some children who were 
playing, he joined them, waiting for nightfall. he was still terribly naked, ex-
cept for a rag which he had picked up and knotted around his neck, and which 
somehow made him seem more respectable.


--- PAGE 185 ---
The Lazy Ones, a novel by albert Cossery, egyptian surrealist, was published  
in 1949.


--- PAGE 186 ---
Africa 165
Joyce Mansour
Widely renowned as the best-known woman surrealist poet, Joyce Man-
sour (1928
–1986) is also—second only to Georges henein—the most 
celebrated surrealist of egyptian origin. Born in england, the daughter 
of Sephardic Jews, Mansour grew up in a family that spoke a mixture of 
en
glish and Judeo-Spanish dialect, with more than a touch of arabic. 
From the 1950s on she lived in France, mostly in Paris. She was a central 
figure in the Surrealist Group, a prolific contributor to the group’s pub-
licat
ions, and hostess of many surrealist gatherings. her poetic genius, 
characterized by a unique erotic intensity and wild humor, was greatly 
admir
ed not only by andré Breton and other surrealists, but also by 
such figures as Gaston Bachelard and henri Michaux.
floating iSland S
later on, towards morning, i am on a beach surrounded by persons of both 
sexes. a turbulent cloud advances in the same way as a race-elephant. General 
hysteria. i next find myself sitting on S.’s knee in an old black car. very tall 
car, and very black. (My grand-mother possessed a similar model, but hers 
was red.) The cloud advances without ceremony on the sands and among the  
dunes: “The abyss summons up the abyss,” says a curious voice entwined in  
the hollow of my ear. i think i see the spirit of Théophile Gautier prancing on 
the shore. Someone throws a buoy or a seagull in the direction of the old ma-
chine
. The cloud returns to the fore. i vainly attempt to close the rear-window 
of the motor-car. i operate the pre-war window-winder, my breasts quiver and 
churn butter under my blouse. S. sings a few verses of his own invention. i 
operate the window-winder (S.’s member?), the window closes stiffly; S. sings 
and the glass drops, leaving an aperture of approximately two inches. The cloud 
comes bellying along. it invades the whole scene. T o me its whiteness seems ex-
cessiv
e, unhealthy. i try more successfully, to keep the window fastened tight. i 
now realize with horror that S. is sitting on the car-roof: only his legs dangling 
like ham-shanks (hams, phallic reminder) remain inside. The cloud envelops us. 
it is both inside and out. The road dissolves beneath my eyes and the car-wheels 
sink down in the mire. in the snot. The legs fall onto the front seat like paren-
theses (prostheses?). i wake up. one can say, “ open parentheses. let’s open 
our legs-cum parentheses; judge the tree by its roots, the dawn rather than the 
defunct day. . . .” “Y ou sound like a prostitute,” said my father.
 a
 year after transcribing this dream i read the following in “ le violoncelle


--- PAGE 187 ---
166 Black, Brown, & Beige
qui résiste,” by Pierre Bourgeade. P .B.: “i am on top of a mountain. i look down at 
the clouds below. They rise. When they reach me, i shall die. They are not really 
clouds but a sort of gas. i cannot escape. They rise. They reach me. i awake.” 
now i remember: this fragment is part of a discussion i had with Pierre Bour-
geade i
n 1970. it was published in the Quinzaine littéraire, and reappears today 
with 
twelve similar texts in book-form. i had totally forgotten the contents of 
the interview, the dream likewise; to the point of repeating it, image for image, 
without recognizing it as belonging to another. Plagiarism or pantaloonery?
Histoires nocives; translated by Peter Wood
freSh cream
My mother eats me
T ortures me
and to pr
event me from following her
She buries me
i ea
t my family
i spit on their remains
i hate their tightrope diseases
and their ear hallucinations
Be careful of toothpaste
That bleaches without destroying
it is wiser to hav
e fun by devouring one’s own people
Than to walk on all fours
T o drink
or tr
y to please
Girls
Shrieks; translated by Peter Wood
forthWith to S
all this because i like to make love under water
Pommade my hair with fog and bile
and l
et myself sink deep into the couch
With a hunchbacked ostler
and a fin
ger of wanderlust
all this because you know i was once a thief
Shrieks; translated by Peter Wood


--- PAGE 188 ---
Africa 167
north expre SS
Cobra is the night image of a Chinese water-print
Cobra ignited by moonlight
unf
urls as does the sea
on beaches black with mountain ash
and oblique corridors
eyes behind goggles
asphalt hells
The nettlegrown quarrels of the cultural owl
Subside
Cobra swallows Cobra as desire
Desire
Far from the shallow sex of habit
Far from the empty port of mechanical rape
Through the blazing hiccups of volcanic mirth
into the f
oxglove
The very heart of panic
rides P
ierre alechinsky and his left-handed mirror
Qui vive?
Cobra
Shrieks; translated by Peter Wood
reSpon Se to an inquiry on magic art
i. recently it has been said that “civilization has dissipated the fiction of magic 
only to exalt, in art, the magic of fiction.” Do you agree with this judgement?
 Response: The distinction between the fiction of magic and the magic of fic-
ti
on is for me, a sophism. art and magic are but two artificially differentiated 
terms, designating the same means of communication with the incommuni-
cable. Traditional art is magic in action, and its message: the seemingly artistic 
expression of contemporary materialism is but the sensation of magic filtered 
through the artist’s intellect. The difference between magician and modern art-
ist resides in this: the former sought to accumulate external forces en-soi while 
the latter, a victim of dispersion, limits himself to “finding relief.” Their main 
thread is well and truly the same, the search for spiritual expansion.
in andré Breton, L’Art magique; transla ted by Cynthia hahn


--- PAGE 189 ---
m o r o c c o
Robert Benayoun
Benayoun (1928–1996) was born in Port lyautey, Morocco, and met 
andré Breton and the Surrealist Group in Paris in 1949. he remained 
one of the most active and productive members of the group. With the 
assistance of ado K
yrou, Georges Goldfayn, and Gérard legrand, he 
started (and served as editor of) L’Âge du Cinéma, a surrealist film maga-
zine (six issues
, 1951–1953). a regular collaborator on the group’s succes-
sive journals—Médium, Le Surréalisme, même, BIEF , La Brèche, and L’Archibras, 
he was also the author or editor of important books, including his 
classic Anthologie du nonsense (1959), Erotique du surréalisme (1965; expanded 
1979); a full-length study of the balloon in comic strips; and several 
books r
elating to film animation, Buster Keaton, John huston, the Marx 
Brothers, Woody allen, and Tex avery.
 his perfect command of english made him a first-rate translator of—
among others—edward lear’s poems, Charles Fort’s Book of the Damned, 
and Ted Joans’ Black Power. h
 e was also the Surrealist Group’s main cor-
resp
ondent with the “anglo-Saxon” world.
 as the texts translated here demonstrate, Benayoun is noted for his 
playfulness, sense of mystification, and lively humor.
no rhyme for reaSon!
in the okefenokee Swamp an absurd poetry contest is staged between an 
earthworm and an alligator; a self-taught cow does not know how to moo; a 
dog takes himself for a cuckoo. Genus and species yield wholly to a carrousel 
of errors and defiances, formally contradicting Buffon at every turn.
 Such is 
the climate of Pogo, written and drawn by Walt Kelly, one of the rare 
comic 
strips to win the recognition of being published in book form. edward 
lear, whose spirit pervades the series from beginning to end (preoccupied as he 
was, long before Magritte, by the relation of word and image), would certainly 
have appreciated such manifestations as these, further enhanced by a graphic 
sense worthy of the best nonsensical doodlers.
Médium/Informations Surréalistes, no. 8 (June 1953); translated by Myrna Bell 
rochester


--- PAGE 190 ---
Africa 169
the oBS cure prote StS
The game’s activity, one day we will realize it, can be a big push in the universe: 
it allows children to resist the corrupting reasoning of adults; it’s up to the artist 
to suppress his artistic outbursts, up to the oppressed to fool the tyrant’s watch-
fulness
. Such are the colonized black peoples. Y esterday, Jean rouch showed 
us in Moi un noir (Me a Black Man) and in Les Maîtres-fous (The Crazy Masters) 
how a split personality, the adoption pure and simple of a borrowed personality, 
either fictitious (a film star), or real (preferably from dominating categories: the 
governor, the police chief) could help a colonized man to get by, all the while 
mimicking and exorcising the wretched defects of the white man.
 i t 
is now up to lionel rogosin, an american filmmaker, that the honor re-
turns to in Come Back Africa,  a film clandestinely made in South africa, that 
paraded before us the silent cortege of secret societies, false religions, sponta-
neous movements, fictitious cults, non-ritualistic dances, mirror games, fortune 
music, in short, the little voodoo of indistinct places and what he overcomes, 
concisely, the terrible stress of the transplanted person, bound and shamelessly 
exploited by an imposter of treacherous sciences.
 i n 
the enslaved there is, despite all the abuse committed on his spontaneity, 
a capacity for wonderful things, a gift of confidence and physical joy that will 
assure his final victory over the barbarous techniques, as well-proven as they 
are. The Schlemils’ schizophrenia is not the unique privilege of the Semitics, his 
innocent compensations are as dark, and innocence does not exclude lucidity 
(assured by intuition), more than lucidity knows how to exclude anger. let’s 
be merciful to rogosin: in the end he lets the anger speak, an invading anger, 
a dark indignation, almost sensual, one that is necessary for the revolutions of 
tomorrow.
 Genêt
, enslaved by poetry, spoke to us through his incantation of the fatal 
sensation of an adequate absorption of light through the obscure. But it is to 
rogosin 
that i give credit, with an avenging satisfaction, in Sophiatown in front 
of Johannesburg, of an immense protest by the obscure.
BIEF , no. 10–11 (February 1960); translated by Melanie Kemp
letter to chicago
Paris, the 13th of February, 1963
Dear Franklin rosemont,
 andré Breton asks me to answer you in his place, since his command of the 
english language is practically nonexistent.


--- PAGE 191 ---
170 Black, Brown, & Beige
 Y our letter was very encouraging to us, and you must excuse the delay in our 
answer, due to several grave affairs, which have completely engrossed us.
 a
s you know (from J. h. Matthews’s report in Books Abroad) we are publish-
ing right now a review called La Brèche, the fourth number of which is due in 
the next couple of weeks. We also publish tracts and booklets, a few occasional 
columns in left-sided weeklies like France-Observateur, and hold occasional exhi-
bitions, collective and individual.
 The 
group includes mostly young people from nineteen to thirty-five years 
old, the only “elder” being Breton himself. We are about twenty “regulars,” meet-
ing every day in the same café to discuss and organize things. But we have many 
satellite members, like andré Pieyre de Mandiargues, Julien Gracq, Matta, Man 
ray, Bellmer, octavio Paz, leonora Carrington; friends like arp, Miro, lam, 
et al., who join us in occasional declarations, manifestoes, or exhibitions.
 i n england the only two surrealists left from London Bulletin are Jacques B. 
Brunius and e.l.T. Mesens. They tell us that they hope to publish a new bulle-
tin, but it seems they have practically no support.
 i n 
the states, you should contact poet Claude Tarnaud, who’s been living in 
new Y ork for several years and has our total confidence (250 riverside Drive, 
new Y ork 25). Calas is our very good friend, but Tarnaud has closer contacts 
with us.
 The 
political attitude of the movement is still very marked, even though we 
do not associate with any parties. We have been publishing a political paper 
called Quatorze juillet [July Fourteenth], which ceased to appear after the big 
affair of the Manifesto of the 121. We are proud to be the initiators of that very 
important manifesto, which indicted French torture in algeria, advised insub-
ordination in the army, and demanded immediate negotiations. it impressed 
DeGaulle so much that he smothered every act of repression against us and 
bowed to what amounted to be the judgment of the French intellectuals, a 
judgment he could not afford to neglect. We are sure that without this act of 
open defiance, and the acclaim it received in foreign countries, DeGaulle would 
have pursued the war, since he repeatedly sabotaged all peace talks.
 We were at that time persecuted by the police, and received death threats 
from the fascist underground movement called o.a.S. now the Gaullist gov-
ernment claims that he enforced peace in algeria, which is a derision. now that 
DeGaulle deals with Franco and offers to “deliver” the Spanish refugees (see the 
enclosed tract), we hope it will be clear that under a thin mask of liberalism, 
DeGaulle is still the tyrant and dictator he never ceased to be.
 h ow far has your project gone, concerning Arsenal? We look forward to 
it, and think a renewal of the International Bulletin  a very opportune gesture.


--- PAGE 192 ---
Africa 171
right now it would be possible to promote several foreign numbers—such as 
english, Belgian, italian, Mexican, and american numbers—which could be 
rewarding.
 Breton still receives regularly letters and communications from the world 
over, but it is very difficult, first, to answer every one, and second, to shape all 
this into a meaningful panorama. our best hope lies precisely in the organiza-
tion of national centers, which would group all individual activities.
 Wha
t is the extent of your Chicago group? Tell us more about your activi-
ti
es and orientation. unfortunately, you will have to read our contributions in 
French, since practically all we do is published in Paris, and has not been trans-
lated. 
i will send you La Brèche 4 and the first three numbers.
 The p
oem you sent us received sympathetic appreciation.
 We are happy to see that subversive thought keeps everywhere its power of 
impact.
very fraternally yours, 
rob
ert Benayoun
the phoenix of animation
animation, in principle, has no other plastic imperative than movement. Stills 
from the most beautiful animated films are as deceptive, as little representative 
of the 
original, as are stills from a film by resnais. When certain critics write, 
therefore, that the animated film is not cinema, they commit the same error as 
so many neophytes who imagine, once they have used an animation stand to 
shoot a number of free forms in the act of moving, that they have made a film. 
They treat the genre as if it were a kind of annex to the beaux-arts, an after-
dinner amusement. But if an animated film is made to be projected in a hall, its 
images registering at 24 per second on the retina, it surely constitutes a film. 
an 
animated film made without traveling shots, without pans, without cuts or 
other cinematic grammar, without dramatic progression, would not only be a 
ludicrous anachronism but would also be as silly as those dance films which 
record a beautiful ballet with deadly stolidity—and in so doing betray the spirit 
of dance as well as that of film.
 The great artists of animation seem to be distinguished very clearly from the 
experimenters. art in animation begins at that moment when the “experimen-
tal” phase ends, and freedom ensues.
Film Quarterly (Spring 1964) (original emphasis)


--- PAGE 193 ---
172 Black, Brown, & Beige
too much iS too much
(An unperformable play)
The stage shows King arthur’s palace at Camelot as imagined by a colorblind 
Pygmy of the Demi-Sikkim.
refrigera
tors, paper pots, and sibyls in overalls.
 enter vareCh: he is dressed in the uniform of a greedy asparagus eater 
but we understand at first sight that this charming young man is actually a shoe 
tycoon in Sunday dress at breakfast time. he sits down in a chair, making it 
clear that he is thinking of the future. his dog, TriCoT, played by a person 
with liver problems in a chimpanzee costume, crouches down beside him and 
cleans his nails with a conceited look.
 Tr
iCoT: May i scratch my left ear?
 vareCh (n odding yes): no.
 They both freeze in position, their eyes vacant. it is very obvious that 
vareCh has just made the irrevocable decision to cut off any support for his 
son rroYCe, a Cévennes landscape artist whom he adores but whose painting 
is annoying to T riCoT. The latter, having been hired by Metro-Goldwyn-
Mayer to play the role of the Dog of Flanders in a production by Dreyer, obvi-
ously has not memorized his lines and is considering a nervous breakdown.
 These two cerebral storms can be worked as discreet stage business that 
goes on for forty minutes in absolute silence, barely interrupted by the hesi-
tant requests for explanation from a music-loving woman in the audience who 
thinks she is at the Salle Pleyel.
 vareCh (racking his brains): Was it Crémone of escarcelle? Calixte of 
Moyeu? obole of arlincourt? Gertrude Pronoun? Clotilde of inverness? Bundle 
of Plethora? Fetters lagrenaille? Daisy T sé-T sé? Giberne of hévéa? agnes of 
Babiole? Moufle Dumdum? aumone of Muscat? adorée Madrépore? oeillére 
of alcali?
The audience walks off with the CurTa in.
La Brèche (December 1964); translated by Marjolijn de Jager
comic Sound S
gnook, sploop, whop, pock, pfff, ugh, humpf, kablowie, shooie, drip, aaugh, sniff, whack, augh, 
smooch, goo, snort, bam, berk, thud, pounce, zowie, gnish, buzz, rowf }, woof } which are 
synonyms, et arf}, smack, blap, yipe, thonk, tsk, zoop, urk, ow, poof, boot, ouch, blub, snore, 
clink, eeeek, scoop, glomp, vop, bash, bonk, slurp, oww, vroosh, flutter, clang, chop, screech, 
zip, burp, zonk, boffo, glug, sob, wham, splat, pok, bawoing, koff, plomp, gasp, drool, whew, 
hoot, skid, blat, whiz, zak, whap, socko, ping, biff, pow, boof, bing, pant, tickle, bonk, slam,


--- PAGE 194 ---
Africa 173
tag, aargh, shazam, pat, clomp, klunk, crack, zap, swat, va-voom, unghn, bang, vroom, swish, 
klunk, thwap, slobber foom
Vroom, T ehac, Zowie
Abdellatif Laâbi
Born in Fes, Morocco, the sixth child in a family of eight, abdellatif 
laâbi (1942– ) was the founder and chief editor of the Maghrebian 
journal Soufflés (Breaths) in the 1960s—a publication very much in the 
spirit of La Révolution Surréaliste and its many successors. The prologue in 
the first issue of Soufflés reads in part: “Something is brewing in africa 
and e
lsewhere in the Third World. . . . no one can foresee what this 
ex-prelogical thought will give to the world. But when the true spokes-
persons of these collectivities really begin to hear their own voices, 
it will amount to a dynamite explosion in the old humanism’s rotting 
mysteries.” For such pronouncements, Soufflés was banned in 19
 71. a year 
later laâbi was arrested for “crimes of opinion” and sentenced to ten 
years in prison. released in 1980—amnestied after years of international 
protest about his case—he now lives in exile in France.
 The f
ollowing text is excerpted from his novel, Rue du Retour (1982).
rue du retour
a footstep behind the door. Did someone knock? a feeling of having been here 
before. That January dawn almost a decade ago hovered in the silence and half-
shadow of the room. a menace which has been since then an integral part of 
your metabolism. Y ou’re so used to it you do not even react physically. But you 
react 
by shriveling inside and straining to listen. it’s the same reaction as that 
of a wild animal who senses its lair is surrounded and whose eyes swivel around 
in its dark den-like sentinels.
 Y our 
eyes renew their pillaging. The ceiling of this room is no higher than 
that of your cell. Y ou start to look at the patches of damp to pick out or imagine 
shapes, outlines, animal silhouettes or geographers’ maps. There, a small poodle 
stands on its hind legs and here, the southern tip of africa flanked by the island 
of Madagascar; further off a pattern that resembles a rorschach test.
 Y ou are now falling back on one of the many habits you learned in prison. 
The prisoner and the ceiling of his cell. a silent, secret dialogue. . . .


--- PAGE 195 ---
t u n i S i a
Farid Lariby
of algerian nationality, Farid lariby (1937–1990) was born in la Marsa, 
Tunisia, and later lived in Tunis. he moved to France in 1956 and for 
ten years worked there as a journalist, painter, and poet. in 1973 he 
cofounded—with comrades from iraq, lebanon, and Syria—the Paris-
based arab Surrealist Movement in exile and collaborated on its peri-
odical, Le Désir Libertaire. Wi th others in the arab Group, he took part in 
the 1976 World Surrealist exhibition in Chicago.
 T wo memorial pamphlets of his poems, Hâter l’exigence (hasten the 
urgency
), and Homage a Farid Lariby (with an introduction by Michel 
lequenne) were published i
n 1990.
pome Brut
here we stand without outrage rigged up in black powers
Masters of resurrections that wriggle into the winds
Strangling your gray promenades
and the debr
is of the fatal poem
here we stand without grandiloquence facing the sinuous suns
absent the guardian of symbols
We unf
url the reddest the blackest ocean
without a flag
Daylight pause on our lips
and h
yphenated flesh and world
Graduate the number of the crossed expectation
in this successive song
and pr
epare yourself prepare yourself for the treks
For the long treks into the surrealist void
i l
ean back against the forest of eyes harsh with realities
and ashes against the poem-fire-wheel torpedoing
a beam of mineral numbers in the vast night
agai
nst the notch of history
or nothing for an imaginary life in the routine


--- PAGE 196 ---
Africa 175
of refuting the last contradictory beasts
oh my accomplices—not to prove—but to hasten
the urgency
For on the threshold of the expanse fiction is red Space radiated by the winds 
of written desire
the imprecise peace of births
the game’s triumph over the road’s wheel
For we will emigrate laughing souls
with the sounds of music
We will emigrate into the intense logic
of our nerves
a swar
m of new stars will sparkle in the inlets
of violent nights
Hâter l’exigence; translated by Myrna Bell rochester
a l g e r i a
Henri Kréa
an algerian poet and revolutionary, Kréa (1933– ) collaborated on the 
surrealist journal Front Unique, published in Mi lan in 1960. his first book 
was Liberté première (1957). Revolution and Poetry Are One and the Same Thing 
(196
0) opens with an anticolonialist epigraph by andré Breton. T wo 
of Kréa’s other books were illustrated by the Chilean surrealist painter 
Matta.
never forever once more
We are immortal
We are free
We are unalterable
We are identical


--- PAGE 197 ---
176 Black, Brown, & Beige
We do not change
We have no reason to change
We are simultaneously
Sky and ocean
Sand and sadness
Salt and joy
We are the tree
We are the plain
We are childhood and sleep
We are immobile
We are in motion
We have multiple dimensions
We are many
We are one
We are two
Eddaz (March 1959); translated by Franklin rosemont
oh yeS
oh yes the lovely scenery
lofty appearances
Good breeding
Correctness
Good manners
Distinction
Just the right amount of mineral water
The cold elegance of milk
her
metically sealed
oh yes oh yes
Edda 2 (March 1959); translated by Franklin rosemont


--- PAGE 198 ---
Africa 177
Jean-Michel Atlan
Born and raised in algeria, the partly Jewish atlan (1913–1960) lived 
most of his adult life in Paris. Though never a member of the Surrealist 
Group, he followed its trajectory and counted several surrealists among 
his fri
ends. henri Pastoureau, an important figure in surrealism in the 
1930s and 1940s, recalls in his autobiography that it was atlan, his fellow 
philosophy student and roommate, who in the early 1930s first urged 
him to read the Surrealist Manifestoes.
 a
 resistance fighter, atlan at one point during the nazi occupation 
of Paris had himself admitted to the Saint-anne hospital as a mental 
patient. after the war, in 1945, he was briefly associated with arp, Bran-
cusi, Gertrude Stein, and others in the short-lived Paris/Chicago Con-
tinuity Group. The following year he illustrated a French translation of 
Kafka’
s work. and shortly afterward he was an early and crucial figure in 
an offshoot of surrealism known as the Cobra movement. his studio on 
the rue de la Grande-Chaumière was a favorite Cobra meeting place. 
Édouard Jaquer was a fellow member of Cobra.
 in the first mon
ograph on his work, published in 1950, Michel ragon 
emphasizes that atlan’s art is above all african, but also a bold synthesis 
of the major movements of the first half of the twentieth century: ex-
pressionism, surrealism, and abstraction.
 atlan
’s celebrated color cries and other innovations made him a 
major force in Cobra, and he always welcomed the most audacious 
exper
imentation, including collective improvisation. “if i get lost in the 
woods,” he once said, “it is only to find the forest.”
the time haS come to call up a World
The time has come to elaborate a new language, to invent the forms, to create 
the shapes, to call up a world of lines and colors with no indebtedness to litera-
ture, one which does not resemble what one calls reality, but which constitutes, 
by itself, a reality.
 Can for
ms hitherto unknown be forced into being?
 i s a purely plastic expression possible?
 i t will gradually be realized that the essential mission of the young school 
of painting will consist in substituting for the vision of reality the authenticity 
and reality of vision.
Continuity, no. 2 (1945); translated by alex Wilder


--- PAGE 199 ---
178 Black, Brown, & Beige
Baya
Born in algeria into a poor family of algerian and Berber ancestry,  
Baya (1931–1998) was orphaned as a child and raised by her grand-
mother. She was already painting at the age of eleven, when she was 
adopted by 
a French woman. at sixteen she had her first solo exhibi-
ti
on in Paris at the Galerie Maeght, for which andré Breton wrote an 
important preface for the catalog. The following year her terra-cottas 
attracted the interest of Picasso.
 a
lthough unable to read, she also narrated stories that were taken 
down by a stenographer.
 a
part from a ten-year period of inactivity, she continued painting: 
large gouaches; arabesques in the brightest colors featuring women and 
children; large birds; musical instruments; and dreamlike landscapes and 
labyr
inths strangely evoking the myths and rhythms of ancient egypt 
and Sumer.
 l
ike the story published here, her tales tend to draw on the same 
magical themes as her paintings.
the Big Bird
once there was a little girl, and her mother was very wicked. The girl wanted 
to get married and her mother wouldn’t let her.
 But 
one day, a Gentleman came along, and this girl hid him in a hole and put 
the djifna [mortar] on top.
 i n the evening the mother comes home and she says: “Someone came in 
here.” “no, no mommy, no one came,” says the girl.
 The mother says: “i’ll rub henna on everyone in the house.”
 henna is brought, and the girl comes, and the little dog and the cat, the 
chickens, the rabbits, all the animals, but not the birds, the jars come, the tadjin 
[spoon] comes, even the pitcher and the sieve and the basket.
 But 
the djifna doesn’t want to move, the Gentleman is underneath. The girl 
says: “The djifna is too old, it can’t walk.” She took a bit of henna in her hand, 
and she went and put it on the djifna there in its corner.
Pleine Marge, no. 6 (December 1987); translated by Myrna Bell rochester


--- PAGE 200 ---
Africa 179
Habib Tengour
one of the Maghreb’s foremost postcolonial poets, Tengour was born 
in 1947 in Mostaganem, in eastern algeria, and has lived ever since in 
algeria and Paris. educated as an anthropologist and sociologist, he has 
taught at universities in both countries. as his Maghrebian Surrealism 
manifesto amply shows, humor and playfulness are central to his work, 
which nonetheless reflects a larger seriousness. This manifesto, for ex-
ample, subtly makes the point that surrealism—commonly considered 
of French or
igin—is in truth a recent european variant of much older 
Maghrebian traditions and practices.
maghre Bian Surreali Sm
During these past twenty years, some Maghrebians in exile have made an act of 
relative Surrealism. They could hardly do otherwise: the family was an absence 
they mourned in front of a postal window, homeland a confiscated identity, and 
religion an i.o.u.
 i t is, after all, in Maghrebian Sufism that surrealist subversion asserts itself: 
pure psychic automatism, mad love, revolt, unanticipated encounters, etc. 
always there is a spark of un-conscious Sufism in those Maghrebian writers 
who are not simply sharp operators—reread Kateb or Khair-eddine.
Feraoun is surrealist in Si Mohand
Kateb is surrealist in tradition
Dib is surrealist in the derive
Senac is surrealist in the street
Khair-
eddine is surrealist in ethylic delirium
i am surrealist when i am not there
Baya is not surrealist, despite Breton’s sympathy
T ranslated by Myrna Bell Rochester


--- PAGE 201 ---
S e n e g a l
Cheikh Tidiane Sylla
Painter, poet, and, later, architect, Sylla was born in Senegal, West 
africa, and came to the united States as a young man and settled in 
Milwaukee. Shortly after the 1976 World Surrealist exhibition in Chi-
cago he came into contact with the Surrealist Group in that city and 
immedia
tely identified himself with it. he collaborated on the surrealist 
issues of Paul Buhle’s Cultural Correspondence (1978 and 1981), Free Spirits: 
Annals of the Insurgent Imagination (1982), and the fourth issue of the Chi-
cago Group’s journal, Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion (198
 9). he also took part 
in the “Surrealism in 1982” group show in Chicago, and over the years 
has cosigned several surrealist declarations.
 a
fter acquiring a degree in architecture, Sylla later moved to Florida, 
where he eventually opened his own architectural firm. in part because 
of the press of business, but also because of his geographical distance 
from his surrealist comrades, he has been less involved in the day-to-day 
activities of the movement in recent years.
Surreali Sm and Black african art
The surrealist aspects of the african way of life, as well as the african implica-
tions of surrealism, have tended to be ignored for reasons already touched on. 
instead of the alienating dualistic intellectualization that usually defines the 
headlines of european social practice, black africans enjoyed the presence of 
the practice of poetry throughout the totality of their traditional social life. in 
africa, that is, the living experience of surreality has since prehistoric times enjoyed 
supremacy over its theoretical justification. in the Western world, however, 
surrealism is the result of a long philosophical, political, scientific and poetic 
struggle to recover what the traditional african has never lost.
 against all forms of indifference and misery, surrealism and black african art 
remain irreducible examples in the development of the complete unfettering of 
the mind. Surrealism and black african art show that history’s last step—the 
step beyond histor
 y—coincides with a return to first principles, which is also a re-
turn to primordial glory, involving nothing less than the systematic and definitive 
liberation of the whole of human society and of nature itself.
Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, no. 4 (1989) (original emphasis)


--- PAGE 202 ---
Africa 181
the Spirit of unity— for freedom
as a surrealist painter, my art is first to question whatever might be related to 
the psychic circuit of the mind: a question whose answer is freed from any ex-
perience already lived, or any criteria conceived by the social elaboration of our 
existence. The priority is for a new starting point chosen out of our knowledge 
by any automatic impulsion to interpret the vibrations of the unconscious.
 i f 
the surrealist movement has been the victim of many dismemberments in 
the past, it is time now to realize the necessity and the imperative of the co-
herence that must animate the spirit of unity, for the freedom of the mind, and 
thereafter, of all societies.
Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, no. 4 (1989)
c o n g o
Tchicaya U Tam’si
in a 1970 letter from africa to the Chicago Surrealist Group, published 
in the first issue of the journal Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, Ted Joans em-
phasizes 
africa’s “marvelous goings-on and creativeness” and adds: “a 
poet like T chicaya u Tam’si of Congo B. is just as seriously surreal as 
thee.”
 Whi
le still in his teens, in 1946 T chicaya (1931–1988) went to Paris 
and orléans to study, escorted by his father, a deputy from what was 
then called the Moyen Congo. his first book of poems, Le mauvais sang 
(Bad blood) appeared in Paris in 1955, followed two years later by Feu de 
brosse (Brush fire), and by many others. early 
 on he was identified as a 
surrealist in the african art and poetry magazine Black Orpheus. h e was 
also active in the vibrant political life of the time; during much of 1960, 
for example, he edited the daily Le Congo.
 a
lthough his association with organized surrealism was tangential, 
reviewers—not surprisingly, in view of his extraordinary imagery—fre-
quently describe his work as surrealist.


--- PAGE 203 ---
182 Black, Brown, & Beige
again St deStiny
i pulled up my throat with multicolored glass
i wished to kick chance in the pants
my second victory
a little pox on the brain
and i
 don’t know how to save myself
then i dreamt of returning
to my village
with eyes behind dark glasses
and i
 had to fear my sorcerer
i leaped the sea
with my sensual insomnia
salt fills my head
i must ar
m my people
against their destiny tonight
in order to name it later
in golden figures
he earned his death
long live love
Selected Poems
m o z a m B i q u e
Inácio Matsinhe
a sheepherder in his native Mozambique, Matsinhe (1945– ) took up 
painting while still quite young.
 Befr
iended by the leading figures of the Surrealist Group of lis-
bon—
artur do Cruzeiro Seixas, Mário Cesariny, isabel Meyrelles—he 
also became well known in Portugal and began exhibiting with the 
surr
ealists. active in several antiapartheid exhibitions as well as festivals


--- PAGE 204 ---
Africa 183
supporting african liberation movements, he went on to show his work 
in holland, italy, venezuela, and england. a participant in the 1976 
World Surrealist exhibition in Chicago—where, in addition to his own 
work, he also showed some pieces done in collaboration with the lis-
bon Group—Matsinhe entered into correspondence with the Chicago 
Surrealist Group and soon was promoting the group’s journal, Arsenal/
Surrealist Subversion on an extended speaki
 ng tour of africa.
painting a S a contri Bution to conSciou SneSS
Macumba, which also lives in my paintings, is a mysterious world inherited by 
the blacks from their ancestors. it has been passed down from generation to 
generation, although missionaries and other agents of Portuguese domination 
have tried to destroy it, along with other rituals of my people. Sexual initiation 
and education, and much else, have been repressed and subjected to contempt 
by the white Portuguese colonialists.
 i
 shall continue to paint—as a protest, and as a contribution to the rising 
consciousness of a people.
Inácio Matsinhe
i Became a tortoi Se to reSiSt torture
i paint for my people, but of course these are problems that the world should 
know about. So i also paint for the world, so they may know the problems of 
my people.
 i
 am making a political portrait of the suffering of the people in Mozam-
bique
, angola and Guinea: the people oppressed by the Portuguese. i chose 
this form because i believe this is a form in which i can tell other people of this 
suffering. i utilize symbols to mark the rage that lives within me.
i have used the tortoise to symbolize the resistance that people have to have to 
face suffering and the conditions of their lives. in order to resist the oppression 
they have to become like tortoises, protected by those very big shells.
Marvelous Freedom/Vigilance of Desire, catalog of the 1976 World Surrealist exhibi tion
the Snake ( a Story)
on that morning, Thursday, in Xipamanine, a snake was found inside a small 
barrel of mahev.


--- PAGE 205 ---
184 Black, Brown, & Beige
 a porter was going to order the aforementioned drink. “ i want a mug of 
mahev, but well-stirred,” he said. h e stirred. But only pretended. The porter 
seemed to have some knowledge of the drink. he yelled, “Stir well, mamana.” 
he stirred, but hesitantly. By accident, he touched the snake at the bottom of 
the barrel that was casting a spell to entice the client and to have the drink filled 
up more. it appeared at the surface of the drink. The porter screamed: “Snake! 
Snake! Snake in the mahev . . .” The snake fled. a nd it was disgraced. everyone 
who spends the whole morning in Xipamanine drinking xicajú, every cocuana 
who has fun the entire morning selling nhagane or whatever, every mamana who 
crowds Xipamanine buying things, and every molwênes who spends the day 
picking bananas, robbing the vendor women and picking oranges and rotten 
mangoes, encircled the snake and filled the place with plaintive screams against 
its witch-owner. They lambasted it, beat it, threw rocks, sand, in short anything 
that was handy. But the snake came back after having performed many miracles, 
such as turning into rectangular objects, hiding in the mboa, nhagane leaves, etc.
 a
fter these miracles, it returned to its owner and hid inside her blouse.
Noticias l.M. (1963); translated by Danielle Jouët-Pastre and neil Pischner
a n g o l a
Malangatana Valente Ngwenya
Born in southern Mozambique, where his father was a migratory 
miner and his mother a tattooist who also sold beads and filled teeth, 
ng
wenya (1936– ) had little schooling as a child. at twelve he left home 
to seek work in Maputo. While working there as a ball boy at a tennis 
club, he attended night school and began painting “furiously,” as he 
put it.
 in 19
63 the Portuguese surrealist poet and painter artur do Cru-
zeiro Seixas, then emp
loyed at the Museum of angola, exhibited a 
large canvas by ngwenya at the museum. This provocative gesture 
resulted in Seixas’ interrogation by the Salazarist police, but it also 
brought n
gwenya’s work to wide attention. The following year, how-
ever
, ngwenya was accused of being associated with the revolutionary


--- PAGE 206 ---
Africa 185
movement FreliMo (Frente de libertação de Moçambique; Front for 
liberation of Mozambique) and imprisoned by the colonial police for 
two years. after independence he served for four years as a FreliMo 
deputy and later as a member of the Maputo Municipal assembly. 
around this time his poetry began to appear in Black Orpheus and other 
periodicals.
 Cofounder 
of the Mozambique peace movement as well as the na-
ti
onal Museum of art, he also initiated an important cultural center in 
his native village, Matalana. he has long been recognized as one of 
africa’s greatest artists. his paintings, drawings, watercolors, prints, 
ceramics, tapestry, and sculpture are included in museum collections 
throughout the worl
d. he has also exhibited in numerous gallery shows. 
in 1976 he took part in the huge World Surrealist exhibition at the Gal-
lery Black Swan in Chicago. The poem reprinted here appeared in that 
show’s catalog, Marvelous Freedom/Vigilance of Desire.
Survivor among million S
i am the survivor among millions
dead from lack of pure air
they were not used to air conditioning
or to the mine that caved in.
Drawing (1970s) by Malangatana 
valente ngwenya.


--- PAGE 207 ---
186 Black, Brown, & Beige
They died, died without saying goodbye
buried in this mine
where there is no cackling of hens
where there is nothing but men
The lantern that blew out
left us in the dark
when the mine exploded
and the gods took advantage of us
and demanded some glass beads from us
and si
nce we had no glass beads
we are dead dead dead.
and m
e i sounded the alarm. i survived
i raised my hands without weeping
or crying for help
and because they were my friends
they let me survive.
T ranslated by Mary Hardy
Amílcar Cabral
of the great world revolutionists and strategists of guerrilla warfare in 
the 1950s and 1960s, few if any were more deeply affected by poetry 
than Cabral (1924
–1973), the leader of the movement to liberate africa’s 
Guinea-Bissau and the Cape verde islands from Salazarist Portugal’s 
fascist colonialism. a student in the 1940s, Cabral was an impassioned 
reader of the works of aimé Césaire and of léopold Senghor’s an-
thology 
of the new black poetry: “Things i had not even dreamed of, 
marvelous poetry written by blacks from all parts of the French world, 
po
etry that speaks of africa, slaves, men, life and human hopes . . . Sub-
lime . . . infinitely human . . . The book brings me much [including] the 
certainty that the black man is in the process of awakening throughout 
the world” (Cabral, Unity and Struggle).
 a
 poet himself—one who, indeed, identified his very being with 
poetry, Cabral affirmed the practice of poetry as an essential part of 
what he call
ed the re-africanization of the mind. only by freeing the 
colonized peoples from imperialist domination, he argued, could they 
re-
become africans.


--- PAGE 208 ---
Africa 187
 a n agronomist by profession, Cabral also developed a profound and 
radical ecological perspective, rare among the Marxists of his time (or ours).
national liBeration and culture
history teaches us that, in certain circumstances, it is very easy for the for-
eigner to impose his domination on a people. But it likewise teaches us that, 
whatever the material aspects of this domination, it can be maintained only 
by the permanent and organized repression of the cultural life of the people 
concerned. implantation of domination can be ensured definitively only by 
physical elimination of a significant part of the dominated population.
 i n fact, to take up arms to dominate a people is, above all, to take up arms to 
destroy, or at least to neutralize and to paralyze their cultural life. For as long as 
part of that people can have a cultural life, foreign domination cannot be sure 
of its perpetuation. at a given moment, depending on internal and external 
factors determining the evolution of the society in question, cultural resistance 
(indestructible) may take on new (political, economic, and armed) forms, in 
order fully to contest foreign domination. . . .
 Study of the history of liberation struggles shows that they have generally 
been preceded by an upsurge of cultural manifestations, which progressively 
harden into an attempt, successful or not, to assert the cultural personality 
of the dominated people by an act of denial of the culture of the oppressor. 
Whatever the conditions of subjection of a people to foreign domination and 
the influence of economic, political and social factors in the exercise of this 
domination, it is generally within the cultural factor that we find the germ of 
challenge which leads to the structuring and development of the liberation 
movement.
Unity and Struggle
Antonio Domingues
antonio Domingues was a good friend of the Surrealist Group in Por-
tugal
, and especially of the great painter and poet artur do Cruzeiro 
Seixas. Because he was also closely associated with amílcar Cabral and 
other radical african students, Domingues in effect served as an infor-
mal liaison between the two groups.


--- PAGE 209 ---
188 Black, Brown, & Beige
the influence of aimÉ cÉSaire in  
por
tugue Se-Speaking africa
lisbon, 24 February 1999
Dear Franklin rosemont,
 Through our common friend artur do Cruzeiro Seixas i acknowledge your 
letter of 12th January last, and by the means i have, it is with all pleasure that i 
am going to try to answer your questions.
 a
imé Césaire was one of the most important points of reference for some 
african people during the 1940s and 50s, such as: amílcar Cabral (Guine); 
agostinho neto (angola); Mário Pinto de andrade (angola); Francisco José 
Tenreiro (S. T omé e Príncipe); alda espírito Santo (S. T omé e Príncipe); noêmia 
de Sousa (Mozambique); antonio Domingues (Portugal).
 aimé Césaire’s work ( Discourse on Colonialism) was translated into Portuguese 
around 1950 by the poet noêmia de Sousa, with introductory remarks by Mário 
de andrade.
 i am antonio Domingues (painter/poet) and i was deeply attached to the 
african milieu in lisbon since the 1940s, having lived together and taken part 
in many activities with all the persons mentioned above, including amílcar 
Cabral, whose portrait i painted in 1952.
 apologizing for my poor english, and hoping that it is at least enough to be 
understood, i am at your disposal for any further questions.
With my best regards, 
an
tonio Domingues 
lisb
on
m a d a g a S c a r
Jean-Joseph Rabéarivelo
rabéarivelo (1901–1937), who lived his entire life on the island of Mada-
gascar, b
elongs to the “accursed” tradition of Baudelaire, rimbaud, and 
Jean-Pierre Duprey. in the course of a short and tragic life dominated


--- PAGE 210 ---
Africa 189
by myriad so-called practical failures, large and small, poetry was—in 
his view—all that really mattered. unfortunately, his seven books of 
poems provided little income for his far-from-prosperous family. indeed, 
rabéarivelo, a victim of colonialist prejudice, never came even close to 
finding a way of making a living that met his hopes and expectations. 
instead, he dev
oted his idleness to the pursuit of dreams, reveries, and 
reckless experiments with narcotics. at the time of his suicide, he was 
employed as a proofreader.
 h
is poems, however—especially those translated from the night—
are a great legacy. Fittingly, he is to this day recognized as Madagascar’s 
finest poet.
a purple Star
a purple star
evolved in the depth of the sky—
a flower of blood unfolding on the prairie of night
evolv
e, evolve.
Y ou see nothing of her but her myriads of eyes
her triangular reptile eyes,
that open one by one
among celestial lianas.
24 Poems
S o u t h  a f r i c a
Dennis Brutus
Born in rhodesia of mixed parents who soon moved to Port elizabeth, 
South africa, Brutus’ (1924– ) irregular education included extensive 
reading of the english poets. With a B.a. from Fort hare university, he 
taught for fourteen years in South african high schools. his antiapart-
heid agitation led to his dismissal as a teacher in 1962, and his arrest in 
Johannesburg the following year.


--- PAGE 211 ---
190 Black, Brown, & Beige
 The years 1963–1966 involved more agitation and more police perse-
cution—including getting shot in the back and eighteen months’ im-
prisonm
ent. Finally, in 1966 he sought exile briefly in england, but soon 
moved to the united States, where he has lived, taught, and agitated 
ever since.
 h
is surrealist connections are long-standing. Shortly after settling 
in Chicago he attended the 1976 World Surrealist exhibition, which he 
subsequently described to Franklin rosemont as “the single greatest cul-
tural ev
ent” during his stay in the city. he collaborated on the surrealist 
journal, Free Spirits: Annals of the Insurgent Imagination (1982), as well as the 
special “Sur
realism: revolution against Whiteness” issue of the journal 
Race T raitor (1998), and cosigned such surrealist declaration as “Poetry 
Mat
ters: on the Media Persecution of amir Baraka” in 2003.
 During the mid-1980s’ agitation to free nelson Mandela—agitation 
in which the Surrealist Group was very active—Brutus in an impromptu 
speech a
t northwestern university to antiapartheid students awaiting 
trial urged them to support the Surrealist Movement.
the Sun on thiS ruBBle
The sun on this rubble after rain
Bruised though we must be
some easement we require
unarguably, though we argue against desire.
under j
ackboots our bones and spirits crunch
forced into sweat-tear-sodden slush
—now glow lipped by this sudden touch
—sun stripped perhaps, our bones may later sing
or spell out some malignant nemesis
Sharpevilled to spearpoints for revenging
but now our pride-dumbed mouths are wide
in wordless supplication
—are grateful for the least relief from pain
—like the sun on this debris after rain.
Stubborn Hope


--- PAGE 212 ---
Africa 191
poet again St apartheid
all artists have an important contribution to make in assertion of humanity 
and humane values. it seems to me that the mere act of creation, the creative 
process, is itself an assertion of our human worth, our human dignity. and so 
we should be conscious of our responsibilities as people who are able to make 
that statement on behalf of all humanity.
 i
 harbor the conviction that all human beings have creative ability, that the 
creative spark exists in all of us. it takes different forms; it must be nurtured and 
developed, but no one of us is incapable of a creative act.
 i n the apartheid society, blacks are told that they must know their place, that 
they are less than human, are subhuman. T old they must accept certain limited 
horizons and cannot rise above them. The notion of african people ultimately 
determining their own destiny, governing their own society, achieving full stat-
ure 
as human beings—this is not admitted. in that context therefore, a simple 
assertion of humanity by an artist is made in defiance of a total denial of that 
humanity.
 Perhaps 
the most positive thing people can do is a negative thing, and that 
is to ensure that the racism of South africa does not penetrate to other parts of 
the world. it must be stopped.
Buhle et al., Free Spirits


--- PAGE 213 ---
George herriman created 
the complex character 
Krazy Kat, a true classic of 
am
erican literature. This 
early strip is from 1911.


--- PAGE 214 ---
5. Surrealist Beginnings in the  
United States, 1930s–1950s
The marvelous represents the triumph of the human spirit over chaos.
—ralph ellison
apart from Man ray, american involvement in organized surrealism in the 
1920s and early 1930s was far from impressive. Man ray, of course, was no run-
of-the-mill exception. Photographer, painter, filmmaker, writer, and a veteran 
of new 
Y ork Dada, he moved to Paris in 1921. arriving on Bastille Day, he was 
warmly welcomed by the Paris Dadaists, who were soon to declare themselves 
surrealists. Cited in Breton’s first Manifesto (1924) and included in the first sur-
realist 
exhibition the following year, Man ray was recognized as the first (and 
for several years the only) u.S. surrealist. a devout Parisian most of his life—
apart from the Second World War years, which he spent in los angeles—he 
remained active in the movement well into the 1960s.
 Josep
h Cornell never joined the surrealist movement, preferring an isolated 
independence that he maintained throughout his life. his object boxes, how-
ever, as well as his collages and film scenarios, were much admired by Breton 
and other surrealists and frequently included in surrealist exhibitions and re-
produced 
in surrealist publications. of Cornell it can truly be said that he was, 
despite himself, objectively surrealist.
 other americans of the 1920s–1940s who are sometimes misidentified as sur-
realists—i am thinking particularly of such writers as evan Shipman, Matthew 
Josephson, and Wayne andrews—were, truth to tell, little more than tourists 
or dabblers, or both. They may have met one or more surrealists or attended a 
few parties, but their understanding of what was at stake in the surrealist quest 
and their actual participation in the movement, were, in a word, nil.1
 Most 
published writings on surrealism in the united States in those years—
by literary folk, newspaper critics, and academics—tend to be of little or no 
help. articles from that period by Kenneth Burke, Malcolm Cowley, ezra 
Pound, herbert Muller, Mike Gold, Samuel Putnam, and a host of others are 
notable not only for their superciliousness, but also and above all for their 
superficiality.


--- PAGE 215 ---
194 Black, Brown, & Beige
 Meanwhile, several african american writers seem to have given surrealism 
at least half a try even as they consciously avoided the word. at their best, the 
surrealist sparks in Fenton Johnson’s poetry bring to mind the imagery of his 
out-of-the-mai
nstream contemporaries Samuel Greenberg and Mina loy, and 
that is not small praise. Jean T oomer, in his early 1930s Chicago days—years 
after the success of his phenomenal Cane—had what might be called an authen-
tic surrealist moment, to which he gave strong expression in his little book Es-
sentials (1931). Privately printed in a limited edition, the book was unfortunately 
almost unknown to readers for seven decades.
 George h
erriman is a special case. in Krazy Kat, a marvelous world of his 
own creation, he left us an unsurpassed verbal circus—much better than most 
poetry of the time—enhanced by his supreme mastery of the comic strip as an 
art form. a unique multimedia vernacular surrealism, herriman’s Kat saga is also 
one of the true classics of american literature.2
 a
nd then there was Zora neale hurston. not many people seem to know 
it, but the great folklorist, anthropologist, and novelist was a writer with strong 
albeit unavowed surrealist tendencies. French surrealist Guy Ducornet, in his 
study 
of surrealism in the united States, was quite right to cite her as an im-
portant inspirer and precursor.3 in the early 1930s she contributed six brilliant 
ar
ticles to nancy Cunard’s surrealist-influenced Negro Anthology. These texts—
including “Characteristics of negro expression,” “visions,” and “Shouting”—
abound with the insight, imagination, originality, vivacity, and humor that char-
acterize her later folkloric studies: Mules and Men (1935) and T ell My Horse (1938), 
the la
tter focused on voodoo practices in Jamaica and haiti. even in childhood, 
as she notes in her autobiography, Dust T racks on a Road (1942), that loneliness 
was a constant shadow, suggesting that her rebellious self-consciousness and 
curiosity regarding “otherness” started early.
 Far 
more than any other ethnographer of her time, she was acutely sensitive 
to what Pierre Mabille calls the mirror of the Marvelous. For her, as larry neal 
once observed, fieldwork involved above all the sensibility of the artist. Passion-
ately attracted to all manifestations of the imaginary—dreams, visions, trance, 
magic, the wonders of everyday life, and wild nature—she also embodied a 
flamboyant but deeply serious black feminism. in retrospect, it is clear that 
what has subsequently been called hurston’s visionary anthropology closely 
resembles the nonconformist poetry-inspired anthropology developed by the 
surrealists at the same time.
 as it happened, the first really serious and in-depth inquiry into surrealism in 
the united States was the work of another african american: a former porter, 
messenger, postal worker, and ditchdigger, better known as the author of Uncle 
T om’s Children, Native Son, and T welve Million Black V oices.


--- PAGE 216 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 195
richard Wright and hiS grandmother
in 1936–1937 an immense exhibition called “Fantastic art, Dada and Surrealism” 
opened at the new Y ork Museum of Modern art. Despite its eclecticism, the 
show gave the u.S. public its first chance to see the new art that was provok-
ing so much controversy. More than a few of its many thousands of visitors 
came to laugh or express their scorn, but some were unafraid to admit that the 
show had, in various ways, significantly changed their lives. For painter arshile 
Gorky, an armenian immigrant whose earlier work was largely derivative of 
early Picasso, the surrealists’ paintings provided a decisive turning point; his 
later works would be recognized as some of surrealism’s finest masterpieces. For 
Dorothea Tanning, a young art student from Galesburg, illinois, the new Y ork 
show made her realize that she herself, lo and behold, was a surrealist.
 Po
etically and philosophically, however, it is doubtful that anyone was more 
affected by this gigantic surrealist manifestation than richard Wright. The ex-
hibition’s nearly seven hundred works, and its catalog—especially the second 
edition (1937), with essays on surrealist history and theory—had an impact on 
him that lasted the rest of his life.4
 i n 
1937, when he moved to new Y ork, Wright was still in his twenties, fresh 
from Chicago, and, as always, on the lookout for anything new and daring and 
liberating. his response to surrealism was deep, spontaneous, and, characteristi-
cally, his own. First and foremost, he recognized surrealism as a creative process 
which helped him clarify a double mystery: the mystery of his grandmother’s 
unusual use of language, and the mystery of blues singers’ song-composition. 
Wright was struck by his stern grandmother’s religion-saturated folk speech, 
full of disconnected sentences and fragmented images, and the blues singers’ 
freewheeling lyrics, with their lack of narrative sequence and juxtaposition of 
discordant 
elements. likening both to surrealist collage, he went on to explore 
the affinities between surrealism and jazz, more particularly, between surrealist 
automatism (in writing and drawing) and jazz improvisation.
 Wr
ight’s surrealist adventure reveals his profound grasp of fundamentals. in 
contrast to most left art critics and litterateurs of the time, including the Trotsky-
ist intellectuals around Partisan Review, Wright recognized surrealism as a revolu-
tionary method of learning, a means of resolving immobilizing contradictions, 
a way of seeing things whole and thereby changing the world.
 his 1940–1941 essay “Memories of My Grandmother” is surely the most 
insightful and original text concerning surrealism written in the united States 
up to that time. By relating surrealism to african american folk expression, and 
to his own life, richard Wright accomplished more—much more—than most 
americans who had, to one degree or another, expressed interest in surrealism.


--- PAGE 217 ---
196 Black, Brown, & Beige
Wright was not simply interested; he was fascinated. he read Freud and Ferenczi 
and dared to explore the world of dreams. listening to what Breton called 
the surrealist voice, he immersed himself in the surrealist experience and applied 
surrealist methods to the problems that troubled him. indeed, his surrealist 
research was so full of new ideas that it could easily have expanded the move-
men
t’s perspectives in many directions. unfortunately, Wright seems to have 
kept his surrealist explorations all to himself. “Memories of My Grandmother” 
was not published, or even completed.
 i n 
his books, however—novels, short stories, essays—the light of surrealism 
burns brightly. Surrealism early on reinforced his break with so-called pro-
letarian literature and, more broadly, with all “closed” realism. radical open-
endedness and free-spirited imagination are the heart and nervous system of 
T welve Million Black V oices (1941) as well as such 1940s tales as “The Man Who 
li
ved underground” and “The Man Who Came to Chicago.” not until ralph 
ellison’s Invisible Man (1952) would a merican fiction include such large doses of 
concrete irrationality and outrageous humor. ellison was no disciple of Wright, 
but in his best-known novel, and in many of his essays as well—on jazz, for ex-
ampl
e, and on the collage art of romare Bearden—he, more than anyone else 
of his time, seems to have picked up hints and flashes of Wright’s surrealism.
 i n “harlem is nowhere” ellison evokes a social reality that Wright surely 
would have recognized: “a world so fluid and shifting that often within the mind 
the real and the unreal merge, and the marvelous beckons from behind the 
same sordid reality that denies its existence. hence the most surreal fantasies 
are acted out in the streets of harlem. . . . For this is a world in which the major 
energy of the imagination goes not into creating works of art, but to overcome 
the frustrations of social discrimination.”5
 a
lthough some critics have found Wright guilty of existentialism, the tag 
fits only a few of his tales, and even then only slightly. The real hallmark of 
Wright’s work (and ellison’s) is not Sartre’s dreary absence of exits, but, rather, 
a powerful poetic refusal—a refusal of misery or, in more positive terms, a search 
for an exalting and liberating Marvelous. From his 1940s “Memories” through 
The Long Dream and his late experiments with haiku, he pursued this passionate 
quest.
 Wright’s sojourn in surrealism was first brought to wide notice by the scholar 
and critic eugene Miller in his pathbreaking V oice of a Native Son. Few commen-
tators
, however, have been willing to pursue the topic. regrettably, too, no one 
seems to have bothered to correct Miller’s mistaken assertion that Wright made 
no attempt to meet andré Breton or any of the surrealists, in new Y ork or in 
Paris.
 i t is not certain that Wright encountered any of the european surrealist


--- PAGE 218 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 197
refugees from nazi-occupied France during World War ii. however, when one 
considers the number and variety of situations in which such encounters might 
have occurred—cafes, bookstores, jazz clubs, exhibition openings, film show-
ings, neighborhood bars, and parties—it is risky to insist that no such meetings 
did i
n fact take place. in any event, Wright in 1944 is known to have been in 
touch with at least one frequenter of the new Y ork surrealist milieu: the great 
photographer helen levitt, a collaborator on the surrealist journal VVV .
 after 1946, however, when Wright himself—as a refugee from u.S. racism—
resettled in Paris (where he remained until his death in 1960), his encounters 
with Breton and others from the surrealist milieu were not only numerous but 
are 
also well documented. interestingly, several of these meetings occurred in 
the course of protest actions. in May 1948, at the opening session of the united 
nations in Paris, a former u.S. bomber pilot named Garry Davis tore up his 
passport, denounced the inherent militarism of nation-states, and proclaimed 
himself a “citizen of the world,” a gesture followed by his arrest. among the first 
to rally to his support were andré Breton and the Surrealist Group. according 
to the newspaper Combat (octo ber 26), Breton and Wright were present at 
Davis’ press conference, and—with albert Camus, Jean-Paul Sartre, and a few 
other writers—served as members of his Solidarity Committee.
 Wright and Breton met again in December 1948, at the historic Writers’ 
Congress sponsored by the rassemblement Democratique révolutionnaire 
(revolutionary Democratic assembly, rDr), a new left group. on this occa-
sion 
Wright also met Gerard rosenthal, who presided at the meeting and as 
Francis Gerard rosenthal had directed the Bureau of Surrealist research back 
in 1924–1925 and later served as leon Trotsky’s French lawyer.6 at least twice in 
public speeches during this period, Breton significantly mentioned Wright.7
 i n 
his Paris years Wright met many others who, at one time or another, were 
involved in surrealism. They include Marcel Duhamel (who translated Black 
Boy), Maurice nadeau (author of the first history of surrealism), essayist and 
critic roger Caillois, poet Jacques Prévert, novelist raymond Queneau, poet 
and short story writer lise Deharmé, and Madeleine rousseau of the Chicago/
Paris Continuity Group, whose members included Jean ar p and Jean-Michel 
atlan.8 Wright is also known to have contributed one of his manuscripts to a 
fund-raising auction for the ailing and indigent surrealist poet and playwright 
an
tonin artaud.
 i n connection with the founding of the journal Présence Africaine, Wright met 
aimé 
Césaire, léon Damas, Frantz Fanon (a student of Césaire’s), and léopold 
Senghor. on the same occasion he met two more surrealist pioneers: Michel 
leiris, who had become a distinguished africanist; and Pierre naville, who had 
coedited with Benjamin Péret the first surrealist journal, La Révolution Surréaliste,


--- PAGE 219 ---
198 Black, Brown, & Beige
in 1924–1925. naville in 1949 translated and introduced the French edition of 
C.l.r. James’ The Black Jacobins.
 T o sum up: very few americans of his time came even close to having as 
wide an acquaintance with past and present participants in surrealism as richard 
Wright.
the Surreali St diaSpora
New Y ork, 1940–1945: The Harlem Connection
The modulations we manufactured were the weirdest.
—Dizzy Gillespie
When nazi military invasion in effect shut down public surrealist activity—and 
all forms of free speech and assembly—in France and many other european 
countries, the “surrealist diaspora” began. Most of the Paris surrealists, after a 
brief respite in Marseilles during the winter of 1940–1941, left for new Y ork. 
others fled to argentina, Mexico, or the Caribbean. underground surrealist 
publications existed, notably in France and holland, but the surrealist refugees 
in new Y ork and elsewhere did not see them until the war was over.
 e ven in new Y ork the status of refugees left much to be desired. andré 
Breton and luis Buñuel, to name only two, were granted asylum in the united 
States on the condition that they avoid political activity of any kind. Both were 
kept 
under close FBi and police surveillance throughout the war.9 Despite such 
restrictive circumstances, however, a Surrealist Group in exile carried on as best 
it could.
 i nternational communication was severely hampered. inhabitants of the 
overrun countries of europe could neither send mail to the united States nor 
receive mail from it. The once-flourishing Surrealist Group in T okyo had been 
outlawed and most of its members jailed or placed under house arrest for the 
duration.10 only in e
 gypt, england, Martinique, Chile—and new Y ork—were 
Surrealist Groups openly and uninterruptedly active during this period.
 Fortunately, a number of americans rallied to the surrealist cause in new 
Y ork. among them were the young painters William Baziotes, Gerome Kam-
rowski
, and Jackson Pollock; sculptor David hare and his poet wife, Susanna; 
friendly critics such as harold rosenberg and Meyer Schapiro; photographers 
Clarence John laughlin, helen levitt, Frederick Sommer; and—of special im-
portance—the young Sicilian american poet Philip lamantia, whose poetry 
Breton greatly admired.
 The fact that the group’s meetings were mostly conducted in French caused


--- PAGE 220 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 199
some difficulty, for few of the americans were fluent in that language, and few 
of the refugees spoke english. More peripherally associated were Paul Good-
man and his circle of anarchist friends, and a more working-class anarchist 
group around the italian Carlo Tresca. The two latter groups did not in fact take 
part in Surrealist Group meetings, but now and then encountered Breton and 
his friends at exhibition openings and eating places.
 i n February 1942 an “ open letter to the President of Mexico” protesting 
Stalinist persecution of antifascist refugees in that country appeared in Partisan 
Review, which was then in its most radical period. The signatories included—
among many others— andré Breton, anita Brenner, civil-libertarian roger 
Baldwin, novelist James T. Farrell, lyle lane (of the Harlem Age), adam Cla yton 
Powell, a. Philip randolph, Carlo Tresca, and edmund Wilson.11
 a t least once in 1945 Suzanne and aimé Césaire came to new Y ork, met 
with Breton, and attended Surrealist Group gatherings. Wifredo lam also 
visited the city in connection with his 1941 solo exhibition, and later to attend 
other shows. T o what extent the Césaires or lam also visited african ameri-
can acquai
ntances during their new Y ork stays does not seem to be recorded. 
african american interaction with the surrealist refugees from europe is also 
poorly documented.
 i nterestingly, however, at least two euro-americans associated with the 
Surrealist Group in new Y ork authored notable books on african american 
history. in 1937 robert allerton Parker published a scholarly study of the evan-
gelist 
sect Peace Mission, run by Father Divine (George Baker) in harlem, and 
nine years later Brion Gysin brought out T o Master: A Long Goodnight (1946), a 
somewhat fictionalized biography of Josiah henson, the escaped slave who 
is believed to have been the model for the title character in harriet Beecher 
Stowe’s Uncle T om’s Cabin. in addi tion to its historical dimension, Gysin’s book 
also included a strong attack on u.S. racism, 1940s style.
 Parker’s book, incidentally, seems to have had a modest influence on the 
1942 new Y ork international Surrealist exhibition. The catalog, titled First Papers 
of Surrealism, features Breton’s album, “ on the Survival of Certain Myths and 
on Some other Myths in Growth or Formation.” halfway through, Breton 
inserted a photograph of Father Divine as an example of a “modern Messiah.”
 neither Parker nor Gysin was a surrealist, but both felt attracted to the 
movement, and both collaborated (Parker prolifically) on VVV . also attracted 
to surrealism in those days was Gysin’s friend herbert hill, who years later 
became a noted civil rights attorney and historian of black labor. in the 1940s 
hill was a young Trotskyist, still in his teens. interviewed in the 1990s, he re-
called 
Gysin’s telling him about “surrealist expeditions to harlem to hear the 
new jazz” back in the Forties. That this was no mere rumor is confirmed by


--- PAGE 221 ---
200 Black, Brown, & Beige
surrealist painter Gerome Kamrowski, who, also in a 1990s interview, empha-
sized tha
t “going to harlem was certainly part of the surrealist scene in those 
days.”12 Matta, Frederick Kiesler, William Baziotes, n icolas Calas, David hare, 
and robert Motherwell were among the names Kamrowski mentioned in this 
regard. Kamrowski himself was particularly fond of the Stuyvesant Ballroom, 
where Bunk Johnson’s band played, but he also enjoyed going to the Savoy 
Ballroom and the apollo Theatre.
 i t is not clear, from the recollections of herbert hill or Gerome Kamrowski, 
that any of the surrealists from europe managed to visit Minton’s Playhouse, 
where, mostly in the wee hours, the newest jazz—bebop—was being collec-
tively created by such geniuses as Charlie “Bird” Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Max 
roach
, Thelonious Monk, and other young and adventurous musicians.
 Whether they actually heard bop live or not, the influence of the harlem 
experience on the surrealist refugees is evident in their writings. in New Direc-
tions 1940 nicolas Calas comments on the phenomenon of objective chance, 
pointing out that “everything from deep-sea life to the dance at the Savoy in 
harlem can be poetic.” and in his Confound the Wise, reflecting on the most vital 
forces in america, he affirms that harlem’s Savoy and its ferocious rhythms 
were vastly preferable, from the surrealist point of view, to the Ballet russe.13
 h arlem jazz was especially significant for andré Breton. The first surreal-
ist generation, in 1920s Paris, included many jazz enthusiasts—Jacques Baron, 
rené Crevel, robert Desnos, Michel leiris, Jacques rigaut, and others—who 
frequented a black jazz nightspot, the Tempo Club, on the rue Fontaine in 
Pigalle. (Man ray did a painting of it.) Many also frequented the Bal nègre on 
the rue Blomet, in the heart of the Paris Caribbean community; andré Masson 
and Joan Miró lived next door. Breton, for his part, was tone deaf and for a long 
time shared Georgio de Chirico’s indifference to music. Kamrowski recalled 
that in the early 1940s he had heard John Cage remark that Breton considered 
music “escapist.”
 a ccording to elisa Breton, however, her husband’s attitude toward music 
changed dramatically in mid-decade. as she explained to Chicago surrealist 
Paul Garon in 1973, Breton—at her request, circa 1944–1945—took her to 
harlem to hear a jazz band. as had been the case with several refugee friends, 
elisa was deeply impressed, and so was andré. not long afterward, in his sole 
article on the subject of music, he reflected, in hegelian terms, on the fusion of 
music and poetry and looked forward to a potential reunification of hearing.14
 no one knows for sure, but it may well have been the Chilean painter 
roberto Matta who, by bringing his large collection of records from new Y ork 
to Paris, introduced the newer bop to the suddenly burgeoning postwar Paris 
surrealist milieu. in no time at all, it seems, victor Brauner, Claude Tarnaud,


--- PAGE 222 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 201
Stanislas rodanski, Georges Goldfayn, and Gérard legrand had formed what 
robert Benayoun later called a Thelonious Monk cult within the Surrealist 
Group.15
 Mat
ta’s special favorite among musicians was Cab Calloway, but his taste in 
jazz was all-embracing and enthusiastic to the point of fanaticism. he sums it 
up in 1984 in his response to Ted Joans’ surrealism/jazz inquiry in the German 
one-shot surrealist publication Dies und Das,  which Joans coedited with poet 
richard anders in Berlin: “Jazz is a word of revolt, pleasure and justice.”16
 i n 
any event, by 1947 at the latest, the black music known as jazz had be-
come, incontestably, not only the “crazy music” that a large part of the public 
identified with surrealism, but also the music with which surrealists themselves 
ident
ified. Make no mistake: the younger French and other european surreal-
ists’ chance 
encounter with the “hip” international african american subculture 
added up to a high-powered new tremor in the intellectual atmosphere.
 h arl
em, then—like Martinique, Cuba, and haiti—left a strong impact on 
postwar surrealism. The new black jazz, no doubt about it, was a prime inspi-
ration for free spirits in Paris, london, Brussels, Cairo, lisbon, amsterdam, 
Santiago, Bucharest, and wherever else surrealism was in flower. The impact, 
moreover, was lasting and assumed many forms. Postwar surrealist exhibition 
openings, for example, especially in the 1950s, often featured jazz, and ap-
preciations of the new music increasingly appeared in the movement’s pub-
lications. Such surrealist works as the jazz poems of Claude Tarnaud, Gérard 
legrand’s Puissances du jazz, and 
 François valorbe’s Carte noir—a suite of poems 
cel
ebrating black musicians—amplified the fact that african american jazz was 
the music of choice for surrealists.
 a
s legrand puts it in Puissances du jazz, the essence of black music is poetry 
and the 
spirit it radiates. in other words, jazz was regarded as a crucial part of 
the surrealist project. Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, no. 3 (1976) is no less explicit: 
“Surrealists recognize in black music, and especially in the recent evolution of 
jazz, not only an ally and a fraternal tendency, but also an irreplaceable con-
stituent element of the surrealist revolution.”17
 Down 
through the years, love of black music has in fact remained one of 
the constants of surrealism. The movement’s publications have now and then 
included appreciations of other kinds of music—Kurt Weill, harry Partch, Bali-
nese Gamelan music, and Spike Jones’ comic “music depreciation”—but these 
are rare compared to the voluminous surrealist literature on african ameri-
can blues 
and jazz. Black surrealists—r ené Ménil, Ted Joans, Jayne Cortez, 
Cheikh Tidiane Sylla, robin D. G. Kelley, and anthony Joseph, to name just 
a few—have written widely on the subject, but so have writers of european or 
euro-american descent: Claude Tarnaud, hilary Booth, Carmen Bruna, Jorge


--- PAGE 223 ---
202 Black, Brown, & Beige
Camacho, Paul Garon, Georges Goldfayn, Joseph Jablonski, Georges Gronier, 
Jaroslav Jezek, Jean-Jacques lebel, Gellu naum, artur do Cruzeiro Seixas, 
Charles radcliffe, anthony redmond, Michael vandelaar, and many others.
 Special credit here belongs to Paul Garon, who has unquestionably written 
more on black music than any other surrealist—or any other ten surrealists. 
For nearly forty years, he has written inspiredly and prolifically on blues and 
bluespeople, affirming and exploring their manifold affinities with surrealism via 
poetry, humor, dream, imagination, freedom, love, revolt, and social transfor-
mation. The Devil’s Son-in-Law (1971; revised 2003); Blues and the Poetic Spirit (1975; 
revised 1996); W oman with Guitar: Memphis Minnie’s Blues (with Beth Garon, 1992); 
and What’s the Use of W alking If There’s a Freight T rain Going Y our W ay (2006)—are 
indisp
ensable to researchers and regarded as classics. he has also contributed 
dozens of blues-related articles to scholarly and popular journals as well as en-
cyclopedias, other reference works, and—of course—surrealist publications.
neW pathS for Surreali Sm
The only way out is inward and forward.
—hilary Booth
Despite intrusions by FBi and other police snoopers, new Y ork’s surrealist 
refugees—with the help of their u.S. allies—accomplished a lot during their 
five years in the new World. They produced three large issues of a wonderful 
journal called VVV—Triple-v, a name clearly inspired by the african ameri-
can Doubl
e-v movement (victory over fascism but also over u.S. racism). The 
three issues total 314 pages.
 i n 
addition to numerous smaller shows, new Y ork’s surrealist refugees orga-
nized 
the comprehensive international Surrealist exhibition in 1942, featuring 
more than fifty artists. The catalog includes a brief preface by Breton focused 
on the urgency of poetry: “The surrealist cause, in art as in life, is the cause of 
freedom itself. T oday more than ever, to speak abstractly in the name of free-
dom or to praise it in empty terms, is to serve it ill. T o light the world, freedom 
must become flesh, and to this end must always be reflected and recreated in 
the word.” They also published books—quite a few for impecunious refugees. 
among them was the first english translation of aimé Césaire’s Return to My 
Native Land. Breton was able to bring out an expanded edition of Le surréalisme 
et la peinture; a volume of poems, Y oung Cherry T rees Secured against Hares; a mono-
graph on artist Yves Tanguy; and Arcane 17. andré Masson published Anatomy 
of My Universe and Nocturnal Notebook, and n icolas Calas, a collection of essays, 
Confound the Wise.


--- PAGE 224 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 203
 They also made effective use of sympathetic u.S. periodicals. Calas’ 200-
page surrealist anthology in the New Directions 1940  annual was a real break-
through—an unprecedentedly extensive collection of surrealist writings in en-
glish. New Directions 1941 featured Clark Mills’ translation of Breton’s long poem, 
Fata Morgana, illust rated by Wifredo lam.18
 The art and literary magazine View was especially receptive to surrealist 
collabora
tion. its early newspaper format series included a special Surrealist 
number, and surrealists remained prominent in subsequent issues. a glori-
ous hodgepodge of surprises, View published letters from a ntonin artaud, 
Suzanne Césaire, and T oni del renzio; poems by andré Breton, Philip laman-
tia, and Juan Breá; a fantastic novella, “Dark Sugar,” by black outsider artist Paul 
Chil
ds; drawings by Wifredo lam (who did the cover for the special May 1945 
“Tropics” issue); articles by nicolas Calas, Benjamin Péret, Paul nougé, Man 
ray, and Mina loy; a review of richard Wright’s Black Boy; and even one of 
lydia Cabrera’s afro-Cuban folktales, translated by Mary low.
 a lso largely devoted to surrealism was the double “Tropics” issue (no. 2–3) 
of Yvan Goll’s magazine, Hemispheres (Fall/Winter, 1943–1944), featuring Breton’s 
tr
ibute to Césaire, “a Great Black Poet,” four pages of Césaire’s poetry, and some 
of Breton’s Martinique-inspired prose poems, including his salute to Suzanne Cé-
saire, as well as drawings and a text by Masson. The issue offered readers several 
more pages of poems by Césaire, together with a full-page drawing by lam.
 as the preceding paragraphs suggest, surrealists of african descent were 
increasingly in the forefront of the movement’s expanding activity through-
out this period. Well represented in every issue of VVV , which also included a 
display ad for T ropiques, aimé Césaire’s poetry was simultaneously appearing in 
other languages in other lands. Wifredo lam’s paintings—full-page features in 
VVV—also proved to be a sensation wherever they were shown. in the 1940s 
alone, four surrealists—Breton, Calas, aimé Césaire, and Mabille, plus surrealist 
sympathizer Pierre loeb—wrote major articles on lam. (Breton, Calas, and 
Césaire in fact wrote two articles each.)
 i n the December 1945 “Speech to Y oung haitian Poets,” Breton, noting that 
“people of color have always enjoyed exceptional favor and prestige in surreal-
ism,” went on to emphasize that “it is therefore no accident, but a sign of the times, 
that the greatest impulses toward new paths for surrealism have been furnished, 
during the war just ended, by my greatest ‘colored’ friends—aimé Césaire in 
poetry, Wifredo lam in painting—and that i find myself among you in haiti in 
preference to any other place in the world.”19
 Strikingly, on that very trip to haiti, in that same tumultuous December, 
Breton encountered yet another black Caribbean genius, Clément Magloire-
Saint-aude, whose extraordinary poetic work—at that time scarcely known


--- PAGE 225 ---
204 Black, Brown, & Beige
outside haiti—added a wildly new dimension to an already amazingly multi-
dimensional surrealism. almost haikulike in its uncompromising simplicity, 
his poetry is not only “entirely free of the picturesque” (as Gérard legrand 
notes),20 but also electrifyingly spontaneous, smoldering with a disquieting her-
metic humor.
diSSolution of the neW york group
Surrealism in new Y ork during the first half of the 1940s had many bright mo-
ments as well as some lasting achievements. The movement’s very presence, 
moreover, as a multiracial revolutionary poetic force, had a vivifying effect on 
young artists, poets, and other assorted malcontents throughout the country. 
But it did not last.
 i n 1945–1946, when Breton and most of the other european surrealists in 
exile returned to their homes across the sea, the Surrealist Group in new Y ork 
ceased to exist. its concluding collective effort was the “Bloodflames 1947” exhi-
bition at the hugo Gallery. organized by nicolas Calas, it featured new work 
by David hare, arshile Gorky, Gerome Kamrowski, Wifredo lam, roberto 
Matta, isamu noguchi, helen Phillips, and Jeanne raynal. an important mani-
festation, it might have sparked a renewal of new Y ork surrealist activity, but no 
one came forward to maintain the momentum. Discouragement was very much 
in the air.
 With the effective dissolution of the new Y ork Group, the individuals 
who had been active in it went their own ways. Max ernst and Dorothea Tan-
ni
ng moved to arizona. Painter and poet Sonia Sekula, who had lived in the 
united States since 1936, had a nervous breakdown and returned to her native 
Switzerland. interestingly, there she became good friends with another refugee 
from the “american way of life,” the blues singer and pianist Champion Jack 
Dupree.21
 Several 
of the americans were especially hard hit by the new Y ork breakup. 
Kamrowski, who abhorred the new Y ork art scene’s antisurrealist xenophobia, 
jealousy, and commercialism, fled halfway across the country to ann arbor, 
Michigan, where he remained the rest of his life, surrealist to the end. Clarence 
John laughlin went back to new orleans, also to stay; he, too, remained firmly 
committed to surrealism’s ideals.
 a
 disconsolate Philip lamantia returned to San Francisco, where an attempt 
to form a local Surrealist Group with the painters Charles howard and Jean 
varda proved a flash in the pan. More enduringly, in 1947—aided by conscien-
ti
ous objector robert Stock and other rebel Bay area poets—lamantia helped 
start The Ark, an anarchist journal with surrealist leanings, now well respected


--- PAGE 226 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 205
by scholars as a significant link between the new Y ork surrealist refugees and 
the later Beat Generation. Soon, however, lamantia began nearly a decade and 
a half of wandering: to France, italy, Spain, north africa, and Mexico.22
 i ronically, as the new Y ork surrealists dispersed to the four winds, new-
comers began to show up, and more than a few of them were black. From 
Cleveland, the indefatigable experimenter russell atkins in 1947 sent a poem 
to View magazine, which published it. T wo years later, oli ver Pitcher’s poems 
appeared in another surrealism-friendly journal, Tiger’s Eye, published in the 
wilds of Westport, Connecticut. Meanwhile, black artists such as romare Bear-
den and n
orman lewis in new Y ork and hughie lee-Smith in Detroit were 
producing fine work very much in the surrealist spirit.
 Whether any of these poets or painters ever considered themselves sur-
realists is not known, but this much is obvious: had the new Y ork Surrealist 
Group held together after war’s end, these and who knows how many other 
newcomers might have appreciably added to it or, even more important, trans-
formed it into a sturdier and more effective force.
 unfortunately, that did not happen. Scattered, isolated individuals continued 
to uphold surrealism’s aims and principles—and indeed, to lead exemplary sur-
realist lives—but the spirit of collective adventure was noticeably missing.
 Depressing, too, was the unmistakable rightist shift in the u.S. cultural scene. 
Several new Y ork painters who had associated with the surrealist refugees, and 
even exhibited with them, had formed a vehemently antisurrealist clique in the 
postwar years, largely under the tutelage of conservative art critic Clement 
Greenberg, a declared enemy of surrealism. More comical—or psychopatho-
logical, depending on your point of view—were the hate-filled outbursts of 
Congressman George a. Dondero. T o this republican we owe a long list of 
crackbrained declarations solemnly uttered on the floor of the house of rep-
resentatives and duly printed in the Congressional Record. his outbursts included 
such pixilated propositions as these:
all mo
dern art is Communistic.
all these isms are of foreign origin, and truly should have no place in 
american art.
all are instruments and weapons of destruction.
Surrealism aims to destroy by the denial of reason.
The question is: Who has let into our homeland this horde of germ-
carrying art vermin?
The evidence of evil design is everywhere.23
So now you know!
 Meanwhi
le, the aforementioned potential newcomers to new Y ork surreal-


--- PAGE 227 ---
206 Black, Brown, & Beige
ism were pursuing distinct paths of their own. atkins, who opted for a poetics 
close to French lettrism, rallied offbeat poets (black and white) from all over; 
his eclectic journal, Free Lance, ran from 1953 to 1976. oli ver Pitcher published 
a chapbook of his poems, Dust of Silence, in 1958, but he remained better known 
as an 
actor and playwright. romare Bearden, norman lewis, and hughie lee-
Smith eventually achieved wide recognition as important american artists.24 
For 
the time being, however, organized surrealism in the united States had 
simply faded away.
 Those who lived through the 1950s in the united States tend to recall 
them—and particularly the decade’s first half—as bleak years, with occasional 
and brief eruptions of nonbleakness. Fear, hopelessness, and boredom were a 
large part of a daily life in which the Bomb, the cold war, the Korean War, race 
discrim
ination, McCarthyism, the house un-american activities Committee, 
gray-flannel suits, and I Led Three Lives  wer e always present. in such an atmo-
sphere, intellectual and cultural life became increasingly conformist. hard as 
it may be to believe today, the banalities of arthur Schlesinger, Jr., were, circa 
1954, praised as the wisdom of a “major thinker.”
 n
ot until 1955, with the Montgomery bus boycott and the subsequent sit-
ins and Freedom rides, would a new hope—and a new left—start up again in 
this country. By decade’s end, a rising youthful radicalism, largely inspired by 
the black 
struggle, was everywhere in the wind. a few years later, a resurgence 
of surrealism in the united States would also be much in evidence.
poStWar pari S
in France the surrealist resurgence started much earlier. Despite the hostility of 
existentialists, Stalinists, the art establishment, the Far right, journalists, clergy, 
mainstream critics, and academics, the Surrealist Group from 1945 on—and 
especially during and after the large 1947 international Surrealist exhibition—
enjoyed a massive rejuvenation as dozens of young people from all over swelled 
its ranks and multiplied its activities. This renewal persisted all through the 
1950s up to and including the near-revolution of May 1968, when the walls of 
Paris were brightened with countless surrealist graffiti.
 i t was during this long and productive period that the sculptor agustín 
Cárdenas, from Cuba; poet Joyce Mansour, from egypt; robert Benayoun, 
from Morocco; Édouard Glissant, from Martinique; Ted Joans, from the united 
States; hervé Télémaque, from haiti; Michel Zimbacca, from Syria; henri 
Kréa and Farid lariby, from algeria; and alexander Boghossian, from ethiopia, 
all became active in surrealism, or at least close to the group.
 The exodus of black poets and intellectuals from the united States also 
gained momentum throughout these years, doubtless inspired at least in part


--- PAGE 228 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 207
by the example of richard Wright and, later, of Ted Joans and the painter 
Beauford Delaney. The sensationally successful French tour of Katherine Dun-
ham’s dance troupe was also a great inspiration. other new additions to the 
postwar cultural life of Paris were novelists James Baldwin, Chester himes, and 
John a. Williams; cartoonist ollie harrington; poet henry Bibbs; and dozens 
of jazz musicians, including drummer Kenny Clark and alto-saxophonist Pony 
Poindexter.
 i n
terestingly, nearly all of these brief or longtime refugees from the united 
States had personal encounters with one or more surrealists in Paris. Several 
met andré Breton. robert Benayoun, Jean-Jacques lebel, and former surrealist 
Marcel Duhamel gladly served as translators as well as liaisons with publishers, 
periodicals, and bookstores. other surrealists invited the african american 
newcomers to Surrealist Group exhibition openings, rendezvous, demonstra-
tions, and parties.
Back in the “ land of the dollar”
in the united States, however, during the late Forties and early Fifties, public 
awareness of surrealism reached a low ebb. With few exceptions the media—
particularly art, poetry, and intellectual magazines—ignored the subject. in 
earlier years, andré Breton’s writings regularly appeared in english translation, 
but this was rarely true in the Fifties. Y oung, upcoming surrealist artists found it 
harder and 
harder to convince galleries to exhibit their work. in most universi-
ties, the study of surrealism was actively discouraged.
 a
 gloomy existentialism was the journalistic and academic fad of the hour. 
it was in the 1950s that French surrealist alain Joubert observed that “the idea 
of freedom is hibernating in the Frigidaires of technical progress.”25 naïv e name-
droppers were particularly fond of heidegger, whose long support of nazism 
was not yet well known in the united States.
 The official “in” art of the Fifties was of course abstract expressionism, mas-
sively promoted by the u.S. State Department and the C ia in a 1953–1954 
exhibition titled “T welve Contemporary american Painters and Sculptors.” a 
major maneuver in the cultural cold war, the show opened in Paris and went 
on to 
Zurich, Dusseldorf, Stockholm, oslo, and helsinki. as with similar ex-
hibits that followed, it was closely linked to the so-called Congress for Cul-
tural Freedom, a notorious Cia-managed organization with offices in thirty-five 
countries.26
 i n
terviewed in the 1990s, Gerome Kamrowski recalled vincent Price’s 1950s 
remark that this new fashionable art (like the later Pop art) was ideal for the 
walls of corporate headquarters, executive law offices, and deluxe hotels.27 as 
Price went on to explain, surrealist paintings—or for that matter Cubist and ex-


--- PAGE 229 ---
208 Black, Brown, & Beige
pressionist paintings—always had a disturbing element: they challenged, some-
times even defied the viewer. abstract expressionism, however—occasional ex-
ceptions aside—was above all a decorative current, hence its wide use in full-page 
chic magazi
ne advertisements for expensive gowns and other luxuries. not too 
surprisingly, by the time the abstract expressionists had established their Cold 
War identity, they were also well known as respectable, nonradical, very much 
a “white” phenomenon, and almost all-male (lee 
 Krasner being the sole female 
exception). needless to say, the champions of this new school regarded sur-
realism as old hat.
 and there you have it. Disregarded and scorned by the great majority of 
critics, journalists, and academic poets, the surrealists were where they always 
are: radically outside and against the established order. Then as now, uncompre-
hending critics found it hard to accept the crucial fact that surrealism has never 
been chiefly concerned with art or literature, but, rather, with “the practice of 
poetry,” human expression in its largest sense, and social and cultural revolu-
ti
on. as Philip lamantia put it in a letter to andré Breton, published in VVV in 
octob
er 1943: “a true revolutionary poet can not help defying every appalling 
social and political instrument that has been the cause of death and exploita-
tion in the capitalistic societies of the earth. . . . T o rebel! That is the immediate 
object of poets! We can not wait and will not be held back by those individuals 
who are the prisoners of the bourgeoisie, and who have not the courage to go 
on fighting in the name of the ‘idea’! The poetic marvelous and the ‘uncon-
scious’ are the true inspirers of rebels and poets!”28
 Ten 
years later, there was not a “serious” journal in the land that would print 
such insurrectionary sentiments. in the late 1940s and early 1950s, even the 
most radical Marxist or anarchist publications shied away from surrealism. 
Bleak years, indeed!
 i n revenge, however, popular culture proved much less timid. Surrealism was 
a recurring subtheme in paperback mysteries such as Clayton rawson’s Foot-
prints on the Ceiling and his other tales featuring a magician sleuth. Surrealism also 
pops 
up in such appropriately unlikely places as helen McCloy’s Who’s Calling?, 
David Goodis’ Nightfall, and Betsy allen’s The Secret of Black Cat Gulch, a mystery 
for teenage girls. Best of all was the riotous 1948 comic book, “Captain Marvel 
and the 
Surrealist imp,” which truly bubbles over with surrealist imagery and 
humor. even today it is as good as a night at the movies!
Notes
 1. The widespread incomprehension of surrealism in the united States 
from the 1920s on is surveyed in Franklin rosemont’s foreword to M. e.


--- PAGE 230 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 209
Warlick’s Max Ernst and Alchemy. See also Guy Ducornet’s Le punching-ball 
& la vache lait.
 2.
 See Franklin rosemont’s “George herriman (Krazy Kat),” 58–64.
 3. Guy Ducornet, Ça va chauffer!, 98 . on hurston in a surrealist perspective, 
see especially Karanja, Zora Neale Hurston.
 4. 
eugene Miller, V oice of a Native Son, 87–93.
 5.
 ralph ellison, “harlem is nowhere,” in Shadow and Act, 294–302. Guy 
Ducor
net, a student and friend of ellison’s, informs me that Invisible Man 
was supposed to have included surrealist photographs by Gordon Parks, 
but that this plan was rejected by the publisher.
 6.
 in response to a query, rosenthal wrote me (april 9, 1991): “after the 
Second World War and andré Breton’s return to Paris, my relations with 
him were very friendly, indeed excellent, and above all personal. We 
naturally found ourselves working together on various actions, particu-
larly matters of the moment, such as the Committee for the Truth on 
Stalin
’s Crimes, and the Garry Davis affair. i presided at the historic 
meeting of the revolutionary Democratic assembly (rDr) on Decem-
ber 3, 1948, at the Salle Pleyel, which brought together Camus, Breton, 
Sart
re, rousset, richard Wright, Carlo levi and others.”
 7. andré Breton, Oeuvres complètes, vol. 3, 977, 1433.
 8.
 Michel Fabre, The Unfinished Quest of Richard Wright.
 9.
 in the late 1990s, under the Freedom of information act, Franklin rose-
mont succeeded in obtaining documents indicating that Breton and 
Buñue
l were closely watched by the FBi and immigration authorities 
throughout their stay in the united States.
 10. on the outlawing of surrealism in Japan, see the entries “repression” and 
“Japan” in Biro and Passeron, Dictionnaire.
 11
. The letter appeared in Partisan Review (March– april 1942), 174–176.
 12. Gerome Kamrowski and herbert hill, telephone interviews with 
Franklin rosemont, late 1990s.
 13. nicolas Calas, Confound the Wise, 266–267.
 14.
 Paul Garon, conversation with elisa Breton, Paris, 1972. Breton’s article 
on music, “Silence is Golden,” is included in What Is Surrealism?, 348–353.


--- PAGE 231 ---
210 Black, Brown, & Beige
 15. robert Benayoun, Le rire des surréalistes, 104.
 16
. Matta, “Jazz inquiry,” Dies und Das (unpaginated).
 17
. on surrealism and jazz, see legrand’s Puissances du jazz, especially “Jazz 
et surréalisme,” 189; and Paul Garon, “Surrealism and Music,” in Blues and 
the Poetic Spirit, 207–216. The quotation from Arsenal appears on p. 18.
 18.
 The Clark Mills translation of Breton’s Fata Morgana, with lam’s draw-
ings, was reissued by the Black Swan Press in 1969.
 19.
 Breton, What Is Surrealism?, 341; original emphasis.
 20
. Gérard legrand, “Magloire-Saint-aude,” in Biro and Passeron, Diction-
naire, 253.
 21
. Writings by Sonia Sekula, with commentary, are included in Penelope 
rosemont, Surrealist W omen, 16 3–165, 278–279. her friendship with 
Champion Jack Dupree is noted in Dieter Schwarz, Sonja Sekula, 1918–
1963, 257.
 22
. See nancy J. Peters, “Philip lamantia,” 329–336; and Franklin rosemont, 
“Surrealist, anarchist, afrocentrist,” 124–143.
 23. Frances Stonor Saunders, Who Paid the Piper?, 253–254.
 24.
 Bearden and henderson, A History of African American Artists, 315–327, 
328–336.
 25
. alain Joubert, one of the mainstays of the Paris Surrealist Group, be-
came act
ive in the movement in the 1950s. his contributions to surreal-
ist periodicals are largely devoted to cultural and political “actuality.” For 
BIEF and La Bréche, for example, he wrote excellent articles on racism, 
neofascism, and neo
-Stalinism. his Le mouvement des surréalistes is the best 
study of surrealism in the postwar years and includes a superb critique of 
the 1969 split and its aftermath.
 26
. Saunders, Who Paid the Piper?,
 27
. in several 1990s telephone interviews, Gerome Kamrowski recalled not 
only vincent Price’s estimate of the new painting, but also his own rec-
ollection of the commercial exploitation of Pollock’s work.
 28
. Philip lamantia, letter to andré Breton, VVV , no. 4 (1944), 18.


--- PAGE 232 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 211
Fenton Johnson
one of the first african american poets to identify with a distinctly 
twentieth-century avant-garde, Fenton Johnson (1888–1958) was very 
much “on the scene” in Chicago in the 1910s and 1920s, the heyday of 
The Little Review and the free-for-all open forum known as the Dil Pickle. 
While still in his teens he was producing original plays at Chicago’s 
Peki
n Theatre. Kenneth rexroth in his autobiography recalls Johnson’s 
poetry readings at the Green Masque.
 a
lthough his early poetry drew largely on spirituals and dialect, 
Johnson soon found his own convention-shattering voice—a voice 
of radical and yet lyrical pessimism embodying, according to Sterling 
Bro
wn, striking departures. The much anthologized “Tired,” for ex- 
ample, is notable for its vehemently antisentimental and quasi-Dadaist/
surrealist rejection of Western civilization and the Protestant work 
ethic. 
Though very different in tone, “The Phantom rabbit” also sounds 
a new and disquieting note. a flashback to the african “Trickster” and to 
african american slave-era “Bre’r rabbit” tales, it also looks ahead to the 
surrealist cartoon star Bugs Bunny, who would in turn, over the years, 
become a zoot-suiter, punk, hip-hopper, and all-around nonconformist 
icon.
 Johnson
’s books include A Little Dreaming (1913), Visions of the Dusk 
(1915), Songs of the Soil (1916), and a collection of stories, T ales of Darkest 
America (1920).
the phantom raBBit
look, my weary brother, ere you die;
night is here, and phantom nigh;
Soul of rabbit with the magic breath,
Soul of l
ife and foe of living Death.
ere we die, my brother, ere we die.
look, my weary sister, ere we die;
o’er the hills the phantom shadows lie;
rabbit ghostly soothes your aching fears,
rabbit ghostly dries your endless tears,
ere we die, my sister, ere we die.
Songs of the Soil


--- PAGE 233 ---
212 Black, Brown, & Beige
tired
i am tired of work; i am tired of building up somebody else’s civilization.
let us take a rest, M’lissy Jane.
i will go down to the last Chance Saloon, drink a gallon or two of gin, shoot 
a game or two of dice and sleep the rest of the night on one of Mike’s 
barrels.
Y ou will let the old shanty go to rot, the white people’s clothes turn to dust, 
and the Calvary Baptist Church sink to the bottomless pit.
Y ou will spend your days forgetting you married me and your nights hunting 
the war
m gin Mike serves the ladies in the rear of the last Chance Saloon.
Throw the children into the river; civilization has given us too many.
it is bet
ter to die than to grow up and find that you are colored.
Pluck the stars out of the heavens. The stars mark our destiny. The stars 
marked my destiny.
i am t
ired of civilization.
George Herriman
Despite ishmael reed’s noble efforts to set the record straight, most 
people still do not know that the all-time greatest u.S. comic strip artist 
was african american. Celebrated above all for his long-running Krazy 
Kat saga, herriman (1880–1944) elaborated a glorious open-ended my-
tholog
y full of outrageous humor, constant surprise, philosophical in-
sight, and plenty of poetry. With his action-packed dreamy drawing and 
delir
ious wordplay, herriman exemplified vernacular surrealism at its 
very best. his comic tales embody the adventurous spirit and dynamism 
of alexandre Dumas, the wit and wisdom of Spinoza and hegel, and the 
fast pace of the silent film comedies he enjoyed.
 ishmae
l reed, by the way, dedicated his great novel Mumbo Jumbo to 
her
riman.
poSitivilly marvilli S
Wundafil wondafil—
There must be a catch in it
Y ou turn off the light


--- PAGE 234 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 213
an turn on the dark
Y ou turn off the dark
an turn on the light
Posi
tivilly MarvilliS
Jean Toomer
“a flash bridges the gap between inner and outer, causing a momen-
tary f
usion and wholeness. Thus poetry starts.” a major and much-
anthologized poet, deeply influenced by Walt Whitman, T oomer (1894–
1967) is best known for Cane, his i magist- and Cubist-oriented 1923 
novel, which includes many poems. a French translation of “harvest 
Song,” from Cane, appeared in the second issue of T ropiques in July 1941.
 a
n unusually complex figure, T oomer was subject to sudden, sweep-
ing shifts in his philosophical and poetic outlook, including a six-year 
sti
nt as student of the Greek armenian guru, Georges Gurdjieff and a 
later (and longer) identification with Quakerism. in the midst of great 
spiritual turmoil, in 1931 he self-published Essentials, a seventy-two-page 
collection of highly imaginative and often cryptic aphorisms, dedicated 
“to m
y friends in and near Chicago.” rarely discussed in the extensive 
critical literature on T oomer, this small book can be considered the 
poet’s chief contribution to surrealism, although he does not use the 
term
. not quite automatic writing but close to it, he claims he left each 
line as it was formed originally, without fillers. These spontaneous jot-
tings invite comparison with the secret notebooks of such very different 
wr
iters as Pascal, Baudelaire, lautréamont, Saint-Pol-roux, and Georges 
henein.
eSS ential S
We are tired of not being intense.
Some people can endure so little so well that they appear to be
satisfied.
This is a psychological adventurer: one who, having had the stock 
experiences of mankind, sets out at right angles to all previous experience 
to discover new states of being.


--- PAGE 235 ---
214 Black, Brown, & Beige
at best, education is a means of acquiring other people’s ideas and habits. 
at worst, it is a system of misfortunes. it is a systematic imposition of 
abnormalities upon normal being.
aim to use i
nsanity as a means of developing reason.
From dreams we talk to each other about reality. The science of life consists 
in deriving significance from all possibilities.
Essentials
Zora Neale Hurston
Folklorist, ethnographer, novelist, playwright, and a remarkably imagi-
nat
ive individualist, Zora neale hurston (1891–1960) has long been 
recognized as a central figure in everything having to do with the new 
negro, the harlem renaissance, the Jazz age, and—more recently—
womanist literature and postmodern anthropology. She is still today 
very much on people’s minds, and her books are acknowledged clas-
sics. Surrealists have greatly admired her poetic insight, originality, and 
nonconf
ormism. as ayana Karanja, one of her most cogent commen-
tators
, has noted, hurston is the author whose work, more than that of 
any other black literary foremother, profoundly affects black women’s 
writing today.
hoW the godS Behave
Gods always behave like the people who make them. one can see the hand 
of the haitian peasant in that boisterous God, Guedé, because he does and 
says the things that the peasants would like to do and say. Y ou can see him in 
the market women, in the domestic servant who now and then appears before 
her employer “mounted” by this god who takes occasion to say many stinging 
things to the boss. Y ou can see him in the field hand, and certainly in the group 
of women about a public well or spring, chattering, gossiping and dragging out 
the shortcomings of their employers and the people like him.
 n
othing in haiti is quite so obvious as that this loa is the deification of the 
common people of haiti. The mulattoes give this spirit no food and pay it no 
attention at all. he belongs to the blacks and the uneducated blacks at that.


--- PAGE 236 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 215
he is a hilarious divinity and full of the stuff of burlesque. This manifestation 
comes as near a social criticism of the classes by the masses as anything in all 
hait
i. Guedé has another distinction. it is the one loa which is entirely haitian. 
There is neither european nor african background for it. it sprang up or was 
called up by some local need and now is firmly established among the blacks.
T ell My Horse
Richard Wright
one of the greatest u.S. novelists, Wright (1908–1960) was also among 
the front-ranking social critics of his time, as evidenced by such very 
different works as T welve Million Black V oices and his introduction to St. 
Clair Drake and 
horace r. Cayton’s Black Metropolis. h is late 1930s im-
mersion in the surrealist adventure was not well known at the time, even 
by his fr
iends, and in its most intense phase was relatively brief. as the 
excerpt published here demonstrates, however, surrealism marked a 
passionate moment and a major turning point in his life and thought. 
it also stron
gly affected his later novels, his haiku, and his ever-more-
radical politics.
laWd today
“Y ou know, the first time i ever set down beside a white man in a streetcar up 
north i was expecting for ’im to get up and shoot me.”
 “Y eah, i remember the first time i set down beside a white woman in a street-
car up n
orth. i was setting there trembling and she didn’t even look around.”
 “Y ou feel funny as hell when you come north from the South.”
 “i use’ to walk around all day feeling like i done forgot something.”
 “Y eah, every time i’d see a white man i’d feel like getting off the sidewalk to 
let ’im pass, like we had to do in the South.”
 “it took me a lon
g time to get use’ to feeling what freedom was like.”
 “ain’t it funny how some few folks is rich and just millions is poor?”
 “and them few rich folks owns the whole world—”
 “—and runs it like they please . . .”
 “. . . and the rest ain’t got nothing?”
 “Well, you know Gawd said the poor’ll be with you always . . .”


--- PAGE 237 ---
216 Black, Brown, & Beige
 “. . . and he was right, too.”
 “Some folks just ain’t got no brains, that’s all. if you divided up all the money 
in the world right now we’d be just where we is tomorrow.”
 “B
ut don’t you think all the white folks is smart. Some of ’em’s crazy! i saw in 
the papers the other day where some old white woman over in Paris said a rose 
is a rose is a rose is a rose . . . She wrote it in a book and when they asked her 
what it was she wouldn’t tell . . .”
 “W
ouldn’t tell?”
 “Wouldn’t tell, man.”
 “Jeeesus, that sounds like old Cab Calloway.”
 “aw, hell, he ain’t never said nothing that crazy.”
Lawd T oday
Ralph Ellison
a brilliant, highly imaginative writer and critic, ellison (1914–1994) 
to a large degree shared and articulated the surrealist point of view. 
oklahoma
-born and raised, he was educated as a musician at the Tuske-
gee inst
itute in the mid-1930s. a 1936 trip to new Y ork, during which 
he visited richard Wright, inspired his initial attempts as a fiction writer. 
his first novel, Invisible Man, recei
 ved both the national Book award and 
the russwurm award.
 a prolific contributor to distinguished magazines and journals, elli-
son taught at B
ard College, the university of Chicago, rutgers, and 
other leading universities. in 1964 he was appointed to the american 
institute of arts and letters.
 The texts published here are excerpted from The Collected Essays of 
Ralph Ellison.
the poetry of it
There is no place like a negro barbershop for hearing what negroes really 
think. There is more unself-conscious affirmation to be found here on a Satur-
day than y
ou can find in a negro college in a month, or so it seems to me.
 i learned very early that in the realm of the imagination all people and their 
ambitions and interests could meet.


--- PAGE 238 ---
Surrealist Beginnings in the United States, 1930s–1950s 217
 i read everything. i must have read fairy tales until i was 13, and i was always 
taken with the magical quality of writing, with the poetry of it.
 i
 think that the mixture of the marvelous and the terrible is a basic condition 
of human life and that the persistence of human ideals represents the mar-
velous pulling itself up out of the chaos of the universe. in the fairy tale, beauty 
must be awakened by the beast; the beastly man can only regain his humanity 
through love. There are other terms for this but they come to much the same 
thing. here the terrible represents all that hinders, all that opposes human 
aspiration, and the marvelous represents the triumph of the human spirit over 
chaos.
 Whi
le the terms and the conditions are different and often change, our tri-
umphs are few and thus must be recognized for what they are and preserved. 
Besides i
 would be hard put to say where the terrible could be localized in our 
national experience, for i see in so much of american life which lies beyond the 
negro community the very essence of the terrible.
Bearden & the deStruction of the accepted World
Bearden seems to have told himself that in order to possess the meaning of 
his Southern childhood and northern upbringing, and to keep his memories, 
dreams and values whole, he would have to re-create and humanize them by 
reducing them to artistic style. Thus in the poetic sense these works give plastic 
expression to a vision in which the socially grotesque conceals a tragic beauty, 
and they embody Bearden’s interrogation of the empirical values of a society 
that mocks its own ideals through a blindness induced by its myth of race.
 a
ll this, ironically, by a man who visually, at least (he is light-skinned and 
perhaps more russian than “black” in appearance), need never have been re-
str
icted to the social limitations imposed upon easily identified negroes. Bear-
den’s art is therefore not only an affirmation of his own freedom and responsi-
bility as an individual and artist, but is an affirmation of the irrelevance of the 
notion of race as a limiting force in the arts. These are works of a man possess-
ing a rare lucidity of vision.
Russell Atkins
The Cleveland-based musician and poet russell atkins (1926– ) is best 
known as one of the most indefatigably experimentalist poets of the


--- PAGE 239 ---
218 Black, Brown, & Beige
1950s and 1960s. around 1951 he gave his poetic and musical praxis 
the name Psychovisualism, basically a homegrown version of French 
lett
rism. his poems—many of them consisting primarily of scattered 
letters and random punctuation marks—prefigured the 1970s fad for 
concrete poetry.
 large
ly ignored and sometimes ridiculed for his eccentricity and 
what many readers called his incoherence, atkins nonetheless had a 
small but devoted following. encouraged by langston hughes, his Free 
Lance (1953–1976) became one of the livelier “little mags” of the time 
and was recognized as an especially important vehicle for young black 
po
ets. in recent years, atkins’ prolific and idiosyncratic work has begun 
to be discovered even by critics and scholars.
 n
ever mentioned, however, is the curious fact that atkins—long be-
fore Psychovisualism—published a poem (reprinted here) in the spring 
1947 issue of the openly surrealist-oriented magazine View. o
 ther con-
tr
ibutors to that issue included surrealists Paul nougé, rufino Tamayo, 
David hare, andré Masson, esteban Frances, and Joan Miró.
upStood upStaffed
upstood upstaffed passing sinuously away over airy arch
 streaming where all th’ lustres (so splendid
 streaming an’ sinuously shone
 bright where more sky
upstood upstaffed) th’ sumptuously ready
 flags full—
 th’ shaded soothed an’ blowing softly
 th’ underlings smoothly
 with horses wavering with winds gently
 an’ smooth th’ men an’ manners soft
 tangling with many manners thick
 gathering the steeds that
 forthwith
 up up
 Christophe
 appearing in th’ imminent
 an’ th’ passion overjoying th’ hour
 unfolding something splendidly
 had risen confused an’ flamy
highly th’ imperial sign
 shone in his huger glory!


--- PAGE 240 ---
6. The 1950s Surrealist Underground  
in the United States
i. ted Joan S
Jazz is my religion and surrealism is my point of view.
—Ted Joans
in the face of systematic neglect and hostility, amounting to a kind of perse-
cuti
on, the unexpected, as so often happens, came to the rescue. out of no-
where—or so it must have seemed—a veritable surrealist underground rose to 
the o
ccasion. its principal figures were not well known at the time, but they 
were highly skilled in the fine art of challenging the status quo, spreading the 
word, attracting attention, and finding reliable allies. Though limited in num-
ber
, they spanned the continent, from new Y ork to San Francisco. in contrast 
to the organizers of most surrealist groups in europe and South america, these 
u.S. guerrilla poets were of impeccable working-class background. Both of 
them, moreover, were black.
 Y es, the 1950s surrealist underground in the united States was started by 
an informal committee of two (“informal,” because the two did not even know 
each other until much later in the decade.) The record, in any case, is plain. 
in the century’s most ostentatiously antisurrealist decade, Ted Joans and Bob 
Kaufman—extraordinary characters by any standard—did more than anyone 
else to advance the cause of sur
realist revolution in the united States.1
 Jo
ans started first. he was born in Cairo, illinois, and discovered surrealism 
as a child. his mother was employed as a domestic by a wealthy white woman 
in or near indianapolis (a friend of nancy Cunard’s). in that home he pored 
over copies of Minotaure and other French surrealist publications. a  convinced 
surrealist at fourteen, Joans later studied painting at indiana university, and 
he had a B. a. when in 1951 he took off for Greenwich village and eventually


--- PAGE 241 ---
220 Black, Brown, & Beige
became one of the first and for several years one of the best-known Beats. his 
surrealist costume balls, all-night parties, lively exhibition openings, and poetry 
readings were key events in the new Y ork hip scene.
 Joans in the 1950s had no communication with the surrealists in Paris (or 
elsewhere, for that matter). he did not know, for example, that Breton and his 
friends were part of the radical minority in France who defended the Mau-Mau 
reb
ellion, just as they later championed lumumba’s struggle in the Congo, and 
still later took up the cause of Black Power in the 1960s united States.
 But Joans was on the same wavelength. one of the most memorable occa-
sions was his 1953 surrealist Mau-Mau party, where Charlie “Bird” Parker ap-
peared in a Mau-Mau costume.2 The great alto saxophonist was one of Joans’ 
closest new 
Y ork friends and his roommate for a time. Many other jazz mu-
sicians, including Babs Gonzales and pianist Cecil Taylor, were also his good 
fri
ends, along with numerous poets, artists, and revolutionaries such as langs-
ton h
ughes, Bob Thompson, and—a little later—Malcolm X.3
 a t 
Joans’ parties, and also at his poetry readings around the village and at 
colleges and universities all over the east Coast, he typically sounded off on his 
favorite subjects: the newest jazz (a.k.a. our own classical music); african inde-
pendence; 
the black struggle for civil rights; surrealism; and rhinoceroses. un-
questi
onably, he helped put the names andré Breton, aimé Césaire, Wifredo 
lam, and Benjamin Péret into wider u.S. circulation.
 The abuse of the words “surrealism” and “surrealist” by the racist, reactionary 
former surrealist Dalí as well as by the commercial media irritated Joans to no 
end. Careful to point out that surrealism was far more than a way of writing 
and painting, he emphasized that its aims included not only the complete free-
dom of the imagination and radical social change, but also a far-reaching moral 
revolution.
 h
umor, then as always, was central to his message. his “it is Time” mani-
festo—first published in All of T ed Joans and No More (1961), but clearly written in 
the mid-1950s—called for
—the President to study Dada and write a thesis on jazz and then apply 
for a Mau-Mau membership.
—jazz and more jazz and some more jazz and still more jazz.
—all workers to work only four hours a day, four days a week, and to be 
allowed to arrange that schedule themselves.
—rhin
oceroses to roam the streets of little rock and spread joy.4
he 
especially urged students to read all the French Dada and Surrealist litera-
tur
e and the poetry of langston hughes. he freely offered a poet’s advice:


--- PAGE 242 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 221
learn everything that you can in school, then come out and use it 
against them.
Dig all the old movies and applaud in wrong places in the new ones.
lov
e your life, and live by loving every minute in it.5
 a
 good improviser in the black jazz tradition, he also had a surrealist’s knack 
for wordplay, and especially for subverting square song lyrics. With Ted Joans 
holdi
ng forth, the corny pop song “i Saw Mama Kissing Santa Claus” suddenly 
became “i saw Mau-Mau kicking Santa Claus.”
 Clearly, what Joans long afterward began to call his “Teducation” was al-
ready off to a good start.
 his 1950s surrealist agitation, like Bob Kaufman’s out in San Francisco, was 
intimately allied with the then-growing ferment known as the Beat Generation. 
Joans’ 1958 reading at the Seven arts Coffee Gallery, with Kerouac, Corso, 
Ginsberg, and leroi Jones, made him a major player in the Beat game. as Jan 
Carew remarked years later, Joans as a poet was essentially a live act, his poetry 
at 
its best when he read it aloud. hearing him read made people want to get his 
books, and the books made them eager to go to his next reading.
 a
s it turned out, his rapidly multiplying readings, combined with his other 
events and art exhibits, added up to a highly popular one-man african ameri-
can sur
realist Beat Generation road show. it wasn’t quite nonstop, but it kept 
him on the move. Many of his appearances were arranged through the short-
lived but (while it lasted) very busy rent-a-Beatnik agency. originally sug-
gested by village photographer Fred McDarrah as a joke, the agency not only 
met a steady demand for “Beatniks” at parties, but also became a real source of 
income for needy poets.
 The 
Beat scene in the united States had other links to surrealism. according 
to Diane diPrima, many people around the early living Theatre in new Y ork, 
herself included, were strongly attracted by the surrealists’ poetry, games, and 
ideas.6 T om Postell, a
 miri Baraka’s friend, may not have considered himself a 
surrealist, but his poems published in the little mag Y ugen suggest that he was 
defini
tely under the influence. oliver Pitcher was also part of the scene. and 
John Bracey recalls hearing howard university’s Percy edward Johnston read-
ing surrealist poetry—and getting arrested for it—at the Coffee & Confusion 
coffeehouse in Baltimore, circa 1960.7
 Poste
ll, Pitcher, and Johnston are not well remembered today, and certainly 
not as Beats, but back then they surely qualified as reinforcements for the Joans/
Kaufman surrealist underground.
 Many years later, in his reminiscences of Charlie Parker, Joans looked back 
on the Beats as “a swinging group of new people . . . intent on international


--- PAGE 243 ---
222 Black, Brown, & Beige
joy.”8 and he added: “We broke out of america’s squareness just as Bird had 
done. We, as an unorganized movement of individuals, freed ourselves of the 
sickness of mass consumerism and pop culture conformity.”
 The Beat ethos figures prominently in his first books, Funky Jazz Poems (1959), 
All of T ed Joans and No More, and The Hipsters (1961). T oday, some of this early work 
might seem a bit dated, especially the quaint and sometimes almost incom-
prehensible jargon of the time. But Joans’ Beat shell contains many a surrealist 
kernel.
 The Hipsters, a comic collage novel, is a good example of Joans’ work as a 
visual artist. in word and image he satirizes such village type as Jivey leaguers, 
creepy creepniks, boring folkniks, and arrogant hipper-than-thou-niks. The 
book’s four-and-a-half-page afterword, titled “ l’envoi,” is an automatic text, 
opening with a militant rap on the rhinoceros and concluding with a quotation 
from andré Breton.
 i n The Beats (1960), one of the first mass-market paperbacks on the subject, 
Seymour Krim offers this description: “Ted Joans is painter poet surrealist and 
gutsy 
outspoken negro on the Greenwich village scene. has humor that can 
kill but is used for life; is a live wire a former trumpet-man, a graduate of the 
u. of indiana, a lover of his favorite and mythical beast the rhinoceros, an 
american to his core, a bearded daddy who oozes creativity and jazz action the 
way squares breathe. a one-man movement who never quits.”9
ii. Bo B kaufman
People ask me, do i think surrealism will spread to iowa.
—Bob Kaufman
exactly when Bob Kaufman began his own program of surrealist subversion is 
not known.10 The rather muddled critical literature about him seems to agree 
that his earliest published work appeared in 1959, when The Abomunist Manifesto 
was serialized in the mimeographed Beat magazine, Beatitude, in San Francisco. 
accordin
g to his friends, however, Kaufman was a well-known participant in 
Bay area poetry readings long before that—by 1956 if not earlier. in addition 
to these formal readings, Kaufman is also known to have read his poems and 
proclamations in the middle of the street, on street corners, and on the roofs 
of p
arked cars. at the Co-existence Bagel Shop he frequently declaimed while 
standing on a table.
 i t 
seems plausible that a poet who took the trouble to read splendid poems 
on busy street corners and on tavern tables year after year might at least once 
in a while have run into someone who expressed interest in publishing a few of


--- PAGE 244 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 223
them. Mimeograph machines and small hand-set presses were still in wide use 
in the Fifties—the heyday of little mags—and it is not impossible that here-
tofore unknown poems or fragments by Kaufman appeared in one or more of 
them and may yet turn up.
 For wha
t it is worth, consider this anecdote from Franklin rosemont:
i recently had occasion to look through several issues of a little-known 
paper called The W asp, a four-page hand-set and hand-printed weekly 
devoted to cult
ural affairs in and around Woodstock, new Y ork, in the 
1950s. My chief interest was not Woodstock but the anarchist couple 
who edited the p
aper: holley Cantine and Dachine rainer, better 
known as the editors of the influential anarchist journal Retort. Turning 
the pages
, i found the following short notice under the title “new Band 
at Brattain’s” (a local pub): “With the inauguration of a Modern Jazz 
policy, Brattain’s brings to the community an art form sorely needed in 
these parts, for while our painting is abreast of the times, the only jazz 
avai
lable has been somewhat dated (circa 1922)! as to the group itself, 
its leader, who answers to the very common title Bobby, is quite an un-
common musician, an accomplished saxophonist, and consummate art-
ist. 
he creates music for our time, and very well, too.” This strong plug 
for the new jazz, signed “BoB KauFMan” (in capital letters), appeared 
in the issue for august 9, 1952.
 Was the author our Bob Kaufman? Who can say for sure? But we do know this 
much: the poet Bob Kaufman was an ardent modern jazz enthusiast, indeed, 
a man deeply interested in all the arts, and in social radicalism, too, especially 
anarchism. From the late 1940s and for several years thereafter as a seaman, 
he is known to have divided his time between new Y ork and San Francisco. 
Woodstock was then a flourishing leftist bohemian art center frequented by 
other anarchist-inclined West Coast poets, including robert Duncan. a visit to 
Woodstock in 1952 would have been wholly in keeping with Kaufman’s major 
interests in life at that time.
 Sifting through the conflicting chronologies of Kaufman’s life is no easy 
task. he did not date his poems, and evidently did not carry on any corre-
spondence. it would be nice to know precisely when and where he made that 
bold and unequivocal affirmation: “ i acknowledge the demands of surrealist 
realization”—but the chances of pinpointing it are slim indeed. Based on the 
recollections of friends, however, it seems safe to conclude that his passion 
for surrealist subversion—as exemplified by the Abomunist Manifesto—was well 
kno
wn, at least in the Bay area, several years before the Manifesto’s publication 
in bro
adside form by City lights in the fall of 1959.


--- PAGE 245 ---
Cover of Bob Kaufman’s The Abomunist Manifesto (1959), a pamphlet/broadside and 
a classic of surrealist humor.


--- PAGE 246 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 225
 The Manifesto is an extraordinary document. Decades later Franklin rose -
mont can still recall, vividly, reading it and then rereading it in the basement at 
City lights Bookstore in September 1960:
although i had discovered surrealism only a year or so before, i knew 
enough to distinguish true surrealism from the many pseudo varieties 
and immedia
tely recognized Kaufman’s wonderful aphorisms (“laugh-
ter sounds orange at night”) as the real thing—as good as any in the 152 
Proverbs by Éluard and Péret. i also greatly appreciated the Manif esto’s 
stron
g anarchism (“abomunists vote against everyone by not voting 
for anyone”). But how disappointed i was when the folks at City lights 
told me that Kaufman was not only out of town—but probably in new 
Y ork!
 Par
t manifesto, part parody, and part poem, the Abomunist Manifesto is all de-
fiance, 
all humor. The word “abomunism” is itself something of a conundrum, 
incorporating as it does the abominable Snowman, abolitionism, the a-Bomb, 
small-c communism, and even the author’s own name (the Manifesto is signed 
“Bomkauf”).
 The text, subtly combining brilliant maxims worthy of la rochefoucauld 
and Pascal, and hard-hitting shaggy-dog stories reminiscent of some of the 
lesser-known pages of Marx’s Capital, differs radically—and immensely—from 
the work 
of other u.S. poets of the 1950s. in his Manifesto, Kaufman fearlessly 
embodies a no-holds-barred critique of the consumer society, government, 
militarism, hollywood, law ’n’ order, greed, bigotry, and other forms of au-
thoritarianism and exploitation. in short, he issues an all-out challenge to white 
Christian-capitalist civilization. instead of the tyranny and conformity of what 
he and his friends called “the square world,” he urges nothing less than a truly 
free and poetic society: an anarchist, or surrealist world.
 The Manif
esto’s openly revolutionary character reminds us that Kaufman was 
also very much an activist, a poet deeply involved in the struggle for civil rights 
and racial equality, and just as strongly against white supremacy, police bru-
tality, the death penalty, nuclear weapons, and war. his activism, which some-
times assumed provocative forms, infuriated the blatantly racist San Francisco 
police
. in one year Kaufman was arrested thirty-six times.11 at a time when the 
word 
“poet” was increasingly synonymous with “academic,” Kaufman adventur-
ously took poetry to the streets.
 abomunism and social activism, Kaufman’s preferred forms of surrealist 
action, set him far apart from the u.S. literary mainstream. Characteristically, 
he was also way to the left of the Beat scene. in his 1991 national Public radio 
documentary on the poet, David henderson quotes Kaufman’s longtime friend


--- PAGE 247 ---
226 Black, Brown, & Beige
Jerry Stoll: “Bob was functioning as a critic of society in a much more social 
and political way than any of the other poets in north Beach. . . . it is really 
clear that people like Ginsberg and the rest of them, when they were political 
acti
vists, were following Kaufman. They didn’t lead Kaufman, he led them. he 
had the political consciousness.”12
 i
 would add that Kaufman also had a poetic consciousness. indeed , with the 
exception of his good friend and fellow surrealist Philip lamantia, many—per-
haps most—of 
the north Beach poets and wannabes were more than a little 
jealous of Kaufman. (in France, he was celebrated as the Black rimbaud.) The 
jealousy was in fact rather out in the open. Glaringly, for example, his work was 
not 
included either in the “San Francisco renaissance” issue of Evergreen Review 
(1957) or i
n Donald allen’s anthology, The New American Poets (1960).
 Such om
issions cannot be considered innocent oversights. after all, what is 
most important about Kaufman is the fact that he was the author of some of 
the most beautiful, playful, and effective poetry of the last four hundred years. 
These are poems of a wildly unanticipated magic. Profoundly moving, Kauf-
man’s poems of love, jazz, wonder, delirium, despair, and ecstasy remain his 
chief title to glory.
 his altercations with cops, judges, and jailers are by no means negligible, but 
it was his magnificent poetry that did so much to keep the surrealist fires burn-
ing in repressive and gloomy times. Despite long years of dire poverty and ill-
ness, aggravated by heavy drinking, smoking, and drug use, he stubbornly held 
fast to a rigorous poetic praxis based on his own ready-or-not, no-compromise 
“surrealist realization.” Dazzling examples of pure psychic automatism at its 
purest and most powerful, Kaufman’s poetry has never ceased to resonate with 
the spirit of wholehearted revolt and the marvelous.
 “W
hen i die,” he said, “i won’t stay dead.”13 ov er twenty years after his death 
from emphysema, his poetry is more alive, more contemporary, and more 
widely read than 95 percent of the work of the best-selling american poets of 
his time.
Notes
 1. Most of the information in this section was supplied by Ted Joans—
much of it in conversation, the rest from published writings and letters.
 2.
 The postwar politics of the surrealist movement are detailed in Jean-
louis Bédouin, Vingt ans du surréalisme; Gérard Durozoi, Histoire du mouve-
ment surréaliste; Joubert, Le mouvement des surréalistes; Pene
 lope rosemont, 
Surrealist W omen; and Sakolsky, Surrealist Subversions.


--- PAGE 248 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 227
 3. The new Y ork Mau-Mau party is described in Joans, “Bird and the 
Beats.”
 4. All of T
ed Joans and No More, 51–53.
 5.
 ibid.; original emphasis. See also Joans, The Hipsters.
 6.
 Diane diPrima, conversations with Franklin rosemont, Chicago, april 
and May 2000.
 7.
 John Bracey, telephone conversation with Franklin rosemont, June 
2006.
 8.
 Joans, “Bird and the Beats.”
 9. Seymour Krim, ed., The Beats, 211.
 10
. Biographical data on Kaufman is scarce and undependable, but over 
the years Philip lamantia, Cecil Taylor, nancy Joyce Peters, Ted Joans, 
Diane diPrima, and Maynard Krasne have provided helpful details and 
reminiscences.
 11
. raymond Foye, quoted in David henderson’s introduction to Kaufman’s 
posthumous Cranial Guitar, 13.
 12.
 Jerry Stoll, in ibid., 9–10.
 13. Kaufman, Solitudes Crowded with Loneliness, 3.


--- PAGE 249 ---
228 Black, Brown, & Beige
Ted Joans
in the absence of an organized u.S. Surrealist Group in the 1950s, Ted 
Joans (1928–2003) in new Y ork and Bob Kaufman in San Francisco—
three thousand miles apart and at first unknown to each other—started 
an authentically surrealist agitation of their own at the margins of the 
Beat Generation.
 Jo
ans, born in Cairo, illinois, discovered surrealism as a child, when 
his mother, employed as a domestic in the house of a wealthy white 
woman, showed him copies of Minotaure and other French surrealist 
publicat
ions. a convinced surrealist at fourteen, he later studied paint-
in
g at indiana university, and he had a B.a. when in 1951 he took off for 
Greenwich village and became one of the first and for several years one 
of the most celebrated Beats. his surrealist costume balls, lively exhibi-
ti
on openings, and poetry readings were key events in the new Y ork hip 
scene.
 in the 19
60s Joans left the united States for africa, and he main-
tained a small house i
n Timbuktu for the rest of his life. over the 
years he traveled widely—all over africa, europe, the united States, 
Mexico—with particularly long stays in Paris. he wrote to andré Breton 
and soon became his good friend. active in the Paris Surrealist Group 
for years, Joans also visited surrealists elsewhere. indeed, his nomadic 
ways made him a natural liaison between surrealists in other countries 
and often an i
nspirer of international surrealist activities. a close col-
laborator and frequent guest of the Chicago Surrealist Group, he played 
a decisive role in shaping the 1993 “T otems without Taboos” exhibition, 
the first show i
n the united States devoted entirely to “exquisite corpse” 
drawings, paintings, and collages.
 Jo
ans’ impact on the surrealist movement, as poet and artist but also 
as activist, was enormous and far-reaching, as in his efforts to change 
the name of 
lake victoria to lake louis armstrong (or lake Satchmo, 
for short), and his tireless campaign to save the rhinoceroses of the 
world. 
he was also a crucial link between surrealism and the interna-
ti
onal Black arts movement.
 i t is not easy to speak of him in the past tense, for Ted Joans’ pres-
ence in world surrealism is still very much in evidence.


--- PAGE 250 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 229
ted Joan S Speak S
Excerpts from Letters to André Breton
Who am i? i am afro-american and my name is Ted Joans. Without surrealism, 
i would not have been able to survive the abject vicissitudes and acts of racist 
violence that the white man in the united States has constantly imposed on 
me. Surrealism became the weapon that i chose to defend myself, and it has 
been and always will be my own way of life.
 i was born in 1928, the year of Nadja, T reatise on Style, and The Spirit Against 
Reason. For a time i lived in Kentucky, in a racially segregated city. i did not have 
the right to use the public library, and i was not allowed to attend the only local 
school that taught French.
 i n 1941 i met an admirer of Dalí who gave me the latter’s address. i wrote 
to him for advice, and sent him some drawings. i also told this robber about 
my obsession: the rhinoceros. neither he nor his representative sent me even 
a word of reply, but in 1951 avida Dollars gave a conference at the Sorbonne, 
in which he proclaimed “his discovery of the rhinoceros.” The rhinoceros is an 
afr
ican and asian animal. i made my first drawing of a rhinoceros in 1939. i love 
rhinoceroses because they are rhinoceroses.
 i
 moved to new Y ork in 1951, after obtaining my diploma from the univer-
sit
y of indiana. in new Y ork i encountered many isolated individuals who loved 
surrealism, but you and the other surrealists had already left the u.S.
 Finally, i went to europe in 1960, and i met you on June 6. i left for london 
the next day. My friend in london, Simon Watson Taylor, urged me not to 
become involved with the surrealists in Paris because, he said, most of them are 
Communists.
 i left london for nigeria, and later returned to america. i have read my 
surrealist poems with the protagonists of the Beat Generation. i have obtained 
much publicity among the Beatniks, so much so that i decided to exile myself 
from the america of the Beatniks and to go back to africa. africa is my mother 
country, and i have a small house in Timbuktu, in Mali. My plan is to write and 
paint in africa until the u.S. rids itself of racist violence and moral poverty.
 i was awakened today by the sun rising over the mountains of the rif. i have 
just read seven strophes of Les Chants de Maldoror (as i  do every day).
* * *
Perhaps you do not know exactly what a hipster is? Well, a hipster is a surrealist 
in 
both his internal and external activity. he is “in the current of things” (hip), 
and consequently nonconformist. The hipster dreams, but most of his time is 
spent in putting his dreams into reality. Sometimes he even creates the Mar-


--- PAGE 251 ---
230 Black, Brown, & Beige
velous without dreaming. Many of my afro-american friends in the ghettoes of 
america are forced to lead a hipster’s life out of simple necessity.
 The white poets of the Beat Generation have borrowed the hipster attitude 
from black americans. They have adopted their argot, comportment, and jazz 
music—all of which embody a surrealist point of view. The Beat Generation 
owes practically everything to surrealism. i have discussed this subject with 
Kerouac, Corso, and Ginsberg.
 My dear friend, i am coming to Paris this summer to find a gallery to exhibit 
my paintings. But in autumn i shall return to africa. i hope to see you—you and 
the other surrealists. This will be the realization of a dream for me. i am one of 
your most ardent disciples.
Bob Kaufman
in an excoriating 1976 critique of the so-called Post-olson generation in 
u.S. poetry, and its “debasement of language,” San Francisco surrealist 
Philip lamantia acknowledged a very few exceptions to the prevailing 
reactionary conformity. his first exception, for reasons “both moral 
and poetical,” was Bob Kaufman (1925–1986), whose no-holds-barred 
imagery exemplifies surrealism’s unfettered imagination and “convulsive 
beauty” at their most daring and dazzling.
 Kaufman’
s initial broadside, the Abomunist Manifesto (1959), is a mar-
velous mix of wild humor and revolutionary fervor, unlike anything 
else i
n the poetry of the time. amiri Baraka said that Kaufman and his 
poetry were nothing less than a radical outsider force.
 Kaufman was bor
n in new orleans, the son of an african ameri-
can Jewish Pullman porter father and a black Martinican schoolteacher 
mother. Books were prized in the Kaufman family, and Bob—like his 
contemp
orary, Ted Joans—grew up a manic reader. a seaman in early 
manhood, he also took up radical politics, which eventually resolved 
in
to a kind of Buddhist-influenced surrealist anarchism. in his poetry as 
in his activism, he lived the life of a one-man surrealist insurrection. as 
with other outspoken defenders of free speech and subversive laughter, 
he often ran into trouble with the agencies of law ’n’ order. During the 
Bea
t years in San Francisco’s north Beach, he was routinely beaten and 
jailed by the white-supremacist police.
 Two coll
ections of his works, Solitudes Crowded with Loneliness (1965) 
and Golden Sardine (1967) have gone through many editions and brought 
Kaufman to wide attention.


--- PAGE 252 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 231
aBomuni St manife Sto
aBoMuniSTS Join noThinG BuT Their hanDS or leGS,
or oTher SaMe.
aBoMuniSTS SPiT anTi-PoeTrY For PoeTiC reaSonS
anD FrinK.
aBoMuniSTS Do noT looK aT PiCTureS PainTeD
BY PreSiDenTS anD uneMPloYeD PriMe MiniSTerS.
in TiMeS oF naTional Peril, aBoMuniSTS, aS realiTY
aMeriCanS, STanD reaDY To DrinK TheMSel veS
To DeaTh For Their CounTrY.
aBoMuniSTS Do noT Feel Pain, no MaTTer hoW MuCh
iT hurTS.
aBoMuniSTS D o noT uSe The WorD SQuare eXCePT When
TalKinG To SQuareS.
aBoMuniSTS reaD neWSPaPerS onlY To aSCerTain Their
aBoMinuBiliTY.
aBoMuniSTS never CarrY More Than FiFTY DollarS
in DeBTS on TheM.
aBoMuniSTS Believe ThaT The SoluTion oF ProBleMS
oF reliGiouS BiGoTrY iS, To ha ve a CaTholiC
CanDiDaTe For PreSiDenT anD a ProTeSTanT
CanDiDaTe For PoPe.
aBoMuniSTS Do noT WriTe For MoneY; TheY WriTe
The
 MoneY iTSelF.
aBoMuniSTS Believe onlY WhaT TheY DreaM onlY
aFTer iT CoMeS True.
aBoMuniST ChilDren MuST Be reareD aBoMuniBlY.
aBoMuniST PoeTS, ConFiDenT ThaT The neW liTerarY
ForM “FooT-PrinTiSM,” haS FreeD The arTiST
oF ouTMoDeD reSTriCTionS, SuCh aS: The aBiliTY To
reaD anD WriTe, or The DeSire To CoMMuniCaTe,
MuST Be PrePareD To reaD Their WorK aT DenTal
ColleGeS, eMBalMinG SChoolS, hoMeS For unWeD
M
oTherS, hoMeS For WeD MoTherS, inSane aSYluMS,
uSo CanTeenS, KinDerGarTenS, anD CounTY JailS.
aBoMuniSTS never CoMProMiSe Their reJeCTionarY
PhiloSoPhY.
aBoMuniSTS reJeCT everYThinG eXCePT SnoWMen.
Abomunist Manifesto


--- PAGE 253 ---
232 Black, Brown, & Beige
$$ aBomunu S craxiom S $$
egyptian mummies are lousy dancers.
alcoholics cannot make it on root beer.
Jazz never made it back down the river.
licki
ng postage stamps depletes the body fluids.
Fat automobiles laugh more than others, and frink.
Men who die in wars become seagulls and fly.
roaches ha
ve a rough time of it from birth.
People who read are not happy.
People who do not read are not happy.
People are not very happy.
These days people get sicker quicker.
The sky is less crowded in the West.
Psychiatrists pretend not to know everything.
Way out people know the way out.
laughter sounds orange a
t night, because
reality is unrecognizable while it exists.
ab
omunists knew it all along,
but couldn’t get the butterscotch down.
Abomunist Manifesto
aBomuni St election manife Sto
1. abomunists vote against everyone by not voting for anyone.
2. The only propositions abomunists support are those made to members
of the opposite sex.
3.
 abomunists demand the abolition of o akland.
4. abomunists demand low-cost housing for homosexuals.
5. abomunists demand suppression of illegal milk traffic.
6. abomunists demand statehood for north Beach.
7. The only office abomunists run for is the unemployment office.
Abomunist Manifesto


--- PAGE 254 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 233
Tom Postell
in his 1984 autobiography, amiri Baraka recalls T om Postell (under the 
name Tim Poston) as a wild character, a real poet, and, most enticingly, 
influenced by surrealism. For a time, despite the fact that Postell was also 
a heavy drinker and, indeed, a bottom-of-the-barrel bohemian, he was 
one of Baraka’s closest friends.
 Frequen
ter of a milieu that included Billie holiday, archie Shepp, 
Jack Kerouac, Diane diPrima, James Baldwin, Jack Micheline, allen 
Ginsberg, Gregory Corso, Frank o’hara, Franz Kline, and many other 
poets, artists, and musicians, Postell seems to have published very little, 
and has been almost entirely ignored by literary historians, critics, and 
memoirists.
 The t
wo poems reprinted here originally appeared in the little mag 
Y ugen (1958).
gertrude Stein ride S the torn doWn el to nyc
Then colors rose through the leaves in light
surprise.
The last peacock poised and sighed on the leaves
and rose.
Wonderful day careens while blighted riff-raff
children skate and
laughin
gly dig the hole for the mid-western
bonfire.
Wrap hone
y in velvet air and hide it in october’s
searching breath.
The bonfire dwindles as the circus leaves and
the animals roar.
it’
s only in the sun that madness splatters into
joy . . .
Cover down the moon for the night before you
lift the skirts of a cloud.
lov
e knocks on the inside of my skull and kicks
in my stomach.
a do
e licks the gum from a tree and runs into
the woods.
She lets me govern her gaze when the parade


--- PAGE 255 ---
234 Black, Brown, & Beige
blares its colors.
Gertrude Stein is long dead but under cover rides
the torn
-down el.
harmony
We, who stung stone know how our toil bathed us in ash, while lilies of the land 
covered their heads and shuttered. We had grass blades for legs and tree limbs 
for arms and our mouths were big black clouds, which at times would burst 
warnings to civilization.
 We remember the times we were nearly human, and almost understood the 
caresses of fried fish laced around our groins by ambassador girl diplomats from 
the sorry state of God.
 Y ou and i were the wine glass tasting the wine but swallowing none. Sitting 
on the forgotten table of love. We looked in our own eyes and blinked stars the 
moons were jealous of.
 i
 loved you under the crushing sledge of wrath, of morning’s pressure on the 
heat of evening. Moons and secrets.
Percy Edward Johnston
a leading figure in the influential howard university poets’ group of the 
1950s and 1960s, Johnston (1930–1993) published his work in such Black 
arts “
little mags” and compilations as Dasein and Burning Spear. a uthor of 
scholarly essays on the philosophy of Jupiter hammon and a 1976 book, 
Phenomenology of Space and Time, he also wrote jazz-inspired poems. More 
than once, in those Beat times, his readings at Baltimore coffeehouses 
resulted i
n a night in jail. rarely anthologized, Johnston’s poetic work 
awaits rediscovery.
variation S on a theme
T o you, eileen, and to new england’s
slaveship owners’ sons, i confess:
i have a library card,
i wasted the Gi bill on poetry.


--- PAGE 256 ---
The 1950s Surrealist Underground in the United States 235
i read the Bill of rights,
i don’t worship the white man’s God,
i sleep where my caramel body is unwelcome,
i don’t salute old glory!
i wept for Patrice lumumba,
i respect Jomo Kenyatta!
leroi Jones, Y ugen (1958)


--- PAGE 257 ---
Katherine Dunham, a university of Chicago anthropology student, formed the 
first african american dance troupe. her T ropical Revue perf ormed in new Y ork  
in 1944.


--- PAGE 258 ---
7. Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts
We must find a way to overthrow the idea on this planet that whites  
are superior beings.
—lar
ry neal
The Sixties turned out to be the brightest, liveliest, and most hopeful decade in 
a bloody and bewildering century. in the united States those ten frantic years 
encompassed countless interconnected sagas. inaugurated in part by a genera-
tion that considered itself Beat long before it finished high school, here all of 
a sudden was a nationwide—and ultimately worldwide—anticonformist youth 
movement that made the “roaring twenties” and swing-era Forties look tame 
in comparison. inspired by activist thinkers as different as Malcolm X, Martin 
luther King, rosa Parks, James Forman, robert F. Williams, Max Stanford, Ted 
Joans, and Bob Kaufman, “hip” young people of all ages and colors were every-
where saying no to race discrimination, the Bomb, the house u n-american 
activities Committee, and the ludicrously square american way of life. But 
they were also hollering yes to the new jazz, the civil rights struggle, a frican 
independence, the Cuban revolution, hitchhiking, and the four r’s—revelry, 
rebellion, revolt, and revolution—in all their myriad forms.1
 Few 
historians have acknowledged the stimulating role of surrealism in the 
new cultural and political atmosphere, but there is no getting around the fact 
that the international surrealist movement flourished throughout the decade, 
and well beyond it. Between 1958 and the mid-1970s new surrealist groups 
were formed in T okyo, amsterdam, Milan, Caracas, athens, lisbon, São Paulo, 
Chicago, and london. Surrealists in exile from various arab countries—alge-
ria
, iraq, lebanon, and Syria—organized a group in Paris. nearly all of these 
groups published journals; many also issued books, pamphlets, and tracts.
 a
s the decade began, surrealism in the united States was still centered in 
Ted Joans’ Greenwich village in new Y ork and Bob Kaufman’s north Beach in 
San Francisco. largely thanks to their efforts, however, a surrealist spirit was 
soon making its presence felt just about everywhere. Distrust of authority, de-
fiance of injustice, and a passionate yearning for Freedom Now! were in the wind,


--- PAGE 259 ---
238 Black, Brown, & Beige
along with a large-scale resurgence of poetry—not just reading it, but living 
it—and a firm determination to change the world and have a good time. Social 
transformations regarded as impossible just a few years earlier seemed now, in 
the wake of the overthrow of the Batista tyranny in Cuba, not only possible, 
but easy. Such old-fashioned terms as “mutual aid” and “direct action” were part 
of the vocabulary of many high schoolers. The very air seemed to tingle with 
a spirit of utopian vision, reckless daring, high humor, and—wonder of won-
ders—a new radical solidarity.
the Black artS movement and Surreali Sm
Spirit is a weapon of defense.
—Pierre reverdy
Much of the historiography of the period has been obsessed with the white 
new left, the white hippie scene, white rock stars, and such trivia as Pop art. 
For many of us, however, it was clear then—and is even more obvious today—
that the driving force of what was greatest and most enduring in the Sixties 
was the radical Civil rights movement, its revolutionary successors, and, not 
least, its cultural affiliates and offshoots. Martha and the vandellas’ “Dancin’ in 
the Streets” and James Brown’s “Say it loud—i’m Black and i’m Proud” were 
anthems of the age.
 i t was the age of Black Power. The term, as Ted Joans liked to point out, 
was coined in 1954 by richard Wright, who used it as the title of his book 
on the african revolution. Popularized in the latter days of SnCC (Student 
non-violent Coordinating Committee) by Stokely Carmichael (Kwame Ture), 
who also used it as the title of his 1967 book coauthored with Charles hamil-
ton, it became one of the catchiest two-word slogans of that decade and the 
next. l
ike the ghetto riots during the long hot summers of those years, Black 
Power was suddenly here, there, and everywhere: in schools and colleges, in 
the workplace, in the unions, in wildcat strikes, in polling places, in sports, in 
the neighb
orhoods, and in the streets. as the older tactics of nonviolent civil 
disobedience gave way to self-defense and empowerment, a new and explicitly 
revolutionary spirit rose, so to speak, from the ashes. new groups emerged, 
including the Black Panther Party, the republic of new africa, and the league 
of revolutionary Black Workers. even the white left was affected. The liberal 
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), which had long upheld such insipid 
slogans as 
“Part of the Way with lBJ,” at last dared to come out against u.S. 
imperialism.
 The age of Black Power was also the age of the Black arts movement. 
Chronologically, in fact, Black arts came first, but the attention it received from


--- PAGE 260 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 239
the media—particularly from the white media—was always much less than that 
paid to Black Power. Far greater was FBi and police attention. never before or 
since in the united States have so many “officers of the law” devoted so much 
time to spying on and disrupting small collectives of poets and artists. Despite 
the conflicts 
that sometimes separated Black arts and Black Power groups—to 
say nothing of the many police-instigated internal conflicts of each—the two 
currents by and large considered themselves part of the same struggle and con-
centrated on the essential: black unity.2
 i t 
was an exciting time. rarely in the history of this country has there been 
so much serious coast-to-coast cultural ferment. rarely, too, have the results 
been so impressive and enduring. The Black arts movement embraced poets, 
painters, sculptors, novelists, actors, dancers, playwrights, a few filmmakers, 
and a powerful cohort of musicians. The marvelous black sounds of Thelo-
ni
ous Monk, Max roach, Cecil Taylor, John Coltrane, ornette Coleman, 
Charles Mingus, eric Dolphy, Fred anderson, Sun ra, Pony Poindexter—and 
such younger cats as Joseph Jarman, lester Bowie, anthony Braxton, roscoe 
Mitchell, and henry Threadgill—did much to define the special magic of that 
decade. nearly all their work is now recognized as classic.
 The poets—and it is worth recalling that many of the musicians were also 
poets, and that poets and musicians had a way of flocking together in those 
years—were especially persistent and prolific; the sheer quantity of magazines 
they produced is dazzling. here are the names of just a few: Y ugen, The Cricket, 
and Black Theatre from n
 ew Y ork; Burning Spear and Dasein, published by students 
from howard university; Ex Umbra, another student publication, from Durham, 
north Carolina; Soulbook (closely linked to the rev olutionary action move-
ment, raM) and The Journal of Black Poetry from San Francisco; and Black Graphics 
International from Detroit. Chicago’s association for the advancement of Cre-
at
ive Musicians (aaCM) also issued a magazine that included art and poetry. 
These publications, and many more like them, reflected diverse inspirations.
 Surr
ealism, like poetry, politics, and adventure, appealed in various ways to 
Black arts militants as different as amiri Baraka, larry neal, Jayne Cortez, Cecil 
Taylor, a. B. Spellman, ernest allen, James G. Spady, ishmael reed, aaron (ibn 
Pori) Pitts, and no doubt many others. although the word “surrealism” occurs 
only rarely in published discussions and debates on the black aesthetic and the 
new black poetry, it was nonetheless an important part of the mix.
 Baraka, who as leroi Jones had acquired an international reputation as 
a Beat poet, was already one of the best-known poets in the united States 
in those days, and unquestionably the best-known black poet. h is interest in 
Dada—and specifically a black Dada—was highly influential and much dis-
cussed. less we
ll known, but even more impactful in the long run, was his 
interest in surrealism, gleaned largely, as his 1984 Autobiography suggests, via


--- PAGE 261 ---
240 Black, Brown, & Beige
his erratic and now scarcely remembered friend, the poet T om Postell.3 What 
intrigued Baraka about surrealism was not only its poetry, but also and above 
all its volatile blend of poetry and revolution, words that became, in effect, 
Baraka’s lifelong motto.
 l arry neal was not only a cofounder of the Black arts movement, but also 
one of its best theorists, a close friend of Baraka’s, and the author of one of the 
movement’s poetic masterpieces: Hoodoo Hollerin’ Bebop Ghosts (1974). The essays 
collected in the 1989 posthumous volume Visions of a Liberated Future, with intro-
ductions by Jayne Cortez and others, are as fresh and vivid today as they were 
in the 1960s and 1970s. While they are not “about” surrealism, many of these 
essays reflect a surrealist sensibility, and we have it on the word of his friend 
and fe
llow Philadelphian James G. Spady that neal in fact loved surrealism.
 The essays resound with inspired provocations. a tribute to Malcolm X 
opens with the challenge: “What i liked most about Malcolm was his sense of 
poetry.” and a splendid essay on ralph ellison—in large part a lyrical defense 
of the unfettered imagination—urges that we “consider . . . a system of politics 
and ar
t that is as fluent, as functional, and as expansive as black music. no such 
system now exists; we’re gonna have to build it. and when it is finally realized, 
it will be a conglomerate, gleaned from the whole of all our experiences.”4 Such 
dreams, with their boldness, beauty, and strongly implied action, are more than 
ever needed today. anyone interested in surrealism, poetry, and revolution 
would do well to read and reflect on the writings of larry neal.
 The Black arts movement also stimulated the demand for translations of 
black and other revolutionary writings from abroad. here, too, surrealism was 
a moving force. in the 1960s and 1970s, english translations of major works 
by andré Breton, aimé Césaire, léon Damas, Joyce Mansour, and T chicaya u 
Tam’si became readily available for the first time. The 1968 Présence africaine 
bilingual edition of Césaire’s classic Return to My Native Land had a significant im-
pact on many in the Black arts movement, as did the Grove Press paperback of 
his A Season in the Congo (a play about lumumba) that same year. Césaire’s scath-
ing Discourse on Colonialism, published by Monthly review Press in 1972, was an-
other b
ook high on Black arts/Black Power reading lists. edward a. Jones’ 1971 
anthology, V oices of Negritude—which includes poems by Césaire, Damas, David 
Diop, and others—was also influential.
 Meanwhi
le, in Paris, books by Ted Joans and Bob Kaufman were translated 
into French and given considerable media attention.5 Joans’ poems and other 
writings also regularly appeared in the publications of the Surrealist Groups of 
Par
is, amsterdam, and Chicago.
 now and then a particularly bold periodical in the united States invited a 
mingling of Black Power, Black arts, and surrealism. in 1970, for example, Paul 
Buhle’s Radical America—the leading SDS journal—devoted a special issue to


--- PAGE 262 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 241
surrealism (with texts by andré Breton, robert Benayoun, aimé Césaire, Ted 
Joans, etienne léro, Clément Magloire-Saint-aude, Joyce Mansour, the Chi-
cago Group, and many others, plus drawings by Wifredo lam). The special 
issue concept caught on, and later issues included one on the work of C.l.r . 
James, and another on the league of revolutionary Black Workers, edited by 
eric Perkins, John Bracey, and John higginson.
 a nother example was lawrence Ferlinghetti’s 1974 City Lights Anthology. 
along with a fifty-two-page section entitled “The Surrealist Movement in the 
united States,” this stunning compilation also includes a play by ed Bullins; a 
lecture by herbert Marcuse; poems by huey newton, ericka higgins, and 
Gary Snyder; and a tribute to Bob Kaufman by Kaye McDonough.
Jayne cortez: free Spirit and fire Spitter
i throw the flame, now catch it on the wing of my laughter.
—lucie Thésée
a later City lights publication, the explicitly surrealist Free Spirits: Annals of the 
Insurgent Imagination (Jablonski, 1982), highlights Black arts and Black Power 
concerns even more. a few excerpts from the Free Spirits opening minimanifesto 
will convey something of its exuberant character:
Free Spirits desire the emancipation of all humankind.
Free Spirits know that no revolution has gone far enough.
Free Spirits reject cynicism and despair.
Free Spirits resolve immobilizing antinomies.
Free Spirits dream extravagantly.
Free Spirits affirm the power of the imagination.
Free Spirits reveal the poetry of life.
Free Spirits find images to inspire action.
Free Spirits evolve models of equality and freedom.
Free Spirits exalt love.
Free Spirits imagine possible futures.
Free Spirits move to realize surreality.
alon
g with much else, its 224 large pages include articles by Bill Cole, ornette 
Coleman, Mel edwards, Wilson harris, C.l.r . James, Ted Joans, James G. 
Spady, and Cheikh Tidiane Sylla. it also features poems by amina Baraka, 
Dennis Brutus, alexis de veaux, and—of special importance in regard to sur-
realism—Jayne Cortez.
 an inspiring presence and strong, clear voice in both the Black arts and 
Black Power movements, Jayne Cortez was also coeditor of Free Spirits. She has


--- PAGE 263 ---
242 Black, Brown, & Beige
contributed prolifically to african american publications, and has also collabo-
rated 
on every collective publication of the surrealist movement in the united 
States since Ted Joans introduced her to the group in the mid-1970s. She is 
widely and rightly recognized as one of the finest poets of our time, and, as is so 
often true of first-rate poets, she is also a sharp thinker, a woman with audacious 
and far-reaching ideas.
 as is true of much of the work of aimé Césaire and Benjamin Péret, Cortez’ 
risk-taking poetry is often political without ever being boringly propagandis-
tic. Bravely defying injustice and misery, her explosive turn-the-world-upside-
down imagery, in which surprise follows surprise, not only calls for a better, 
more harmonious world, but also contributes to its realization. Profoundly 
surrealist from cover to cover, her poetry broadcasts the language of high-
flying, no-compromise freedom, always wildly original and as fresh as a week 
from tomorrow.6
 h
er public readings and her many recordings are memorable events in the 
lives of those who are fortunate enough to hear her. T ogether with her many 
books and chapbooks, her records and CDs add up to an indispensable body of 
work—a library of the Marvelous at its most magical and revolutionary best.
 a
 longtime friend of Ted Joans, Cortez since her teens has also been deeply 
involved in the world of black music. her good friends and codreamers in-
clude poets, writers, musicians, painters, surrealists, surrealist sympathizers, and 
radical activists from all over the world. Through the years, however, her most 
direct contact with ongoing surrealist activity has been with the globetrotting 
Jo
ans, the historian and social critic robin D. G. Kelley, and the group in the 
Windy City.
the chicago Surreali St group
For all of us, the discovery of surrealism was much more than a turning 
point; it was a major turn-on, and really changed our lives.
—Simone Collier
Surrealism in Chicago has a long history. Some of the first english translations 
of surrealist writings appeared in the mid-1920s in Margaret anderson’s journal, 
The Little Review, founded in Chicago. Marcel Duchamp had his first-ever u.S. 
exhibition at the Chicago arts Club in 1937. elisa and andré Breton spent a 
few days in the city in 1945, on their way west. according to elisa, they found 
Chicago “far more interesting than new Y ork,” where they had lived during the 
war. What interested andré most in Chicago was the oceanian art at the Field 
Museum of natural history.7
 Several well-known surrealist painters enjoyed long stays in or near the


--- PAGE 264 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 243
city, most notably Wifredo lam and leonora Carrington. Chicago even had 
a couple of galleries friendly to surrealism: Katharine Kuh’s in the 1940s and 
richard F
eigen’s in the 1950s.
 i n the 1950s and early 1960s several artists with surrealist leanings were 
active in Chicago. The best known is Gertrude abercrombie, whose house at 
5728 Dorchester in hyde Park—known simply as 5728 to the cognoscenti—
was for years a hangout for all kinds of characters. an eccentric millionaire 
whose parents were opera stars, abercrombie was the central figure of a group 
of surrealist-influenced artists, most of whom lived in Wisconsin. The group 
was all white, but abercrombie herself had long-standing friendships with 
black jazz musicians, including Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Max roach, 
and many others. Gillespie wrote a delightful appreciation of her art, and 
richie Powell, brother of pianist Bud Powell, dedicated a composition to her: 
“Gertrude’s Bounce.”8
 a t 
5728 nonconformity was the rule. on a good evening one could meet—
in addition to the greatest figures in modern jazz—poets arna Bontemps and 
aldine Gunn, novelists nelson algren and Jack Conroy, and even Bob Kauf-
man’s Greenwich village friend, Max Bodenheim, veteran of wild parties in 
Chicago dating back to the 1910s. Frequently present was african american 
anarchopacifist Joffre Stewart, who, after meeting allen Ginsberg in San Fran-
cisco, found himself described in Howl.9 in 1960 Stewart was the Beatnik Party’s 
an
ticandidate for anti–vice president in a campaign sponsored by Slim Brund-
age’s free-speech cabaret, the College of Complexes.10
 abercrombie’s husband, Frank Sandiford, was something of a character him-
self: an ex-convict known to the press as the “Gentleman Burglar.” T o this day 
he is better known by his nom de plume, Paul Warren, author of the paperback 
Next Time Is for Life  (1953). a hipster prison memoir, the book has interesting 
things to say about jazz, drugs, jails, and race relations behind bars.
 now and then the notorious Fallonites would show up—“Bud” Fallon and 
his band of rowdy proletarian quasi-Dadaists, acquaintances of Conroy’s and 
alg
ren’s from east St. louis. an occasional guest was abercrombie’s neighbor, 
leon Despres, who would later become the city’s all-time greatest alderman, 
noted for his superb record on civil rights. in his earlier years, as a revolution-
ary 
socialist, Despres not only had served as one of leon Trotsky’s guards in 
Mexico, but also had escorted Frida Kahlo to the movies. in later years, he 
counted members of the Chicago Surrealist Group among his friends and even 
attended several of their public events.11
 abercrombie left a sizeable number of fine paintings, but her “circle” had 
only the vaguest connection with authentic surrealism. Closer to the true 
surrealist spirit was a young african american painter of real promise, Dino 
Campbell, who arrived in Chicago from San Francisco in 1959. Making a living


--- PAGE 265 ---
244 Black, Brown, & Beige
as a cab driver and singer of songs, he took part in the local Beat scene and 
exhibited his work at outdoor art fairs. his paintings reflect the inspiration of 
Magritte and Clovis Trouille, but each one radiates his own distinctive humor 
and imagination. Sadly, Campbell died of cancer in the mid-1960s.
 v er
y different, but also very much in surrealism’s subversive spirit, was the 
work of Tristan Meinecke and eve Garrison, who devoted themselves to the 
pursuit of a radical automatism in painting. Meinecke’s drip paintings (starting 
around 1941) and Garrison’s “sculptural relief oil painting” introduced audacity 
and pro
vocation to a largely provincial art scene. like abercrombie, these art-
ists of europ
ean descent were profoundly influenced by the new black music. 
Meinecke for years never missed a Chicago appearance of Charlie Parker, Dizzy 
Gillespie, or Bud Powell. and in a period of rampant McCarthyism and white 
liberal hypocrisy, he and his friends were actively antiracist. a pioneer of tele-
vision music programming, Meinecke regularly played Charlie Parker and other 
bop records on a popular children’s show hosted by his wife, angel Casey, who, 
by the way, was a longtime close friend of jazz pianist lil hardin.12
 o
ther radical arts groups active in Chicago in those years include the circle 
around noted printmaker Margaret Burroughs, cofounder of the DuSable Mu-
seum of afro-american history; the Compass and Second City Players and 
other theater groups; Katherine Dunham’s renowned Performance arts Train-
ing Center; the negro history Club, which sponsored a wide range of readings 
and lectures at roosevelt university; and the abraham lincoln Center, an old 
unitarian-supported settlement house that provided the fledgling aaCM with 
rehearsal space.
 i n addition there were such long-standing open forums as the College 
of Complexes and Bughouse Square, numerous lively coffeehouses, and the 
beginnings of what became an extensive underground press. in two or three 
years, Chicago’s nonconformist multiracial arts activists radically transformed 
the lo
cal cultural scene. in the changed milieu, Black Power and Black arts were 
warmly welcomed.13
 encouraging as this was, however, it was a long way from organized sur-
realism. a few of the artists mentioned here may have thought of themselves 
as surrealists, others, decidedly not. utterly lacking were a collective surrealist 
identity, a coherent theory and practice, basic agreement on aims, and a clear 
sense of surrealism as transformative and revolutionary.
 a
nd then, in 1966, like a bolt from the blue, the Chicago Surrealist Group 
was formed.
 i n February of that year in Paris, andré Breton welcomed a young Chi-
cago couple—the author of this introduction and his wife, Penelope—into the 
Paris Surrealist Group at the café la Promenade de venus. at the group’s daily 
meetings during the next few months, the situation of surrealism in the united


--- PAGE 266 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 245
States, and the prospects of a group in Chicago, were much discussed. With-
out exception—as several individual and collective letters later confirmed—the 
Paris surrealists encouraged the Chicagoans to proceed with their plans, full 
speed ahead.
 i n his important study, Le mouvement des surréalistes,  alai n Joubert, a leading 
figure in the Paris Surrealist Group from the mid-1950s on, summarizes the 
significance of the Chicago group:
in addition to the small but active nuclei in lisbon, london, Brussels 
and Madrid (among others), one could cite [in the late 1960s] four 
reg
ularly functioning surrealist groups outside of France: in Brazil, hol-
land, the 
u.S., and Czechoslovakia. The most recent of these was the 
u.S. group, formed in 1966 by Franklin and Penelope rosemont after 
their long sojourn in Paris and their meeting with andré Breton. The 
Paris group had in fact been in correspondence with the Chicagoans 
for several years, and had addressed to them a collective message dated 
May First, 1967 (81st anniversary of the Chicago workers’ uprising). 
and i
n october of that year, a communication from the Chicago group 
was translated and published in the Paris group’s journal L’Archibras, tiled 
“Sit
uation of Surrealism in the u.S.a.”14
Concluding his summary, Joubert points out that, in the new millennium, the 
Chicago Group, along with the group in Prague, is “the most important surreal-
ist group outside of France.”15
 The Chicago Group was the first surrealist group ever formed in north 
america. it was soon joined by numerous poets, writers, and artists who, ever 
since then, have conducted a genuine and forceful activity in favor of the sur-
realist project—via journals (Arsenal), books, translations, and international ex-
hibitions. The group, moreover, has continued its activity to this day, without 
any interruption.
 For
mally organized in June 1966, the Chicago Surrealist Group announced 
its existence by distributing several thousand copies of its first tract, “The Fore-
cast is hot!” a
t a huge downtown civil rights march led by Martin luther King, 
Jr. a few weeks later it released its first pamphlet, Surrealism & Revolution.  The 
fledgling group was soon recognized as one of the most active and innovative 
in the international movement, and as such, it was written up extensively in 
surrealist journals in Paris, Prague, and amsterdam.16 articles also appeared in 
the 
Chicago dailies as well as numerous new left, anarchist, and underground 
papers all over the country. The authoritative reference work Dictionnaire général 
du surréalisme et de ses environs (1982) describes the Chicago Group not only as “the 
first organ
ized american surrealist group,” but also as “one of the most active 
surrealist groups in the world.”17


--- PAGE 267 ---
246 Black, Brown, & Beige
 o f the many influences that shaped the character of Chicago surrealism, the 
meeting with Breton and the Paris Group was unquestionably most decisive. 
other encounters, however—particularly with French poet Claude Tarnaud, 
Spanish painter and poet e. F. Granell, and Greek writer nicolas Calas, all of 
whom were living in new Y ork in the early 1960s—were also determining. 
Tarnaud, youngest of the three and one of postwar surrealism’s finest poets, 
was the principal mentor of the nascent Chicago Group. his letters to us in 
the spring of 1963—the first of which reached me at the City lights Bookstore 
in San Francisco—were followed by a weeklong visit with him and his wife, 
Gibbsy, a noted painter, at their riverside Drive apartment. our discussions, 
which lasted several hours each day, were a rich learning experience for us 
and, indeed, a major inspiration. Passionately committed to surrealism and its 
revolutionary goals, Tarnaud was also something of a hipster, in the best sense 
of the term, and very much in favor of devising and practicing “new forms of 
defiance.”
 an ardent admirer of Thelonious Monk, and of the new black music generally, 
Tarnaud emphasized the vitality, originality, and hopefulness of black culture in 
contrast to the cynical and complacent conformity of the dominant u.S. white 
middle class. in addition to his captivating commentaries on the near-mythic 
Monk, Tarnaud’s illuminating discussions of the Poèsies of isidor e Ducasse (lau-
tréamon
t), Jacques vaché’s W ar Letters, Breton’s Arcane 17, Simon ro dia’s Watts 
T owers, the books of Charles Fort, and the work of romanian surrealist Ghera-
sim l
uca also did much to shape Chicago Surrealist perspectives.
 Correspondence played an important role. letters, periodicals, books, 
and art sent to the Chicago Group from surrealist comrades in Paris, Brussels, 
Buenos aires, london, amsterdam, Prague, and many other places made it 
clear that the international surrealist movement was not only still on the go in 
the 1960s, but, indeed, very much in the forefront of that decade’s revolution-
ary thought and action.
St. clair drake and Black anthropology
There is an impromptu ceremony always ready for every hour of life. 
no little moment passes unadorned.
—Zora neale hurston
in addition to these specifically surrealist inspirations, the Chicago surrealists 
were also strongly influenced by Prof. St. Clair Drake at roosevelt university, 
later known throughout the world as the father of black anthropology. Drake 
taught much more than the history, theory, and methods of the science of


--- PAGE 268 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 247
culture. his lectures on nineteenth-century slave revolts, native american up-
risings, May Day, the roots of the civil rights struggle, and the revolutionary 
fer
ment in africa set forth the basics of an anti-imperialist and activist-oriented 
anthropology relevant to the times.
 Somet
imes, as in his discussions of negritude and the harlem renaissance, 
Drake even touched on surrealism, thereby provoking a series of extended after-
class chats on the subject. These informal sessions were always stimulating and 
productive. Drake’s reflections on the possibilities of an urban anthropology, 
for example, led directly to the Chicago surrealists’ conception of a vernacular 
surr
ealism, as manifested in popular culture and outsider art.18
 a
bove all, St. Clair Drake made the emerging Chicago surrealists aware of 
the richness and urgency of black history, politics, and culture. his lectures on 
the varieties of african, afro-Caribbean, and african american radicalism were 
especially moving. Thanks to Drake—and to his brilliant student John Bracey, 
cofounder 
of roosevelt’s negro history Club—the Chicago surrealists were 
well versed in the works of such writers as Zora neale hurston, W.e.B. Du Bois, 
richard Wright, George Padmore, C.l.r. James, oliver C. Cox, Max Stanford 
of the raM, and Drake’s former student James Forman, who had since become 
head of SnCC and would later play important roles in other, even more radical, 
organizations.
 not too surprisingly, Drake was especially eloquent on the subject of his 
fellow anthropologist Zora neale hurston, whose combination of deeply felt, 
down-home fieldwork, attention to detail, and superb writing he greatly ad-
mired. hurston’s books were not in fact easy to find in the early 1960s. Thanks 
to Drake’s repeated recommendations, however, his students were out looking 
for them lon
g before the 1970s hurston revival.
 Drake’s lectures and hurston’s works also deepened the nascent surreal-
ist group’s awareness of the many and varied relationships between human 
societies and the natural world. as these ecological concerns expanded, alain 
Joubert pointed out in a letter from Paris that the Chicagoans were helping 
develop a new language for surrealism—a language uninhibited by the old lan-
guage of politics.
a viBrant, energizing force
The poet shocks those around him. he speaks openly of what authority 
has deemed unspeakable. he becomes the enemy of authority.
 While the poet lives, authority dies.
—Bob Kaufman


--- PAGE 269 ---
248 Black, Brown, & Beige
at roosevelt university in 1962–1963, several of the young poets who would 
later found the Surrealist Group formed the anti-Poetry Club, expressly to 
ridicule the school’s existing bourgeois Poetry Club. When nelson algren, the 
city’s best-known novelist, read about the club’s formation, he called it the best 
news he had heard in years.
 The a
nti-Poetry Club was only one of several interconnected and almost 
interchangeable anarchist- and surrealist-oriented groups. another was the 
roosevelt university Wobblies. having learned that the old revolutionary 
labor union, the industrial Workers of the World (iWW, or Wobblies), still 
maintained a hall in Chicago, several militants of the nascent Surrealist Group 
took out red iWW cards. as it turned out, the off-campus hangout of all these 
groups was the iWW’s Solidarity Bookshop, which also served as the Surrealist 
Group’s mailing address for several years. The Chicago iWW journal, more-
over—The Rebel W orker—published a considerable quantity of surrealist material, 
mostly original, but also reprints of texts by Breton, Carrington, Péret, Mabille, 
and others. Y ears later, David roediger, in Encyclopedia of the American Left, cited 
The Rebel W orker as “the first sustai
 ned u.S. surrealist-oriented publication.”19
 n
oted especially for their large and youthful contingents at civil rights and 
antiwar demonstrations, these groups were truly a vibrant, energizing force in 
the new 
radicalism. Cynical remnants of the “old” left, however, as well as the 
more straitlaced adherents of the “new,” objected to their playfulness, antiau-
thoritarianism, and hard-hitting humor, and tended to dismiss them as the left-
wing of the Beat Generation.
 although most of these groups were ephemeral and have not been well 
remembered by historians, several people who took part in them became well 
known. aside from anti-Poetry Club member Scott Spencer, who became a 
best-selling novelist (Endless Love, Men in Black ), these individuals were african 
american. John Bracey, Jr., who was anti-Poetry Club main officer for a time, 
went on to become a noted historian and leading figure in african studies, au-
thor of many journal essays, and editor of such important works as Black Nation-
alism in America  (1970) and an updated edition of C.l.r . James’ Facing Reality 
(2006).
 a trio of young women active in Solidarity Bookshop (and who also worked 
at the main post office, where richard Wright had worked some thirty years 
earlier), went on to greater things: Charlotte Carter as a popular mystery writer; 
Simone Collier as a playwright; and Joan Smith as a psychologist.
 The strongly multiracial dimension that characterized all these groups, 
together with their Far left politics and emphasis on radical cultural activity, 
were key factors that distinguished them sharply from most old and new 
left sects. influenced above all by surrealism and its revolutionary tradition, 
but also by Drake, John Bracey, Jr., the negro history Club, folklorist archie


--- PAGE 270 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 249
Green—and the old-time Wobblies, whose reminiscences as hobo intellectuals 
and soapboxers were an education in itself—Chicago surrealism from its very 
beginnings maintained friendly relations with the most creative and uncompro-
mising currents in african american radicalism, including the revolutionary 
action Movement, the Black Panther Party, and the later league of revolution-
ary Black Workers.
 Significantly—and highly revelatory of the dynamics of international sur-
realism—the Chicago surrealists’ special attention to black radicalism also had 
a powerful impact on surrealist groups elsewhere, above all on the Paris Group. 
in 
January 1968, for example, the Chicagoans issued the first of a series of 17″ 
× 22″ wall posters titled Surrealist Insurrection, f eaturing the demand, “Free huey 
newton!” (the jailed cofounder of the Black Panther Party). Fully supporting 
this protest, the Paris surrealists sent in reply a letter of solidarity (with nineteen 
signatures), along with an international money order for the huey newton De-
fense Fund. The March issue of the Paris Group’s journal, L’Archibras, features a 
striking Black Power cover and a two-page article on the subject by T ed Joans.20
 i n 
1971 the Chicago Group sent out an inquiry to a couple of dozen indi-
viduals around the country who had indicated their desire to participate in 
collective surrealist activity. T wenty-two responded, spanning the continent 
from nicolas Calas in new Y ork to Marie Wilson in the San Francisco Bay area. 
The responses were collated into a sixty-four-page compilation titled Surreal-
ism in 1971. amon g the respondents was aaron (ibn Pori) Pitts, a Detroit artist, 
musician, and writer, member of the league of revolutionary Black Workers, 
and editor of the Black arts magazine Black Graphics International. not ing that 
surrealism in the united States was impeded by “the refusal of amerika to re-
veal the truth of the historical development of surrealism,” Pitts urged that the 
best way to advance the surrealist cause was for surrealists “to do more of what 
they already are doing,” and especially “to bring surrealist art to the people—by 
any means necessary.” later that year, in a lengthy discussion of surrealism in 
1971 in the Paris Group’s Bulletin de Liaison Surréaliste, Jean -louis Bédouin himself 
drew particular attention to Pitts’ insistence on the need to find “new ways of 
uniting art and politics” and his confidence that surrealism was itself a valuable 
contribution to “the unity of revolutionary theory and practice.”21
 i n 
January 2007 aaron ibn Pori Pitts was saluted by the Detroit Metro Times as 
art
ist of the Y ear.
Notes
 1. The revolutionary imagination and activist innovation in the Sixties 
are the main themes of Franklin rosemont and Charles radcliffe, eds., 
Dancin’ in the Streets.


--- PAGE 271 ---
250 Black, Brown, & Beige
 2. James edward Smethurst, The Black Arts Movement.
 3.
 Postell’s surrealist influence on Baraka is evident in amiri Baraka, The 
Autobiography of LeRoi Jones, 131–133.
 4. 
larry neal, Visions of a Liberated Future, 125 (Malcolm), 5 3–55 (ellison).
 5. Ted Joans’ Black Power Manifesto, translated as Proposition pour un manifeste 
Pouvoir Noir by J
 eannine Ciment and robert Benayoun, was published by 
eric losfeld in 1969. T wo collections of Bob Kaufman’s poems (Solitudes 
Crowded with Loneliness, Sardine Dorée) have been translated by Mary Beach, 
Claude Pelieu, and others. Kaufman was also featured in the “Burroughs/
Pelieu/Kaufman” issue of the Cahiers de l’Herne, no. 9 (1967).
 6.
 in addition to inclusion of her work in numerous anthologies, the grow-
ing critical literature on the poetry of Jayne Cortez includes “Jayne 
Cortez
, Supersurrealist vision,” in D. h. Melham, Heroism in the New Black 
Poetry; Jon Woodson, “Jayne Cortez,” 69–74; aldon lynn nielsen, Black 
Chant; Karen Ford, “on Cor tez’s Poetry”; Kimberly n. Brown, “of Post-
structuralist Fallout, Scarification, and Blood Poems.”
 7.
 During a visit to the Bretons’ studio at 42 rue Fontaine in early spring 
1966, Penelope and i spoke at length with elisa Breton about many 
things, including their brief 1940s stay in Chicago.
 8.
 on abercrombie, her milieu, and her interest in jazz, see the exhibition 
catalog Gertrude Abercrombie and Friends (Spri ngfield: illinois State Museum, 
1983).
 9.
 The lines described Joffre Stewart in Howl as in beards and shorts and 
passing out incomprehensible leaflets.
 10
. on the Beatnik Party and the 1960 elections, see Franklin rosemont, 
From Bughouse Square to the Beat Generation, 30–34, 146–155.
 11
. The Fallonites and other characters at 5728 are described in the journal 
New Letters (Winter 1971), an issue that also contains an early sampling 
of r
ichard Wright’s haikus. The Fallonites’ east St. louis background is 
detailed in Douglas Wixson, W orker-Writer in America, 429– 438. at a sur-
realist lunch m
eeting, leon Despres confided to Franklin rosemont that 
the movie to which he escorted Kahlo was directed by Marc alegret. 
Despres has published a memoir, Challenging the Daley Machine.
 12.
 Surprisingly little has been written about Tristan Meinecke; i have re-
lied here primarily on my many conversations with him and his wife,


--- PAGE 272 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 251
angel. Paul Buhle’s Cultural Correspondence, no. 12–14 (1981), includes 
Meinecke’s response to an inquiry on the future of surrealism, and sev-
eral of his poems appear in Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, no. 4 (1989). See 
also “a Fr
esh Breath of habit-Breaking unruliness: The art of Tristan 
Meinecke,” in Franklin rosemont, Revolution in the Service of the Marvelous, 
85–94.
 13
. Smethurst, The Black Arts Movement.
 14.
 Joubert, Le mouvement des surréalistes, 84–85.
 15
. ibid.
 16. The Chicago surrealists’ collaboration on the movement’s publications 
abroad is noted in Sakolsky, Surrealist Subversions, 50–
 52. See also rose-
mont et al., eds., The Forecast Is Hot!
 17
. Biro and Passeron, Dictionnaire, 34, 368.
 18.
 The concept of vernacular surrealism was also inspired by folklorist 
archie Green, who regularly sent copies of his articles to the Chicago 
iWW hall.
 19. Mari Jo Buhle, Encyclopedia of the American Left, 761.
 20
. L’Archibras, no. 3 (1968), features Ted Joans’ essay, “Black Flower”  
(pp. 10–11).
 21
. aaron, from Bédouin’s “news from the new World,” appeared in French 
in the Bulletin de Liaison Surréaliste, no . 4 (December 1971). an english 
translation by Myrna Bell rochester is included in Franklin rosemont 
et al., The Forecast Is Hot!, 261–265.


--- PAGE 273 ---
252 Black, Brown, & Beige
Ted Joans
propo Sition for a Black poWer manife Sto
Black Power is the vanguard of the insurrection inside america today.
Black Power is that marvelous explosive mixture which has accumulated since 
the first Black slav
e uprising—always the same motive: FreeDoM!
Black Power is dreams that are carried out into reality. Black Power has the real 
and b
eyond the real in which to move. our african ancestry has enriched us 
with this marvelous surreality.
Black P
ower is not out to win the Civil rights struggle, but to win the human 
rights struggle. Black Power is like jazz, it is based upon the freedom of the 
spirit.
 Tha
t spirit is black. Black people must never lose their freedom of spirit.
Black Power is fanatical for freedom.
Black Power is Black people charting their own destiny.
Black Power is marvelous and beautiful.
Black Power is a fierce black hope. Black Power is determined  
to surmount all obstacles.
Black Power is a black truth.
Black Power! Black Power!
Proposition pour un manifeste Pouvoir Noir


--- PAGE 274 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 253
Hart Leroy Bibbs
Bibbs (1930– ) was born in Kansas City, Kansas, and tried journalism as 
a young man. The new jazz led him straight into the far-reaching cul-
tural rebellion of the late 1940s/early 1950s, and he became a vagabond, 
photographer, painter, sculptor, and poet above all. Seeking refuge from 
u.S
. racism, he took off for Paris and made himself at home in Paris’ 
flourishing african american jazz scene.
 unlike his longtime friend and fellow expatriate Ted Joans, Bibbs’ 
formal association with the surrealist movement was tangential, but 
as Simon n
jami points out, Bibbs’ poetry is itself a form of surrealism. 
Several of his bitter and disorienting poems were recorded with music 
by 
archie Shepp and Sonny Murray. For Bibbs, whose sense of urgency 
reaches fever pitch, the task of true poets is to ponder life’s essentials.
 The p
oems printed here appear in Double T rouble (1992), a joint pro-
duction of Bibbs and Ted Joans, published in Paris.
hurricane
in a bed of rolling thunder
Trapped in pillows of rushing clouds
 Whi
te lightning flashing behind my red, swollen eyelids
and wild winds chasing dreams through my brain
it feels like i’m in a hurricane
it feels like i’m in a hurricane
Black Spring
Be bleak spring but roll on northwards
with me through central park sign winding trail,
around the lake and reservoir,
through the hilly, singing, bird sanctuary
over the underpass of the horse;
the newly discovered path where a tale
was told but five minutes ago—
by one who had returned southward
of a sinister black bar


--- PAGE 275 ---
254 Black, Brown, & Beige
Jayne Cortez
Jayne Cortez was born in arizona in 1936, grew up in California, and 
currently lives in new Y ork City. She is the author of ten books of 
poems and performer of her poetry with music on nine recordings. her 
voice is celebrated for its political, surrealistic, dynamic innovations, in 
lyricism, and visceral sound. Cortez has presented her work and ideas 
at un
iversities, museums, and festivals in africa, asia, europe, South 
america, the Caribbean, and the united States. her poems have been 
translated into many languages and widely published in anthologies, 
journals, and magazines. She is the recipient of several awards, including 
arts 
international, the national endowment for the arts, the interna-
ti
onal african Festival award, the langston hughes award, and the 
american Book award. her most recent books are Jazz Fan Looks Back 
(2002) and Somewhere in Advance of Nowhere (1996 ). her latest CD record-
ing with the Firespitter Band is T aking the Blues Back Home, produced by 
Bola Press. Cortez is director of the film Y ari Y ari Pamberi: Black W omen 
Writers Dissecting Globalization. She is presiden
 t of the organization of 
Women Writers of africa, inc., and is on screen in the films W omen in 
Jazz and Poetry in Motion.
national Security
if you take these capes
of wet sheets and broken glass
these torn hearts of mesh screens
these decorated screens of 2nd degree burns
and toilet tissue armbands
if you tak
e these football helmets
towels and broom handle headdresses
these bullhorn mouths of mace
these spinning bullets full of navels and hostages
if you tak
e these ornamental gifts
to the governor of shellshock
you will be rewarded
with the momentous eyes
of society’s autopsy
attica
Scarifications


--- PAGE 276 ---
Firespitter (1982), a book of poems by Jayne Cortez. This dramatic cover was 
designed by sculptor Me
lvin edwards.


--- PAGE 277 ---
256 Black, Brown, & Beige
making it
i know they want me to make it
to enter eye droppers and invade pills
turn around or get shot
i kn
ow they wanna vaccinate me with
the fear of myself
so i’
ll pull down my face and nod
i know they want me to make it
But i’m not in a hurry
Scarifications
St. Clair Drake
Frantz Fanon, in his most popular and influential book, The Wretched of the 
Earth (1961, p. 213), had occasion to insist that “the poets of negritude 
will n
ot stop at the limits of the continent. From america, black voices 
will take up the hymn with fuller unison. The ‘black world’ will see 
the light and Busia from Ghana
, Birago Diop from Senegal, hampate 
Ba from the Sudan, and St. Clair Drake from Chicago will not hesi-
tate to assert the existence of common ties and a motive power that is 
identical.”
 Coauthor wi
th horace Cayton of the classic Black Metropolis (1945)—
for which 
richard Wright wrote an important introduction—Drake 
(1911–1990) several decades later also wrote the magisterial two-volume 
Black Folk Here and There (1987
 –1990). in the meantime the “father of 
black anthropology” authored a veritable library of pamphlets, essays, 
speeches, reports, and reviews.
 a
 wise, insightful, inspiring, and beloved teacher, his rapport with 
students was extraordinary. his after-class discussions were often as long 
as the class itself.
 Drake’
s students at Chicago’s roosevelt university included Sterling 
Stuckey, John Bracey, Frank london Brown, James Forman, and nearly 
all of the young men and women who, a few years later, founded the 
Chicago Surrealist Group.
 The text published her
e is excerpted from an essay originally written 
for herbert hill’s Soon, One Morning (1968).


--- PAGE 278 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 257
negritude and pan- africani Sm
The end of the Second World War marked the beginning of the liberation of 
africa and of racial integration in the united States. although there is no causal 
connection between these two momentous developments, they are interrelated 
and they influence each other. That they occurred at approximately the same 
time has profound implications for negro americans, all of whom are aware 
that they are “of african descent.” in america, this “african descent” is consid-
ered 
to be the only really socially relevant fact about negroes, and some states 
actually define a negro as “anyone with an ascertainable trace of negro blood.” 
Whether those who are defined as “ american negroes” like it or not, history 
and the peculiar evaluations of american society have linked them with the fate 
of africa and its peoples. This is a reality to which negroes in the united States 
have always had to adjust.
 i n 
1925, the distinguished american negro literary critic alain locke pre-
sented an anthology to the public which bore the title The New Negro. The poets, 
essayists, and writers of fiction whose works appeared in the volume were par-
ticipants in what came to be called the negro renaissance, that remarkable out-
burst of literary creativity which followed the First World War. The dominant 
theme in the work of all these writers was the negro experience. The intellec-
tual 
vanguard of ten million negro americans was expressing the moods and 
wishes, the aspirations and frustrations, the joy as well as the anger, of their 
ethnic group. They were also revealing their own sensitive reactions to reality, 
and laying bare the distinctive configurations of ideas and emotions which each 
had elaborated in order to cope with reality. For some of them, africa was a part 
of this reality.
Edward A. Jones
Mississippi-born, edward a. Jones studied at Morehouse College in 
atlanta, Georgia. after further studies at Middlebury College, Cornell 
university, and the Sorbonne in Paris, he returned to Morehouse as pro-
fessor of French and chairman of the Department of Modern Foreign 
lang
uages. over the years he contributed many articles and reviews to 
such publications as South Atlantic Quarterly, Modern Language Journal, French 
Review, and The Journal of Negro History.
 The excer
pts that follow are from his anthology V oices of Negritude. 
one of the earliest works on the subject i
n english, the book was a sig-
nifican
t influence on the Black arts movement.


--- PAGE 279 ---
258 Black, Brown, & Beige
the Birth of Black aWarene SS
The common denominator of all the negritude writers is consciousness of color 
and racial pride, complemented by a deep conviction of solidarity among all 
blacks, both in and outside africa, who share a common heritage of oppression, 
injustice, poverty, and economic ills resulting therefrom. The reaction of the 
various proponents of Negritude to the whites responsible for their plight runs 
the gamut from Senghor’s humane forgiveness to the indignation and bitter-
ness of Césaire et al. Their poems are veritable laments amounting to variations 
on a common theme: the suffering, insults, and humiliations resulting from 
racist attitudes and practices the world over. They all came to accept Senghor’s 
concept of Negritude as an arm of deliverance, a tool for the liberation of blacks 
from their present-day serfdom, for without belief in one’s own potential and 
pride in one’s own past and ancestral culture, as well as group solidarity, blacks 
would lack the basic essentials for launching any kind of social revolution or 
for initiating any kind of movement for liberation that could possibly succeed 
[original emphasis].
* *
 *
another factor in the birth of black awareness and solidarity among black ex-
patriates in Paris in the decade 1925–1935 was their discovery of fellow black 
wr
iters in the united States, such afro-american literary pioneers of great tal-
ent 
as alain locke, an intellectual who interpreted to them the black experi-
ence i
n america and opened their eyes to the excellent writers of the negro 
renaissance, Charles W. Chestnut, W.e.B. Du Bois, Paul lawrence Dunbar, 
Claude McKay, Countee Cullen, langston hughes, and Sterling a. Brown; 
novelists such as Jessie Fauset and Jean T oomer; painters henry o. Tanner and 
William e. Scott; sculptors Meta Warrick Fuller, Mae Jackson, and elizabeth 
Prophet. The meetings at Mlle. andré nardal’s brought together blacks from 
two hemispheres and facilitated cross-fertilization of talent, unity of purpose, 
and color solidarity. Common ancestry and background, community in suffer-
ing, and long-pent-up resentments bridged the geographical distance separat-
in
g these sons of africa and endowed them with a cause commune. indeed, the 
effect of negro american intellectuals and writers on their african and West 
indian counterparts was enormous.


--- PAGE 280 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 259
Ishmael Reed
Born in Chattanooga, Tennessee, in 1938, reed lived for several years in 
new Y ork, where he coedited the East Village Other and contributed to 
many poetry, political, and underground magazines
 h
e has taught at Yale, Dartmouth, and the university of California at 
Berkeley. his publications include several volumes of poetry, two plays, 
and a series of remarkable novels including the surrealist-from-cover-
to-cover Mumbo Jumbo. h
 is essays have been collected in Shrovetide in Old 
New Orleans and Writin’ Is Fightin’. h e has also directed two television pro-
ducti
ons: “Personal Problems” and “a Word in edgewise.”
 r eed lives in Berkeley, California. The text published here appears as 
the opening chapter of Writin’ Is Fightin’.
Boxing on paper: thirty-Seven yearS later
a black boxer’s career is the perfect metaphor for the career of a black male. 
every day is like being in the gym, sparring with impersonal opponents as one 
faces the rudeness and hostility that a black male must confront in the united 
States, where he is the object of both fear and fascination. My difficulty in com-
municating this point of view used to really bewilder me, but over the years i’ve 
learned that it takes an extraordinary amount of effort to understand someone 
from a background different from your own, especially when your life doesn’t 
really 
depend upon it. and so, during this period, when black males seem to 
be on somebody’s endangered-species list, i can understand why some readers 
and debating opponents might have problems appreciating where i’m coming 
from.
 a
nd so as long as i can be a professional like larry holmes, that is, have 
the ability to know my way around my craft, i’ll probably still be controversial. 
arguing on behalf of the homeless, but at the same time defending atlanta’s 
middle-class leadership against what i considered to be unfair charges made by 
the great writer James Baldwin (no relation). and as i continue to practice this 
sometimes uncanny and taxing profession, i hope to become humbler.
 i ’ve had a good shot. it’s almost a miracle for a black male writer to last as 
long as i have, and though some may regard me as a “token,” i’m fully aware 
that, regardless of how some critics protect their fragile egos by pretending 
that black talent is rare, black talent is bountiful. i’ve read and heard a lot of 
manuscripts authored by the fellas over the years. The late hoyt Fuller was


--- PAGE 281 ---
260 Black, Brown, & Beige
right when he said that for one published ishmael reed there are dozens of 
talented writers in the ghettos and elsewhere, who remain unpublished. and 
having lasted this long, i’ve been able to witness the sad demise of a lot of 
tokens who believed what their literary managers told them. Who believed that 
they were indeed unique and unusual.
 Just think of all of the cocky boxers who got punched out by nobodies as 
they took on an unknown to warm up for their fight with the champion. in this 
business, spoilers are all over the place.
 i
 was shocked to hear Secretary of State George Shultz acknowledge during 
the iran-Contragate hearings what our cultural leadership, and “educational” 
defenders of Western civilization, fail to realize. That people are smart all over 
the world. i know that. i’m aware of the fellas, writing throughout the country 
in the back of beat-up trailers, in jails, on kitchen tables, at their busboy jobs, 
during the rest period on somebody’s night shift, or in between term papers. all 
the guys burnt-out, busted, disillusioned, collecting their hundredth rejection 
slip being discouraged by people who say they’ll never be a champion, or even 
a contender. This book is for them. Writin’ is Fightin’.
Katherine Dunham
one of the central “founding mothers” of modern dance, Dunham 
(1909–2006) has long been celebrated as an outstanding dancer, cho-
reographer, anthropologist, actress, writer, teacher, and activist in 
struggles against social injustice. Chicago-born, she was active as a 
young woman in the city’s radical and Dadaesque free-speech forum, 
the Dil Pickle Club, noted for its controversial lectures and debates. 
Founder 
of the first african american dance company in Chicago, in 
1931, her “Ballet nègre” prefigured the negritude movement. in her later 
dance troupes she not only developed new dance techniques, but also 
in
troduced Caribbean- and african-based dance into the modern dance 
repertoire, and in the process inspired several generations of dancers 
and actors to discov
er expressive movements of their own. her students 
included eartha Kitt, ava Gardner, James Dean, and Marlon Brando.
 as a university of Chicago anthropologist, Dunham made several 
field trips to the Caribbean, where she closely studied the wide variety 
of nat
ive dance and gesture. her experience on the islands enabled her 
to incorporate elements of voodoo rituals into her dance long before 
the French sur
realist dancer hélène vanel. eventually Dunham claimed 
haiti as her second home.


--- PAGE 282 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 261
 her passion for social justice, meanwhile, was evident in her involve-
men
t in the negro Federal Theatre Project (1938) and the new Y ork 
labor Stage (1939).
 her surrealist connections, rarely acknowledged by u .S. critics, are 
nonetheless memorable. The printed program for her troupe’s perfor-
mances in Paris during the late autumn of 1949 features an enthusiastic 
two
-page tribute to Dunham by andré Breton. on the same occasion, 
roger Caillois wrote about her as well. She was also acquainted with 
Marcel Duchamp. according to african american scholar veve Clark, 
Dunham for years kept framed photographs of Breton and Duchamp on 
the mantle of her living room fireplace.
 repr
inted here is an excerpt from an early article on her Ballet nègre 
(Abbott’s Monthly, 1931) and a summary of her views on dance as a major 
art.
Ballet nègre
a negro Ballet has to come. Periodically the negro makes some startling inno-
vat
ion, some rich contribution to america’s art. When freedom put a pen in the 
negro’s hand, he wrote a lyrical record, sometimes masked, sometimes pure 
in its racial expression. he found that those things which had belonged to his 
past, the workings of his mind, and even his daily life, were of great interest to 
the am
erican public; and so he wrote them down, and as he wrote, he knew 
that only he could actually re-live that past.
 The n
egro sang, wrote, acted, and now he is about to dance. There will un-
doubtedly be some objection to the futurity expressed in this statement. There 
are 
those who will remind us that the negro has been dancing since the dawn 
of history; but, perhaps unfortunately, civilization draws a sharp distinction 
between an uncurbed, purely racial expression—governed simply by rhythm 
and emotion—and the crystalline symphony of the traditional ballet.
 n
ow the soul of the negro Ballet has made itself articulate. We have discov-
ered the ésprit de ballet.
note S on the dance
With Special Reference to the Island of Haiti
Dance is a rhythmic motion for one or more of a number of reasons: social co-
hesion, psychological or physiological catharsis, exhibitionism, auto-hypnosis, 
pleasure, ecstasy, sexual selection, play, recreation, development of artistic


--- PAGE 283 ---
262 Black, Brown, & Beige
values, stimulus to action, aggressive or non-aggressive, extension and affirma-
tion of social patterns and others.
 i
 realize that this formula enters more into the terms of a description than a 
definition, which often occurs when, by a certain continuous extension of cor-
related characteristics, the only answers seem to be over-complexity or over-
simplici
ty. verbalization is apt to end in sterility, and the aesthetic experience 
such as makes up a large part of any art creation eludes explicitness with a tan-
talizin
g facility. (even now i see, however, that i, like numerous other creative 
artists, have fallen into this pitfall and try to explain with many words an ex-
perience which is firmly rooted in man’s essential being and may well be a key 
to his potentialities for personal and social integration.)
 The 
universality of dance has for long been recognized by historians, phi-
losophers, graphic and plastic artists, and of late has become a subject of inter-
est to anthropologists, psychologists, and physiologists; there has begun to 
emerge in recent years a strong popular concern for this expression, not only 
from a theatrical or entertainment point of view, but in terms of its examination 
as a cultural trait, comparative analysis of its different forms and its significance, 
sociological, biological, and psychological. But as the cultural importance of 
the dance is brought to prominence by such media as the folklore theater, 
exploitation by camera, and the ever-growing library of descriptive travel-lore, 
there arises in modern society a dispute which has finalized itself in placing 
dance in that ambiguous position between science and art, between exposition 
and entertainment. This dichotomy seems to me to be a useless one, as the 
paths of art and scientific discovery too often cross, even merge, to allow for 
dispute. in primitive societies dance is an accepted functional element of both 
personal and community life, and for this reason the conflict of classification 
does not arise. The ecstasies, repressions, challenges, sorrows, and pleasures of 
peoples still living in a folkloric or primitive state find expression and are chan-
nel
ed, controlled, or released, as the case may be, by ritualized dance. and it is 
from a careful observation of the dance as a community expression that many 
useful hypotheses of culture type or pattern, psychology, and philosophy may 
be arrived at.
 a
lone or in concert man dances in his various selves and his emotions and 
his dance becomes a communication as clear as though it were written or spo-
ken in an universal language.
Puma, ed., 7 Arts


--- PAGE 284 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 263
Melvin Edwards
edwards (1937– ) was born and raised in Texas and studied art at the los 
angeles art institute and the university of Southern California in the 
1960s. Well known as the most prolific african american sculptor in re-
cent y
ears and always politically active, he took part in the Civil rights 
and Black arts movements, and in the 1970s came into contact with the 
Chicago Surrealist Group. he has taught at the university of Connecti-
cut, 
rutgers university, howard university, and other schools.
 r egarding himself as the descendent of ancestral african metalwork-
ers, 
edwards has visited africa many times and made a special study of 
the work of the brass casters of Benin. his own sculptures, embodying 
the most disparate found objects, including chains, hammers, and other 
tools, are among the most powerful and innovative artworks of our time. 
Wide
ly exhibited in galleries and museums all over the united States as 
well as in Paris and many places in africa, his work has also generated an 
impressive critical literature.
 The text r
eprinted here appeared in the only issue of the surrealist 
journal Free Spirits: Annals of the Insurgent Imagination.
lynch fragment S
a lynching is a murder, a group murder. Y ou take all of the energy of a lynching, 
all the hate and all the fear, and pile it on one human being. Y ou tie that person 
to a tree and you slowly or fastly kill him. The lynch Fragment series is a series 
of sculpture ideas. What i’m doing is taking fragments of the intensity of a 
lynching, turning it around, changing it into an object, and making that object 
something creative and positive. So the thing itself is not to look like it’s been 
lynched, but to have that scale of intensity, and that kind of power.
 i
 have developed suspended environmental works made of barbwire and of 
chains. i also make larger pieces, public sculpture meant to have a relationship 
with architecture and the general public. Y ou can say that the lynch Fragments 
are a private conversation. a one on one situation. The public works are meant 
to affect masses of people at once. The material used for the lynch Fragments is 
steel. Sometimes a piece of brass or bronze or chrome is added but for the most 
part they are welded steel. each lynch Fragment is different from the other 
and each has an individual title. in that respect they are like traditional african 
sculpture. The idea of a lynching was bad luck, or bad fate, or a bad situation 
for african-american people in the united States. But the lynch Fragment, the


--- PAGE 285 ---
264 Black, Brown, & Beige
sculpture, is really a positive work. They are powerful and they are ours, and 
they are mine, if they are not made by our oppressor. They are made by us as a 
continuance of the resistance against oppression.
 i
 started making them in 1963 during the period when the civil rights move-
men
t was in full force. it was my first experience with collective resistance. at 
that time i was teaching myself how to make sculpture and trying to find my 
own unique way of working. The lynch Fragments come from family stories 
about lynchings. They come from my experiences of growing up in houston, 
Texas, the black community in the fifth ward, the five years i lived in Dayton, 
ohio, in the all-black Desoto-Bass housing project, and in the black neighbor-
hoods i
n los angeles, California.
 i intended for the lynch Fragments to remind black people of what we 
have come out of. That’s important because in the united States we’re the only 
people to actually come out of the lynching experience. They lynched a few 
other people, but basically being lynched belonged to us. We were the only 
ones brought here to be slaves, and after slavery we were a people without 
rights. We were the only people who could be lynched with impunity. it’s docu-
mented and it’s not over yet. Making the lynch Fragments is a strong way to 
work.
 i ’m 
a physical person. i believe in strong statements. i believe in a certain 
amount of significant directness. Within the visual arts, the abstract work is very 
much in the area of fiction and poetry. They’re imaginary. Y ou can put things 
together and in real life there would be no reason for them to be together, 
except in the reality of their being works of art. once i have decided that my 
subject is lynching and lynch Fragments, that calls into question the whole 
society. The whole of art, the whole of everything.
Joseph Jarman
Jarman was born in Pine Bluff, arkansas, in 1937 and raised in Chicago. 
he learned drums in high school and took up the saxophone in the 
1950s while in the army. around 1961, at Wilson Junior College in Chi-
cago, he m
et bassist Malachi Favors and three other saxmen—roscoe 
Mitchell, anthony Braxton, and henry Threadgill—who shared his 
interest in the “new music” pioneered by ornette Coleman, Cecil 
Taylor, and albert ayler. By 1962 Jarman and his young friends were 
taking part in the weekly sessions of Muhal richard abrams’ experi-
mental Band, a wide-open group devoted to totally free improvisation.


--- PAGE 286 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 265
The band, which met at the abraham lincoln Center (an old Chicago 
settlement house) and did not play in public, was in turn the nucleus of 
the new music’
s greatest co-op, the association for the advancement of 
Creative Musicians, which abrams and Jarman and their aforementioned 
friends cofounded in 1965.
 Wi
thin the aaCM Jarman and Mitchell—with others (including 
Favors and newcomers lester Bowie, trumpet, and Don Moye, drums), 
formed the art ensemble of Chicago, whose wildly theatrical concerts 
were often called “Dada” and “surrealist” by admirers and critics alike. 
The ensemble’s sensational tours across the country and ’round the 
world soon made Chicago’
s new music and the aaCM famous all over 
the planet.
 in Ma
y 1986 Cecil Taylor attended the World Surrealist exhibition 
in Chicago and urged Jarman and other aaCM members not to miss it, 
and it was Jarman who introduced the surrealists to a sizeable group of 
aaCM mem
bers. The long-range upshot was a whole series of events 
which brought the Surrealist Group and the aaCM together.
 o ne of the outstanding creative musicians of our time, Jarman is a 
man of many and wide-ranging interests. an accomplished poet, he is 
also a longtime student of Zen Buddhism and a teacher of the martial 
arts
. he lives in Brooklyn, new Y ork.
odaWalla
oDaWalla came through the people of the Sun
into the grey haze of the ghost worlds
vanished legions, crowding bread lines—the people
of the Sun coated with green chalk
all kinds of warm light between them
destroyed for the silver queen of the ghost worlds
wild beast such as dogs gone mad and lechers—
the wanderers
oDaWal
la came through the people of the Sun
to warn them of the vanished legions
and to teach them how they may increase their bounty
through the practice of the drum and silent gong
(as taught by oDaWal
 la) was realized
on seeing one another they transformed themselves into
one the hand the other the left big toe of KaW 
 Zu PaM
(the one who creates the door through the passage on


--- PAGE 287 ---
266 Black, Brown, & Beige
the hill of
Quan Bu Ka) their purpose
to guide the people of the Sun as they sought knowledge of
the door through the grey haze.
when SeKa saw the sound of the silent gong
SeKa sought to transform itself into the right hand
of oDaWalla wher e Coo Be Su rested while waiting
to move into the right big toe of KaW Zu PaM
(the one who creates the door through the passage on
the hill of
Qu
an Bu Ka) their purpose
to guide the people of the Sun as they
seek to leave, seek to leave, seek to leave, seek to leave
the grey haze
only riMuM
 Ba remained to find the place of the
drum and silent gong
such knowledge would enable it to enter into the inner
organs of
KaW 
Zu PaM
(the one who creates the door through the passage on
the hill of
Qu
an Bu Ka) their purpose
to guide the people of the Sun  the grey haze.
oDaWalla vibrated the movement of CaM Be Gill
o Poiu
causing the silent gong to sound silent, the body whole.
the grey haze
Sun people
drum
silent
gong—here now
here now
here now
here now—between us
grey haze Sun
people
Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, no. 3 (1976)


--- PAGE 288 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 267
Oliver Pitcher
Playwright, actor, and drama teacher by profession, Pitcher (1923– ) was 
also a painter and a noted poet in the 1940s and 1950s underground. a 
contributor to periodicals as varied as the surrealist-oriented Tiger’s Eye, 
the Paris-based Présence Africaine, Negro Digest/Black W orld, and the Beat 
Y ugen, edited by hettie and le
 roi Jones (amiri Baraka), he was also 
active in the new Y ork–based umbra group of poets. he was born in 
Massachusetts and lived for extended periods in Pittsburgh, atlanta, and 
new Y ork before settling down in his later years in Palo alto, California. 
robert hayden has hailed his offbeat and sardonic poetry, but Pitcher 
has published only one slim book, Dust of Silence (1958).
Jean-Jacque S
Died august 23, 1946,
thumbing his nose
The sheets
, spotted, a sad sea of latin faces. Blood and
bone, grandmothers sitting, kneeling, knitting in a graveyard,
or doi
ng their beads. and not a comptesse in the lot.
Jean-Jacques lies in an empty black room of the mind
where the face of the 
angel of Death appears. . . .
“Take it on the lam, angel with your twelve karat halo,
disrobed of personal feeling. Fat and beaming, or slick and
chi-chi
, angels of Death, all have smelly feet. . . .”
wet with tears. . . .
“Jean-Jacques. When you returned to yourself you were
dragg
ing a carrion carcass behind you. oh, Jean-Jacques.”
“Shed your milky tears for the neon-world!”
“The door of entrances and exits has gone, Jean-Jacques.
Gone!” (
ave! ave!)
a dark cloud of tragic laughter. all say goodbye. The
petrified sheet. reflected on the half-lidded eyeball: the anxious gawk of a 
little black haired girl, half-hidden behind the
door. She shuts her eyes, and slams the door.
(av
e.
ave.)
Tiger’s Eye, no. 9 (october 15, 1949)


--- PAGE 289 ---
268 Black, Brown, & Beige
Frank London Brown
a truly great writer, Frank london Brown (1927–1962) has still not re-
ceived the recognition his many-sided work deserves. T o the extent that 
he is acknowledged at all by mainstream critics it is for his first novel, 
T rumbull Park (1959), a high-powered story based largely on his own ex-
periences in the South Chicago racial battleground near the steel mills. 
With its anger, humor, vivid detail, and radical insight, the book remains 
a classic Chicago novel.
 But as Sterli
ng Stuckey emphasizes in one of the earliest and finest 
essays on Brown’s work, Brown always demanded more of himself. Both 
before and after T rumbull Park he was at the same time an artist and a man 
of action, and his writing boldly ventured into other dimensions. Brown 
was also the first to read short stories (not poetry) to jazz accompani-
ment. Sadly, his admirable stories—scattered in various magazines—
have never been collected.
 Bro
wn’s specifically surrealist affinities appear in his second and last 
novel, The Myth Maker (196 9). on one level it is the story of a group 
of black youngsters trying to come to grips with early 1960s life, love, 
and race politics, but it is also a weird and tragic tale of urban gothic 
gloom: violence, nightmare, desperation, and death under the Southside 
el t
racks. haunted by a phantomlike sage known only as the monk, the 
book’s tone and tempo lean toward the oneiric and even mythic, as the 
title suggests. Defiance, delirium, and doom appear as driving forces. 
and y
et, challenging the horror and squalor, the sense of poetry and 
wonder persist against all odds—a heightened awareness of the Mar-
velous inspired by nothing less than the magic of another monk, and the 
impossible sounds that were realized by Thelonious Monk.
Jazz
The chatter of the cymbals floored the high pitched introductory, gave it a base 
from which to soar. and dew dropping off minor chords, shattering their reso-
nance with an even more contradictory high keyed set of notes, came Thelo-
nious Monk. The bass started walking, booming like a strong man’s healthy 
heart beating beneath the drums, which beat beneath the piano, which chorded 
beneath the tenor saxophone. The song built, throbbing while moving to the 
height of the first chorus. Building, building, chugging now like a great steam 
engine huffing uphill, clashing iron on the iron track, bells of piano ringing, 
guiding the reverberation of sound from the walls of the booth’s close tunnel.


--- PAGE 290 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 269
up the tenor went, repeating the melody, driving, chugging with the great 
train and box cars of bass, drums, and piano. The trumpet fell silent, and now 
the tenor pushed, bellowing and grunting, rough and beautiful in the nobility 
of co
arseness, of mass trying to execute delicate gyrations. it was a big horn, 
not like Charlie Parker’s or some light flute squawking pain and pity, hawking 
feelings thin and silver between and beneath great layers of muscle, guile and 
strength, but a big horn blowing, blowing the blues away. Blowing in news 
from Siam while the cymbals called out, called out to the world that the King 
was coming. hail the king of life! now the trumpet lay in wait, and the piano 
agitated the upward motion. The tenor said something, stated a phrase and the 
trumpet picked it up and the tenor eased into quiet.
 e r
nest listened to the music without patting his foot. he stood calmly. lis-
tening to the sound turning into substance. Seeing a structure being built as 
surely as if it were brick, glass and steel. he saw the floor and the super struc-
ture and the places where the windows were to be, yet which Monk, the Master 
architect, had purposely left out so that he, ernest Day, could put them in.
 Wong! went the piano, and now the Monk himself was taking a solo. he 
played in the low keys, and he played things that by passed the daily bread 
and the constant tick of the clock. Things that took time into another quarter, 
where it could not continue its constant repetition of the ancient archetype of 
beginning, middle and end; time of all times, blood of all bloods, image of all 
images. 
The thing done once, and no other thing again to be done. T o ernest, 
Monk moved history forward, took it from the cold grey grip of the eternal 
return, the repeating of things done and said, and hence the cyclic circularity 
of history, and of the future of man, and the end of the bad things, and the 
beginning of the good things. Forward! Monk’s off chorded notes said. never 
to come this way again! There are still secrets to be known. new secrets, not 
old regurgitated ones of crosses dark with the blood of too many saviors gone 
wrong.
 e r
nest laughed at the sounds, the impossible sounds that Thelonious Monk 
made possible. That was it! That was his appeal, his attraction. he was free, 
loose, weightless, yet not in need of wings! in need of nothing but his will to be 
free.
Frank london Brown, T rumbull Park


--- PAGE 291 ---
270 Black, Brown, & Beige
Pony Poindexter
although he never quite hit the big time, Poindexter (1926–1988) was 
a superb alto and soprano sax player. new orleans–born and widely 
known as “little Pony”—he was a mainstay of the late 1950s/early 1960s 
San Francisco north Beach scene celebrated in the opening pages of 
Jack Kerouac’s The Dharma Bums.
 Soft-
spoken, modest, with a lively critical intelligence and a good 
sense of humor, Poindexter also exemplified the new jazz as a moral 
for
ce for a better world. his friends included Bob Kaufman, Philip 
lamantia, robert Stock, and other poets including Franklin rosemont, 
who in 1959 was only sixteen, but very much involved not only in the 
Ba
y area Beat and jazz scene, but also in the great Jazz Festival in Mon-
terr
ey, where ornette Coleman made one of his earliest public appear-
ances bef
ore a large audience. Deeply interested in the new american 
poetry and in surrealism, these poets and artists frequented the Co-
existence Bage
l Shop, the Coffee Gallery, and the Jazz Cellar, where 
Poindexter and his group often played.
 a
 repeated victim of Bay area police brutality, Poindexter moved to 
Paris in 1964, where he encountered many other black american mu-
sicians and—inevitably—globe-trotting poet Ted Joans. Shortly after 
his arrival in Paris, the interview excerpted here appeared in the leading 
French jazz journal.
Jazz iS more french than american
Why did you decide to settle in France?
i want to play every night. in europe, i think i can do so.
Y ou find the situation better?
Ther
e are too many musicians in america. For a small group, there are only 
a few places to work: new Y ork (with three clubs), Philadelphia, Chicago, 
Pittsburgh, los angeles, San Francisco. and besides, in France, the public 
is much friendlier to jazz musicians. The whole ambiance is better.
Why do you think the situation is so bad in the U.S.?
Many musicians are very bitter, and their music sounds bitter. People want 
jo
y, they’re looking for enthusiasm in music. also, there is no real support 
for jazz in the u.S.; it is not written up in the newspapers, or featured on 
television. in america, people like jazz but they don’t like those who play


--- PAGE 292 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 271
it. i have some great projects in mind for jazz in France. i think there is 
every reason to expect jazz to expand all over europe.
Why?
Jazz b
egan with an african element, rhythm—and an occidental element, 
harmony. it was b orn in the u.S.a. in new orleans, where the French 
influence was very strong. Believe me, jazz is more French than american. 
i want to recover that French ambiance.
But what, exactly, are you going to do?
First of all 
i’m going to play in my own style. i was born in new orleans and i 
play a lively, high-spirited sound. i also want to play in schools; even to the 
very young. all people need is a little education. and that’s what they don’t 
get in the 
u.S.
Or here, it seems to me.
Don’t be discouraged. The French are surely less narrow-minded than 
am
ericans. hey, even French cops are sympathetic! in Pigalle, two of 
them stopped me to look at my “papers,” and when they saw that i was 
born in new orleans they said, “ah, you’re like Sidney Bichet! That’s 
formidable!” in their honor i am composing a “Gendarme Blues.” listen, 
there’s better music than rock ’n’ roll. There’s good music, that’s all.
What are your greatest musical memories?
i ha
ve played with most of the best: art Tatum, Max roach, lionel hampton, 
but it’s Charlie Parker who has affected me most, with his truly great 
virtuosity.
Do you have any friends here?
Y es—
i’ve got the youngest impresario in France!
Jazz-Hot (october 1964)
Anthony Braxton
Chicago was a major center of the new revolutionary black music of the 
1960s—the music influenced by John Coltrane, Cecil Taylor, ornette 
Coleman, eric Dolphy, and a few others—and it did not take long for 
anthony Braxton (1945– ) to become one of its central figures. like 
Joseph Jarman, leo Smith, roscoe Mitchell, and henry Threadgill, all


--- PAGE 293 ---
272 Black, Brown, & Beige
of whom he knew at Chicago’s Wilson Junior College in the early years 
of the decade, Braxton by late 1966 was one of the leading lights of the 
coopera
tive aaCM. a part-time librarian at roosevelt university, he 
also frequented the anarchist/surrealist Solidarity Bookshop.
 This ar
ticle appeared in the mimeographed single issue of the aaCM 
(association for the advancement of Creative Musicians) journal in 
1968.
earth muSic
That the West is in the eleventh hour is now undebatable. We must redefine 
every aspect of what we now call art. Steps should be taken to show that all art 
is one (whether it be painting, writing, or running).
 i f i
 were to talk about my life (the part which the people of earth call music) 
i would say the essence of what i am doing is re-creating life. i would talk about 
how amazed i am. all i know is that every day i wake up in this body and from 
then on everything is in a constant state of flux. i have been told this is called 
life. Since i really don’t remember me before i was born, i find that something 
is happening that i don’t know about, and this is what i play and write about.
 a t this point in my music i find little use for harmony, time, development, 
ideas, form, notes, technique, and sometimes sound—although some of the 
nicest people i know feel differently.
 [until i played with the aaCM] never could i have imagined creativity 
on such a large scale. i am indeed fortunate to be able to work and exchange 
ideas in what must be another important link in what will likely be called earth 
Music. The fact that we’re being suppressed only gives us more time to explore 
and perfect (walls are falling down, truths are emerging).
 The 
music happening here in Chicago is the end-product of years of trying 
to cooperate, help, and love each other, as well as an honest desire to partici-
pate in the cosmics.
 o bvi
ously, what is needed on this planet is some kind of understanding of 
our lives. What people call art is, in fact, life.
 There seems to be an unplanned movement in the air among the young 
people with consciousness (i’ll call them artists) toward unity. in Chicago, the 
association for the advancement of Creative Musicians, the afro-arts Theater, 
and CoBra are living proof that something is happening. in the last five years 
the music here has advanced farther than i had ever dared to dream, and we are 
only beginning.
 There is a universal creative vibration in the air. The creativity here will


--- PAGE 294 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 273
undoubtedly play an important part when we gain more exposure (and when 
we do more exposing). More important, we are taking steps toward securing 
the development and understanding of art by teaching young people, and by 
becoming closer to our communities (knowing the self).
 i n 
the end, the destruction of art will lead to the rebirth of creativity, which 
is what is happening now.
Thelonious Monk
Maker of much of the most exciting, inspired, and inspiring music of the 
past century, Thelonious Sphere Monk (1920–1982) was always far more 
than what is commonly m
eant by the term “artist.” his whole attitude 
set him apart: his wildly adventurous imagination; high-seasoned hu-
mor; electrifying intelligence; and carefree detachment from most of 
the worl
d’s busyness and boredom. in three words, his unique poetic genius 
qualified him early on as an ex
emplary figure. as far back as the 1940s, 
surrealists as different from each other as the romanian victor Brauner, 
the Chilean roberto Matta, the French poet Claude Tarnaud, and the 
african american Ted Joans all regarded him as exceptional. like lau-
tréamon
t and Jacques vaché, two of surrealism’s major precursors, Monk 
was recognized—objectively—as a thoroughgoing surrealist character. 
in the same 
way that andré Breton once declared that heraclitus was 
surrealist in dialectic, and Gustave Moreau in fascination, so too it is 
perfectly clear now that Thelonious Monk was surrealist in being Thelo-
nious Monk.
 This quest
ion-and-answer interview appeared in the jazz magazine 
Metronome.
three Score— a quiz for Jazz muSician S
 (1) Whom do you consider one of the greatest americans of the century?
 (2) e xcepting new Y ork City and los angeles, where in the uSa would 
you prefer to live? . . .
 (6
) Which classical musician, alive or dead, composer or performer, do 
you most enjoy? . . .


--- PAGE 295 ---
274 Black, Brown, & Beige
Thelonious Monk answers
 (1) George Washington Carver.
 (2) The moon. . . .
 (6) i turbi.
Cecil Taylor
one of the truly great pianists of our time, rightly celebrated for the 
profound originality and impassioned lyricism of his marvelous music, 
Taylor (1933?– ) is also distinguished as poet, theorist, and choreogra-
pher
. his interest in surrealism, dating from the 1950s, was inspired at 
least in part by Ted Joans and Bob Kaufman. in 1976 Taylor collaborated 
on the journal Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion and attended the huge World 
Surr
ealist exhibition at Chicago’s Gallery Black Swan. in 2004, with 
Jayne Cortez, robin Kelley, and others, he played an important part in 
the memorial tribute to Ted Joans at new Y ork university.
the muSician
he pour’d floors talk
fly comment on latest views
arms moons ride fingers press inside
gallopin’ galoshes shit ma points narrow’d in
torso wick tor
ch  ease & confluent hips
silent upon open grass
voices float casts above
the own’d resolve
bronze suzy q’d sand spread
chapter behind raining lens
chatting arch’d contracting
par
ts travel some sum’s
speed deity alone fondles
like settin’ almost dependable day
independent of time deliverance


--- PAGE 296 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 275
spoken bitch workin’ gospel
mean chants meant defy logics death
spies numerals rotating
all but the gentle lie buried there
you
 see come heifer here
to me see
self forests chords calling solved goings
speech palms extends there many come
witness sword point yesterday sorrowing
now sparrow fly nut-spice beseeching
many new again grown to bring having
hyacinth seed by certain ides spring appear
knows inside whispers moves feeding
laughter swinging arms wait
pedigreed diameter bisected
brown body black being beside
behemoth poised to accede
ri
ng Dem Bells!
a head tone
phenomic color in
origin heated thoughts
cross & niger as
lines source contained
—within—
stamp stamp
dust mores
shadows float
Cire Perdue
process kept comin’
by out yet keepers
came
realms
all populate
even stride
bloodstain’d leer to catch
emperor’s children
Muzimu to
heals
 o duduwa
secrets grown
protects 
 nature


--- PAGE 297 ---
276 Black, Brown, & Beige
projection fast
feed becoming
orisha
thru
gate
Arsenal, no. 3 (1976)
Ornette Coleman
a leading figure in the post-bop jazz revolution in the 1950s and 1960s, 
ornette Coleman (1930– ) radically transformed the way the world 
listened. While critics debated whether this was a blatant hoax, a new 
breakthrough in jazz, or something entirely new beyond jazz, young 
peop
le all over the united States—and soon all over the world—were 
eagerly digging the new sound and relishing its beauty, delighted no 
end by Coleman’s resolve to express more kinds of feeling than previ-
ously possibl
e. his early albums, from Something Else (1958) to Free Jazz 
(1960) and beyond, were welcomed as harbingers of a sweeping social 
transformation, a new and marvelous freedom. This music dramatically 
changed people’s lives.
 Coleman is also a thi
nker, a theorist, a poet, and a teacher. a major 
inspirer of at least two generations of great musicians—including albert 
ayler, eric Dolphy, John Coltrane, and the wonderful musician/magi-
cians of Chicago’s 
aaCM—he is still, more than ever, inspiring up-and-
coming young musicians.
 Be
yond the fact that surrealists—in the united States, Paris, Prague, 
and elsewhere—have long admired his music, Coleman’s association 
with sur
realism has been casual and occasional. in 1970 surrealist globe-
trot
ter Ted Joans met him in Paris at an exhibition of the work of roma-
nian sur
realist victor Brauner, where Coleman told Joans that Brauner 
was in fact his favorite painter. interestingly, too, his principal statement 
of his theory of harmolodics—reprinted here—first appeared in the 
surrealist journal Free Spirits: Annals of the Insurgent Imagination (1982).


--- PAGE 298 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 277
harmolodic = hig heSt inStinct
Something to Think About
When i speak of rhythm i’m speaking about the oxygen for the notes. The beat 
or the time is the constant format. it’s the mechanical part of motion. rhythm 
is the freest part of that motion. The beat is the cement for the road. it’s the 
road that you’re traveling on; the road doesn’t necessarily ever change. rhythm 
can be harmonic or melodic. Most listeners and players think of rhythm as the 
drums and think of non-rhythm as sound or words. T o me they’re the same. Y ou 
can be moved rhythmically or non-rhythmically.
 i
mprovising is a word used to express music that is not being written and 
calculated at the moment. once i heard eubie Blake say that when he was play-
ing in black bands for white audiences, during the time when segregation was 
strong, that the musicians had to go on stage without any written music. The 
musicians would go backstage, look at the music, then leave the music there 
and go 
out and play it. he was saying that they had a more saleable appeal if 
they pretended to not know what they were doing. The white audience felt 
safer. if they had music in front of them, the audience would think that they 
were trying to be white. So that’s what i think about the word improvising. it’s 
outdated. The term doesn’t describe the musician’s individual struggle for ex-
pressi
on. usually the person improvising has to use some sort of vehicle to let 
you know he’s doing that. it’s a limited term. Memory has a lot to do with im-
provisation. People enjoy the music they’ve heard before, much more than the 
music they haven’t heard. T o me that’s like memory. The same sensations that 
made them enjoy what they liked in the past, when it was the present, wasn’t 
memory. That was an experience.
Sun Ra
herman “Sonny” Blount (1914–1993), a member of Fletcher henderson’s 
orchestra in 1946–1947, adopted the name Sun ra in the mid-1950s. he 
soon became one of the great iconoclasts of jazz, a man with a mission 
for whom music was a means of getting to know—and helping others 
kno
w—the universe. noted for his aggressive rejection of conventional 
melodic development, he and his band—the intergalactic research 
arkestra—also elaborated their own uniquely uproarious and theatrical 
style of collective improvisation. Sun ra’s gigs were truly extraordinary


--- PAGE 299 ---
278 Black, Brown, & Beige
multimedia events, complete with costumes, special lighting, dancing, 
film, and physical interaction with the audience, as he and his entourage 
snake-danced through the aisles, placing their hands on the shoulders of 
each and all while chanting, over and over, “The next stop is Jupiter!” or 
“Space is the Place!”
 a
s suggested by the titles of his recordings—such as Outer Planes of 
There, Secrets of the Sun, and The Heliocentric W orlds of Sun Ra (in two vol-
umes)—outer sp
ace clearly played a large role in Sun ra’s mythology. 
Deeply interested in cosmology and egyptology, he was also a poet 
and agitator; in the 1960s he often soapboxed at Washington Square in 
Gr
eenwich village, together with surrealists, anarchists, and other revo-
lutionaries and poets.
coSmic equation
Then another tomorrow
They never told me of
Came with the abruptness of a fiery dawn
and sp
oke of Cosmic equations:
The equations of sight-similarity
The equations of sound-similarity
Subtle 
living equations
Clear only to those
Who wish to be attuned
T o the 
vibrations of the outer Cosmic Worlds.
Subtle living equations
of the outer-realms
Dear only to those
Who fervently wish the greater life
the endle SS realm
i have nothing
nothing!
how really is i am. . . .
nothing is mine.
how treasured rich am i
i have the treasure of nothing. . . .
vast endless nothing


--- PAGE 300 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 279
That branches out into realm beyond realm.
This and these are mine
T ogether they are nothing.
The idea of nothing
The notion of nations
na
tion. . . . notion
i have the treasure of nothing
all of it is mine.
he who would build a magic world
Must seek my exchange bar
in order to par
take of my endless
Treasure from my endless realm of nothing.
Babs Gonzales
no one knows whether Babs Gonzales (1919–1980) ever read any of 
the surrealist manifestoes, but there is no getting around the fact that 
he liv
ed a surrealist life. like many others who found imaginative ways 
out of the daily grind—jazz people, circus folk, scholarly hoboes, and 
street-corner soapboxers (the improv comics of their day)—the “king of 
the bop poets” was street-smart to the point of street-genius and de-
veloped a hip version of vernacular surrealism that was all his own and 
still capable today (on film, vinyl, and CD) of bringing down the house. 
humor
, kicks, and good music were his game, and he played it with 
uncompromising flamboyance. Cosmopolitan in the best sense, in his 
en
glish plaid coat, Mexican sombrero, and wooden shoes from holland, 
he enjoyed introducing musicians and songs in French, Danish, and 
Swedish. 
his life story, I Paid My Dues (1967), is a book full of insight as 
well as laughs.
 For 
all his wordplay, gags, and funny stories, Babs Gonzales also had 
a serious side. highly critical of corruption in the music business, he 
was fundamentally antiauthoritarian and an advocate of direct action to 
solve problems that the “law” often prefers to ignore. Moreover, as the 
excerpts reprinted here make clear, the maestro of “Three Bips and a 
Bop” was by no means a moderate on race matters.


--- PAGE 301 ---
280 Black, Brown, & Beige
i paid my dueS
The street was really something in those days. The war was on and there were 
always loads of sailors and soldiers who wanted to and did fight every time they 
saw 
a negro musician with a white girl. i’d seen a whore uptown beating her 
man with her shoe heel and him just holding his eyes screaming. When it was 
all o
ver i asked her why the guy didn’t fight back? She answered, “Just get a box 
of red pepper for a dime and throw it in his eyes and you’ll win.”
 i
 took her advice and until today, i’ve never been without it.
* * *
Bird came by the theater on closing day and explained he’d just got in from Chi-
cago, and didn’t have a pad. i told him he could shack up with me for a couple 
of days so i took him home with me. The next morning i had an appointment 
with a shyster agent so i told Bird to “lay Dead” until he got ready to split and 
to leave the key with the landlady.
 When i
 got back that evening, Bird had departed with three of my suits. i 
wasn’t worried because i knew he had to open up at the “Bopera” house in two 
weeks.
 o n 
his opening night, i walked in around midnight. he saw me and calmly 
walked down off the bandstand and went to the office in the rear. Ten minutes 
later 
he walked up to me and said, “Babs, baby, i know i downed your vines, 
so here’s the tickets. They’re in for five apiece. here’s twenty for the interest. 
another five for cab fare and while you’re here, have anything you want on 
me cause i love you.” he just turned around and went back on the bandstand 
and played his ass off like nothing had happened. There are at least a thousand 
stori
es i can tell about Bird beating people out of something but in the ten years 
of our friendship, he always paid me back.
Spellman, I Paid My Dues
A. B. Spellman
Poet, critic, and historian, Spellman (1935– ) emceed the Where It’s At 
jazz and ethn
ic music program in new Y ork in the 1960s and contrib-
uted to magazines as different as Metronome and The Liberator. h is Four Lives 
in the Bebop Business (1966) was one of the first in-depth appreciations of 
the new jazz.


--- PAGE 302 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 281
the neW thing in Jazz: cultivation of the marvelou S
Few people have been able to get next to ornette Coleman’s music in one 
hearing. There is just too much personality in his playing to relate its most 
salient sound to what even the most studiously prepared listener is accustomed 
to hearing, from any direction. Y et, everyone who attended the first press con-
ference at the Five Spot came prepared to form a lasting opinion. Since then, 
some of those opinions have changed and some have not. But few of his original 
detractors consider ornette a fake today, and this holds true even for those 
who still do not like his music.
 a t any rate, the original predictions that ornette Coleman would change 
the direction of jazz proved to be completely true. Such modernists as John 
Coltrane 
and Jackie Mclean admit that hearing ornette has opened their own 
ears to new rhythmic possibilities in both group and solo playing. More impor-
tant 
is the impact that ornette’s group has had on the younger generation of 
musicians who followed them. These younger musicians are overhauling jazz in 
much the same way the beboppers did, and they are just as controversial. There 
have been innumerable articles written pro and con on this new music, which 
was som
ewhat negatively named the “new Thing,” as if it were a science fiction 
monster.
 This 
impact, however, was not merely technical or, as leroi Jones wrote, 
“theoretical.” . . . ornette’s confession that he doesn’t “know how it’s going to 
sound before i play it” [identifies his] true innovation. . . . That indefiniteness of 
not knowing how the music is going to sound before it is played . . . enhanced 
its emotional expression. Thus the new musician has been primarily involved 
in 
the cultivation of the Marvelous. and he judges his work more by the fre-
quency wi
th which the Marvelous occurs than by compositional values. it is 
therefore fair to say that ornette Coleman’s contribution to modern american 
music has been that he has opened up the way for the creation of situations 
wherein incredibly beautiful accidents occur.
Spellman, I Paid My Dues
Dizzy Gillespie
one of the founding fathers of bebop, and the first person to try 
orchestrating the new sounds of Charlie Parker, Gillespie (1917–1993) 
remained throughout his life one of the major figures of twentieth-


--- PAGE 303 ---
282 Black, Brown, & Beige
century music. his lively humor and repartee, together with his trade-
mark beret and goatee, were well known all around the world.
 a
long with his passionate devotion to music, he maintained a deep 
interest in the other arts—especially painting. This touching tribute to 
his gr
eat Chicago friend, artist Gertrude abercrombie, reflects this less-
known aspect of his sensibility.
gertrude aBercrom Bie: Bop artiSt
i would like to make an unequivocal statement: Gertrude abercrombie is the 
bop artist, bop in the sense that she has taken the essence of our music and 
transported it into another art form. That is her main contribution, i think, 
because, in the future, the music that she loves will become the classical music. 
So we 
can say that the artistic career of Gertrude abercrombie and the music 
of the 40s went hand in hand.
 i
 have been following the career of Gertrude for many years. i have several 
of her paintings myself. i get great joy from them.
 i remember an incident. i had a ring, an intaglio, and it was Minerva. i would 
wear this ring and when i would write somebody i would put some wax down 
and press it in and make a big impression on people. Well, i asked Gertrude 
to paint this ring. She looked at me and said, “Would i ask you, on one line of 
paper, to compose a symphony?”
 a rt and music are so closely related—we paint pictures too—we have to 
look to someone for inspiration. i know that Gertrude is versed in the funda-
men
tals of her art. i can tell by the way she pushes her brush around. There are 
certain things that go with learning an art. art is just an extension of the artist, 
but you know you are going in the right direction. First of all, you have to seek 
the truth in yourself and not what anyone else says about it and you just keep 
going and time will take care of it.
exhibition catalog, hyde Park art Center, 1979


--- PAGE 304 ---
Surrealism, Black Power, Black Arts 283
Amiri Baraka
Born in newark, new Jersey, where he now makes his home, interna-
ti
onally renowned amiri Baraka (1934– ) published his first books as 
leroi Jones. his far-ranging influences as a poet and a revolutionary 
cannot be covered in this short note. it is impossible to list his numer-
ous books and ar
ticles. (he is discussed elsewhere in this book.) Thus it 
was not possible to excerpt poetry, fiction, or theater, but following is a 
passage from his br
illiant essay, “The Changing Same, r&B and the new 
Black Music.”
the changing Same
The content of the new Music, or The new Black Music, is toward change. it 
is change. it wants to change forms. From physical to physical (social to social) 
or from physical to mental, or from physical-mental to spiritual. Soon essences. 
alb
ert ayler no longer wants notes. he says he wants sound. The total articula-
ti
on. ra’s music changes places, like Duke’s “jungle music.” Duke took people to 
a spiritual past, ra to a spiritual future (which also contains “little Sally Walker 
. . . sitting in a saucer . . . what kind’a saucer? . . . a flying saucer”).
 a
frican sounds, too: the beginnings of our sensibility. The new, the “primi-
tive,” meaning first, new. Just as Picasso’s borrowings were Western avant-garde 
and “the new” from centuries ago, and Stravinsky’s borrowings were new and 
“savage,” centuries old and brand new.
 The black musicians who kn
ow about the european tempered scale (Mind) 
no longer want it, if only just to be contemporary. That changed. The other 
black musicians never wanted it, anyway.
 Change
 Fr
eedom
 and finally Spirit. (But spirit makes the first two possible. a cycle again?)
 What are the qualitative meanings and implications of these words?
 There is the freedom to exist (and the change to) in the existing, or to re-
emerge in a new thing.
 e
ssence
 h ow does this content differ from that of r&B?
 l ove, for r&B, is an absolute good. There is love but there is little of it, and 
it is a valuable possession. how Sweet it is T o Be loved By Y ou. But the practi-
cal lov
e, like the practical church the r&B people left, a much more emotional


--- PAGE 305 ---
284 Black, Brown, & Beige
church and spirit worship than most jazz people had, is a day-to-day physical, 
social, sensual love. its presence making the other categories of human experi-
ence mesh favorably with beautiful conclusions. “Since i lost My Baby” (or 
older) “When i lost My Baby . . . i almost lost my mind.” There is the object 
(even, the person). But what is the object of John Coltrane’s “lo ve” . . . There is 
none. it is for the sake of loving, Trane speaks of. as ra’s “When angels Speak 
of love.”
Black Music


--- PAGE 306 ---
8. Toward the New Millennium:  
The Mid-1970s through the 1990s
the World Surreali St exhi Bition, 1976
Dreams have contributed greatly to humankind’s culture and 
development.
—n
ovalis
in her excellent biography of Joyce Mansour, Marie-l aure Missir emphasizes 
that the surrealists in France, after a rancorous split in 1969 (which some people 
naïvely mistook for the end of the movement) decided that an effective re-
newal of surrealist activity depended largely on the “international dimension.” 
as the ten issues of their Bulletin de Liaison Surréaliste demonstrate, Mansour and 
her friends focused on the two most active surrealist centers: Prague, where 
public surrealist manifestations were, unfortunately, forbidden; and Chicago, 
where the group was not only youthful and prolific, but also closely in touch 
with numerous collaborators throughout the country, and in other lands as 
well. Prague and Chicago are similarly highlighted by French surrealist alain 
Joubert in his admirable critical history, Le mouvement des surréalistes.1
 Dur
ing the first half of the 1970s, the Surrealist Insurrection wall posters; the 
surrealism issue of Radical America; the burgeoning Surrealist research & De-
velopment Monograph Series from Black Swan Press; the surrealist section of 
lawrence Ferlinghetti’s City lights anthology; the Chicago Group’s journal, 
Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion; the 
 group’s extensive correspondence with herbert 
Marcuse; and its comradely relations with the league of revolutionary Black 
Workers were all written up by Mansour, vincent Bounoure and others in the 
Bulletin de Liaison Surréaliste Group, as significant contributions to the movement’s 
international renewal.
 The 
year 1976 heralded much more and was indeed a banner year for sur-


--- PAGE 307 ---
286 Black, Brown, & Beige
realism in Chicago. The ripple effect of the group’s many actions spread across 
north america and ’round the world.
 i n January the magazine Living Blues (“a
  Journal of the Black american Blues 
Tradition”) ran a special sixteen-page supplement titled “Surrealism & Blues,” a 
collection of celebratory articles on the history, poetry, and politics of blues, 
edited 
by the Surrealist Group. a militant preface salutes “the blues’ true source 
of inspiration, the black working-men and women of this country,” and goes on 
to denounce “so-called ‘white’ blues” as a racist appropriation. The basic theme 
of the supplement is indicated in the opening lines: “Surrealism is the exalta-
tion of freedom, revolt, imagination and love. The surrealists could hardly have 
failed to recognize aspects of their combat in blues (and in jazz), for freedom, 
revolt, imagination and love are the very hallmarks of all that is greatest in the 
great tradition of black music.”
 a
pril brought the third issue of Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion—the largest issue 
yet (120 pages), with 30-plus articles, including one called “Black Music and 
Surrealist revolution,” a statement by Malcolm de Chazal (from Mauritius), 
some 50 reproductions, and poems by—among others—Jayne Cortez, Joseph 
Jarman, Cecil Taylor, Ted Joans, Clément Magloire-Saint- aude, and Joyce 
Mansour.
 a nd then came May Day, the opening of the World Surrealist exhibi-
tion—“Marvelous Freedom/vigilance of Desire”—at the Gallery Black Swan 
in Chicago.
 Major international surrealist exhibitions had taken place in Paris, 1959; new 
Y ork, 1960–1961; Milan, 1961; amsterdam, 1961; Paris 1965–1966; and São Paulo, 
1967. They varied widely. The Paris show, for example, featured 104 works by 
75 artists from 19 countries, while the Milan show included only 24 works by 
18 artists from 10 countries. Most of these shows were also organized with the 
assistance and support of a friendly gallery.
 The 
1976 Chicago exhibition was by far the biggest of all. With over 600 
works by 150-plus artists from 31 countries, it was truly the largest exhibition in 
the mo
vement’s history. and with no friendly galleries at hand, the surrealists 
themselves had not only to find a space of their own, but also to secure the 
works, frame them, mount them on the walls, and—no small task—prepare the 
catalog, posters, and press releases.
 Circumstances 
enabled them to fulfill a long-cherished dream: to defy and 
supersede gallery tradition by planning the show as an unrelentingly subversive 
manifestation. The space—named Gallery Black Swan for the occasion—was 
just the place to realize such a dream: a huge second-story car barn which, de-
cades earlier, had housed trolleys and the horses that pulled them. The entrance 
was a wide ramp—no stairs. nearly a half-block square, the sprawling cavernous


--- PAGE 308 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 287
chaos featured eleven Domains of Surrealist vigilance. each was named for a 
mythic figure admired by surrealists, such as alice in Wonderland, Bugs Bunny, 
harpo Marx, T-Bone Slim, and Peetie Wheatstraw, the devil’s son-in-law.
 The arrangement was deliberately informal, with disquieting but playful in-
stallat
ions at every turn (a forest of green gloves in the robin hood Domain; 
a six-foot-tall carrot in Bugs Bunny’s bed). The overall effect was as unlike a 
museum as possible. instead of an aesthetic spectacle, strollers encountered 
a series of poetic provocations. The large-format catalog included an archi-
tect’s blueprint indicating the domains and such special features as the Corri-
dor of the Forgotten Future, with Tristan Meinecke’s twelve-foot-square three-
dimensional paintings and Gerome Kamrowski’s towering mobile, Menagerie of 
Revolt.
 The Chic
ago T ribune critic likened the show to being at the scene of an explo-
sion, but that did not seem to discourage the crowds that climbed the ramp day 
after day for two months.2
 The 
Chicagoans did the organizing and the on-site work of setting up the 
show, but surrealists from out of state and overseas played key roles. among the 
most helpful were eugenio F. Granell (new Y ork), Ted Joans (Paris, Timbuktu), 
Mário Cesariny (lisbon), Édouard Jaguer (Paris), Conroy Maddox (l ondon), 
Shuzo Takiguchi (T okyo), and the iraqi abdul Kader el Janaby (Paris).
 Thanks to Shuzo Takiguchi, well over two dozen works—including two 
of his own—arrived from Japan. Takiguchi, whose surrealist activity extended 
back to the 1920s, was a major figure in surrealism; his support, not only for the 
1976 exhibition, but also for the Chicago Group’s overall perspectives, meant 
a lot 
to the growing surrealist movement in the united States. another Japa-
nese exhibitor, Y oshie Y oshida, flew to Chicago for the opening with some 
additional works. after returning to T okyo, he wrote a long and well-illustrated 
article on the exhibition for the november 1976 issue of Japan’s leading art 
journal, Mizué.
 Surrealist groups in lisbon and Copenhagen sent crates of paintings. 
The Portuguese also sent pieces by inácio Matsinhe from Mozambique and 
Malangatana valente from angola. impressive packets also arrived from lon-
don, the Bulletin de Liaison G roup in Paris, and the arab Surrealist Movement in 
exile. Édouard Jaguer—coorganizer of the 1960–1961 exhibition in new Y ork—
sent packets representing artists active in the Phases movement. Mimi Parent 
and many others sent their own works by airmail.
 others, including Jayne Cortez, Joyce Mansour, Philip lamantia, aurelien 
Dauguet, and Takasuke Shibusawa, participated by contributing poems to the 
catalog.
 Special 
events gave the exhibition extra sparkle and sound. opening night


--- PAGE 309 ---
288 Black, Brown, & Beige
featured alice Farley’s Surrealist Dance, and later there was a showing of Fernando 
arrabal’s anti-Franco film, Viva la muerte. T he June 5 “World Surrealist exhibition 
Blues Show” highlighted the great acoustic blues guitarist and vocalist David 
“honeyboy” edwards, plus eddie Shaw & the howlin’ Wolf Band. edwards in 
later years played at other surrealist-related events; at least once a local news-
paper identified him as an active member of the Surrealist Group.
 The 
World Surrealist exhibition also featured two stunning performances 
of “Great Black Music” by the Sun Song ensemble, a free jazz group affiliated 
with Chicago’s association for the advancement of Creative Musicians. The 
ensemble included Douglas ewart (reeds), hamid Drake (percussion), George 
lewis (trombone), Gloria Brooks (vocalist), and rrata Christine Jones (dancer). 
emphasizing the unfettered imagination, improvisation, collective creation, 
and play, the aaCM exemplified then, as it still does, an authentically surreal-
ist spirit. The Sun Song recitals, combining music, song, dance, comedy, and 
costume, were not only a highlight of the exhibition but also a milepost of 
surrealist theater.
 The participation of black artists in surrealist exhibitions had been steadily 
expanding over the years, but here too the 1976 Black Swan show was a land-
mark. in addition to individual pieces by Wifredo lam and Malangatana valente, 
there were multiple works by Ted Joans, Farid lariby, inácio Matsinhe, and 
Jacinto Minot, plus some thirty-odd paintings, watercolors, and metal sculp-
tures by fifteen exhibitors from haiti—artists still identified in those days as 
“naïves,” many of whom (including Murat Brierre, George liataud, and Gabriel 
Bien-aimé) subsequently became well known. T o the african american photog-
rapher Melody rammel we owe much of the exhibition’s best documentation.
 i n short, “Marvelous Freedom”—with its blues show, Sun Song concerts, and 
the many contributions to the catalog by black poets—added up not only to 
the biggest of all international surrealist exhibitions, but also the blackest. The 
T ribune critic notwithstanding, the show had an impact that is still reverberating. 
Few Chicago cultural events have received more international attention.
 South african poet and antiapartheid activist Dennis Brutus, who was there 
at the opening, recalled years later that the 1976 exhibition was “the most stu-
pendous and inspiring cultural event” of his first Chicago years, and went on 
to add that, during his many later years in the city, he had never seen anything 
better.
 Pronounci
ng the show great and important, pianist and poet Cecil Taylor 
not only spent several hours taking it all in, but also took the trouble to phone 
musician friends all over Chicago, urging them to visit the Black Swan. Joseph 
Jar
man and henry Threadgill were just two of the many who followed his ad-
vice. Jarman went on to compose music titled “Marvelous Freedom/vigilance of


--- PAGE 310 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 289
Desire,” and Threadgill composed music for aimé Césaire’s Return to My Native 
Land.
 Gerom
e Kamrowski, seasoned veteran of art shows going back to the early 
1940s, declared that the 1976 Chicago show was the largest completely unsub-
sidized art exhibition of all time. The Dictionnaire du surréalisme et ses environs sums 
it up as “an unprecedented panorama of living surrealism.”3
 a
 historical note: after June 1976 the Gallery Black Swan was not used again 
for exhibitions, surrealist or otherwise. Some twenty years later, the space was 
remo
deled and renamed Michael Jordan’s restaurant.
Surreali StS in the Street S
The main thing is to know and seize the critical moment.
—Paul de Gondi, Cardinal de retz
even before the 1976 exhibition was over, the Chicago surrealists as a group 
had joined an activist coalition, Workers’ Defense, and were soon involved in a 
vigorous campaign to support striking coal miners. Within a week, according 
to a 
Miners’ union official in Boonville, indiana, the bumper sticker the group 
had designed was on every car in the mining region. a few weeks later sur-
realists were also active in a successful struggle against neo-nazi racist terror 
in Chicago. “Thus,” as French surrealist Guy Ducornet put it in a Paris-based 
magazine 
at the time, “surrealism in the u.S.a. is fulfilling its moral and politi-
cal exigencies.”4
 Simpl
e incidents of daily life are often highly revelatory. like most artists, 
Jocelyn Koslofsky—a young woman of lithuanian descent and active in the 
Chicago Surrealist Group in the 1970s—had to support herself with a day job. 
one afternoon an african american woman coworker told her that she was 
“the nicest white person i’ve ever known.” and then another fellow worker, also 
black, said: “hey, Jocelyn’s not white—she’s a surrealist!”
 i n 1978 the Surrealist Group disrupted the unveiling of Pop artist Claes 
oldenburg’s Batcolumn statue (described in the surrealist leaflet as a hundred-
foot-long billy-club). The Chicago Sun-Times declared: “a s in all true Chicago 
cultural events, there were three arrests.”5
neWcomer S
it is not the technique of painting which is surrealist, it’s the painter, and 
the painter’s vision of life.
—Joyce Mansour


--- PAGE 311 ---
290 Black, Brown, & Beige
The 1976 World Surrealist exhibition was followed two years later by sizeable 
international shows in Milwaukee (“The 100 th anniversary of hysteria”) and 
london (“Surrealism unlimited”), the latter organized principally by veteran 
British surrealist Conroy Maddox. The momentum persisted throughout the 
next decade and into the new millennium, with a multitude of smaller shows 
in places as varied as Paris, lyon, lisbon, Mexico City, Prague, reykjavik, all 
over Chicago, and even in Gary, indiana. notable in the Gary show was the 
inclusion—for the first time anywhere—of four works by the then-unknown 
outsider ar
tist henry Darger.6
 new surrealist exhibitions tend to involve new surrealists. The 1970s and 
1980s brought forth the Milwaukee-based Senegalese painter, poet, and es-
sayist Cheikh Tidiane Sylla and the Chicago-based Cuban painter Jacinto 
Minot. other newcomers included three highly innovative african american 
artists whose work, like Sylla’s and Minot’s, has appeared in surrealist publica-
tions: Patrick Turner, a wildly imaginative collagist from Milwaukee; Chicagoan 
norman Calmese, who later became well known as a cartoonist; and Tyree 
Guyton of Detroit.
 Guyton’s unique medium is collage on a grand scale. his collages consist of 
abandoned houses that he imaginatively embellishes with dolls, toys, bicycles, 
street signs, flat tires, pants, shoes, hubcaps, wheels, graffiti, and extravagant 
paint jobs often featuring large polka dots. his wife, Karen, his grandfather 
Sam Mackey, and many neighbors have helped on his projects. here was a 
semislum, neglected by city officials, suddenly brightened up and given new life 
and beauty by a few imaginative residents. in Surrealist Subversions ron Sak olsky 
commends Guyton for having “turned the flotsam and jetsam of urban debris 
in
to visual surrealist poetry inspired by an explicitly afrocentric sensibility.”7 
For Guyton’s surrealist friends, the grandeur of these walk-in collages was en-
hanced by the fact that he preferred to work on them while listening to the 
recorded music of Thelonious Monk.
 Guyton
’s amazing collaged houses, admired by many and detested by a few, 
soon became Detroit’s top tourist attraction; large groups came from all over 
the world to see them. When the mayor and City Council announced their 
intention to destroy the buildings, the protest was immediate and enormous. 
The issue was even debated on the Oprah Winfrey Show (
 oprah favored destruc-
ti
on). The surrealist movement in the united States promptly issued a poster 
and tract on the matter—a statement widely reprinted and eventually cosigned 
by surrealists and sympathizers in Paris, São Paulo, Madrid, and other cities. 
no collective declaration in the movement’s history has included so many 
signatures.
 although Guyton lost his battle with Detroit’s politicians, he nonetheless


--- PAGE 312 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 291
won renown as the city’s most celebrated artist and, indeed, as one of the fore-
most outsider artists in the nation. With his community-backed collective 
art, moreover, Guyton also exemplified the truth of one of Malcolm X’s most 
brilliant observations. at the founding meeting of the organization of afro-
american unity in June 1964, Malcolm argued that the black jazz musician’s 
ability to improvise, to play “sounds that he never thought of before,” should 
be regarded as the prefiguration of the black population’s potential—when al-
lowed to function in “an atmosphere of complete freedom”—to improvise other 
aspects of life as well: a new society, for example, a new philosophy, a new art 
and culture.8
 a similar insight no doubt inspired French surrealist José Pierre’s confi-
dence that the work of sculptor augustín Cárdenas and a few other poets and 
painters—he specifically named aimé Césaire, Wifredo lam, and hector hyp-
polite—marks the beginning of a new civilization, free of all the old ethnic and 
aesthetic prejudices: a civilization, that is to say, founded on a new morality, a 
surrealist morality.9
a Surreali St puBliShing Boom
The unprecedented efflorescence of surrealism in the visual arts was only one 
aspect of the movement’s large-scale ongoing resurgence internationally. From 
the spring of 1976 through the 1990s no fewer than thirty periodicals, in ten 
languages, were produced by surrealist groups around the world, and new 
groups sprouted up as never before. T o help coordinate the activities of so 
many geographically scattered groups, several issues of the International Surrealist 
Bulletin appeared (in english, Swedish, Czech, French, Spanish, and Japanese).
 For the always inspired and energetic Ted Joans, international surrealism’s 
prime globe-trotter throughout this period and beyond, the 1980s and 1990s 
were as frantic and fulfilling as ever. his tours of north america included key 
stops in Chicago, Mexico City, and, later, Seattle and vancouver. his Chicago 
visits were always momentous occasions. he took part in the 1985 “Free nelson 
Mandela” antiapartheid demonstrations at northwestern university. Joans also 
showed his Film Poems at the occult Bookstore, lectured sagaciously on the 
rhinoceros as an endangered species, and arranged poetry readings at venues 
ranging from the downtown main library to black colleges.
 i t was Joans, too, who proposed the 1993 exquisite Corpse exhibition, 
“T otems without Taboos,” at the heartland Café Gallery—the first u.S. show 
exclusively devoted to one of surrealism’s earliest, best-loved, and most creative 
games.10
 This was also a period rich in the publication of surrealist books. Joans


--- PAGE 313 ---
292 Black, Brown, & Beige
brought out several new titles, as did Jayne Cortez, who also issued several 
new recordings. new Directions brought out the formerly uncollected poems 
of Bob Kaufman, The Ancient Rain. an thony Joseph’s T eragaton was published in 
london by P
oison engine Press.
 The Éditions Surréalistes in Paris, Surrealist editions in Chicago, and their 
equivalents in Prague, Stockholm, and elsewhere turned out volume after vol-
ume. notable among the Stockholm publications was the pocket-sized an-
thology Black Music and Surrealism.
 l arger 
publishers, too—commercial as well as academic—became increas-
in
gly interested in surrealism. in Paris, for example, Jean-Michel Place issued 
elegant reprints of such old and hard-to-find periodicals as La Révolution Surré-
aliste, Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution,  Légitime Défense, and T ropiques. robert 
laf
font published T racées, a hefty selection of essays by rené Ménil. Éditions 
arabie-sur-Seine reissued Mary low and Juan Breá’s La saison des flûtes.  azul 
e
ditions brought out aída Cartagena Portalatín’s Y ania Tierra. and Thunder’s 
Mouth Press published a good-sized volume of larry neal’s Visions of a Liberated 
Future.
 o
ther publishers brought out the complete works of Joyce Mansour, andré 
Breton, Claude Cahun, Jehan Mayoux, and Clément Magloire-Saint-aude.
 i n Germany, heribert Becker, with Édouard Jaguer in Paris and the Czech 
Petr Kral, edited Das Surrealistische Gedicht, the largest compilation of surrealist 
poetry in any language. The first edition (1985) ran to 1,475 pages; the 2005 
edition was expanded to 1,888. German readers can now savor the poetry of 
robert Benayoun, Juan Breá, aimé Césaire, Jayne Cortez, Georges henein, Ted 
Joans, etienne léro, Clément Magloire-Saint-aude, Joyce Mansour, and scores 
of others.
 i nevi
tably, the ongoing black surrealist renaissance has also inspired euro-
pean and euro-american surrealists. Guy Ducornet’s Ça va chauffer!,  the first 
French study of surrealism in the united States, details the american surrealists’ 
passion for black music and includes a chapter on the critique of “whiteness.” 
interestingly, Ducornet in the 1950s was a student of the great ralph ellison 
and remained his friend and correspondent in later years.
 i n 
addition to the 1992 tract “For Tyree Guyton,” important surrealist docu-
ments of the 1990s include an international tract against the procolonialist 
Columbus Quincentennial (1992), the widely translated “Three Days That 
Shook the n
ew World order: The los angeles rebellion of 1992,” and—
voluminously circulated in the streets of Seattle in 1999—“Who needs the 
WTo?”11


--- PAGE 314 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 293
neWS from claude tarnaud
Claude Tarnaud’s posthumously published De is a book in a category all by 
itself. Subtitled The Hidden Face of an Afro-American Adventure  and written in the 
1960s, slightly expanded in the 1970s, but not published until 2003, it was origi-
nally titled The End of the W orld, but Tarnaud—upon learning that the title had 
already been used—decided on the two-letter title, de being the end of the 
French word monde (world).
 a
 new book by Tarnaud inevitably sparked a sensation in surrealist circles 
’round the world, and especially in Chicago. his personal influence on the 
beginnings of Chicago surrealism—dating back to the spring of 1963—had 
been decisive to such a degree that the group regarded him as an honorary 
cofounder despite the fact that he was living in Switzerland at the time the 
group was actually formed. his letter on the Chicagoans, published in La Brèche, 
no. 5 (october 1963), was in fact the first public announcement of the Chicago 
group-to-be.
 De is an apocalyptic, wildly humorous, and noir chronicle of adventures in 
new 
Y ork City in the early and mid-1960s, during which Tarnaud frequented 
clubs featuring the finest jazz—Thelonious Monk above all, but also Max 
roach, John Coltrane, Miles Davis, and Charles Mingus, as well as younger mu-
sicians, from albert ayler and ornette Coleman to Pharoah Sanders and archie 
Shepp. Centered around the rising afro-american rebellion of that decade, the 
book abounds with references to Malcolm X, Patrice lumumba, Black Power, 
robert F. Williams, James Baldwin, amiri Baraka, and Max roach’s Freedom Now 
Suite. it is also a hard-hitting critique of the lackluster monotony of Cold War 
white capitalist society, its hypercommercial and relentlessly conditioned con-
sumerist pseudo-culture, and its nightmarish out-of-control “development.”
 Written at red heat in the brightest of bright moments, this dazzling and 
defiant book is a kind of spontaneous one-man surrealist insurrection.12
neW approache S to the White proBlem
Why are all blacklists white?
—Bob Kaufman
in 1991 David roediger, a historian who had long contributed to surrealist pub-
lications, brought out a new book, The W ages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the 
American W orking Class. inspired by W.e.B. Du Bois’ insight that low-paid white 
workers were compensated in part by a psychological wage, the book was an 
immedia
te sensation and a major influence on race studies. a few years later,


--- PAGE 315 ---
294 Black, Brown, & Beige
noel ignatiev’s case study, How the Irish Became White, expanded the discussion. 
not long afterward, ignatiev and others started a lively journal, Race T raitor, cen-
tered on the white problem and what it is possible to do about it. The journal’s 
motto was “Treason to whiteness is loyalty to humanity.”
 i n 1998 Race T raitor devoted an entire issue to surrealism or, more precisely, to 
surrealist writings on various aspects of the “white mystique” and ways to over-
come it. The issue’s introduction states, in part: “This special issue of Race T raitor 
focuses on a particular group of race traitors—the world’s first Surrealist Group 
in 1920s Paris, and its direct offshoot, the international (and multiracial) surreal-
ist movement. With an unbroken continuity from 1924 down to the present day, 
the surrealist movement has helped develop not only a revolutionary critique 
of whiteness but also new forms of revolutionary action against it.”
 The volume’s nearly two dozen articles add up to a sustained critique of 
“whiteness” in its various dimensions. Several articles examine the surrealists’ 
“race politics” historically, among them a fourteen-page minianthology of texts 
titled “Surrealists on Whiteness, from 1925 to the Present”; David roediger’s 
“Plotting against eurocentrism,” on the 1929 Surrealist Map of the World; and 
Myrna Bell rochester’s “rené Crevel: Critic of White Patriarchy.”
 Dennis Brutus contributed a vibrant, enthusiastic review essay on David 
roediger’s anthology, Black on White: Black Writers on What It Means to Be White.  
others focus on more current issues: the Madrid Surrealist Group’s “Beyond 
anti-racism: The role of Poetic Thought in the eradication of White Su-
premacy”; “racist Cliches,” by the Mexican/native american poet ronnie Burk; 
Charles radcliffe’s “Whitewashing the Blues”; and australian surrealist hilary 
Booth’s “We’re Sorry Y ou’re not Sorry,” on crimes against aborigines Down 
under.
 Denounced by rush limbaugh, Communists, nazis, the New Y ork Times, 
liberals, and former new leftists galore, Race T raitor proved very attractive to 
young anarchists. like William lloyd Garrison’s Liberator 150 years earlier, it was 
also popular among black readers.
 i t is not easy to gauge the influence of a small radical journal, but Race T rai-
tor—judging from its many letters to the editor—seems to have really got 
around and 
had more than a little impact. as it happened, the 1998 surreal-
ist issue was something of a best seller and provoked more letters than ever. 
Burnham Ware, of owenton, Kentucky—a longtime contributor to the journal 
Living Blues, called Race T raitor an excellent publication and added that “the Sur-
realists seem unafraid to align themselves with the black masses, and as a black 
male 
i appreciate that very much.” Many others wrote in the same vein.
 Darryl lorenzo Wellington, a young black poet and reader of Race T raitor—
which, by the way, he had purchased at a traveling circus!—not only praised


--- PAGE 316 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 295
the surrealist issue of Race T raitor, but also began a correspondence with the 
Chicago Surrealist Group. When he announced his plans to visit friends in 
Paris, the Chicagoans urged him to look up the Surrealist Group there and 
also to consider going to Prague, where an international surrealist conference, 
accompanied by an exhibition, was soon to be held. in short order Wellington 
was warmly welcomed by the Paris surrealists and was attending their meetings. 
he also made the trip to Prague, where he represented the surrealist movement 
in the united States. at the conference, he made a special presentation on the 
surrealist issue of Race T raitor and urged the delegates from europ
 ean countries 
to establish solidarity with the oppressed Gypsies.
 a
 second and larger special surrealist issue of Race T raitor (250 pages), edited 
by 
anarchist scholar ron Sakolsky, appeared in summer 2001.13 in addition to 
many of those mentioned in the immediately preceding paragraphs, its con-
tributors included surrealists Gale ahrens, Jayne Cortez, Brandon Freels, Jan 
hathaway, Joseph Jablonski, Don laCoss, Philip lamantia, Mary low, anne 
olson, and nancy Joyce Peters.
Surreali Sm at the Black radical congre SS
The storms of youth precede brilliant days.
—lautréamont
no doubt to the surprise of many, surrealism was a scheduled topic at the 1998 
Black radical Congress in Chicago. The speaker was the young new Y ork–
based black historian robin D. G. Kelley, whose books (Hammer and Hoe, 1990; 
Race Rebels, 1994) surrealists in Chicago had read and admired. in a Chicago 
Surrealist Group discussion, the strong surrealist undercurrent in Kelley’s writ-
ings was emphasized, a view amply confirmed by their reading of his Y o’ Mama’s 
Disfunktional! (1997), enthusiastically reviewed by Dave roediger in the first 
surrealist issue of Race T raitor.
 Kelley’s talk at the congress brought forth a hearty response from amiri 
Baraka, who commended the Chicago surrealists for, among other things, “re-
stori
ng surrealism to its original revolutionary perspectives.” a few years later, 
when Baraka was under attack by the Far right, the surrealists—forty strong—
issued a tract in his defense titled “Poetry Matters! on the Media Persecution of 
amiri Baraka.” a later edition included ninety-six additional signatures, among 
them John Bracey, Dennis Brutus, Diane diPrima, Martín espada, Joseph Jar-
man, u
tah Phillips, archie Shepp, James Smethurst, and Gary Snyder.
 after the Congress, Kelley began a series of essays about surrealism, or 
touching on it significantly. it was immediately evident—and not only to fel-


--- PAGE 317 ---
296 Black, Brown, & Beige
low surrealists—that he was one of the most insightful and innovative writers 
on the subject.
 i n 
a later talk to a large audience of black students in the South, he discussed 
the resplendent upheaval of black surrealism in the Caribbean during the 1940s. 
relating the glory days of T ropiques to the new currents in a frican american 
youth culture in our own time, Kelley boldly predicted “a resurgence of surreal-
ism beyond anything the world has ever seen.”14
Notes
 1. Missir, Joyce Mansour, 166; Joubert, Le mouvement des surréalistes, 85, 312.
 2.
 Chicago T ribune (June 7, 1976).
 3.
 Biro and Passeron, Dictionnaire, 368.
 4. G
uy Ducornet, “introduction aux surréalisme actuel aux u.S.a.,” Phases, 
new Ser
ies, no. 5 (november 1975), 67.
 5. roger Simon, “a Batty Welcome to Chicago,” Chicago Sun-Times (a pril 15, 
1977).
 6.
 a paragraph in the Gary, indiana, Post-T ribune (a pril 17, 1977, sect. D3), 
discusses the inclusion of Darger’s work in the show.
 7.
 Sakolsky, Surrealist Subversions, 95.
 8.
 Malcolm X, By Any Means Necessary, 63–64.
 9.
 José Pierre, “Cárdenas ou l’exigence et la grace,” 133–136.
 10. originally planned as a one-month show, “T otems without Taboos” re-
ceived considerable media attention and was extended for several weeks. 
not lon
g afterward, the art institute of Chicago exhibited a few cadavres 
exquis from Chicago collections.
 11
. “Who needs the WTo?” was widely reprinted. The major book on 
the subject, eddie Yuen et al., The Battle of Seattle, features the tract as its 
opening statement, right after the editors’ introduction.
 12.
 For further information on Tarnaud, see Sakolsky’s Surrealist Subversions, 
and the short essa
y, “Claude Tarnaud and the Poetic use of the useless,” 
in Franklin rosemont, Open Entrance to the Shut Palace of Wrong Numbers, 
46–49.


--- PAGE 318 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 297
 13. This second surrealist issue, titled “Surrealism in the u.S.a.,” includes 
nearly fifty original texts by nearly as many writers, as well as twenty-
five reproductions of artworks and a selection of documents from the 
1960s through the 1990s.
 14.
 Quoted in Race T raitor, no. 13–14 (Summer 2001), 63.


--- PAGE 319 ---
298 Black, Brown, & Beige
Aimé Césaire
my Joyful acceptance of Surreali Sm
i have never forgotten my meeting with andré Breton in 1941. This meeting was 
such that it oriented my life in a decisive manner, and i must say that his image 
never has ceased to accompany me. absent but familiar, and always there: Such 
was for me, and such is still for me the presence of andré Breton: the very in-
carnation of purity, courage, and the noblest virtues of the mind.
 i
 was ready to accept surrealism because i already had advanced on my own, 
using as my starting points the same authors that had influenced the surreal-
ist poets. Their thinking and mine had common reference points. Surrealism 
provided 
me with what i had been confusedly searching for. i have accepted 
it joyfully because in it i have found more of a confirmation than a revelation. 
it was a weapon that exploded the French language. it shook up absolutely 
everything.
 Surrealism interested me to the extent that it was a liberating factor. My 
thinking followed these lines: Well then, if i apply the surrealist approach to my 
particular situation, i can summon up these unconscious forces. This, for me, 
was a call to africa. i said to myself: it’s true that superficially we are French, we 
bear the marks of French customs, we have been branded by Cartesian philoso-
phy, by French rhetoric; but if we break with all that, if we plumb the depths, 
then what we will find is fundamentally black. . . . a process of disalienation, 
that’s how i interpreted surrealism. . . . a plunge into the depths. it was a plunge 
into africa for me.
interview with rené Depestre, 1967; translated by Myrna Bell rochester
of course i am surrealist. i accept, absolutely, the surrealist teaching. For me, 
the surrealist teaching is an extremely precious thing. But i am not a Parisian 
surrealist. i have put surrealism in the service of something else.
 Why did i affirm my complete agreement with surrealism? Because i recog-
nized 
surrealism as the highest point of the european spirit, the point at which 
the european spirit harmonizes most with the spirit of the Far east and the 
spirit of the Black world. That is why i took part in surrealism.
 o f course, my surrealism could not be the same as that of Breton, or the 
early aragon. it is something different.
interview with Michel Benamou, February 14, 1973; translated by Myrna Bell 
rochester


--- PAGE 320 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 299
i had read the Surrealist Manifestoes, a bit distractedly, but in the end i knew 
their content. i had read Légitime Défense, the journal of my Martinican surrealist 
fri
ends—léro, Monnerot, Ménil.
 and then, i had already read the father of surrealism. Without truly being 
surrealist, i had the same ancestors that they had: rimbaud, of course, Mal-
larmé, the symbolists. My own poetry, as a result, did not derive from the 
Manifestoes, but from the currents that had prepared the way for surrealism.
 Wha
t did Breton bring us? he brought us boldness; he helped us take a strong 
stand. he 
cut short our hesitations and research. i realized that the majority of 
the problems i encountered had already been resolved by Breton and surreal-
ism. i
 would say that my meeting with Breton was a confirmation of what i had 
already arrived at on my own. This saved us time; it let us go quicker, further. 
The encounter was extraordinary. i 
 met him, and he literally fascinated me. This 
was a man of very great culture, with an astonishing sense of poetry. Truly a great 
man.
 The encounter with Breton was very important  f or me. it was the end of 
hesitations.
 Y es, i had read lautréamont; but starting from the day that i met Breton i 
reread him systematically, with a different eye, a new eye, with the formidable 
illumination that Breton’s presence had brought me.
interview with Jacqueline leiner, 1978; translated by Myrna Bell rochester 
(original emphasis)
homage to frantz fanon
Frantz Fanon is dead. We expected this for many months, but against all rea-
son, we were hopeful. We knew him as such a determined person, capable of 
miracles, and as such a crucial figure on the horizon of men. We must accept 
the facts: 
Frantz Fanon is dead at age 37. a short life, but extraordinary. Brief, 
but bright, illuminating one of the most atrocious tragedies of the 20th century 
and detailing in an exemplary manner the human condition, the condition of 
moder
n man. if the word “commitment” has a meaning, then it is embodied in 
the person of Frantz Fanon. he was called “an advocate of violence, a terrorist.” 
and it’s true Fanon appointed himself the theoretician of violence, the sole 
weapon of the colonized against the barbarism of colonialism.
 h owever odd it seems, his violence was non-violent; the violence of justice, 
of pureness, uncompromising. his revolt was ethical, his approach one of gen-
erosit
y. he did not simply join a cause. he gave himself to it. Wholly. Without 
reserve. Without measure. With unqualified passion.


--- PAGE 321 ---
300 Black, Brown, & Beige
 a doctor, he knew human suffering. as a psychiatrist, he observed the im-
pact on the human mind of traumatic events. above all, as a “colonial” man 
he felt and understood what it was to be born and live in a colonial situa-
tion; he studied this situation scientifically, aided by introspection as much as 
observation.
 h
is revolt was in this context. as a doctor in algeria, he witnessed the un-
fol
ding of colonial atrocities, and this was what gave birth to rebellion. it wasn’t 
enough for him to argue in defense of the algerian people. he united himself 
with the oppressed, humiliated, tortured and beaten down algerian. he be-
came algerian. lived, fought and died algerian. a theoretician of violence, 
doubtless, and yet more so of action. Because he had an aversion to mere talk. 
Because he had an aversion to compromise. Because he had an aversion to cow-
ardice. no one was more respectful of ideas, more responsible to his own ideals, 
more exacting of life he imagined as a practical ideal.
 i t is thus that he became a combatant, and a writer, one of the most brilliant 
of his generation.
 o n 
colonialism, the human consequences of colonization and racism, the 
key text to read is Black Skin, White Masks. on decolon ization, again by Fanon, 
The Wretched of the Earth.
 Fan
on died and one reflects on his life; his epic side as well as his tragic side. 
The epic side is that Fanon lived to the very end his destiny of a champion of 
liberty, mastering to the heights his sense of identity with humanity and that 
he died a fighter f
or internationalism.
 a t the actual moment when he himself was entering the “great darkness,” 
at the brink of which he was reeling, he understands: “Come Comrades, it is 
better to change our thinking. T o shake off and leave behind the great darkness 
in
to which we have plunged. . . . it is necessary to invent, to discover . . . for 
europe, for ourselves, and for mankind, . . . to develop a new way of thinking, 
to try to bring forth a new humankind.”
 i don’t know of anything more moving or greater than this lesson of life 
coming from a deathbed.
Présence Africaine, no. 40 (1962); translated by Connie rosemont


--- PAGE 322 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 301
Jayne Cortez
there it iS
There It Is: a collection of conscious/unconscious tonal attitudes, expressions, 
responses and rhythms poetry/music collaborations concerned with human 
need. The need for security, for education, for temporary migration or per-
manent immigration. Populations moving from one place to another out of 
necessity. This is a part of the content of “T o a Gypsy Cab Man,” a driver of 
an independent taxi service who generally services the Black and hispanic 
communities. “opening act” opens with the band in a rapid intense free intro-
duction that slows down into a good blues feeling. The poetry speaks of trials 
and problems connected with the presentation of creativity and the reality of 
cont
inuing. The tone of the poem is defiance. “if the Drum is a Woman,” a short 
dialogue between the poet and the drums—a dialogue about human rights, 
equality and justice.
 “u.S./nigerian relations,” “There it is” and “Blood Suckers” are poems com-
menting on big business, international trade and the dehumanization involved 
in the process. “Chano Pozo was the first conga player to play with a jazz band.” 
i 
heard the famous afro-Cuban drummer around 1948 at Wrigley Field in los 
angeles. he was playing with the Dizzy Gillespie band. i was very young but i 
remember being excited and impressed by his performance. i wrote the poem 
“i See Chano Pozo” for the Chano Pozo Music Festival at Dartmouth College 
in 1980. The poem speaks of the importance and significance of the drums. “Y ou 
must come up for air.”
 i n Denardo Coleman’s instrumental composition “Skin Diver,” the writing is 
harmolodically inspired and the playing is compositional improvisation.
 a
nd there it is, another example of what a poet does with music and what 
musicians do with poetry.
There It Is, album liner notes
What’ S ugly
i learned very early about what’s ugly, and racism is very ugly. . . .
 We are waiting in the wings of a false democracy. People are inflamed. 
We have a growing community of homeless people. The wealthy are getting 
wealthier and more toxic-wasteful. Friends are dying. Folks are in a state of 
stagnation, a state of passivity, a state of frenzy. areas of los angeles resemble 
areas of Beirut in conflict and solitude. near Douglas, arizona, you can’t see the


--- PAGE 323 ---
302 Black, Brown, & Beige
sky through the dense pollution. The nuclear industry is still in the business of 
producing man-made radiation. Television is still dominated by white men and 
their vi
ews of the world. u.S. policies concerning Third World countries are 
designed to destabilize—to cripple and destroy independence.
 i ’m 
opposed to these policies that promote death of people, death of land, 
death of a culture. i reject the notion that might is white, right, and supreme.
interview with D. h. Melhem, Heroism in the New Black Poetry
poetry muSic technology
in a recording session or musical setting many important things just happen. 
even though i have a certain amount of material prepared, the real structure is 
created while working. in performance i usually read from a manuscript, recite 
lines from memory and spontaneously compose on the spot. By using music 
and techn
ology i’m trying to extend the poet’s role, which means the poet in 
this situation becomes the band, the pen, paper, books, research, instruments, 
words and 
all the possibilities of the technology. The poet is in control. one 
of the highest compliments given in the arts is when an artistic work is said to 
be not only excellent but also has beautiful poetic qualities. This compliment 
usually suggests that the work is more sensitive, has more insight, and is at a 
higher level of expression. i am trying to move this combination of poetry, 
music, and technology to a higher poetic level. it’s the poetic use of music, the 
poetic use of technology, the poetic orchestration of it all.
Poetic Magnetic
everything can Be tran Sformed
i don’t wait for inspiration. i write whenever i can.
* * *
i think of issues, i think of situations, i think of the future.
* * *
i’m concerned with reality, illusions, contradictions, transformations.
* * *
i use dreams, the subconscious, and the real objects, and i open up the body 
and use organs, and i sink them into words, and i ritualize them and fuse them 
into events. i guess the poetry is like a festival. everything can be transformed.


--- PAGE 324 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 303
The street becomes something else, the subway is something else, everything 
at a festival is disguised as something else. everything changes: the look of the 
person changes, their intentions change, the attitudes are different, experiences 
are fiercer. voices become other voices. So that’s what i do in my poetry. i keep 
making connections. i try not to wade in the shallow water of shallowness and 
i try not to get stuck in the mud of art council standards and the spectators’ 
demand for messages. it’s called multiplication, subdivision, and subtraction.
* * *
The intellect and the intuition—that’s all one thing. Can’t be one without the 
other. i mean you select, and you think, you have an idea [ snaps fingers], you 
reason and you don’t reason. But it’s all together; one reinforces the other. it’s 
all one thing for me.
* *
 *
My role as a poet? i want to be creative, inventive, imaginative, free, secure, 
and make poetry.
 i think that poets have the responsibility to be aware of the meaning of 
human rights, to be familiar with history, to point out distortions, and to bring 
their thinking and their writing to higher levels of illumination.
From an interview in D. h. Melhem, Heroism in the New Black Poetry
taking the Blue S Back home
This collaboration of poetry and music is focused on the basic progressive as-
pects of the blues in the deepest sense.
 T aking the Blues Back Home m eans being progressive. i am using elements of 
my personal history and the history of my people in all of its spirit, conditions, 
and experience, and taking it forward. The blues talks about and has respect for 
the struggles of the past and is definitely concerned with the present and the 
fut
ure. it talks about Black culture and reinvestigates the african experience as 
encountered all over the world. We are piecing together our story, recombining 
dif
ferent african literary and musical forms and experimenting.
 T aking the Blues Back Home is , itself, the subject, the information, the angola 
one step, deep ocean currents, african ancestors, and the miracle of survival.
T aking the Blues Back Home, CD liner notes, introduction


--- PAGE 325 ---
304 Black, Brown, & Beige
lÉon dama S: human Write S poetry
léon-Gontran Damas is the poet who reminds us what growing up in French 
Guiana meant and what he observed and experienced while living in Mar-
tinique and Paris. in his poetry he speaks of the suppression of feelings, the 
repression of life, humiliation, and human rights. he said: “i always feel about 
to foam with rage against what surrounds me, against what prevents me from 
being a man.” “There are nights with no moon when clammy suffocation nearly 
overwhelms me, the acrid smell of blood spewing from every muted trumpet 
and my childhood returns in a rousing fit of hiccups.”
 Damas 
was like his poems: quick, precise, sharp, ironic, intense, humorous, 
confrontational, nonconforming, on the edge, not for commercial use, and not 
for 
sale. he reminded me of myself and other poets of the 1960s whose need 
for self-expression had exploded into poetry, into the black is beautiful, mili-
tant 
revolutionary, poetic movement within the Civil rights movement, which 
moved into the streets, into the homes and minds of black people and was a 
peoples movement for justice and freedom. . . .
 We read his work in english translation on paper. he read our work in 
French translation on paper. We spoke to each other in broken english, broken 
French, and in the other voice, the voice of laughter, songs, jokes, complaints, 
predictions, disappointments, the voice with african, Creole, and ebonic words 
and phrases. The voice poets use when they really want to communicate and 
pass the torch on, as he did, right in the middle of the belly of the beast . . .
 Damas 
was a progressive political thinker, a poetic person who did not have 
“the frenzy of eyes, the frenzy of feet.” his eyes were focused on the future, his 
feet were pointed toward africa. his conversations were about creativity and 
how to create and move forward. . . . his message was clear. he felt abused, 
overused, overly Frenchified, and toxic. he rejected the atmosphere of exclu-
sion, he rejected “white european civilization” with its violence, oppression, 
and white superiority complex. his staccato style is not static. his song is a 
protest against all forms of discrimination. his poetic vision is held together 
by his love of life, love of the earth, love of nature, love of human capacity and 
possibilities. he asserted his blackness, his desire to be independent, to set 
himself free. We encountered him as negritude in motion. . . .
 he created his language from the natural tones of black French Guiana, 
black Paris. his message concerned with the experience of the black world is 
condensed into a high voltage of metaphors, connotations, imagery, irony, and 
allusions
. The subject is language, his own poetic identity. he interconnected 
inflections of his voice into his own written drum language. . . . he developed 
his own spontaneous form of rhythmic patterns and accents. he taught us


--- PAGE 326 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 305
the art of sound repetition, the variations on a theme, the magic of words and 
imagination. he was a universe of universal expressions. his poems remind us 
of african american blues: blunt, direct, indirect, coded, and complex. They 
are like jazz in their feeling of swing and improvisation. . . .
 Through these encounters i understood the concept of negritude to be 
broad and subject to many interpretations and applications and to vary from 
place to place because the african Diaspora is large, broad, complicated, and 
crosses many cultures, many languages, many national borders, and a multitude 
of cir
cumstances. if the problems can be identified in the realm of negritude, 
the solutions to the problems can be found in the realm of negritude. Damas 
used to say: “negritude has many fathers but only one mother.” his confidence, 
solidarity, Pan-africanism meant negritude. negritude as a force that exists to 
help forge a new world. negritude as a step used in literature to fight the slave 
master, to defend oneself against negative images, distorted information, cul-
tural 
and spiritual imperialism. . . . negritude as black life, black thought, black 
attitude and multiculturalism. negritude as a link between the past, present, 
and future. Damas could see that the planet was in trouble, that resources were 
limited, that the atmosphere was polluted, that the ecological system had al-
ready been affected by industrial technology. That’s why “Human Writes Poetry” 
and Damas was Damas. Good news for poetry, bad news for those who have 
established a system of domination.
For the léon-Gontran Damas Symposium, Cayenne, French Guiana, october 
1998
main Stream Statement
i had a real problem writing a statement for this forum because i needed to 
know the [conference] organizer’s definition of mainstream. now the Missis-
sip
pi river is the largest river in the united States. it is the middle of the coun-
tr
y, has a native american name, and is a mainstream watershed. in the united 
States there are about three million miles of streams. Based on numbers main-
stream literature is the literature that’s not published. The minority stream is 
what’s published. Commercial publishers are not publishing from all streams. 
The 
record of the american publishing industry is much worse than the seg-
regated school system of the Deep South in the 1960s and is in need of a Civil 
rights 
movement to put it on a more sharing and more democratic course. The 
use and invention of the term “mainstream” is another colonial device, this time 
applied to literature.


--- PAGE 327 ---
306 Black, Brown, & Beige
 Mainstream is a metaphor for whitestream, a stream set up with standards 
to exclude other streams. it means cultural, political, economic domination. 
There is a real need to develop a publishing industry and distribution network 
which would include the cultural experiences and language of all the people 
in 
the united States. i cannot tell you why this writer or that artist considers 
herself or himself mainstream. i can only speak for myself. i am my own main-
stream. i absorb moisture from different soils, infiltrate other streams, emerge as 
precipitation in the air, mix with additional components, transport my zone of 
saturation into new zones, and move through life in a natural turbulent way.
For the Bumbershoot Forum, Seattle, Washington, September 2, 1990
larry’ S time
it’s good to have the opportunity to take a closer look at the poetry of larry 
neal. Great to see the porkpie hat, the pegged legged boys with polished saxo-
phones, the ears flying into space, distant orishas, the sun sperms exploding and 
hear the thick thudding sounds and the juju wonder songs of his world again. 
larry neal jumped into the middle of the whirlpool of cultural activity in the 
early 1960s and 70s. a young man. a young poet/writer/activist, with friends 
and associates who together doo wopped, finger popped, name dropped, orally 
bounced information off each other, offered social and political comments to 
audiences, and produced books, magazines and articles that gave voice to un-
heard v
oices of alternative attitudes and viewpoints. larry neal, smack dab in 
the center of the swirl of events, teaching, writing, linking his poetry to the 
black struggle for liberation, stood in the front row of the march for civil rights, 
the literary part of the need for revolution. he wrote about Malcolm X, Frantz 
Fanon, the Watts & newark rebellions, historical african roots, and the current 
affairs affecting people in his community. neal, an urban poet, syncopating 
and mixing dissonant levels of insults, mythologies, ideologies, appropriations, 
clichés and rhetoric as poetic combinations, was still evolving, still in the first 
draft 
of his research when “touched by death’s whisper.” now we can examine 
some of the aspects of his poetic experience.
larry neal, Visions of a Liberated Future


--- PAGE 328 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 307
James G. Spady
economist and historian, James G. Spady has long been associated with 
the Black history Museum in Philadelphia. his books include “negri-
tude
, PanBanegritude and the Diopan Philosophy of history”; Sterling A. 
Brown: A UMUM T ribute; and more recently, studies of hip-hop.
larry neal never forgot philly
he was not only a famed son of Philadelphia (recipient of a Guggenheim fel-
lowship, a Yale fellowship, a man listed in Contemporary Poets, and a New Y ork Times 
film and drama critic), but he used this city as a constant motif in his artistic 
expressions. his oeuvre is deft testimony against the many jokes we have all 
heard about this being an urban wasteland, a city that becomes doomstown as 
the evening sun sets. larry elevated the folk expressions of the people to an 
art form.
 n
orth Philly, for him, was a place to conjure with—the deep and heavy seat 
of the cool ones. at night, it became a place of fear, but also of electrifying 
possibilities. Barbershops were places where old and young men twisted their 
dreams and shaped new worlds from lean fables.
 n
orth Philadelphia, where garment factories bent low to hear the seething 
saxophone sound of John Coltrane. is this not the building where the great 
tragedian edward Forrest lived?
 The great mansions of north Philly’s past had been turned into apartments 
and life bubbled within them anew, spilling onto the streets and into the up-
town Theater.
 Tha
t was a part of larry neal’s world of reality, his artistic landscape. he 
was a great knower of folk traditions. reaching constantly for the coefficients 
necessary to complete those equations. ever in search of the marvelous. his 
name never will be known in the streets, and he was given a quiet funeral.
 l arry neal—the Great Knower of Black arts of language as art, carrier of the 
“Phillystyle” tradition to worlds beyond us.
Philadelphia Enquirer (February 9, 1981)


--- PAGE 329 ---
308 Black, Brown, & Beige
Charlotte Carter
a one-time Chicago postal worker, Charlotte Carter in the 1960s was 
active in a rebellious youth milieu that included roosevelt university 
and the Civil rights movement as well as the nascent Chicago Surrealist 
Group and its favorite hangout, Solidarity Bookshop. Carter went on to 
become a popular writer of mystery novels, among them several featur-
in
g an african american street musician with a knack for solving crimes. 
She has lived in France, north africa, and Canada and currently lives in 
new Y ork. The text printed here—a reverie on the magic of movies—is 
excerpted from her unpublished 1974 manuscript.
on film
There’s nothing like a good movie. Film. Basically everyone in the country is 
a star. The Japanese photographer said it: if you’re not news, you’re nothing. 
i can’t believe there is a single living human being who does not live with the 
same camera setup, or some variation on it, as i do. i can’t imagine anyone not 
knowing what it’s like to live with the monitor.
 Degrees of schizophrenia, degrees of genius, degrees of disconnectedness—
measured by how many monitors there are. Y ou can live in a space where you’re 
constantly aware of the monitor. in a space where you’re constantly aware of 
a monitor monitoring a monitor. aware of a monitor monitoring a monitor 
monitoring a monitor—and so on.
 Film. Cinema. Pictures. The movies. The kinnies. The bios. Part of my con-
sciousness—like people i have become. in some sense i suppose it’s impos-
sible to have a favorite film. it’s all the same. 400 Blows—5 times/Jules and Jim 
5 times/Morocco/r ebel without a Cause/now voyager/Casablanca 7 times/
Maltese Falcon 12 times/Deception/l olita/The organizer 5 times/The lady 
vanishes/los olvidados/l’aventura.
 There are key words in movie language. Words like Paris. he has instructed 
Sam not to play the song. not ever again. Though ingrid calls him the boy at 
the piano, she is reduced to catching peanuts like a trained seal in the Paris 
zoo—for him—Y ou Know Who. Screw the husband, Streetfighter, anti-nazi 
Counterfeit bedroom eyes, Concentration camp victim.
 Claude rains. Peter lorre. Sydney Greenstreet. Y ou’re going over for it, 
Sweetheart. Miles was my partner. Smiles of a Summer night/Mr. Deeds Goes 
to T own/Breathless.
 l et
’s get out of here, boss.


--- PAGE 330 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 309
Robin D. G. Kelley
Born in new Y ork, Kelley (1962– ) grew up in harlem, Seattle, and 
Pasadena. his new Y ork boyhood was especially exhilarating, for 1960s 
harlem was a community strongly influenced by civil rights agitation 
and Black nationalism. as a youngster, Kelley took part in the Black 
Panther Party’s free breakfast program. at his elementary school, stu-
dents san
g “lift every voice and Sing” instead of the “Star-Spangled 
Banner,” and the colors of the school flag were red, black, and green, 
symbolizing black liberation.
 a
 precocious lad, Kelley did exceptionally well at all the schools he 
attended, and as a university student rapidly secured degree after de-
gr
ee. at the age of thirty-two he was hailed as one of the youngest full 
professors in the country. he has taught at the university of Michigan 
in ann arbor, new Y ork university, Columbia, and, most recently, the 
university of Southern California in los angeles.
 i n a 1998 interview at Stanford university, he summed up his politi-
cal outlook as “Marxist Surrealist Feminist: not just anti-something but 
pro-emancipation, pro-liberation. Marxist is anti-capitalist, feminism is 
anti-patriarchy. But it’s also about re-envisioning our lives in this world.”
 a
mong his books are Hammer and Hoe; Race Rebels; Y o Mama’s Disfunk-
tional!; and Freedom Dreams, which includes a detailed chapter on surreal-
ism ti
tled “Keeping it (Sur)real: Dreams of the Marvelous.”
reflection S on malcolm x: in a Blue haze of inSpiration . . .
recalling his appearance as a teenager in the 1940s, Malcolm dismissively ob-
serv
ed, “i was really a clown, but my ignorance made me think i was ‘sharp’” 
(Autobiography, 78). Forgetting for the moment the integrationist dilemmas of 
the black 
bourgeoisie, Malcolm could reflect: “i don’t know which kind of self-
defacing conk is the greater shame—the one you’ll see on the heads of the 
black so-called ‘middle-class’ and ‘upper class,’ who ought to know better, or the 
one you’ll see on the heads of the poorest, most downtrodden, ignorant black 
men. i mean the legal-minimum-wage ghetto-dwelling kind of negro, as i was 
when i got my first one” ( Autobiography, 55). Despite Malcolm’s sincere efforts 
to grapple with the meaning(s) of “ghetto” subculture, to comprehend the logic 
behind the conk, the reat pleat, and the lindy hop, he ultimately failed to solve 
ralp
h ellison’s riddle. in some ways this is surprising, for who is better suited to 
solve the riddle than a former zoot suiter and brilliant organic intellectual who 
rose to becom
e one of america’s most insightful social critics of the century?


--- PAGE 331 ---
310 Black, Brown, & Beige
 When it came to thinking about the significance of his own life, the astute 
critic tended to reduce a panoply of discursive practices and cultural forms to 
dichotomous categories—militancy versus self-degradation, consciousness ver-
sus unconsciousness. The sort of narrow, rigid criteria Malcolm used to judge 
the political meaning of his life left him ill-equipped to capture the signifi-
cance of his youthful struggles to carve out more time for leisure and pleasure, 
free himself from alienating wage labor, survive and transcend the racial and 
econom
ic boundaries he confronted in everyday life. instead, “Detroit red” in 
Malcolm’s narrative is a lost soul devoid of an identity, numbed to the beauty 
and complexity of lived experience, unable to see beyond the dominant culture 
he mimics.
 Wha
t Malcolm’s narrative shows us (unintentionally, at least) is the power of 
cultural politics, particularly for african-american urban working-class youth, 
to both contest dominant meanings ascribed to their experiences and seize 
spaces for leisure, pleasure, and recuperation. intellectuals and political leaders 
who continue to see empowerment solely in terms of “black” control over po-
litical and economic institutions, belittle or ignore class distinctions within 
black communities, and insist on trying to find ways to quantify oppression 
need to 
confront ellison’s riddle of the zoot suit. once we situate Malcolm 
little’s teenage years squarely within the context of wartime cultural politics, 
it is hard to ignore the sense of empowerment and even freedom thousands of 
black youth discovered when they stepped onto the dance floor at the Savoy 
or roseland 
ballrooms, or the pleasure young working-class black men experi-
enced when they were “togged to the bricks” in their wild zoot suits, strolling 
down the avenue “doin’ the streets up brown.”
 But 
“collapsing” the divisions Malcolm erected to separate his enlightened 
years from his preprison “ignorance” also compels us to see him as the product 
of a totality of lived experiences.  as i  have tried to suggest, aspects of Malcolm’s 
politics must be sought in the riddle of the zoot suit, in the style politics of 
the 1940s that he himself later dismissed as stupidity and self-degradation. This 
realization is crucial for our own understanding of the current crisis of black 
workin
g-class youth in urban america. For if we look deep into the interstices 
of the postindustrial city, we are bound to find millions of Malcolm littles, male 
and female, whose social locations have allowed them to demystify aspects of 
the hegemonic ideology while reinforcing their ties to it. But to understand the 
elusi
ve cultural politics of contemporary black urban america requires that we 
return to ellison’s riddle posed a half century ago and search for meaning in 
the language, dress, music, and dance styles rising out of today’s ghettoes, as 
well as the social and economic context in which styles are created, contested, 
and r
eaccented. once we abandon decontextualized labels such as “nihilism”


--- PAGE 332 ---
T oward the New Millennium: The Mid-1970s through the 1990s 311
or “outlaw culture,” we might discover a lot more Malcolm Xes—indeed, more 
el-hajj Malik el-Shabazzes—hiding beneath hoods and baggy pants, Dolphin 
earrings and heavy lipstick, raiders caps and biker shorts, than we might have 
ever imagined.
Norman Calmese
Chicagoan norman Calmese, as he explains in the statement published 
here, first discovered his surrealist affinities while still a grade-school 
studen
t in the city’s hyde Park area. his meeting with the Chicago 
surrealists a few years later soon led to his participation in the interna-
ti
onal exhibition “Surrealism in 1978: 100th anniversary of hysteria” (in 
Milwaukee), and other local shows, as well as his collaboration on the 
journal Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion. h
 is work is also represented in ron 
Sakolsky’s anthology, Surrealist Subversions.
my diScovery of Surreali Sm
as far back as i can remember i have loved to draw. as a kid i was always 
drawing, even during class in grade school, when i was supposed to be doing 
something else. Sometimes the teacher would grab one of my drawings and say, 
“What’s this got to do with today’s lesson?”
 i n high school everybody who saw my drawings said, “you’re a surrealist.” 
This disturbed me at first; i had never heard of surrealism and had no idea of 
what a surrealist was. But i looked it up in the encyclopedia and was fascinated 
by what i read—about andré Breton and the Surrealist Manifesto; that sur-
realism was an international movement; that it was based on brilliant ideas—
pure psychic automatism; freeing the imagination repairing the break between 
dream and reality. What it said about surrealist poetry and art i found very 
exciting. The more i read, the more i thought: “This is me—this is who i am: a 
surrealist.”
 But 
at the end of the article in the encyclopedia, it said that the Surrealist 
movement fell apart around 1940 and didn’t exist anymore. i almost cried. i 
couldn’t believe it. in fact, i refused to believe it. i  thought: if surrealism is dead, 
then i must be dead, too—and since i’m still alive, then surrealism is still alive, 
too!


--- PAGE 333 ---
312 Black, Brown, & Beige
 For a long time i thought i was probably the only surrealist alive in the 
world. needless to say, i kept right on drawing.
 i tried to find more out about surrealism at the library. it didn’t have much, 
but i loved the reproductions of surrealist paintings by Yves Tanguy, victor 
Brauner, rené Magritte and all the rest.
 and then one say at the food store checkout counter, i saw a headline in the 
neighborhood newspaper, the Hyde Park Herald. it ann ounced that surrealists—i 
could hardly believe my eyes!—were having an exhibition right there in hyde 
Park, and opening that very day!
 o f course 
i rushed straight over there . . .
unpublished manuscript
Ted Joans
kaufman iS a Bird called Bo B
Bob Kaufman has said, “ i acknowledge the demands of surrealist realization,” 
and his great dazzling poem, “Song of the Broken Giraffe,” is an affirmation of 
his surrealization. Kaufman is one of true poets that became known during the 
Bea
t Generation. his images are more magical and humorous than those of his 
contemporaries. immersed in the Marvelous, Kaufman confronts the human 
condition directly in all its tragic facets. Y et he giggles while struggling. he is 
one of the greatest poets on this planet earth.
 Kaufman is like Bird—he too has always been “high on life.” he is the man 
that walks down crowded streets talking aloud to himself in spite of many (too 
many) unhip people running in the opposite direction, instead of toward him. 
Kaufman is a Bird (of the poetic word) called Bob. his Solitudes give us all a 
chance to share his poetry with the international multitudes.
 Dig him!
Ted Joans Papers, university of California-Berkeley
cogollo: african artiSt from colom Bia
in the world of music—that is, folk and jazz music—the Black creators have 
always been the innovators. even in the world of sports the Black athlete has 
added a certain style to the game and is more often the “star.” But in the field


--- PAGE 334 ---
Flying Piranha (1978), a book of poems by Ted Joans and Joyce Mansour, who 
fe
lt a special affinity as surrealists since Joyce was from Cairo, egypt, and Ted 
Joans from Cairo, illinois. The drawing is by heriberto Cogollo, a surrealist born 
in Colombia, making this a truly international collaboration spanning oceans, 
cultures, and continents the way only surrealism can. The flying piranha was a 
canary who alwa
ys defended elisa Breton.


--- PAGE 335 ---
314 Black, Brown, & Beige
of creative painting (Fine arts), especially the so-called avant garde, the Black 
painter or sculptor has not been recognized as the innovator. Where are the 
painters who can honestly say that their bit is on par (creatively and original) 
with such Black musicians as louis armstrong, Duke ellington, Dizzy Gil-
lesp
ie, Charlie Parker, Bud Powell, John Coltrane, Coleman hawkins, lester 
Y oung, or Bessie Smith? What sculptor is continuing the great african tradition 
of sculpture, who can say that his work is as important to humanity as those 
works created by our ancestors?
 now to hit closer to home. Where is afroamerica’s ray Charles in oils, 
or Miles Davis of sculpturing, or even the equals of albert ayler and Sunny 
Murray in modern art? Where are they? We do have some mighty powerful 
swingers in paint and sculpture who now are getting their thing (which is our 
thang) together. one of the brothers is Cogollo. he is one of our naturals, and 
is on par with his musical brethren in the u.S.
 Cogollo was born in the republic of Colombia, in so-called latin america 
South. he attended all the usual academies there and in europe. Cogollo went 
back to his roots, which he had never left spiritually. he was born in 1945 at 
Cartagena, a town where the european slave ships used to dock. Cogollo is 
a direct descendant of those africans who were brought there. Cogollo con-
ti
nues the african tradition by remaining in contact with his descendants, thus 
allowing them to “direct and dictate” that which he paints. Cogollo is a man 
possessed.
 Cogollo’s thought hinges on the healthy idea of fertility, a celebration of 
the organic life on earth, including spectrophilia. This is very evident in many 
of his works, especially in the large oil titled Jeux de Jeunes Filles. in the 
 works of 
Cogollo, a genuine link with africa’s faith in its positive black magic and with 
its spiritual vision, proper to all of West africa, survives. he has learned the 
euro tribal techniques, the perfect use of their tools, but has avoided being led 
into their “integrated,” art-For-arts-Sake popular swamps. Perhaps Cogollo has 
learned from the great afro-Chinese-Cuban painter Wifredo lam that a non-
white artist must swim with his own original strokes to avoid drowning in the 
polluted 
“art,” undercurrents. Cogollo’s and lam’s works are totally different, as 
different as ornette Coleman and John Coltrane soloing. But their works are 
just as vital to the revolutionary cause of emancipation of humankind’s mind. 
Their 
works reveal the african old and new; their works are neither dreams nor 
reality, but the natural (for them) fusion of both. Thus, before the creations of 
these men one stands at the threshold of the marvelous. Cogollo is a young 
creative Black master painter; let us thank our ancestors for him.
Joans, Complete W orks


--- PAGE 336 ---
9. Looking Ahead: Surrealism  
Today and Tomorrow
a gathering of peoples at the crossroads . . . an’ reports are still comin’ in
—anthony Joseph
it is surely a sign of the times—and a heartening sign—that one of the most 
influential books pertaining to surrealism since 1990 is robin D. G. Kelley’s 
Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination  (2 002). other writers have tried, 
with varied success, to approach surrealism from different angles, but Kelley 
has convincingly provoked entirely new ways of regarding the movement and 
its far-reaching project, from the 1920s to our own time.
 Freedom Dreams is not only the first book to relate surrealism to the long and 
eventful history of black radicalism, but also—and more precisely—the first 
to compare surrealist ideas to the thought of such great black dreamers, theo-
rists
, and activists as anna Julia Cooper, ida B. Wells, W.e.B. Du Bois, C.l.r. 
James, amiri Baraka, Malcolm X, and James Forman. Kelley’s discussion of 
black surrealism—from etienne léro and the Légitime Défense Group of the 1930s 
through the Césaires, T ropiques, and Wifredo lam to Ted Joans, Bob Kaufman, 
Jayne Cortez, and others in more recent years—is by far the most illuminating 
summary 
in english. impressive, too, is his perceptiveness in recognizing the 
surrealist qualities in artists not usually considered surrealist, such as richard 
Wright, Frank london Brown, and Thelonious Monk.
 i n a similar vein, he suggests that women surrealists in europe in the 1920s 
and 1930s—T oyen, valentine Penrose, leonora Carrington, Meret oppenheim, 
Claude Cahun, Mary low, and others—would have benefited from hearing the 
songs of such women blues artists as Bessie Smith, Ma rainey, alberta hunter, 
Memphis Minnie, lucille Bogan, and ida Cox. The language barrier blocked 
that possibility back then, but Kelley argues that such lost connections still 
have a place in freedom dreams today.
 Deeply rooted in surrealism’s high priorities—poetry, freedom, love, and 
the unfettered imagination—Freedom Dreams is also a superb critique of the same 
old protest politics and a splendid example of that rarity of rarities: a history di-


--- PAGE 337 ---
316 Black, Brown, & Beige
rected toward the future. it is no wonder that the book has had, and continues 
to have, a strong impact—not only in the united States and the rest of the 
english-speaking world, but also in other lands, and not only among surrealists 
and people interested in surrealism, but also among a wide readership looking 
for ways out of today’s massive misery and miserabilism.
 a y
ana Karanja’s Zora Neale Hurston is a very different book, but it shares much 
of Kelley’s poetry-inspired radicalism and exhilaration. This wide-ranging, 
innovative study is first of all a searching reassessment of a great ethnographer, 
folklorist, novelist, and playwright. But it is also much more. Deftly combining 
black feminist social criticism, utopian reverie, and an acute awareness of the 
politics of language, Karanja reflects on every page an ardent respect not only 
for oral literature but also for the dream experience as a source of knowledge. 
indeed, 
her own dreams and her interpretations of them are a crucial part of 
this deeply moving narrative, which is further enhanced by her poems and 
photographs.
 impassioned throughout, Karanja’s vivid appreciation of hurston exempli-
fies a free-spirited reconceptualization of ethnography as an imaginative, cre-
ative, and playful activity, in other words, a surrealist activity.
 These 
two books alone would suffice to place black writers in the forefront 
of surrealism today, but they are only part of the story. Just about every sur-
realist group in the world today maintains a Web site, but the surrealist book 
publishing boom begun in the 1990s not only has continued, but has greatly 
expanded in the 2000s. Books by and about black surrealists and their allies 
are clearly in demand. in 2000 Monthly review Press brought out a handsome 
new edition of aimé Césaire’s Discourse on Colonialism, with a new introduction by 
robin Kelley. a 2005 Charles h. Kerr edition of C.l.r. James’ A History of Pan-
African Revolt also has a preface by Kelley. richard Wright’s T welve Million Black 
V oices has been reissued with a new introduction by n oel ignatiev. haymarket 
Books has brought out an excellent collection of Dennis Brutus’ poems and 
essays under the title Poetry and Protest (2006).
 T o 
Paris publishers we owe Marie-laure Missir’s lavishly illustrated biogra-
ph
y of Joyce Mansour and the complete works of Georges henein, a volume 
of 1,062 pages. in São Paulo two beautiful little books—one on the singer elsie 
houston, the other on pioneer Brazilian jazz orchestra leader abigail Moura 
(both with CDs)—were issued in connection with the large 2003 “negras 
Memórias, Memórias de negros” exhibition in São Paulo.
 This short list—many more titles could in fact be added—suffices to in-
dicate that the work of black surrealists, heretofore snubbed by more than a 
few pompous white critics, is not only becoming more and more visible to an 
ever
-increasing audience, but also more and more studied and appreciated. no


--- PAGE 338 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 317
doubt about it, in many and diverse realms of research, criticism, creativity, and 
action, surrealists black, brown, and beige are clearly leading the way.
 Tak
e poetry, for example. Ted Joans—one of the movement’s most tireless 
public figures for half a century—was still cogitating and agitating as surrealist 
poet, mage, and sage until, as robin D. G. Kelley puts it, he “joined the an-
cestors” in May 2003. Several dozen legends in his own time, Joans influenced 
and inspired countless young poets of all ages and colors, and from all over 
the world. his last books—Okapi Passion; the voluminous T education, illustrated 
by Cogollo; W ow and Our Thang, both with drawings by his companion, laura 
Corsiglia—i
nclude much of his finest work.
 a
 poet first and last, Joans was also noted for his lectures on many topics, 
from jazz history to the struggle against South african apartheid. he enjoyed 
addressing black students on such outstanding figures—and friends of his—as 
langston hughes, Charlie Parker, and Malcolm X. on several occasions he 
intervened in academic conferences on the “Beat Generation,” bringing his per-
sonal experience, truth, and clarity to an otherwise all-too-mystified subject.
 The 
best friend the rhinoceros ever had, Joans spoke eloquently and often 
on this endangered species, and more generally identified himself with wilder-
ness preservation and animal rights.
 Many 
important facets of Joans’ work have been overlooked by commen-
tators: his film-poems, for example, above all his lovely tribute to the Facteur 
Cheval’
s “ideal Palace” (accompanied by the bop sounds of Charlie Parker). his 
paintings, drawings, and collages—especially the splendid “ alphabet Surreal” 
series—also deserve far more attention than they have received, and ditto for 
his “o
utagraphs”—photographs in which one or more images have been cut 
out and replaced by other images.
 i n addition to his prolific poetry and work in the visual arts, Joans left a 
large and impressive critical literature. his many jazz reviews in Coda magazine 
surely merit publication in book form, as do his scattered contributions to such 
surrealist journals as La Brèche, Brumes Blondes, L’Archibras, Arsenal, Free Spirits,  the 
surrealism issues of Race T raitor, and the hefty one-shot Dies und Das that Joans 
coedi
ted with poet richard anders in Berlin in 1984.
 Ted Joans’ surrealist legacy is rich, diverse, still very much in the wind, and—
like the well-attended memorial for him at new Y ork university in 2003—full 
of hipness, humor, revolt, the Marvelous, and the everlasting joy of jazz. al 
Y oung signaled Joans as the wandering grandfather of today’s Spoken Word 
poetry.
 Fortunately, the voice of Ted Joans continues to reach new ears, for many of 
his readings, lectures, and impromptu talks were recorded. More than a few of 
these recordings marked truly memorable occasions. his fabulous joint reading


--- PAGE 339 ---
318 Black, Brown, & Beige
with Jayne Cortez, for example, at the 2002 Printers’ row Book Fair in Chicago, 
attracted far and away the largest crowd ever for a poetry event at the city’s 
annual outdoor book expo. no one who was there will ever forget it.
 Cortez herself, one of contemporary poetry’s international treasures, re-
mains 
as active as ever, on tour in the united States and ’round the world, 
on CD, and in print. her influence on the new generation of poets has been 
great and is certainly growing. her Jazz Fan Looks Back, with its cover by Melvin 
edwards
, is a veritable classic—an all-day, all-night celebration of the best in 
black music from its african roots through blues and bebop to free jazz. With 
her many and diverse african, Caribbean, South american, and other connec-
tions, and an activist background that includes civil rights agitation and union 
organizing, Jayne Cortez is truly a world force—for poetry and the Marvelous, 
ecology and women’s emancipation, and freedom struggles everywhere.
 Many 
of the younger black surrealist poets coming up probably do not even 
know each other yet. T ogether, however, each in his or her own way, they ex-
emplify an audacious return to the deepest, most radical automatism. as it turns 
out, what andré Breton called pure psychic automatism was not only surreal-
ism’s bold starting point, way back in 1919, but has also served as a port of call 
for the movement’s poets and artists ever since.
 anthony Joseph, a Trinidadian active in the Surrealist Group in london; 
Deusdedit de Morais, of the Surrealist Group Decollage in São Paulo; Gérard 
Janvier, from haiti but currently living in Chicago; and ron allen, of Detroit 
and los angeles—a poet also noted for his dynamite plays—are some of the 
truest and livest “live wires” of today’s ongoing surrealist generation. These 
are poets who, to paraphrase an observation John Coltrane once made about 
albert ayler, are moving poetry to even higher frequencies.
 i n the introduction to his sensational book of poems, T eragaton (1997), 
an
thony Joseph outlines his method: “ i had to locate myself in a parallel 
present, unravel my tongue, reclaim all headspace, disengage critical analysis—
to find the core object lost in Simulacra, until the text became a mind map and 
if possible, a transliteration before it is censored by consciousness. essentially i 
had to write until i wrote without writing, accessing the unconscious by using 
its language.”
 This 
is the very voice of surrealism today—the revolutionary poetic spirit 
at its most daring and defiant. at fever pitch, the freedom of dreams leads 
straight to the realization of the age-old but always up-to-the-minute dreams 
of freedom.
 o r 
as the South african Dennis Brutus puts it, poetry and revolt automati-
cally go 
hand in hand with freedom, love, and changing the world. in the dis-
cussion following his april 2006 lecture at northwestern university, Brutus


--- PAGE 340 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 319
emphasized the strong solidarity and affection he felt for those brave spirits 
who, during reactionary periods, had been unafraid to defend surrealism and 
its goals. For surrealists and their allies, Brutus went on to affirm, revolutionary 
politics, the practice of poetry, cultural liberation, and radical ecology are fun-
damentally one and the same struggle for true freedom and a good life for all.
 n
ow as always, poetry—language as a way to infinite imaginary combina-
tions, according to Philip lamantia—remains surrealism’s heart and nervous 
system, but it is important to keep in mind that surrealist poetic practice em-
braces all forms of human expression. it 
 is not surprising, therefore, that in the 
visual and performance arts, too, black surrealists are increasingly in the fore-
front throughout the world.
 Surr
ealism in music, for example—a topic that most academic works on sur-
realism 
do not even mention—is more than ever in the air today. in Chicago 
the magician musicians of the Great Black Music aaCM are still going strong 
after their fortieth anniversary in 2005. hamid Drake, widely and without exag-
geration renowned as the world’s greatest living drummer, and the redoubtable 
reed man from Jamaica, Douglas ewart—both of whom have played at many 
surrealist events over the years—continue to bring us the liberating sounds we 
need to 
realize the new society humankind has long been dreaming about. and 
now they have been joined by a new aaCM generation that includes tenor 
sax tornado David Boykin and one of the all-time greatest jazz flutists, nicole 
Mitchell. T o Mitchell the world is indebted for some of the most entrancingly 
initiatory music of our time: music that truly opens the doors of the Marvelous. 
She is also a highly original thinker and brilliant writer, with a profound sense 
of poetry at its emancipatory best, as evidenced in the splendid liner notes to 
her Vision Quest, Afrika Rising, and other CDs.1
tomorro W iS the queStion
The street has become another, more ancient; the lights in the  
window are turned off: it’s tomorrow already.
—Joyce Mansour
Globally and locally, surrealism today is a far-reaching panorama, an open-
ended, free-spirited example of unity and solidarity in an incredibly dynamic 
diversity. vastly exceeding its numerical strength, its influence, now as in the 
past, is especially evident among various sectors of young people and the op-
pressed, who, despite the discouraging temper of today’s mainstream dominant 
authoritarian politics and culture, have not abandoned the dream of transform-
ing the world and changing life.


--- PAGE 341 ---
320 Black, Brown, & Beige
 T oday as in the past, surrealism rejects commercial dabblers, poseurs, and 
other pseudo-surrealists such as the moronic imitators of Dalí who clutter up 
the inter
net. The movement remains resolutely nonsectarian, however, and is 
by no means unfriendly to the many scattered individuals who—for whatever 
reason—have chosen not to identify themselves with organized surrealism, but 
have followed a parallel path.2
 n
ow as always, what interests surrealists above all is not establishment art 
or the literary scene, or any particular genre, or any other kind of specializa-
tion, but, rather, human expression in all its forms, the becoming of freedom, 
objective chance, the realization of poetry in everyday life. Jacques Brunius’ 
ambitious 1945 proposal, that surrealism’s practice of collective research should 
be extended to every field of knowledge—has by no means been exhausted and 
is not likely to be exhausted in the near future. it is obvious, however, that the 
movement’s fields of inquiry, creativity, critique, and discovery in recent years 
have been enormously broadened and deepened and are still expanding in all 
directions.
 o bvious, too—a few bigoted art critics notwithstanding—is the fact that 
black surrealists have been a major force in this continuing expansion. as for 
the future, the possibilities are infinite.
 a
 marvelous mix of poetics and politics, surrealism exemplifies activism as 
its best and brightest. in april 2008, the “all Power to the imagination” con-
fer
ence took place at the new College in Sarasota, Florida. The explicitly an-
archist gathering was organized and conducted not by professors but almost 
ent
irely by young african american students. a featured speaker, ashanti—an 
anarchist who had been a member of the Black Panther Party—spoke enthusi-
astically 
of robin Kelley’s work and also noted that his own writing involved 
the connections between jazz improvisation and anarchy.
 a
s Dennis Brutus has put it, there is every reason to expect that the inter-
national surrealist movement will continue to pursue its revolutionary poetic 
imperatives and “keep soaring!”3
 This 
much is certain: black surrealism is here and everywhere—and on the 
move!
Notes
 1. For background on the aaCM, see John litweiler, The Freedom Principle, 
172–
199. a tribute to its fortieth anniversary, and to nicole Mitchell, 
appears in Franklin rosemont, Revolution in the Service of the Marvelous, 
127–129.


--- PAGE 342 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 321
 2. i am thinking particularly of such poets as T. J. anderson iii, Will alex-
ander, 
regie Gibson, and the Milwaukee-based hip-hop-oriented Black-
Surreal band.
 3.
 Dennis Brutus, conversation with Franklin rosemont, Chicago, april 
2006.
Ted Joans was famous for his letters and mailings to friends 
coming from all over the world—Timbuktu to Portland, 
oregon
. he was especially fond of enclosing tickets, 
collages, and photos.


--- PAGE 343 ---
322 Black, Brown, & Beige
Aimé Césaire
on December 5, 2005, for the first time in his long career as mayor of 
Fort-de-France, Martinique, aimé Césaire, at ninety-two, refused to see 
a visitor—France’s interior minister, nicolas Sarkozy, who had come 
with the specific plan to convince the Martinican government to soften 
up the contents of the island’s textbooks, particularly in regard to such 
mat
ters as slavery and colonialism. here is Césaire’s response.
i do not agree to receive the mini Ster
i do not agree to receive the Minister of the interior, nicolas Sarkozy, for 
two reasons: 1) Personal reasons, and 2) Because, as the author of the Discourse 
on Colonialism, i remain faithful to my doctrine, and continue to be a resolute 
anticolonialist.
Robin D. G. Kelley
Surreali Sm: thinking a Bout freedom in neW WayS
Surrealism opens an avenue to try to talk about redemptive politics, but spe-
cifically to think about freedom in new ways that are non-religious. That might 
get m
e into some trouble, but i don’t think that’s necessarily an antithesis of 
what Dr. King was saying. i don’t really have an answer for this. i love reading 
the surrealists like Suzanne Césaire and aimé Césaire, even richard Wright’s 
surrealism, because it seems to me to break with the old language. We need a 
new lan
guage of struggle, a new language of hope and possibility. i don’t think 
we even have the language to talk about what kind of world we want to create. 
in som
e ways, poetry is the quest to explode language as we know it, to open 
it up.
 i
 feel like i’m caught between a lot of different movements. i feel like i’m 
still somewhat of a Marxist, but that Marxism is too little. i feel like my roots 
are in Black nationalism, as critical as i am of nationalism and of nations. The 
core of that movement, that attracted me in the first place, was the idea of 
building a sense of humanity. Black nationalism allowed ordinary black people


--- PAGE 344 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 323
to stake a claim to history, to say that we’re contributing to the world. That 
sense of pride is something that i’m still very much connected to, as much as 
i’m anti-nationalist.
 and then there’s the sense of emergency. i too get caught up in the immedi-
ate moment and the need to solve immediate problems, whether it’s to keep the 
u.S
. out of the war or to save battered children. Whatever it is, i will continue 
and many people will continue to fight those battles on a day-to-day basis. i’m 
simply saying that, as we fight these battles, they should be opportunities to 
produce new visions of the future.
 i honestly, to this day, cannot map out that new vision. one of the main 
points of Freedom Dreams is to say that one doesn’t map out a new future by 
simply “dreaming.” i don’t know what the future of politics will look like. i think 
that we are in a tremendous ideological transformation, but, if i believe my own 
argument, i can’t know what that is because part of knowing is learning in the 
process of struggle, in a collective movement. in other words, no one can see 
it. That’s the new age, where you meditate, or you’re in a steam room, and all 
of a sudden you’re able to see and envision it. no, it’s on the picket lines; it’s in 
the streets; it’s in study groups; it’s participation in social movements. even the 
failures are very, very important, for they provide very important lessons for 
thinking about the future. But it requires work, it requires organizing, it requires 
study, to read, to think, to debate.
 The sense of the future and what’s possible is in all my books. it’s in Hammer 
and Hoe, it’s in my other books, that you can win, that the next generation will 
take us there.
 i f 
you think of something like the end of slavery as one of the most revolu-
tionary moments in u.S. history, in 1854—a decade before the end of slavery—
none of those people thought slavery would end. it wasn’t even in the cards. 
imagine if we write history not from the perspective of the victors or even in 
hindsight—by that i mean standing in the present, turning back and trying to 
explain how we got here. But if you stand in 1854, what you see ahead is not the 
end of slavery. Y ou don’t see any of that.
 T oo 
often we’re told that, if you’re a real radical, you’re not supposed to be 
optimistic. That’s the culture we grew up in. But the radicals i wrote about, 
they’re all optimistic. Just imagine what it meant in the middle of the Depres-
sion in 1934 to join a movement where they were going to inherit the earth, “a 
better world’s in birth.” The future was theirs and they knew it. That’s why they 
fought every day.
 i t’s always the work of struggle, the thing that transforms the conditions 
in which we operate, that makes things possible. Y ou cannot dream your way


--- PAGE 345 ---
324 Black, Brown, & Beige
out of your situation. Y ou dream to imagine where you’re going to go next, but 
without social movement, without struggle, you’re stuck.
unpublished manuscript
Ayana Karanja
Born and raised in Chicago, ayana Karanja is director of black world 
studies and teaches in the Department of Sociology and anthropology 
at loyola university. Poet, photographer, and filmmaker, deeply inter-
ested in the poetics of black women’s life narratives, she is noted espe-
cially for her innovative study Zora Neale Hurston.
 lon
g familiar with the writings of andré Breton, aimé Césaire, and 
other surrealists, Karanja was also impressed by the long chapter on 
surr
ealism in robin D. G. Kelley’s Freedom Dreams. n ot long after reading 
Kelley’s book she encountered the Chicago surrealists, and her friendly 
association with the group continues to this day.
contemplation
(A Lighted Candle)
 ancient mother of the seas,
 your womb, a vessel of sacred blood.
Y ou make mountains with your wings and
 stars fall from your mouth
.
 Pierce the night with mystic eyes.
ride the spray of my breath, the sound of my voice
 to the cusp of yesterday.
hear the sound of my words playing on the wind.
 Wrap my voice in your hair;
 awaken the daughter/spirit in your bosom-nest.
 Sing the song of her primeval name.
 ride the breath of my voice.
  ride the breath of the wind.
 ride the breath of my voice.
  ride the breath of the wind.


--- PAGE 346 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 325
hear the breath of her voice on the sound of the wind.
 v oices moving . . . mooooving . . . moooooooving.
nyazema breathes; her voice sings re/memberings.
 hear the breath of my voice.
 hear the breath of the wind.
  Feel the spray of her voice.
  Feel the spray of her words.
 our voices soar on the edge of the wind.
in Zora Neal Hurston
Melvin Edwards
thinking a Bout Surreali Sm
By the time i was eighteen in 1955 haitian art had already hit the art world. i 
started seeing it in the late 50s and by the mid 60s i had seen plenty of it. and 
by then i had also heard of Wifredo lam. i hadn’t seen too much of his work 
but i heard of him and knew him to be an important afro-Cuban-Chinese 
painter related to the upper crust international modern art world. he was an 
important intellectual black figure and considered a surrealist. i did not know a 
lot about surrealism at the time, but i knew enough to know that surrealism fit 
within a kind of free approach to developing images in visual art.
 i nstead 
of surrealists going to the geometry, they went to the subject, the 
subject inside reality, the subject in imagination and the subject in dream and 
combined them in new different ways. For black artists in the united States 
there’s not much record of them in that period (1920–1940). among those who 
started a little later would have been norman lewis who had been through 
some surrealist ideas, but i don’t think you could call norman a surrealist. also 
there was the painter eldzier Cortor who often uses the female figure in a sur-
real interior and exterior environment. of course, the epitome for creativity 
in Western art was the female nude, the nude being transformed. Transfor-
mation as a process is essential to surrealism. Surrealism is never alone. one 
important thing about surrealism is that there are many styles. Surrealists are 
individualistic.
 i n my sculpture experiment was based on a free approach. By the time (1963) 
i entered the general art world as a sculptor i could use any approach to putting


--- PAGE 347 ---
326 Black, Brown, & Beige
forms together. i’m curious about many ways of making art. i’ve chosen assem-
blage, metal fabrication and industrial welding as a primary way of working. 
i combine many ideas, cut old, used, new and found forms and shapes, then 
feel free to distort, twist, forge or do anything i want to them. My way of con-
ceiving, making, and presenting my sculpture is comfortable in the open space 
of surrealism. But not limited to that universe. My most direct contact with 
surrealism was knowing léon-Gontran Damas from 1969 to 1978. he was the 
strongly political co-father of negritude from French Guiana. We met in new 
Y ork City and became family friends. he was a real example of the committed 
politically aware active creative writer. i made the sculpture “ homage to the 
Poet” dedicated to his memory and the continuing struggle inspired by his 
poetry philosophy and participatory experience in the esthetics of the freedom 
struggle for Pan african liberation and independence. he spoke of artists he 
knew in France: arp & Duchamp etc.
 Surrealism comes out of colonialism and international trade. information 
and ideas were showing up in europe from many cultures around the world. 
artists had access and were sensitive and using what they saw and heard. our 
generation was a generation that studied art which started from the cave to 
the renaissance and from the renaissance to yesterday afternoon. So we were 
potentially affected by anything from anywhere, we were everywhere in art. 
Some were in new Y ork City like emilio Cruz in the 1950s and 60s.
 With existentialism, the beat generation, with norman lewis, and ed Clark 
in abstract expression, and surrealism very much a part of that. What i’m saying 
is a person, black and coming from the black community but his or her black in-
put is coming from many experiences. There are two generations of artists and 
i’m talking about the emilio Cruzes the Bob Thompsons, the Wifredo lams, 
the romare Beardens.
 Those are artists who have been to art school and whose works were headed 
for the museum art world and collections. They use culture from their own 
community but in their studios they were putting their own ideas together and 
creatively trying to make art develop in the most unique forms that they could 
come up with. They always go home to the black community for information, 
luckily 
in new Y ork City black music is there, present and experimental and 
black visual artists think they are also experimental, use black stuff with the 
most avant garde ideas like the musicians.
 i ’m talking about people trying to be original and be honest about how they 
actually got to it and that they didn’t necessarily learn all those things from 
home or from their neighborhoods. But you have to always remember when 
someone says abstraction and cubism that traditions of african art are folded


--- PAGE 348 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 327
in that. People are paying attention to traditional african art and it varies from 
person to person.
 i n 
contemporary african art many artists can be discussed as having surreal-
istic 
imagery. Malangatana ngwenya from Mozambique is celebrated for his 
fantastic compositions of humans, animals, plants and complex environments. 
Composi
tions alive with their own natural surreal dynamic at home in african 
art imagination. There are many other artists in africa who move artistically 
beyond classification. The black artists who appeared since 1940 and who are 
most often called surrealists came from the French african Caribbean country 
of haiti and the haitians artists are unique, but i don’t want to call them sur-
realists because maybe they call themselves something else.
 The
y make use of voudou combinations, political imagination, history, reli-
gion, the underworld, other worlds, and this world at the same time. The same 
is true of the Zimbabwe stone sculptors who also have surrealist tendencies but 
they are not called surrealists even though their realism is fantastic unique art. 
artists like Joram Mariga, John Takawira, locadia ndandarika and Tapfuma 
Gutsa are artists whose imaginative stone carvings from traditional myths and 
modern themes are transformed beyond ordinary reality. The painter heri-
berto Cogollo, who lives in France is a fantastic realist and magical surrealist 
academy trained painter who extends the early dynamics of surrealism. in his 
work there are the things that could be and the things that are. The smoke 
coming from the flesh of a horse’s butt looks like smoke and veils the truth. he 
takes realism to the realm of the new fantastic. Cogollo is like the pre-industrial 
poet who is a surrealist and being a modern afro-Colombian he has afro-
Colombian imagery and mysticism in his work.
 Surrealism was a set of ways of inventing and from surrealism other ways 
evolved that have new qualities. it sometimes takes the reader a long time to 
catch up with the writer and it’s the same thing with the visual artists and the 
viewer.
unpublished manuscript
T . J. Anderson III
T. J. anderson (1958– ) is the author of At Last Roundup and Notes to Make 
the Sound Come Right: Four Innovators of Jazz Poetry and has published both 
po
etry and poem translations. his research interests include jazz poetry, 
african american literature, and the work of aimé Césaire.


--- PAGE 349 ---
328 Black, Brown, & Beige
at laSt round up
i want to clear the table
a train language speeding on tracks
with sidewinder skulls in midland dust
a weed star called dandelion
draining its filament
in a full smoke gallop.
The eye arrives a top hat mandrake
vein hood insides squared off and drowsing.
But there is something riding
high on tear foam
too many blotches of air wrapped caracaras
too many soldiers shaking on their watch
too many shamans making strange uses of rain.
The real furnace is the blistering mouth
thrashing like a cylindrical fish.
Be plaintive my pig headed dinosaur
melting in the gold rim haze
of a paleontologist’s spectacles.
ever
ywhere we are wrong.
i unbutton my sleeve
bare my arm
in the str
eets imbeciles are melting
in the juice of their wits.
At Last Roundup
vaudeville 1951
a weighs the tear suspended
on the eye’s scaffold
minstrelled under top hat accordion
le blanc glove splay
solar parasol five fingers to shine
where the spotlight
plays furnace to night’s easel


--- PAGE 350 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 329
a thigh to tuxedo romp
here’s looking at tree swing
beef shank in transit
erector leg launch
crossroads familial catacomb
snake stick hard
cold glimmer tiger smock
the false drape dribble
where zoot suits illumine
a mirror’s shadowed conversion.
At Last Roundup
Michael Stone-Richards
Born and raised in Britain, Stone-richards’ introduction to surreal-
ism was a volume of poems by Ted Joans given to him as a graduation 
presen
t by his father. he has gone on to become a leading scholar of 
international surrealism, with a special interest in the groups in Paris 
and Prague
. his articles on various aspects of surrealism—in poetry, 
painting, politics, and life—have appeared in journals as varied as Pleine 
Marge, Art History, Race T raitor, and Equinoxe. h
 is essay “The Political in the 
Culture of Surrealism” is one of the richest contributions to surrealist 
studies in recent years.
 Stone-r
ichards has taught at northwestern university and other 
schools. at the time of this writing he was associate professor in the 
Department of liberal arts, College for Creative Studies, Detroit, 
Michigan.
 The text published her
e originally appeared in the “Surrealism in the 
u.S.a.” issue of Race T raitor (Summer 2001).
Surreali St Su Bver Sion in everyday life
We are struck, have always been and will always be, by a fact of particular sin-
gularity: that of all the avant-garde movements with any claims to historical 
importance for the first third of the last century, Surrealism alone, in any signifi-
cant way, held within its fold women and people of color, and that one cannot


--- PAGE 351 ---
Race T raitor was founded by noel ignatiev. This special 1998 issue was edited by 
the Surrealist Group in Chicago.


--- PAGE 352 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 331
imagine Surrealism without their presence. What is it, then, that Surrealism 
made possible for them, that no other movement could even approximate? it is 
clear, astoundingly clear, that Surrealism alone found a way of translating into 
practice certain of the ethical insights from the generation of the great Sym-
bolists h
uysmans, Mallarmé‚ of igitur in which the question was not first and 
foremost the displacement of one political party or order by another, but the 
far more basic question of a new form of thinking in which the erotic and the 
feminine would be allowed to structure perception and action.
 Wha
t is it in Surrealist experience—its conception of love, its deep think-
ing of friendship that bewilders and unsettles patriarchy and masculine sense-
making if not the passage a l’act of a mode of feeling and responsiveness based 
upon reciprocity (to and from the world, to and from the desired subject), a 
mode of thinking which, long before the lacanians of the 1960s, uncovered 
the ethics of desire and long before the tedium of talk about performativity, 
realized the radical contingency of the subject in the movement of desire? if, as 
Breton says in Les vases communicants, a work that speaks of desire and not mere 
pleasure, desire, if it is real, refuses itself nothing, it also remains, hence the 
importance of reciprocity and reversibility for Breton, that desire must renew 
itself and everything in relation to itself.
 a
n ethic of desire is not, indeed, about mere satisfaction; patriarchy, based 
upon suppression and the manipulation of commodified desire, cannot allow 
for reciprocity and thus has need of a politics of mere satisfaction and reifi-
cation. The challenge posed by Surrealism, historically, is to think from the 
position of the third, of the other which is to say, from the position of radical 
liberty. We are far from exhausting, still less realizing the implications of this 
thinking.
 i s 
it possible, any longer, to think of chance, coincidence, strangeness and 
encounters in everyday life without doing so in terms that bespeak a demotic 
Surrealism? We think not. it is, though, more difficult to link these experi-
ences to a sense of the liberation from the constraints of everyday life, the 
shared tedium of humdrum life, of routine, of crushing habit, all the more so 
as the forces of technological modernity impose by ever more successful ruses 
a dea
thly uniformity. and yet, faced with the vogue of existentialism upon his 
return to Paris from america in 1945, Breton rejected existentialism with the 
declaration,” away with Miserabilism!” whilst in the same breath, and in agree-
ment with Bataille, he rejected Stalinism with the unanswerable truth that it was 
“moral extermination.” This is a rejection of the politics of order in favor of an 
ethics of liberty; henceforth, as was clear from the disaster of the Stalinization 
of the Party in the 1930s, politics could only be an infrapolitics.
 Can Surrealism, undoubtedly correct in its diagnosis of the misery of moder-
nity, still have something to offer? That depends very much upon what it is that


--- PAGE 353 ---
332 Black, Brown, & Beige
one might be expecting. Certainly there is no formula, no blueprint that kind 
of politics is for the bureaucratic mind and the reconstructed Stalinists with 
their boy-scout view of history. What remains is the insistence on liberty and 
recognition (of the other), the refusal of work, the constant effort of renewal 
(in the words of Sade, “Cosmopolites de tous les pays, encore un effort!”).
 i n the context of a discussion on Surrealism, internationalism and the Carib-
bean in June 1999, Franklin rosemont made a comment of startling limpidity 
that made me think of something obvious: he spoke of the american contri-
buti
on to Surrealism as being largely a demotic Surrealism. looking through 
any of the classic Surrealist reviews, alongside the discovery of the everyday, 
the r
ecognition of such forms as le Palais ideal of the Facteur Cheval, there 
is, noticeably, a constant, if critical engagement, with what can only be called 
the r
emnants, avatars of high culture. T o look through the american Surrealist 
journals from the 1960s onward, is to see the prevalence of the demotic—the 
Wa
tts T ower, for example, the american lawn (“What’s wrong with it? every-
thing!”) side by side with a commitment to anarchist and workingclass politics, 
a p
olitics of the specific unlike anything to be found in French or european or 
Japanese Surrealism. has this commitment to infrapolitics as a distinctive com-
mi
tment of american Surrealism been sufficiently noted?
 as with the case of the role and significance of women in the articulation of 
Surreality, likewise the presence of people of color in the articulation of Sur-
realism from Légitime Défense to T ropiques and beyond bears witness to the range, 
depth and singularity of the Surrealist vision: the questions of gender, sexuality, 
race and the post-colonial so much a part of our contemporaneity can be seen 
to have informed the distinctive definition of Surrealism from the moment of 
its 
response to French military adventurism in the riff to its denunciation of 
the colonial exhibition in 1931. it is also telling that when one looks at Surreal-
ism internationally, it is almost impossible to confound its manifestations in 
hungary or France with the antilles/Caribbean, for Surrealism avails itself, as 
aimé Césaire realized, of the fauna and flora of the local imaginary; thus when 
Breton, with Pierre Mabille, assisted at voudoun ceremonies in haiti he could 
acknowledge that there was no question of bringing Surrealism to haiti, it was 
already present.
 Magloire-Sai
nt-aude is a poet who could not but be Surrealist. Surrealism, 
inconceivable without its desire to re-think alterity, as witnessed in its Map of 
the World (1929) which put into practice valéry’s insight that “ l’europe est 
finie,” presented for people of color a means of articulating the local in rela-
tionship to the universal. When Césaire left the Party he declared that Party-
Communism could not address the particularities of Black experience, whilst 
the glorious Suzanne Césaire could write in “le Surréalisme et nous” in T ropiques: 
“Surrealism tightrope of our hope.”


--- PAGE 354 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 333
 after the Second World War, the most significant, the most urgent develop-
men
ts in Surrealism passed through women (Joyce Mansour, annie le Brun) 
and people of color: the French Caribbean and Francophone africa. every-
thing that Surrealism understood concerning the relationship between the 
freedom of the imagination and liberty found a new voice of passionate refusal 
in anti-colonialism and the dream of liberty of the civil rights movement: The 
po
wer implicit in the experience “i have a dream” was the color of a time long 
awaited. it is the color of a time still to come.
With Julien lenoir
Ron Allen
Poet, playwright, and apostle of “weightless language,” ron allen was a 
dynamic force in the Motown arts scene for two decades or more before 
his resettlement in southern California. Deeply influenced by Buddhism 
as well as post-bop jazz, he remains a vehement word consciousness ex-
plorer whose ecosphere insurgency aims at nothing less than the poetic 
transformation of the world and the realization of the Marvelous.
revelation
open
the
head
walk
up
the
neck
look
in
the
cortex
read
the
bones
fly
unpublished


--- PAGE 355 ---
Detroit poet and playwright ron allen’s Neon Jawbone Riot appeared in Race T raitor, 
no. 9 (Summer 1998), with the cover by Shaqe Kalaj.


--- PAGE 356 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 335
conver Sation BetWeen eye and mouth
MouTh: the first official act was the mouth, the taste of cucumber . . .
 i t drained the rosemary in us. it was thyme, the eye of the
  rosewood.
eYe: the first official act was the eye, a griddlecake of history,
  juniper, paper onions, of deliberate corruption. it was rancid—
  foiled sheep, and deep wounds of game.
MouTh: the first official act was tomato, a core of myopia, a balm, a
  weaving tongue text of urgency, a happening. it was sweet, a
  conflict, sweet tunnel of muck, an evening, a night shade.
eYe: a vinegar of dried wombs, coarse rhubarb in the wheat-
  malted crud of black.
MouTh: it tasted of camphor and chamomile, frankincense and
  sandalwood, fish baked in the sun with plum pits, orange
  blossom, and salt, sour milk and fetid gas, sweat and syrup of
  hung bergamot, hair fried mud pie and vapors.
eYe: the first official act was a resin of trash bags and machine
  grinding life, pit bull in desiccated shit, musk and twisted
  peels of lime and rosewater, a red image of pomades and rats
MouTh: a turnstile of a cavity sickly sweet as whores’ wine, a medicine
  in the gut, castor and cinnamon, grease, mildew, chard,
  cheese and blood.
eYe: a priest, nipple, sachet of cork, the candy of reubens and vanilla.
MouTh: soggy mattresses and sage in the blunt end of the mouth.
eYe: ash penicillin in the dumpster of the eye.
MouTh: dried fruits, lamp oil, cow tongue in smokey brine.
eYe: caskets and mace roaches, and us.


--- PAGE 357 ---
336 Black, Brown, & Beige
MouTh: in the wine cellar, twisted dreams of wigs, dollar faxed copper
  and myrrh.
eYe: a slow rush of maple, tar, onyx, and cocoa.
MouTh: crushed fruit rinds of saltpeter tincture, and us.
eYe: coffee and prisons, and us.
MouTh: spoons, melons, and us.
eYe: the first official act was . . .
MouTh: the first official act was . . .
eYe: murder.
“eye Mouth Graffiti Body Shop”
Anthony Joseph
Born and raised in Trinidad, Joseph moved to london in 1989. he was a 
longtime friend of poet and publisher John la rose and surrealist globe-
trot
ter Ted Joans, and in the 2000s has become active in the london 
Surrealist Group. his publications include Desfinado, T eragaton, and the 
CD Liquid T extology—Readings from the African Origins of UFOs. Still a resi-
dent of the 
united Kingdom, Joseph has traveled and lectured widely in 
europe and the united States.
hoW Surreali Sm found me
My interest/evolution in surrealism was a gradual realization. i had been writing 
since childhood but around 1994 i began a search for what i called “the core 
text.” i was interested in speed, a way of bypassing the conscious. i realized that 
the poetry i enjoyed writing, the poems that resonated most, were the ones i 
wrote in an out-of-body moment, the ones that were “abstract” or “cryptic,” and 
seemed to leap off the page: texts of transcendence.


--- PAGE 358 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 337
 and so i became obsessed with the idea of the unconscious and with ways 
of accessing it. i believed that, as Madan Sarap wrote, “the true speech, the 
unconscious, breaks through usually in a veiled and incomprehensible form.” 
around this time i was introduced to the work of Ted Joans, andré Breton and 
aimé Césaire, and the musicians albert ayler, Charles Mingus, John Coltrane, 
Pharaoh Sanders, ornette Coleman.
 i n surrealism i finally found what i had been searching for—the release of 
the unconscious ego, a way of writing swiftly from some internal space. like 
a jazz musician reaching for the point where notes didn’t matter, where what 
mat
tered was the purity of intent, the core, the truth. and it was almost as if 
in my dislocation from home and culture, i was trying to find within the text, 
or at least to record the memory of Trinidad. at this point the whole modus 
of my writing seemed to congeal into surrealism. i had found a name for the 
things i had been doing. all those years in Trinidad, going to the Baptist church 
with my grandparents, seeing the spirit possessions and hearing the glossolalia, 
dancing in the streets at the annual carnival, bathing in mud and white paint, 
riots of noise and color, the way we speak in Trinidad; breaking language into 
morsels of liquid text—all these informed the surreal for me.
 So in a wa
y surrealism found me!
unpublished manuscript
extending out to Brightne SS
this floating island spun centre of the earth as an epicentre of all things sensual. 
here we measure time by temperature. distance by breath, prefer death by fire. 
revellers, we as dense as wet gravel down henry, george and charlotte street, 
all the way down to the jetty in a vast and surging kaleidoscope of blazing 
fire mas.
wire frames support rabelaisian disguises, meticulous sequins and fetish figures 
of startling silver worn swinging with the hip shake/my chest gone tight as a 
warm drum, niggerman, make the snare pop! sweet socalypso man chanting 
till him heart bust an’ big big arse rolling ’pon truck top. grind mama grind and 
shake the firmament—o gorm—no man can brace when the tempo
 drop.
i
t what make moko jumbie come down from the st ann’s hills—ten leg long, 
look! a shit hound hoppin’ through a bush of masquerade boots—’e tongue 
heng slack like the red bandana roun’ he neck and he sniff and lickin’ snow-


--- PAGE 359 ---
338 Black, Brown, & Beige
cone syrup, lickin’ rum spit dried crisp on the hot so hot heels leave holes in 
bitumen and sweat salt collects in the gutters to dissolve woe within the flux of 
blood and spum and bile and funk piss grieving through muck and breastmilk 
like kingfish liver oil. immortelles are in bloom of electric orange in memorial 
square. and on this festival road, every flag that slap my face is a blessing for 
exile. then a chantwell come his come from up duke street, strumming bones on 
a bamboo saxophone, leading a mud mas band and 10,000 watts of wild island 
jazz on a mack truck back. down in the engine room the bass man start pump 
an’ the drummer knock claves and the horns leggo bop and the whole band 
ketch a vaps and start churn a revel rhythm/congas run amok like footsteps of 
runaway slaves.
well saturnalian ointment began to bead like salt butter saliva—and a river of 
arms rise up when the singer chants. his voice moves like mad bull kite in dry 
season. much like syrup dripping from a guava tree, such like thick black love 
dripping like the blood of Gabriel into an old man’s eye as he reclines—hung 
over the door for good luck but blinds him cold
when it
 drop.
and the brass band b
egin to push past the park for the big yard stage.
but some of us are shaking and some of us are waiting
for the fruit to fall.
unpublished manuscript
Patrick Turner
The work of Patrick Turner (1953– ), one of the quickening forces in 
imaginative collage in recent years, is profoundly influenced by black 
music and has been widely shown in outdoor art fairs throughout the 
count
ry. it has been reproduced in surrealist publications, including 
Arsenal.
 Milwauk
ee-based, Turner is also a noted blues musician. his thought-
ful sta
tement, reprinted here from ron Sakolsky’s Surrealist Subversions, is 
excerpted from Turner’s exhibition catalogs.


--- PAGE 360 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 339
unre Stricted image S: a continuou S floW of energy
The mind has to think in terms of unlimited possibilities when working in col-
lage. 
a common ground is established between time and space.
 There is a continuous search for that harmonic relationship that is in tune 
with the universal beat. There are secrets to be discovered among the shuffled 
shadows that move within the jungles of a transient playground.
 Moments for a private ecstasy will burst forward from an earthly 
wilderness.
 o n the road of life there will be many twists, turns, and detours. The de-
viation of a unsuspecting glance is now challenged to unbridle the penetrating 
mysteries that stretch our dimensions beyond the horizon.
 The 
silence of a night saturates a void. astral prophecies remain dormant. 
The anatomy of a conversation stubbornly bends into the concentration of 
an exhaustive intellect. The essence of a thought is now weighed for its true 
wisdom.
 The 
final expression created in a work of art should be a surprise to the artist 
and the viewer.
 i
 like to think of myself not only as an artist in a broad sense, but as a visual 
poet.
Adrienne Kennedy
Born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, as adrienne hawkins (1931– ), Ken-
nedy’s first play, Funnyhouse of a Negro, was produced b y edward albee in 
new Y ork. Since then she has written and had produced numerous plays 
that draw on myth, history, and the american experience. See the dis-
cussion i
n the afterword by robin D. G. Kelley.
people Who led me to my playS
People on Old Maid cards: (1936, age five):
Through make-believe one could control people on a small scale.
Paper dolls:
Y ou could invent enchantment with paper.


--- PAGE 361 ---
340 Black, Brown, & Beige
The BLUE BIRD (1940 movie):
Somewhere, if i could find them, there were some steps, many, many steps, that 
led to the Blue Bird of happiness. But i would have to climb them and they sort 
of sat just in the middle of the sky. it would be worth it, though. i wondered if 
they were in another city. What city?
Jack and Jill:
Went up a hill to fetch a pail of water. Jack fell down and broke his crown and 
Ji
ll came tumbling after. What’s a crown? i asked my mother. his head, she said. 
[or
iginal emphasis]
Blondine:
a 
heroine in a fairy tale who went through trials and hectic adventures to find 
happiness, until she befriended a tortoise who helped her destroy her nemesis, 
a wick
ed king. i had never seen a tortoise and didn’t know anyone who had one. 
i wondered if i had to confront an evil king who would help me?
Elves:
i ask
ed my mother, could we leave milk for the elves that came out at night.
People my mother dreamed about:
in the 
morning i could hardly wait to hear about them. The stories she told of 
them were as exciting as the movies of Frankenstein and Dracula that i saw at 
the Waldorf.
 These 
people my mother dreamed about continued to grow in my imagina-
ti
on. like the people in the red scrapbook, they often knew each other and had 
known my parents when they were young.
 i
 would list them in my mind as i sat on the front steps of our house (the 
steps that faced the orange tower).
 h
er mother who died when she was three.
 her stepfather who was killed walking across an electrified railroad track.
 her aunt h attie who died when my mother was pregnant with me.
 When my mother was making oatmeal on winter mornings as i sat waiting 
with my bowl at the kitchen table, i secretly yearned that my mother would 
talk more about people she had dreamed about. There is no doubt that a person 
talking about people in his or her dreams became an archetype for people in my 
monologues, plays and stories.
People Who Led Me to My Plays


--- PAGE 362 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 341
Tyree Guyton
there iS a true magic here
On the Heidelberg Project in Detroit: Interview by Maurice Greenia (October 10, 1991)
looking at the art world today, i feel that a lot of artists have deviated. They’re 
not painting from the heart. They’re caught up in the fame or prestige or the 
money 
factor. But going out there and saying “i’m going to try something new,” 
or “i’m going to take a chance”—i don’t meet many artists saying that or doing 
that today.
 i ’
ll tell you what i found to be incredible. i never visualized, that i was going 
to have people from all over the world coming here to see the project. i just 
went out there and i just wanted to say something. i had this problem. The 
house was begging for someone to put life back into it. a nd me being an artist, 
it spoke to me. i connected with that house. and i just had to put life back into 
it. and i was shocked to find out that this work of art was going to speak to so 
many people. i grew up on this street—heidelberg Street. i remember starting 
school from here. My great-grandmother and great-grandfather came here and 
moved into this house in 1947.
 i was always painting [as a kid]. i always had some kind of watercolor paint 
set. The painting i was doing was sometimes rather weird stuff. Grandpa was a 
house painter and he would take me with him, teaching me how to mix colors 
and explaining about direction and contrast, light and dark.
 Then i
 heard about Charles McGee. he was teaching a master’s residency 
program at eastern university, and he was also teaching a course over at north-
ern high School. he was teaching a philosophy, and he would play music—i 
would hear jazz playing all the time. he was listening to people like Thelonious 
Monk. he even told me to go out and buy some albums—to buy some of the 
music and study it. he felt i needed to know about this person. he really talked 
a lot about Thelonious Monk. and i began to listen—to Monk, and to McGee 
talking about Monk and his unique style.
 i
 think the art world needs a lot of changing, i think the world of capitalism 
plays a big part in it now. People really get caught up in that fame. They get 
caught up 
in that power syndrome. having somebody from Art News coming to 
do a 
story—they get caught up in that. i try to stay away from it myself. i see 
the system as being very out of order.
 h o
w did i get started on the heidelberg Project? a lot of the paintings i 
was working on were too large to do inside—and some of the sculpture pieces,


--- PAGE 363 ---
342 Black, Brown, & Beige
too. i started working with fifty gallon drums—some of that stuff got too large. 
So right next door we had a vacant lot here. The house that had been there 
was not up to city code and the city came out and condemned it. That was the 
first house 
we started on. it was called “Fun house.” i was just visualizing doing 
something on that house—just doing something with it.
 e v
ery day when i first started it was like something so magical, something so 
beautiful. once i started, i couldn’t stop. Driving around the city looking—in-
side buildings and junk yards and rummage sales and flea markets, looking for 
stuff—like stopping on the expressway picking up hubcaps.
 When i
 began transforming and repainting houses, there was a lot of mixed 
emotion. Some of the neighbors thought i was kinda crazy. They felt, “this 
guy’s gotta be totally out of his head to be doing that kind of stuff.” and then 
there were people that would come over and you just couldn’t get them off, 
they were so excited—so thrilled about the fact of there being art [on heidel-
berg 
Street]. and the kids loved it—loved the art. They came down here, and 
came back, and looked, and shared things with us.
 i ’m 
a radical artist myself. and i find myself looking real, real deep into life. 
There is a true magic here. i feel personally that we were put here on this planet 
to do something extraordinary—to do something great. and i believe that the 
heidelberg Project is not dead. i believe it’s going to revive. i believe that some-
thing greater will truly manifest from all this chaos that has happened. i keep 
hearing something—and it keeps telling me to look beyond. and already i’ve 
begun to think of new ideas—new things i want to do. another project must 
come out of it—something great.
Henry Dumas
Poet and teacher henry Dumas (1934–1968) was active in the Civil 
rights and Black Power movements. his works have been published 
thanks to his friend eugene redmond. notable are poetry collections 
Play Ebony: Play Ivory (1974), Knees of a Natural Man (1989), and fiction 
works Ark of Bones (1974) and Jonoah and the Green Stone (1976). See the  
discussion of his li
fe by robin D. G. Kelley in the afterword.


--- PAGE 364 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 343
Will the circle Be unBroken?
Probe was deep into a rear-action sax monologue. The whole circle now, like 
a bracelet of many colored lights, gyrated under Probe’s wisdom. Probe was a 
thoughtful
, full-headed black man with narrow eyes and a large nose. his lips 
swelled over the reed and each note fell into the circle like an acrobat on a tight 
rope stretched radially across the center of the universe.
 he heard the whistle of the wind. Three ghosts, like chaff blown from a 
wasteland, clung to the wall. . . . he tightened the circle. Movement began 
from within it, shaking without breaking balance. he had to prepare the womb 
for the afro-horn. its vibrations were beyond his mental frequencies unless he 
got deeper into motives. he sent out his call for motives. . . .
 The blanket of the bass rippled and the fierce wind in all their minds blew 
the blanket back, and there sat the city of Samson. The white pillars imposing 
. . 
. but how easy it is to tear the building down with motives. here they come. 
Probe, healed of his blindness, born anew of spirit, sealed his reed with pure air. 
he mo
ved to the edge of the circle, rested his sax, and lifted his axe . . .
 There are only three afro-horns in the world. They were forged from a rare 
metal found only in africa and South america. no one knows who forged the 
horns, but the general opinion among musicologists is that it was the egyp-
tians. one european museum guards an afro-horn. The other is supposed to be 
somewhere on the West Coast of Mexico, among a tribe of indians. Probe grew 
into his room a black peddler who claimed to have traveled a thousand miles 
just to give it to his son. From that day on, Probe’s sax handled like a child, a 
child waiting for itself to grow out of itself.
 i nside the center of the gyrations is an atom stripped of time, black. The 
gathering of the hunters, deeper. Coming, laced in the energy of the sun. he 
is blowing. Magwa’s hands. reverence of skin. under the single voices is the 
child of a woman, black. They are building back the wall, crumbling under the 
disturbance.
 i n 
the rear room, Jan did not hear the volt, nor did he see the mystery be-
hind 
Probe’s first statement on the afro-horn. he had closed his eyes, trying 
to capture or elude the panthers of the music, but he had no eyes. he did not 
feel ron slump against him. Strands of Tasha’s hair were matted on a button of 
ron’s jacket, but she did not move when he slumped. Something was hitting 
them like waves, like shock waves. . . .
 The 
musicians stood. The horn and Probe drew up the shadows now from 
the audience. a child climbed upon the chords of sound, growing out of the 
circle of the womb, searching with fingers and then with motive, and as the 
volume of the music increased penetrating the thick callousness of the irishan


--- PAGE 365 ---
344 Black, Brown, & Beige
twirling his stick outside of black flesh, the musicians walked off, one by one, 
linked to Probe’s respectful nod at each and his quiet pronouncement of their 
names
. he mopped his faced with a blue cloth.
 “What’s the matter here?”
 “Step aside, folks!”
 “These people are unconscious!”
 “look at their faces!”
 “They’re dead.”
 “Dead?”
 “What happened?”
 “Dead?”
 “it’s true then. it’s true. . . .”
Echo T ree: The Collected Short Fiction of Henry Dumas
Deusdedit de Morais
The young afro-Brazilian poet who calls himself Deusdedit is a co-
founder and member of the Surrealist Group in São Paulo in 2006—a 
group that has adopted the name Decollage.
 in addi
tion to his specifically surrealist activity, Deusdedit and his 
wife also operate what is widely regarded as the single best bookstore in 
São Paulo.
cafÉ de cher Bourg ( automatic Writing)
The living room is a chaos of immense universes and noises—the air oily and 
dizzy. T ouch the switch and the pallid lamp under the lampshade illuminates 
a tight room in protest. My soul is a window near the wall of this unfinished 
house in this dense parade of opaque lights which border the avenue almost 
devoid of cars.
i 
see myself in silence and pain, and a long rainbow escapes from me, from deep 
in my eyes, invading the living room, the furniture, the floor (bright and full 
of termites), throwing me, in less than a second, into the immensity of the rain 
and the emptiness.


--- PAGE 366 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 345
Clusters of car drones bluster at remote intervals, a crazy beggar curses the 
gods under the rain, a melancholic cab driver is immobilized in a suspended 
animation.
askia 
the Great walks in beauty and ferocity under the rain. aimé Césaire is 
my neighbor. out of vague territory comes an immense continent, ready to 
cross the earth, from north to south, and the volcanic blue of the cafe in “ les 
Parapluies de Cherbourg”—i wish it were my soul.
unpublished manuscript; translated by Marcus Salgado
Jayne Cortez
poetry coming a S Blue S and Blue S coming a S poetry
Blues singer John lee hooker once said: “i was born with the blues, i eat with 
the blues, i sleep with the blues because the blues comes from way way back.” 
leadbelly said: “ it’s that old feeling.” lightnin’ hopkins said: “ it’s real to my 
way of knowin’.” and for me that feelin’, that knowin’, that way way back is the 
angola one step, deep ocean currents, african ancestors, Black struggle and 
the miracle of survival.
 The poetry coming as blues and the blues coming as poetry is filled with the 
smell of fish fluid and leopard musk, the taste of volcanic rocks and cemetery 
head stones
. it is marked by black snakebites and is jammed with sermons at 
the crossroads, shipwrecks at the temptation club, conversations with invisible 
forces, competitive triangles, self-centered fixations, the aftermath of rebellious 
gestures and the meanness of madness smoldering and pacing in a circle of 4/4 
time. it is the feeling behind the feeling. and like the Bouki character of black 
folktales, the blues makes and solves its own contradictions. “it carries its own 
mind away.”
 i t
’s the search, the heat, and the showdown, the call, repeat, and response 
device. it is stripped to the bone of revolt and loneliness and is mystified in 
apprehension, masqueraded with tragedy, stuffed with exile, and vitalized with 
humour. it is “pulled out of the sky” and is a force that hears itself saying: “i love 
you baby, ain’t gonna tell you no lie, but the day you quit me that’s the day you 
die
.” it is dotted with protest: “We got so much trouble at home, we don’t need 
to go to vietnam.” it is the story of poetic verse.
 The story of performers/composers like Big Bill Broonzy, Bessie Smith,


--- PAGE 367 ---
346 Black, Brown, & Beige
Charlie Patton, howlin’ Wolf, J. B. lenoir, Son house, robert Johnson, Mem-
phis Minnie, Muddy Waters, Big Mama Thornton and others pushing the poetic 
fission of blues beyond repetition, stock phrases and structural limitations and 
into spontaneous intense vocaltudes. The blues is like a skeleton key opening 
the door to the cockpits, to the chaotic tornadoes, to the swaying chain gangs, 
to the stagnant ponds of racism, to the love potions, to sexual escapades, to the 
“drinkin’ and not thinkin’,” to “blues falling down like hail” and “hell hound on 
my trail,” to the bluntness “you’re like an old horseshoe that has had its day,” 
lines of r
esentment, “will i be called a man or do i have to wait till i’m 93.”
 i t is riddled with the lack of opportunity and money problems, “Y ou can’t 
spend what you ain’t got, you can’t lose what you ain’t never had.” it’s about 
“bad luck at your door” and “blues please turn your train around.” it’s about in-
struments imitating the human voice and the human voice imitating machines, 
imitating the howling of coyotes, and musicians fixing the form into a 12 mea-
sure structure. But the soul, the poetic fission of the blues can’t be fixed.
 i t 
is unruly, uncompromising and persistent. it is matted down in black cul-
tural matters when agitated it speaks like a whirlwind, stings like a bolt of light-
ning, tears a guitar to pieces, melts harmonicas, and pulverizes piano keys.
For the Bouki Blues Festival, January 10, 2002, St. louis, Senegal
free time friction
For T ed Joans (2003)
i heard that
a zillion mosquitoes
rode a million human ankles into
the twilight of madness
and even mudfish cults
took off their helmets as
crickets wailing like uncontrollable sirens
lifted you into
baritone fire of the eclipse
and night surfaced with ghosts from Katanga
with lava from city of Goma
with 
ouagadougou dust on words flying on
flying piranhas
back through
crevices of Timbuktu


--- PAGE 368 ---
Looking Ahead: Surrealism T oday and T omorrow 347
as you
entered yourself
drinking black stout
chewing kola nut
and riff-raffin’ like the great djali you were
with your inflamed spirit lungs
spotted okapi legs
and overheated bongo lips beating in
free-time-friction
very conflictive
very defensive
very Ted-u-nomadically
camel walking forward
& sand-dancing sideways into
a song swallowing its tooth on
a proverb that says:
“The fly has nobody to advise”
& it was
another dawn rising with murmuring roosters
another dump smoking through used wallets
another octopus throbbing between zoot-suited penguins
another prostate full of untamed windstorms
another ear of canned laughter embedded with
butcher rhythms backed by
horns turning corny lyrics into
beautiful instrumental music
& it was like
another sanctified shrine chalked in gun powder
another mask of assertive razors hanging in hallways
another agitated banjo drunk on crocodile tears sold
in plastic bottles to
other civilizations in the mirror of
other planets disappearing with
burros painted like zebras
flamboyant monkeys swinging on
rubber tires in medicine stalls
& the freeze dried bottom of Mars
re-entering steel-purifying-processes in
competition with blow-torch blow of
the trillion trilling tonalities assembled like jackals under


--- PAGE 369 ---
348 Black, Brown, & Beige
purple postal pulp of your tongue as you yelled
“Tell the Tuaregs i’m on my way”
and it was another pipeline in the treaty
another muted cornet call under
off shore drilling rigs
another bundle of bank notes smiling at
another shitty border dispute
& the battle for who you are
and what you feel
was saying that
“joy is more transient than grief”
& there are
all kinds of uninhabited areas
all sorts of extractions and precipitations
oozing from
sweet surreal marshes of your body splashing into
intersection for irresistible insurrections where
you sit like
an autographed picture that says:
the poet was what he was
and what he was looking for
and deeper than that is not deep
“T
ell the Tuaregs i’m on my way”
Jayne Cortez


--- PAGE 370 ---
after Word
Surrealism and the Creation  
of a Desirable Future
robin D. G. Kelley
i discovered surrealism buried under the rich, black soil of afro-diasporic 
culture. in it i found a most miraculous weapon with no birthdate, no expi-
rat
ion date, no trademark. i traced it from the ancient practices of Maroon 
societies and shamanism back to the future, in the metropoles of europe, and 
forward into the colonial world. i came to Breton through Césaire, came to 
Péret through richard Wright, came to leiris through Jayne Cortez, traveled 
to T oyen through Wifredo lam’s jungle on the backs of one of Ted Joans’ rhi-
nos
. although i’m still just a neophyte to this expansive, revolutionary thought 
and practice and i have much to figure out, surrealism has provided me with a 
clear and wide open window onto what freedom is all about.
 My coeditor, Franklin rosemont in Chicago provided me with a treasure 
map. and this book in many ways represents the fullest and richest articulation 
of the surrealist vision i have yet encountered. it’s fitting that my initial meet-
ing with Franklin and Penelope rosemont took place at the inaugural Black 
radical Congress in 1998, when revolutionaries and progressives from around 
the country and parts of the world converged on Chicago to figure out a way 
for
ward. as a committed Marxist among Marxists, i felt stuck. i knew all the 
“antis,” but the “pros” seemed less clear, aside from a vague understanding of 
what a socialist society might look like. But even that vision was mechanical, 
utilitarian, functional. it didn’t address feeling or the psyche, spirit or soul, or 
desire. in my own sort of halting, confused way, i tried to speak to what i be-
lieved was a failure to grasp desire in our efforts to imagine a revolutionary 
future. i suggested the surrealists might have something to offer, but i just was 
not sure what.
 i had an inspiration, though, thanks to a chance encounter with the late, 
great poet Ted Joans, who, along with his wife, laura Corsiglia, sat me down at 
an indian restaurant in Greenwich village and proceeded to give me a “Tedu-


--- PAGE 371 ---
350 Black, Brown, & Beige
cation.” he taught me that we must learn how to turn our mental chains into 
instruments of freedom—sax, trumpet, claves, drums, paint brushes, chisels—
weapons for beauty-making, not just retaliation or self-defense. From Ted i 
learned what it meant to be hip, to be cool, to possess the power to pull the 
marvelous out of a pot, a sweet potato pie, a champagne glass, a sliver of garlic, 
an abandoned piece of wood, a tattered roll of paper, a memory, a story, a song 
. . 
. laughter. a homeboy of Cairo, illinois, Joans came into the world on July 4, 
1928, but he was not born on a riverboat as legend would have it. he studied 
trumpet, sang bebop, and earned a bachelor’s degree in fine arts from indiana 
university before moving to Greenwich village in 1951. he was one of the 
original Beat poets, though you wouldn’t know it from most Beat anthologies. 
Joans was the granddaddy of bringing jazz and “spoken word” together on the 
bandstand. When his former roommate, the great saxophonist Charlie Parker, 
passed away in 1955, it was Joans who began scrawling “Bird lives!” all over 
lower Manhattan.1
 a well-known black expatriate, in the early 1960s Joans initially bypassed 
europe and went straight to africa, making Timbuktu his home base while 
he traveled throughout the continent and much of the world, reading poetry, 
making love, writing jazz criticism, creating “happenings” before that term be-
came 
popular, and turning a life into an adventure. he exchanged ideas with 
the leading figures of Surrealism, hung out with Jack Kerouac, met an admiring 
Malcolm X, 
broke bread with afro-Cuban painter Wifredo lam, shared bread 
with african american painter Bob Thompson, exchanged bread stories with 
singer and hustler “Babs” Gonzalez, and played invisible man when invitations 
came with . . . no bread.
 While andré Breton himself acknowledged Joans as the only african 
american surrealist he had ever met, Joans’ main man was langston hughes. 
one hears echoes of hughes in Joans’ poems as well as in his performance style. 
author of over thirty books of poetry, prose, and collage, including Black Pow-
W ow, All of T ed Joans and No More, Afrodisia, Double T rouble, and T education,2 Joans’ 
best-known statement is a poem titled “The Truth.” he warns us not to fear 
the poets, for they speak the truth; they are our seers, clairvoyants, visionaries. 
Joans knew that speaking truth was a dangerous thing, which is why he called 
one series of poems “hand grenades” since they were intended to “explode on 
the enemy and the unhip.” While his topics ranged from love, poverty and 
africa to the blues and rhinos, all of his writing, like his life, was a relentless 
revolt. in 1968, Joans dispatched his nearly-forgotten “Black Flower” statement, 
a surrealist manifesto that envisioned a movement of black people in the u.S. 
bringing down american imperialism from within with the weapon of poetic 
imagery, “black flowers” sprouting all over the land.3 While some of his poems


--- PAGE 372 ---
Surrealism and the Creation of a Desirable Future 351
blow up like a bomb, others spring to life like a fake snake in a can. his imagery 
is rich with humor, joy, and sensuality, evident in poems like the “Flying rats of 
Paris” or the darkly humorous “Deadnik.”
 a
s Ted put it succinctly: “Jazz is my religion, surrealism my way of life.”
 A way of life?
 So i stood there before my black radical comrades and quoted Ted and 
talked about creating “a way of life.” and amiri Baraka laughed and nodded. i 
think he was the only one. at the time i was woefully ignorant of his insightful 
and critical essay on aimé Césaire, published in his Daggers and Javelins: Essays, 
1974–1979.4 and i  remembered he once ran with Ted Joans back in the day. 
afterward, i ran into rosemont, a long-time mover of Charles Kerr publishers 
whose work i had been referencing just minutes earlier. i gained an even deeper 
appreciation for those four little words.
 a
nd thus was born nearly a decade-long correspondence and a confirma-
ti
on that the distance between socialism and surrealism is not so great. after 
all, surrealists have consistently opposed capitalism, promoted international-
ism, and have been strongly influenced by Marx and Freud in their efforts to 
bridge the gap between dream and action. indeed, they continue to demand 
the overthrow of bourgeois culture and insist that proletarian revolution is one 
of their “First Principles.” in other respects, surrealism is night to socialism’s 
day: it breaks the chains of social realism and rationality, turning to poetry as a 
revolutionary mode of thought and practice. i learned this from aimé Césaire’s 
great essay “Poetry and Cognition,” first published in 1945.5
 o
pening with the simple but provocative proposition that “Poetic knowl-
edge is born in the great silence of scientific knowledge,” he then attempts to 
demonstrate why poetry is the only way to achieve the kind of knowledge we 
need to move beyond the world’s crises. “What presides over the poem,” he 
writes, “is not the most lucid intelligence, the sharpest sensibility or the subtlest 
feelings, but experience as a whole.” This means everything—every history, 
every future, every dream, every life form from plant to animal, every creative 
impulse—plumbed from the depths of the unconscious. Poetry, therefore, is 
not what we simply recognize as the formal “poem,” but a revolt: a scream in 
the night, an emancipation from old ways of thinking—an emancipation of 
language.
 Consider Césaire’s third proposition regarding poetic knowledge: “Poetic 
knowledge is that in which man spatters the object with all of his mobilized 
riches.” Surrealism, in other words, is not an ideology but a state of mind, a 
“permanent readiness for the Marvelous,” as the late Suzanne Césaire once put 
it. T o embrace Surrealism is not a simple matter of reading a manifesto and 
signing a card; it requires a freeing of the mind, a willingness to enter


--- PAGE 373 ---
352 Black, Brown, & Beige
the domain of the strange, the marvelous and the fantastic, a domain 
scorned by people of certain inclinations. here is the freed image, daz-
zling and beautiful, with a beauty that could not be more unexpected 
and ov
erwhelming. here are the poet, the painter and the artist, presid-
ing over the metamorphoses and the inversions of the world under the 
sign of hallucina
tion and madness . . . here at last the world of nature 
and things makes direct contact with the human being who is again in 
the full
est sense spontaneous and natural. here at last is the true com-
munion and the true knowledge, chance mastered and recognized, the 
mystery now a friend and helpful.6
 Suzanne Césaire’s words were like a birth canal for me. They left me wet 
and vulnerable and curious about the world i thought i knew. She gave me 
new eyes and replaced all my nerve endings. The afro-Cuban painter Wifredo 
lam, another surrealist of the african diaspora, also taught me how to see anew. 
lam’s childhood in “black Cuba” actually prepared him for surrealism, exposing 
him to african culture as well as revolt. his godmother, Mantonica Wilson, 
was a practitioner of Santeria, and was consulted far and wide for remedies for 
physical and spiritual afflictions. lam studied art in Madrid and stayed long 
enough to participate in the defense of republican Spain during the Civil War 
and, partly through Picasso, studied african sculpture while in Paris. as lam 
embraced the marvelous, his work became more totem-like, less androcentric. 
“The Jungle,” one of his greatest paintings, offers one of the most powerful 
representations of Surrealist revolution. We are confronted with four monster-
like creatures of enormous feet and masks, surrounded by powerful spirits he 
knew from childhood—the orishas of his godmother’s religious practices. lam 
himse
lf thought of it as a representation of revolt but from the depth of the un-
conscious
. “My idea was to represent the spirit of the negroes in the situation 
in which they were then. i have used poetry to show the reality of acceptance 
and protest.”7
 l am rejected social realism at a time when most politically radical artists 
believed it was the only path to revolutionary art. instead, he sought to express 
“the negro spirit, the beauty of the plastic art of the blacks. in this way i could 
act as a Trojan horse that would spew forth hallucinating figures with the power 
to surprise, to disturb the dreams of the exploiters. i knew i was running the 
risk of not being understood either by the man in the street or by the others. 
But a true picture has the power to set the imagination to work, even if it takes 
time.”8
 r
ichard Wright tried to achieve with his writing what lam was attempting 
to do with his painting. like lam, Wright did not have to travel too far to find


--- PAGE 374 ---
Surrealism and the Creation of a Desirable Future 353
Surrealism; he was surrounded by it in the lives of black working people. in-
deed, his 1941 text, T welve Million Black V oices, captures the surrealist character of 
black life and turns to poetry as a means to elucidate alienation and its impact 
on the psyche. “The noise of our living,” he writes, “boxed in stone and steel, is 
so loud that even a pistol shot is smothered.”9 What a remarkable text! T welve 
Million Black V oices is in many ways a history that, in Baudelaire’s words, at-
tempts to “plunge to the bottom of the abyss, hell or heaven . . . to the bottom 
of the unknown in order to find the new!”10
 For 
Wright, plumbing the depths is not only an investigation into the un-
conscious but a plunge into the world of which history is often unconscious, 
where 
the actors/creators have no names, no faces. he is uninterested in the 
middle class, the success stories who are “like single fishes that leap and flash 
for a split second above the surface of the sea.” instead, he focuses on the “tragic 
school that swims below in the depths, against the current, silently and heavily, 
struggling against the waves of vicissitudes that spell a common fate.”11
 The 
hell, the tragic, the abyss. it is the dark-side of Surrealism that is, more 
often than not, the purview of black surrealists who understand that emanci-
pation begins by knowing the mind and understanding what black existential 
reality does to the psyche. We must then reckon with the work of adrienne 
Kennedy, henry Dumas, amiri Baraka, in addition to Wright and ellison and 
many others. in my book Freedom Dreams, i failed to reckon with this side of 
Surrealism because i was so set on discovering the Marvelous, on finding roads 
to emancipation. i did not come to terms with the multiplicities of Madness, 
the nightmares, the terrifying hallucinations embedded in the collective black 
unconscious.
 My mea culpa is sincere, but so is my peculiar journey to Surrealism. i
  focused 
on afro-diasporic artists not only because their work brought me to Surrealism, 
but because they each suggest that a thorough understanding and embrace of 
the Marvelous existed in the lives of Blacks and non-Western peoples, particu-
larly in music, dance, speech, the plastic arts, and above all philosophy. Perhaps 
my own dissatisfaction with “proletarian realism” has to do with the suppression 
of key elements of black culture that Surrealism embraced: the unconscious, 
the spirit, desire, magic, and love.
Baraka, duma S, kennedy— original S!
adrienne Kennedy’s play, “The ohio State Murders,” opens with playwright 
Suzanne alexander (her fictional alter ego) explaining to a college lecture hall 
why there is so much violent imagery in her work. She answers the question 
by telling the story of her college experience—a harrowing tale of racism, mur-


--- PAGE 375 ---
354 Black, Brown, & Beige
der, and betrayal. violent imagery erupts in her imagination because violence 
constitutes the context for black people’s lives in america. her plays focus on 
what the physical and psychological violence of racism and colonialism do to 
the psyche.
 Surr
ealist imagery dominates her work, which plumb the depths of the un-
conscious through dreamlike, hallucinatory flights of terror.12 her characters 
and the spaces they occupy are rendered surrealistically—like the “pale negro 
children” who are half human, half rat in “a rat’s Mass” (1966), or her hallucina-
tory 
conversations/monologues in works like “Funnyhouse of a negro,” (1964), 
“The owl answers,” (1965), “She Talks to Beethoven” (1989), and “Sleep De-
privation Chamber” (1996).13 although hallucinations are sometimes the path 
to clairvoyance, the outcomes are tragic because her dreams are nightmares—
much like the reality of black life.
 i n “Funnyhouse of a negro,” for example, Sarah’s hallucinations, which 
transform her room into a “funnyhouse” replete with a hall of mirrors and two 
sinister clowns mocking her, leads her to suicide. in her unconscious state, her 
identity is fragmented into four selves: Queen victoria, the Duchess of haps-
burg, P
atrice lumumba, and Jesus Christ. it is an extreme manifestation of Du-
Bois’ 
“double-consciousness” as multiple personality disorder. victoria and the 
Duchess not only represent Sarah’s “european” side but empire writ large—the 
empire that not only swept “africa” into modernity, but was brought to moder-
nity by afr ica. lumumba, bloodied is her african side, but more specifically 
her revolutionary opposition to racism and empire. and Jesus Christ, played 
as a yellow dwarf dressed in rags, is distorted, disfigured, and poor—symbolic 
of the 
distorted, corrupt and racist theology imposed on colonial subjects. in 
the age of decolonization, she underscores DuBois’ famous characterization of 
double-consciousness as “two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged 
strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.”14 and yet, while her dark 
(or rather mulatto) body is ultimately turn asunder, her warring identities are 
virtually identical, in that they repeat the same lines, sometimes in unison. The 
play speaks to her own sense of isolation—as a foreigner (she wrote much of 
“Funn
yhouse” in Ghana and rome), a wife of a frequently absent husband, a 
new mother, a black person in europe, an african american in africa, and as a 
lover of British literature in an age of anticolonialism. By plumbing the uncon-
scious to give voice to her own alienation, she speaks to the very collective and 
multilayered alienations that Frantz Fanon explores in Black Skin, White Masks  
(1952) and The Wretched of the Earth (1961).
 Bor
n in Pittsburgh in 1931, Kennedy grew up in Cleveland in a black middle-
class family. She was surrounded by fairy tales, and classic european litera-
ture, as well as black oral tradition, her father’s stories of racial uplift, and her


--- PAGE 376 ---
Surrealism and the Creation of a Desirable Future 355
mother’s dreams of death, suffering, and memory. rather than excerpt a pas-
sage from her plays, which is difficult to do out of context, we included a short 
section from her autobiographical, stream-of-consciousness compendium of 
influences on her work, People Who Led to My Plays (1987). The book essentially 
is a response to two simple questions: “Who influenced you to write in such a 
nonli
near way? Who are your favorite playwrights?” it provides a lens into what 
led Kennedy to surrealism.
 h
enry Dumas understood that part of what rendered black life surreal was 
the frequent confrontation with violence and death. The african american was 
a modern subject, born of slavery, Jim Crow, lynching, and police brutality. he/
she lived in brutal contradiction, offering america a vision of hope, freedom, 
and democracy, while every day confronting the possibility of violent death.
 Dumas’ 
short stories and poems illuminated this contradiction, and he ex-
per
ienced it firsthand. on May 23, 1968, a white transit cop fatally shot henry 
Dumas in a subway station at 125th Street in harlem. his crime? Singing out 
loud and putting his hands in his pockets when the cop approached him. in 
the dystopia known as black reality, this simple gesture rendered him a sus-
pect. he was thirty-three years old. For the Black arts Movement of which he 
was a beloved part, it felt like an assassination. after all, Dumas was known for 
creating characters that used music and poetry as weapons against The Man. 
as 
his friend and collaborator, poet eugene B. redmond, put it, “one needed 
very little imagination or coaxing to conclude that Dumas’ awesome abilities as 
a seer/sorcerer had been deemed dangerous enough to destroy.”15
 Wi
th characteristic insight, amiri Baraka declared Dumas an “ afro-Surreal 
expressionist,”16 a phrase he coined that could apply to any number of thinkers 
included 
in this text. in the tradition of black surrealists, freedom was Dumas’ 
obsession and black music was its highest form of expression. Y et, while black 
music gives voice to the Marvelous, for Dumas it also narrates the pain and vio-
lence of black existence; it is a lethal weapon in struggle, and a sigh of the spirit. 
and like Wifredo lam, richard Wright, and others, Dumas found his surreal-
ist imagery in black folk culture, particularly the realm of the spirit world. 
The arkansas-born, new Y ork-bred writer absorbed the prophetic teachings 
of the Bible as well as the world of hoodoo, spirit possession, ghosts, ancestor 
divination, Sufism, Buddhism, hinduism, and islam. he found in the churched 
and unchurched sacred world the mythic, magical, and imagistic elements that 
made up his brilliant short stories such as “ ark of Bones,” “Goodbye, Sweet-
water,” “Fon” and “rope of Wind.”17 Black sacred expressions—whether in the 
form of music, chants, sermons, prayer—spoke of death as a journey “home”; 
heaven as the reward for one’s labors, where there is no more labor, no more 
suffering, only pure love; a world where people can fly, speak all manner of


--- PAGE 377 ---
356 Black, Brown, & Beige
languages, engage spirits and angels, and can perform acts of physical transfor-
mation. in many ways, Dumas’ writing paralleled the musical explorations of 
John Coltrane and albert ayler (in my mind, the musical equivalent to Dumas 
who also died a violent death in new Y ork City at age 34), whose passage to 
the so-called “avant-garde” required a deep exploration of black sacred music. 
and 
it is no accident that just before his tragic murder, he was studying with 
composer/pianist/visionary Sun ra.
 The excerpt is from his short story “Will the Circle Be unbroken?” included 
in this volume. The story might read as a dark, violent tale, but it’s about black 
liberation and the lethal power of black liberation arts. Dumas tells the story 
of Pro
be, a musician whose magical “afro-horn” kills three whites (one a cop) 
who force their way into a black club despite warnings. The point here is that 
the “
new Thing,” the avant-garde, the music associated with Coltrane, ayler, 
Sun ra and archie Shepp, is lethal.
 Poet, playwright, essayist, propagandist, revolutionary, teacher, scholar, 
music critic, musician, amiri Baraka has been one of the most prolific and influ-
ential artists of the last half century. Despite a very long, critical engagement 
with Surrealism and Dadaism, going back at least to the publication of his poem 
“Black Dada nihilismus” (1964)18 and his novel, The System of Dante’s Hell (1965),19 
few critics have associated Baraka with surrealists. on the one hand, despite 
the surrealistic character of much of his writing—poetry and prose—he has 
leveled a very sharp critique of Surrealism as political practice from a Marxist-
leninist position. in his often ignored essay on aimé Césaire, Baraka acknowl-
edges Surrealism’s powerful critique of bourgeois society, but suggests that in 
its disillusionment with Western humanism it has erred in the direction of “ex-
oticism and primitivism.” Moreover, Surrealism simply doesn’t go far enough: 
“Surrealism calls for a disordering finally of the bourgeois world, but even that 
is momentary, and it does not really call for its destruction.”20
 o n 
the other hand, where surrealism is revolutionary is in its insistent re-
orderi
ng of reality and hence the imagination. For Baraka (and andré Breton), 
the juxtaposition of different elements in real life produce new associations, 
new meanings, and thus new possibilities. But he warns that the “rearrangement 
of reality” alone is not the point, but rather “the creation of a new reality after 
the destruction of the old.”21 While Baraka acknowledges the Paris Surrealist 
Group’s short-lived decision to join the Communist Party as an action intended 
to create a new reality, in his view the Surrealists have done more rearrang-
ing than changing. of course, given the history of activism among surrealist 
Groups worldwide, Baraka’s critique is a bit premature.
 n
evertheless, Baraka’s own commitment to creating a new reality is unassail-
able. For nearly five decades, he has been continually active in movements for


--- PAGE 378 ---
Surrealism and the Creation of a Desirable Future 357
change, from Black nationalist formations to Marxist-leninist-Maoist groups 
to community-based cultural forums. however he positions himself vis-à-vis 
Surrealism, Baraka is nonetheless responsible for some of the most forceful and 
revolutionary poetry to come out of the united States. What makes his poetry 
forceful is not just words but the “sound” and the effect. as critic/poet Sherry 
Brennan wrote, for Baraka the poem must act and have effect in the world. “ it 
does so directly, by taking up the activity and energy of a people, the history, 
economy, and struggle of a people, directly into the sound and force of the 
poem. T o write such poetry is to proceed by something other than linguistic 
sense. is to proceed by the spirit and material force that carries revolution itself. 
This force is the sound of poetry. . . . it is a black sound, and this black sound is 
a social body. it is an active body, a living justice, or the sound of justice carried 
under and through the language, which animates that language and speaks it as 
black as a black sound, as a black social body.”22
 The 
poem as an emancipation of language, a freeing of the imagination, a 
radical act. here we hear Baraka’s surrealism as revolutionary music. it should 
not surprise us, then, that some of his most powerful surrealist expressions 
erupt when he is exploring the emancipatory potential of black music.
dialectical method
That most black radicals did not jump on the Surrealist bandwagon, ironically, 
might have something to do with its very familiarity; its revolutionary core was 
recogn
ized as having always existed in black life. Throughout the african dias-
pora, one can plainly see the practice of Surrealism in everyday life—cultures 
that, for the most part, value imagination, improvisation, and verbal agility, 
from storytelling, preaching, singing, to toasting and the dozens. The emphasis 
on turning all expressions, practices, and communications into art coincides 
with lautréamont’s injunction that “Poetry must be made by all.”23 as early as 
1792, olaudah equiano described the world from which he was stolen as “a 
nation of dancers, musicians, and poets.”24
 Surrealism has not only compelled me to think differently about afro-
diasporic culture, about art and imagination, about ancient practices and the 
power of spirituality, it has also compelled me to think differently about Marx-
ism. as hard as it is for me to admit, i believe Marxism has failed to comprehend 
this elusive thing we call consciousness, despite wonderful efforts to incorpo-
rate 
psychoanalysis by Wilhelm reich and eric Fromm,25 writings on spiritu-
alit
y by ernest Bloch and Cornel West, and cultural insights of Georg lukacs 
and herbert Marcuse. (Marcuse, of course, drew a great deal from Surrealist 
writings in his own reassessments of Marxist philosophy late in his life.) Surreal-


--- PAGE 379 ---
358 Black, Brown, & Beige
ists took up the revolutionary implications of Freud and psychoanalysis even 
before reich, and retained a very strong dialectical method in their thinking. 
Y et, they have always pushed further, resisting notions of “progress” seen as so 
essential to modernity on both sides of the ideological spectrum; drawn on 
“primitive” ideas of dreams, magic, social organization; explored the explosive 
emotional realms of love and Madness.
 Conscious or not, Surrealist injunctions have been present in contempo-
rary anti-racist, feminist, gay and lesbian, indigenous, reparations, and environ-
mental justice movements. The very contexts of globalization and the latest 
manifestation of u.S. empire have generated new, expanded visions of what 
a “desirable future” might be. and steps toward realizing that vision is not de-
pendent upon seizing state power. The Zapatistas and autonomista movements 
in argentina, for example, question whether the goal of revolution is simply 
taking institutional power (state). instead, they are creating spaces for prefigur-
ing or modeling the world they want to create; to transform social relations and 
build a new society in these liberated zones. hakim Bey calls these Temporary 
autonomous Zones—and we see them popping up in latin america and i be-
liev
e here in the u.S.26
 The 
combination of the history of Third World liberation movements, anti-
racist struggles, the notion of Temporary autonomous Zones, radical feminism 
(especially as defined by women of color), and the challenge of u.S. militar-
ism, neoliberalism, and globalization, has inspired many youth organizations to 
develop new visions of a desirable future right here in the united States. one 
of the most Surrealist of the new movements is the Sista ii Sista Collective, a 
Brooklyn-wide community-based organization located in Bushwick. They de-
scribe themselves as “a collective of working class young and adult Black and 
latina women building together to model a society based on liberation and 
love. our organization is dedicated to working with young women to develop 
personal, spiritual and collective power. We are committed to fighting for jus-
tice and creating alternatives to the systems we live in by making social and 
political change.”27 They insist that internal, spiritual, and emotional transfor-
mation is essential to social transformation, and vice versa. Survival, in other 
words, 
is not simply making it alive to the next day. it is about crafting a sus-
tainable life, a loving life, a joyous life, a life worth living.
 as the texts gathered here demonstrate, Surrealism is not some lost, esoteric 
body of thought longing for academic recognition. it is a living practice and it 
will continue to live as long as we dream. For me at least, it takes us to places 
where Marxism and other “isms” in the name of revolution have yet to fully 
tread. Surrealism recognizes the decadence of Western civilization but doesn’t 
fall into the trap of cynicism or technotopias or fatalism and false prophets. nor 
is it some atavistic romanticization of the past. it considers, above all, love and


--- PAGE 380 ---
Surrealism and the Creation of a Desirable Future 359
poetry and the imagination as powerful social and revolutionary forces, not as 
a replacement for organized protest, for marches and sit-ins, for strikes and slow-
downs, for matches and spray paint. Surrealism recognizes that any revolution 
must begin with thought, with how we imagine a new World, with how we 
reconstruct our relationships with each other, with unleashing our desire and 
building a new future on the basis of love and creativity rather than rationality 
(which is the same word they use for improving capitalist production and limit-
ing peoples’ needs—rationalize/ration, etc.)
 Ther
e is no doubt that we need more bread, better homes, better schools, 
more time, better air to breathe and land on which to live. That goes without 
saying. But to stop there, to accept the rule of some bogus notion of pragma-
tism
, to not even delve into the question of Freedom seems so defeating. if we 
cannot articulate our dreams without being accused of being utopian and un-
realistic, then we might as well submit to the current order and open up more 
soup kitchens.
Notes
 1. Ted Joans interview with author, December 15, 1995; Ted Joans, “Je Me 
vois (i See Myself),” Contemporary Authors Autobiography Series, vol. 25 
(Detroi
t: Gale research, 1996).
 2. Ted Joans, A black manifesto in jazz poetry and prose (london: Cal der and 
Boyars, 1971); Black Pow-W ow: Jazz Poems (n ew Y ork: hill and Wang, 
1969); All of T ed Joans and no more; poems and collages (n ew Y ork, excelsior-
Press Publishers, 1961); Ted Joans and hart leroy Bibbs, Double trouble: 
Poems (Paris: rev ue noire, editions Bleu outremer, 1992); T education: 
selected poems 1949–1999 (Minneap olis, Mn: St Paul, Mn: Coffee house 
Press, 1999).
 3.
 Ted Joans, “Black Flower” L’Archibras 3 (March 1968), 10–11.
 4. 
amiri Baraka, Daggers and Javelins: Essays, 1974–1979 (n ew Y ork: Williams 
Morrow, 1984).
 5.
 aimé Césaire, “Poesie et Connaissance,” Tropique 12 (January 1945), 
translated and reprinted as “Poetry and Knowledge” in Refusal of the 
Shadow: Surrealism and the Caribbean, trans
 . by Michael richardson and 
Krzysztof Fijalkowski (london: verso, 1996), 134–145.
 6. Suzanne Césaire, “Domain of the Marvelous,” in Penelope rosemont, 
ed., Surrealist W omen: An International Anthology (a ustin: university of Texas 
Press, 1998), 137.


--- PAGE 381 ---
360 Black, Brown, & Beige
 7. lam quoted in lowery Stokes Sims, Wifredo Lam and the International Avant-
Garde, 1923–1982 (a ustin, Tex: university of Texas Press, 2002), 63; see 
also, Max-Pol Fouchet, Wifredo Lam (Bar celona: ediciones Polgrafa, S.a., 
1989 [2nd ed.]).
 8.
 lam quoted in Sims, Wifredo Lam and the International Avant-Garde, 62.
 9.
 richard Wright, T welve Million Black V oices (n ew Y ork:Thunder’s Mouth 
Press, 2003 [orig. 1941]), 108.
 10
. This line comes from Charles Baudelaire’s celebrated poem, “le voyage,” 
quoted in Charles Baudelaire, Flowers of Evil and Other W orks, edited and 
transla
ted by Wallace Fowlie (Mineola, nY: Dover Pub., 1992), 103.
 11. Both quotes from Wright’s preface to, T welve Million Black V oices, p. xx.
 12.
 on Kennedy’s surrealism see, Paul Bryant-Jackson, “intersecting Bound-
ari
es: The Surrealist Theatre of Poet/Playwright adrienne Kennedy,” 
African American Review 27 , no. 3 (1993 Fall), 495–500 [reprinted in robert 
Scanlan, “Surrealism as Mimesis: a Director’s Guide to adrienne Ken-
nedy’s Funnyhouse of a Negro,” in P aul K. Bryant-Jackson and lois More 
overbecke, eds., Intersecting Boundaries: The Theatre of Adrienne Kennedy (Min-
neapolis: 
university of Minnesota Press, 1992)], 93–109; Philip C. Kolin, 
Understanding Adrienne Kennedy (Columbia , SC: university of South Caro-
lina Press, 2005).
 13
. all published in adrienne Kennedy, The Adrienne Kennedy Reader (Minne-
apolis: 
university of Minnesota Press, 2001).
 14. W. e. B. DuBois, The Souls of Black Folk (Chicago: a. C. McClurg and Co., 
1903), 3.
 15
. eugene B. redmond, “introduction: The ancient and recent voices 
Within henry Dumas,” Black American Literature Forum 22, no. 2 (Summer 
1988), 144.
 16
. amiri Baraka, “henry Dumas: afro-Surreal expressionist,” Black American 
Literature Forum 22, no. 2 (Summer 1988), 164–166.
 17
. See Dumas, Echo T ree: The Collected Short Fiction of Henry Dumas (Minneapo-
lis, M
n: Coffee house Press, 2003), and his Play Ebony Play Ivory, ed. 
eugene B. 
redmond (new Y ork: random house, 1974), both published 
posthumously.
 18.
 reprinted in William J. harris, ed., The LeRoi Jones/Amiri Baraka Reader 
(n
ew Y ork: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1991), 71–72.


--- PAGE 382 ---
Surrealism and the Creation of a Desirable Future 361
 19. amiri Baraka, The System of Dante’s Hell (n ew Y ork: Grove Press, 1965).
 20. amiri Baraka, “aimé Césaire,” in William J. harris, ed., The LeRoi Jones/
Amiri Baraka Reader, 325 –326. The essay originally appeared in amiri 
Baraka, Daggers and Javelins: Essays, 1974–1979 (n ew Y ork: Morrow, 1984), 
189–200.
 21
. ibid., 332. as critic Maurice lee observed, “T o Breton, this perspective 
is the fusion of the waking and sleeping (dream) state, the unconscious 
with the conscious. T o Baraka this perspective is the fusion of the social 
with the individual, the existential self, that self that does not conform. 
Since, however, the societal self for the Black man is also nonconform-
ist and alienated, in image, language, and reality, his world is always 
fragmented. Duality, therefore, a double consciousness, or in a physical 
sense, ‘
schizophrenia,’ is a healthy state in a Barakian character. and, 
to Baraka, ‘healthy’ does not mean physically well so much as it means 
spir
itually functioning.” [Maurice lee, The Aesthetics of LeRoi Jones/Amiri 
Baraka: The Rebel (val encia: universitat de valencia, 2004), 31.] here is 
where Baraka meets adrienne Kennedy meets henry Dumas. although 
Kennedy’s fragmented identities signal a spiritual dis-ease, both agree 
that i
t is the existential reality of the modern black subject. and all 
three writers, if not virtually everyone gathered together in this book, 
regard the healthy functioning of the spirit as an essential precondition 
for emancipation.
 22
. Sherry Brennan, “on the Sound of Water: amiri Baraka’s ‘Black art,’” 
African American Review 37, n os. 2/3 (Summer–autumn, 2003), 309–310.
 23. Comte de lautréamont, Maldoror and Poems, transl . by Paul Knight (new 
Y ork: Penguin Books, 1978), 252.
 24.
 olaudah equiano, The Interesting Narrative and Other Writings (n ew Y ork: 
Penguin, 1995), 34.
 25
. robert S. Corrington, Wilhelm Reich: Psychoanalyst and Radical Naturalist 
(n
ew Y ork: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003); eric Fromm, The Art of 
Loving (london: T horsons, 1957); Psychoanalysis and Religion (n ew haven: 
Yale university Press, 1950); Marx’s Concept of Man (n ew Y ork: Frederick 
ungar, 1961); The Crisis of Psychoanalysis. Essays on Freud, Marx, and Social 
Psychology (n
 ew Y ork: holt, rinehart and Winston, 1970).
 26. hakim Bey, The T emporary Autonomous Zone: Ontological Anarchy, Poetic T error-
ism (Brooklyn, nY: autonomedia, 1991).
 2
7. “Sista ii Sista: hermana a hermana,” http://www.sistaiisista.org/main.html.


--- PAGE 383 ---
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK


--- PAGE 384 ---
Bibliography
adandé, a. Haiti, poètes noirs. Présence a fricane 12. Paris: Du Seuil, 1951.
ahmad, Muhammad (a.k.a. Maxwell Stanford, Jr.). W e Will Return in the Whirlwind: 
Black Radical Organizations, 1960–1975.  introduction by John Bracey. Chicago: 
Charles h. Kerr, 2007.
alexander, Will. The Stratospheric Canticles. Berkeley, Calif.: Pantograph Press, 1995.
al
exandrian, Sarane. Georges Henein. Paris: Seghers, 1981.
———. Histoire de la philosophie occulte. Paris: Éditions Seghers, 1994.
all
en, ron. “eye Mouth Graffiti Body Shop.” unpublished play.
———. Neon Jawbone Riot. Detroi t, Mich.: Weightless language Press, 2000.
almeida, Fernando Mendes de. Phantom Carrousel. São Paulo: editora SPeS, 1937.
anderson, T. J., iii. At Last Round Up. Somer ville, Mass.: lift Books, 1996.
———. Notes to Make the Sound Come Right: Four Innovators of Jazz Poetry.  Fayetteville: 
un
iversity of arkansas Press, 2004.
andrews, Wayne. The Surrealist Parade. n ew Y ork: new Directions, 1977.
antoine, régis. Les ecrivains français et les Antilles. Par is: Maisoneuve et larose, 1997.
aragon, louis. Les cloches de bâle. Paris: Denoël, 1960 (1934).
———. “Fragments d’une conférence.” La Revolution Surréaliste, no. 4 (July 15, 1925): 
23–25.
araujo, emanoel, ed. Abigail Moura: A Orquesta Afro-Brasileira.  São Paulo: negras 
Memórias, Memórias negros, 2003.
———. Elsie Houston: A feminilidade do canto. São Paulo: negras Memórias, Memórias 
negros, 2003.
arnold, a. James. Modernism and Negritude: The Poetry and Poetics of Aimé Césaire. Cam-
bridge
, Mass.: harvard university Press, 1981.
artaud, antonin. A la grand nuit ou le bluff surréaliste. Oeuvres complètes, vol. 1. Paris: Gal-
limard, 1956.
atkinson, J. edward. Black Dimensions in Contemporary American Art.  new Y ork: new 
american library, 1971.
Baeza Flores, alberto. La poesía dominicana en el siglo XX: Historia, crítica, estudio comparativo 
y estilístico. 4 vols. Santiago: universidad Católica Madre y Maestra, 1976–1986.


--- PAGE 385 ---
364 Black, Brown, & Beige
Baker, houston a., Jr. Blues, Ideology, and Afro-American Literature: A V ernacular Theory. 
Chicago: u
niversity of Chicago Press, 1984.
Balakian, anna. Surrealism: Road to the Absolute.  new Y ork: Dutton, 1959; revised 
1970.
Baldwin, James. No Name in the Street. n ew Y ork: Dell, 1972.
Baragaño, J. a. Wifredo Lam. ha vana, 1958.
Baraka, amiri. The Autobiography of LeRoi Jones. n ew Y ork: Freundlich Books, 1984.
———. Black Music. n ew Y ork: Da Capo Press, 1998.
———. Daggers and Javelins: Essays, 1974–1979. n ew Y ork: Morrow, 1984.
———. “ henry Dumas: afro-Surreal expressionist.” Black American Literature Forum 
22, no. 2 (Summer 1988).
———. The System of Dante’s Hell. n ew Y ork: Grove Press, 1965.
Bearden, romare, and harry henderson. A History of African American Artists. new 
Y ork: Pantheon, 1993.
Becker, heribert, edouard Jaguer, and Petr Kral. Das Surrealistiche Gedicht. Frankfort: 
Museum Bochum, 1985.
Bédouin
, Jean-louis. Vingt ans du surréalisme. Paris: Denoël, 1961.
Bélance, 
rené. Épaule d’ombre. Por t-au-Prince: imprimerie de l’État, 1945.
———. Luminaires. Port-au-Prince, hai ti: Morissett, 1941.
Benayoun, robert. Anthologie du nonsense. Paris: J. J. Pauvert, 1959.
———. Erotique du surréalisme. Paris: J. J. Pauvert, 1965.
———. Le rire des surréalistes. Par is: la Bougie de Sapeur, 1988.
Berry, Faith. Langston Hughes: Before and Beyond Harlem.  new Y ork: Citadel Press, 
1992.
———. Légitime Défense before and beyond Harlem. n ew Y ork: Citadel, 1982.
Biro, adam, and rené Passeron. Dictionnaire général du surréalisme et ses environs.  Paris: 
universitaires de France, 1982.
Bounoure, vincent. La civilisation surréaliste. Paris: Payot, 1976.
———. Moments du surréalisme. int roduction by Michael löwy. Paris: l’harmattan, 
1999.
Bracey, John, Jr. Black Nationalism in America. indianap olis, ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970.
———, august Meier, and elliott rudwick. Black Nationalism in America. indianapo -
lis, 
ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970.
Brandon, ruth. Surreal Lives: The Surrealists, 1917–1945. n ew Y ork: Grove Press, 1990.
Breá, Juan, and Mary low. Red Spanish Notebook: The First Six Months of the Revolution 
and the Civil W ar. int roduction by C.l.r. James. london: Martin Secker and War-
burg, 1937.
———. La verdad contemporánea. ha vana: Privately printed, 1943.
Breton, andré. L’Amour fou. Paris: Gallimard, 1937.
———. Arcane 17. n
 ew Y ork: Brentano, 1944.
———. L’Art magique. Par is: Club Français du livre, 1957.
———. “away with Miserabilism!” in Surrealism and Painting. new Y ork: harper & 
row, 1956.


--- PAGE 386 ---
Bibliography 365
———. La clé des champs. Paris: Pauvert, 1967.
———. Communicating V essels. T ranslated by Mary ann Caws. lincoln: university 
of nebraska Press, 1990.
———. “Distances.” in andré Breton, Les pas perdus. P aris: nouvelle revue Français, 
1924.
———. Entrétiens. Paris: nrF , 1969.
———
. Fata morgana. Buen os aires: Éditions des lettres Françaises, Sur, 1942.
———. Fata Morgana. Translated by Clark Mills. Chicago: Black Swan Press, 1969.
———. “ le jeu de Marseilles.” in andré Breton, La clé deschamps.  Paris: Pauvert, 
1967.
———. Martinique: Snake Charmer. Translated by David W. Seaman; introduction by 
Franklin 
rosemont. austin: university of Texas Press, 2008.
———. Nadja. Paris: Gallimard, 1928.
———. Oeuvres complètes. edi ted by Marguerite Bonnet et al. 3 vols. Paris: Galli-
mard, 1988–1999.
———. “Prolegomena to a Third Manifesto of Surrealism or not.” in What Is Sur-
realism: Selected Writings. n ew Y ork: Pathfinder, 2000.
———. “revolution now and Forever.” in What Is Surrealism? Selected Writings. new 
Y
ork: Pathfinder, 2000.
———. Martinique, charmeuse de serpents. Paris: Sagittaire, 1948.
———. Situation du surréalisme entre les deux guerres. P aris: Éditions de la revue Fontaine, 
1945.
———. “Sur l’échec du front populaire.” in Marguerite Bonnet et al., eds. Oeuvres 
complètes, vol. 2. Paris: Gallimard, 1992.
———. Surrealism and Painting.  T ranslated by Simon Watson Taylor. new Y ork: 
harper & row, 1972.
———. Le surréalisme et la peinture. Paris: Gallimard, 1965.
———. What Is Surrealism? Selected Writings. n
 ew Y ork: Pathfinder, 2000.
———. Y oung Cherry T rees Secured against Hares. T ranslated by edouard roditi. new 
Y ork: view editions, 1946.
———, ed. This Quarter: Surrealist Number. n ew Y ork: arno Press, 1969.
———, and Édouard Glissant. Cárdenas. Translated by John a shbery. Chicago: 
richard Feigen Gallery, 1961.
Breton, andré, and Gérard legrand. L’Art magique. Paris: Éditions Phebus, 1991.
Br
eton, andré, and Benjamin Péret. “revue de la presse.” Le Surréalisme au Service de la 
Révolution, no. 5 (May 15, 1933).
Br
icktop, with James haskins. Bricktop. n ew Y ork: atheneum, 1983.
Brown, Fahamisha Patricia. Performing the W ord: African American Poetry as V ernacular Cul-
ture. n ew Brunswick, n.J.: rutgers university Press, 1999.
Brown, Frank london. The Myth Maker: A Novel. Chicago: Path Press, 1969.
———. T rumbull Park. Chicago: regner y, 1959.
Brown, Kimberly n. “of Poststructuralist Fallout, Scarification, and Blood Poems: 
The revolutionary ideology behind the Poetry of Jayne Cortez.” in Kimberly n.


--- PAGE 387 ---
366 Black, Brown, & Beige
Brown, Other Sisterhoods: Literary Theory and U.S. W omen of Color. urbana: u niversity 
of illinois Press, 1998.
Brown, Sterling a. The Collected Poems of Sterling A. Brown. edi ted by Michael S. harper. 
Chicago: TriQuarterly Books, 1980.
———. The Negro Caravan. n ew Y ork: arno Press, 1970 (1941).
———. Southern Road. n ew Y ork: harcourt, Brace, 1932.
Brutus, Dennis. Poetry and Protest: A Dennis Brutus Reader.  edi ted by lee Sustar and 
aisha Karim. Chicago: haymarket Books, 2006.
———. Stubborn Hope. Washington, D.C.: Three Continents Press, 1978.
Br
yant-Jackson, Paul. “intersecting Boundaries: The Surrealist Theatre of Poet/Play-
wr
ight adrienne Kennedy.” African American Review 27, no. 3 (Fall 1993).
Buhle, Mari Jo. Encyclopedia of the American Left.  oxf ord: oxford university Press, 
1998.
Buhle, Paul, et al., Free Spirits: Annals of the Insurgent Imagination.  San Francisco: City 
lights, 1982.
Buñuel, luis. My Last Sigh. n ew Y ork: Knopf, 1983.
Cabral, amílcar. Revolution in Guinea: An African People’s Struggle.  london: Stage 1, 
1969.
———. Unity and Struggle: Speeches and Writings of Amílcar Cabral. int roduction by Basil 
Davidson. Biographical notes by Mário de andrade. new Y ork: Monthly review 
Press, 1979.
Calas, nicolas. Confound the Wise. n ew Y ork: arrow editions, 1942.
Camacho, Jorge. Le mythe d’Isis et d’Osiris. Par is: la Table d’emeraude, 1995.
Cardinal, roger, and robert Short, eds. Surrealism: Permanent Revelation. new Y ork: 
Dutton, 1970.
Caws, Mary ann. The Poetry of Dada and Surrealism.  Pr inceton, n.J.: Princeton uni-
versity Press, 1970.
Césaire
, aimé. Aimé Césaire: Écrivain martiniquais.  edi ted by S. Battestini. littérature 
africaine 9. Paris: Fernand nathan, 1967.
———. Les armes miraculeuses. Paris: Gallimard, 1946.
———. Cadastre. n
 ew Y ork: Third Press, 1973 (1961).
———. The Collected Poetry.  edi ted and introduced by Clayton eshleman and 
annette Smith. Berkeley & los angeles: university of California Press, 1983.
———. Discourse on Colonialism. int roduction by robin D. G. Kelley. Translated by 
Joan Pinkham. new Y ork: Monthly review Press, 2000 (1955).
———. Et les chiens se taisaient. Par is: Présence africaine. 1956.
———. Letter to Maurice Thorez. Par is: Présence africaine, 1956.
———. Lyric and Dramatic Poetry, 1956–1982. Charlot tesville: university Press of vir-
ginia, 1990.
———. Poètes d’aujourd’hui. Paris: Pierre Seghers, 1962.
———. Return to My Native Land (Cahier d’un retour au pays natal).  T
 ranslated by emil 
Snyders. Paris: Présence africaine, 1968.
———. A Season in the Congo. n ew Y ork: Grove Press, 1968.
———. A T empest: Based on Shakespeare’s The Tempest: Adaptation for a Black Theatre.


--- PAGE 388 ---
Bibliography 367
ubu repertory Theater Publications, 0738-4009: 14. new Y ork: G. Borchardt, 
1985 (1969).
———. The T ragedy of King Christophe. n ew Y ork: Grove Press, 1969.
Chapman, abraham, ed. New Black V oices: An Anthology of Contemporary Afro-American 
Literature. n ew Y ork: new american library, 1972.
Charpier, Jacques. Lam. Paris: le Musée de P oche, 1960.
Clarke, John henrik, ed. Harlem, U.S.A. n ew Y ork: Collier Books, 1971.
Cogollo, heriberto. Cogollo: Le monde d’un Nohor.  exhibit ion catalog. Paris: Galerie 
Suzanne visat, 1973.
Cole, Bill. John Coltrane. n ew Y ork: Da Capo Press, 1993.
Colquhoun, ithell. Goose of Hermogenes. london: P eter owen, 1961.
Coombs, orde, comp. Is Massa Day Dead? Black Moods in the Caribbean. Garden City, 
n.Y.: 
anchor Books, 1974.
Cooper, anna Julia. A V oice from the South. new Y ork: oxford university Press, 1988 
(1892).
Cooper, Wayne F. Claude McKay: Rebel Sojourner in the Harlem Renaissance. B aton rouge: 
louisiana State university Press, 1987.
Cortez, Jayne. The Beautiful Book. n ew Y ork: Bola Press, 2007.
———. Firespitter. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1982.
———. Jazz Fan Looks Back. Brooklyn , n.Y.: hanging loose Press, 2002.
———. Mouth on Paper. n ew Y ork: Bola Press, 1977.
———. Poetic Magnetic. n ew Y ork: Bola Press, 1991.
———. Scarifications. n ew Y ork: Bola Press, 1973, 1978.
———. Somewhere in Advance of Nowhere. n ew Y ork: Serpent’s Tail, 1996.
Cossery, albert. The House of Certain Death. n ew Y ork: new Directions, 1949.
———. The Lazy Ones. T ranslated by Willia Goyen. norfolk, Conn.: new Direc-
tions, 1949.
———. Men God Forgot. Transla ted by h.e. Berkeley, Calif.: G. leite, 1946.
Costa, Sosígenes. Morro do desterro. São Paulo: editora Cultrix, 1979.
Cripps, louise. C.L.R. James: Memories and Commentaries. n ew Y ork: Cornwall, 1997.
———. Puerto Rico: The Case for Independence. Dorado, P .r.: Borinquen Books, 1993.
Crowder, henry, with hugo Speck. As W onderful As All That?  int roduction by 
robert l. allen. navarro: Wild Trees Press, 1987.
Cruz è Souza, João da. Evocações. r io de Janeiro: Typographia aldina, 1898.
Cunard, nancy, ed. Negro Anthology. london: W ishart & Co., 1934.
Damas, léon-Gontran. African Songs of Love, W ar, Grief, and Abuse. ibadan , nigeria: 
Mbari Publications, 1961.
———. “a Caribbean view on Sterling a. Brown.” in Sterling A. Brown: A UMUM 
T ribute. Philadelphia: Black history Museum uMu M Publishers, 1976.
———. Pigments. Paris: Gl M, 1937.
———. Névralgies. Paris: Présence africaine, 1972.
———
. Poètes d’expression française (d’Afrique Noire, Madagascar, Réunion, Guadeloupe, Mar-
tinique, Indochine, Guyane) 1900–1945. Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1947.
———. V eillées noires. o ttawa: Éditions leméac, 1972 (1943).


--- PAGE 389 ---
368 Black, Brown, & Beige
Davidson, Basil. The Liberation of Guiné. Middlesex, eng.: Penguin Books, 1969.
de andrade, Mário. Será o Benedito!  São Paulo: Pontifícia universidade Católica, 
1992.
———, and aimé Césaire. Modernisme brésilien et négritude antillaise. P aris: harmattan, 
1999 (1957).
Despres, leon. Challenging the Daley Machine. evanston, i ll.: northwestern university 
Press, 2005.
Deveney, John Patrick. Paschal Beverly Randolph: A Nineteenth Century Black American 
Spiritualist, Rosicrucian, and Sex Magician. (albany: State university of new Y ork 
Press, 1997.
Documents 34. repr inted in L’Arc 37. Paris: n.d.
Drake, St. Clair. The American Dream and the Negro: 100 Y ears of Freedom? Chicago: roose-
velt university, 1964.
———. Black Folk Here and There: An Essay in History and Anthropology. 2 vols. los ange-
les: Center for afro-american Studies, university of California, 1987–1990.
———. The Redemption of Africa and Black Religion. Chicago: Third World Press, 1991 
(1970).
———, and horace r. Cayton. Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern 
City. introduction by richard Wright. 2 vols. new Y ork: harper T orchbooks, 
1962 (1945).
Ducornet, Guy. Ça va chauffer! Situation du surréalisme aux U.S.A., 1966–2001. Mons: Talus 
d’approche, 2001.
———. Le punching-ball & la vache lait: La critique universitaire nord-américaine face au sur-
réalisme. Paris: act ual/Deléatur, 1992.
Dumas, henry. Ark of Bones and Other Stories.  edi ted by eugene B. redmond. new 
Y ork: random house, 1974.
———. Echo T ree: The Collected Short Fiction of Henry Dumas. Minneapolis, Minn.: Cof-
fee 
house Press, 2003.
———. Jonoah and the Green Stone. n ew Y ork: random house, 1976.
———. Knees of a Natural Man: Poetry. n ew Y ork: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1989.
———. Play Ebony: Play Ivory. edi ted by eugene B. redmond. new Y ork: random 
house, 1974.
Durozoi, Gérard. Histoire du mouvement surréaliste. Par is: hazan, 1997.
edwards, Melvin, and Jayne Cortez. Fragments. n ew Y ork: Bola Press, 1994.
el alailly, ikbal. V ertu de l’Allemagne. Cairo: Éditions Masses, 1945.
el Janabi, abdul Kader. Horizon vertical.  T ranslated by Charles illouz and Mona 
huerta. arles, France: actes Sud, 1998.
ellison, ralph. The Collected Essays of Ralph Ellison. edi ted by John F. Callahan. Preface 
by Saul Bellow. new Y ork: Modern library, 1995.
———. Invisible Man. n ew Y ork: Signet, 1952 (1947).
———. Shadow and Act. n ew Y ork: vintage Books, 1972 (1953).
Éluard, Paul. Selected Writings. n orfolk, Conn.: new Directions, n.d.
———. “la suppression de l’ésclavage.” La Révolution Surréaliste, no. 3 (1925).


--- PAGE 390 ---
Bibliography 369
equiano, olaudah. The Interesting Narrative and Other Writings.  ne w Y ork: anchor 
Books, 1995 (1789).
esenwein, George. “Testament of a revolution.” Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, no. 4 
(1989).
eshleman, Clayton, and annette Smith, trans. Aimé Césaire: The Collected Poetry. Berke-
le
y & los angeles: university of California Press, 1983.
Fabre, Michel. The Unfinished Quest of Richard Wright.  urbana: u niversity of illinois 
Press, 1993.
———, et al., eds. The French Critical Reception of African-American Literature: From the 
Beginnings to 1970. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1995.
———. From Harlem to Paris: Black American Writers in France, 1840–1980. urbana: u ni-
versi
ty of illinois Press, 1991.
Fabre d’olivet, antoine. Miscellanea Fabre d’Olivet. n ice: Claude Boumendil, 2000.
Fanon, Frantz. Black Skin, White Masks. n ew Y ork: Grove Press, 1968.
———. The Wretched of the Earth. n ew Y ork: Grove Press, 1963 (1961).
Ferlinghetti, lawrence, ed. City Lights Anthology. San Francisco: City lights Books, 
1974.
Flamand, Élie-Charles. “ introduction.” Les oeuvres de Nicolas Flamel.  Paris: Éditions 
Pierre Belfond, 1973.
Ford, Karen. “ on Cortez’s Poetry.” in Karen Ford, Gender and the Poetics of Excess.  
oxford: university Press of Mississippi, 1997.
Fouchet, Max-Pol. Wifredo Lam. Paris: Éditions Cercle d’art, 1976.
Fowlie, Wallace. Age of Surrealism. Bloomi ngton: indiana university Press, 1960.
Frutkin, Susan. Aimé Césaire: Black between W orlds. Miam i, Fla.: university of Miami 
Press, 1973.
Fry, varian. Surrender on Demand. Boulder, Colo.: Johnson Books, 1997 (1945).
Fusco, 
rosário. O agressor: Romance. r io de Janeiro: J. olympio, 1943.
———. Poemas cronológicos. r io de Janeiro: José olympio, 1940.
Garon, Paul. Blues and the Poetic Spirit. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1996.
———. The Devil’s Son-in-Law: The Story of Peetie Wheatstraw and His Songs.  london: 
Studio vista, 1971.
———. What’s the Use of W alking If There’s a Freight T rain Going Y our W ay? Black Hoboes 
and Their Songs. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2006.
———, and Beth Garon. W oman with Guitar: Memphis Minnie’s Blues. new Y ork: Da 
Capo Press, 1992.
Gascoyne, David. A Short Survey of Surrealism. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1982.
Gaudibert, Pierre, and Jacques leenhardt. Wifredo Lam: Oeuvres de Cuba.  Paris: 
librairie Séguier, 1989.
Gayle, addison, Jr., ed. The Black Aesthetic. n ew Y ork: anchor Books, 1972.
Gershman, herbert. The Surrealist Revolution in France.  ann ar bor: university of 
Michigan Press, 1969.
Gertrude Abercrombie and Friends. exhibition catalog. Springfield: illinois State Museum, 
1983.


--- PAGE 391 ---
370 Black, Brown, & Beige
Gillespie, Dizzy. Gertrude Abercrombie. Chicago: h yde Park art Center, 1977.
Gonzales, Babs. I Paid My Dues: Good Times—No Bread.  east orange , n.J.: expubi-
dence Publishing, 1967.
Granell, e. F. “la aventura surrealista en las antiles.” in El surrealismo entre viejo y nuevo 
mundo. exhibition catalog. Gran Canaria: Centro atlántico de arte Moderno, 
1989–1990.
Gysin, Brion. T o Master—A Long Goodnight: The Story of Uncle T om. new Y ork: Creative 
age Press, 1946.
harrington, oliver W. Why I Left America and Other Essays. J ackson: university Press 
of Mississippi, 1993.
harr
is, Wilson. Eternity to Season. london: new Beacon, 1978.
———. Palace of the Peacock. london: F aber & Faber, 1960.
———. T radition: The Writer and Society. Por t of Spain: new Beacon, 1967.
henein, Georges. Oeuvres. Paris: Denoël, 2006.
hellwig, David J., ed. African-American Reflections on Brazil’s Racial Paradise.  Philadel-
phia: Temple university Press, 1992.
henderson, Stephen. Understanding the New Black Poetry: Black Speech and Black Music as 
Poetic References. n ew Y ork: William Morrow, 1973.
henein, Georges. De la liberté comme nostalgie et comme projet.  P aris: arabie-sur-Seine, 
1984.
———. Déraisons d’être. Paris: Éditions de la Géhenne, 1999.
———. L’esprit frappeur (Carnets 1940–1973). Par is: encre Éditions, 1980.
———. La force de saluer. Paris: Éditions de la Différence, 1978.
———. Notes sur un pays inutile. Paris: Puyraimond, 1977.
———. Pour une conscience sacrilège. Cairo: Éditions Masses. 1944.
———. Qui est Monsieur Aragon? Cairo: Éditions Masses, 1945.
———. Le signe le plus obscur. Paris: Puyraimond, 1977.
henr
y, Marjorie louise. Stuart Merrill: La contribution d’un Américain au symbolisme fran-
çais. Paris: Éditions Champion, 1927.
henry, Paget, and Paul Buhle, eds. C.L.R. James’s Caribbean. D urham, n.C.: Duke 
university Press, 1992.
herriman, George. Krazy Kat. n ew Y ork: h. holt, 1946.
hill, herbert. Soon, One Morning: New Writing by American Negros, 1940–1962. new Y ork: 
Knopf, 1968.
huddl
eston, Sisley. Paris Salons, Cafes, Studios. n ew Y ork: Blue ribbon Books, 1928.
hurston, Zora neale. Dust T racks on a Road: An Autobiography.  Philadelphia: J. B. 
lippincott, 1942.
———. Mules and Men. Phi ladelphia: J. B. lippincott, 1935.
———. T ell My Horse. Phi ladelphia: J. B. lippincott, 1938.
ignatiev, noel. How the Irish Became White. n ew Y ork: routledge, 1995.
Jablonski, Joseph. “Millennial Soundings.” in Paul Buhle et al., Free Spirits: Annals of the 
Insurgent Imagination. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1982.
Jahn, Janheinz. Muntu: African Culture and the W estern W orld. int roduction by Calvin C. 
hernton. new Y ork: Grove Weidenfeld, 1990 (1961).


--- PAGE 392 ---
Bibliography 371
———. Neo-African Literature: A History of Black Writing.  new Y ork: Grove Press, 
1968.
James, C.l.r. The Black Jacobins: T oussaint L’Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution.  
new Y ork: vintage Books, 1963.
———. Facing Reality: The New Society: Where to Look for It & How to Bring It Closer. With 
the collab
oration of Cornelius Castoriadis; new introduction by John h. Bracey. 
Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2006.
———. A History of Pan-African Revolt. int roduction by robin D. G. Kelley. Chicago: 
Charles h. Kerr, 2005 (1938).
———. Minty Alley. london: M . Secker & Warburg, 1936.
———, and Grace C. lee. Facing Reality. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2006.
James, Winston. A Fierce Hatred of Injustice: Claude McKay’s Jamaica and His Poetry of Re-
bellion. london & new Y ork: verso, 2000.
Joans, Ted. Afrodisia: New Poems. n ew Y ork: hill & Wang, 1970.
———. All of T ed Joans and No More: Poems and Collages. new Y ork: excelsior Press, 
1961.
———. “Bird and the Beats.” Coda, no. 181 (1981).
———. Black Power Manifesto. Arsenal: Surrealist Subversions, no. 2.
———. Black Pow-W ow: Jazz Poems. n
 ew Y ork: hill & Wang, 1969.
———. Funky Jazz Poems. n ew Y ork: rhino review, 1959.
———. The Hipsters. n ew Y ork: Corinth Books, 1961.
———. Okapi Passion. Berk eley, Calif.: ishmael reed, 1994.
———. Our Thang: Several Poems, Several Drawings. illust rations by laura Corsiglia. 
victoria, B.C.: ekstasis editions Canada, 2001.
———. Proposition pour un manifeste Pouvoir Noir. Translated by Jeannine Ciment and 
rob
ert Benayoun. Paris: eric losfeld, 1969.
———. Sure, Really I Is. har pford, Sidmouth, Devon: Transformaction, 1982.
———. T education: Selected Poems 1949–1999. Mi nneapolis, Minn.: Coffee house Press, 
1999.
———. WOW . illust rated by laura Corsiglia. Mulkiteo, Wash.: Quartermoon 
Press, 1999.
———, and hart leroy Bibbs. Double T rouble. Par is: Éditions Bleu outremer, 1992.
Joans, Ted, and Joyce Mansour. Flying Piranha. n ew Y ork: Bola Press, 1978.
Joans, Ted, et al., eds. Dies und Das. Berlin: Dies und Das, 1984.
Johnson, Fenton. A Little Dreaming. College Park, Md.: McGrath, 1969 (1913).
———. Songs of the Soil. n
 ew Y ork: F.J., 1916.
———. T ales of Darkest America.  Fr eeport, n.Y.: Books for libraries Press, 1971 
(1920).
———. Visions of the Dusk. n ew Y ork: F.J., 1915.
Johnston, Percy edward. Phenomenology of Space and Time. n ew Y ork: Dasein, 1976.
Jolas, eugene, ed. T ransition W orkshop. n ew Y ork: vanguard Press, 1949.
Jones, edward a. V oices of Negritude: The Expression of Black Experience in the Poetry of Seng-
hor, Césaire and Damas. vall ey Forge, Penn.: Judson Press, 1971.


--- PAGE 393 ---
372 Black, Brown, & Beige
Jones, leroi. Blues People: Negro Music in White America. new Y ork: William Morrow, 
1963.
Josep
h, anthony. T eragaton. london: P oison engine Press, 1997.
Josephson, Matthew. Life among the Surrealists. n ew Y ork: holt, rinehart, 1962.
Joubert, alain. Le mouvement des surréalistes ou le fin mot de l’histoire: Mort d’un groupe—nais-
sance d’un mythe. Par is: Maurice nadeau, 2001.
Karanja, ayana i. Zora Neale Hurston: The Breath of Her V oice. new Y ork: Peter lang, 
1999.
Kaufman, Bob. The Abomunist Manifesto. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1959.
———. The Ancient Rain: Poems 1956–1978. edi ted by raymond Foye. new Y ork: new 
Directions, 1981.
———. Cranial Guitar. Minneap olis, Minn.: Coffee house Press, 1996.
———. Golden Sardine. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1967.
———. Solitudes Crowded with Loneliness. n ew Y ork: new Directions, 1965.
Kelley, robin D. G. Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination.  Boston: Beacon 
Press, 2002.
———. Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists during the Great Depression.  Chap el hill: 
university of north Carolina Press, 1990.
———. Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black W orking Class. new Y ork: Free Press, 
1994.
———. Y o’ Mama’s Disfunktional! Fighting the Culture W ars in Urban America. Boston: Bea-
con Press, 1997.
———, 
and earl lewis, eds. T o Make Our W orld Anew: A History of African Americans. 
oxf
ord: oxford university Press, 2000.
Kennedy, adrienne. People Who Led Me to My Plays.  new Y ork: Theatre Communi-
cations Group, 1987.
Kerouac, Jack. The Dharma Bums. n ew Y ork: viking Press, 1971 (1958).
Kesteloot, lilyan. Les écrivains noirs de langue française: Naissance d’une littérature. Brussels: 
un
iversité libre de Bruxelles, 1965.
———. Poètes d’aujourd’hui: Aimé Césaire. Paris: Éditions Pierre Seghers, 1962.
Ko
ber, Marc, ed., with iréne Fenoglio and Daniel lançone. Entre nil et sable: Écrivains 
d’Égypte d’expression française (1920–1960). P aris: Centre national de Documentation 
Pédagogique, 1999.
Kréa
, henri. Revolution and Poetry Are One and the Same Thing. Paris, 1960.
———. La révolution et la poésie. Paris: M. J. Minard, 1965.
Krim, Seymour, ed. The Beats: A Gold Medal Anthology. n
 ew Y ork: Gold Medal, 1960.
Kuhn, reinhard. The Return to Reality: A Study of Francis Viélé-Griffin. G eneva: a Droz, 
1962.
laâbi, 
abdellatif. Rue du Retour. london: readers international, 1989 (1982).
laCoss, Don. Surrealism in ’68: Paris, Prague, Chicago. Chicago: Surrealist research & 
Development Monograph Series, 2008.
lam, 
Wifredo. Wifredo Lam: Figures cara bes. exhibit ion catalog. Preface by Édouard 
Jaguer. Paris: Galerie Thessa herold, 2002.
lamantia, Philip. Bed of Sphinxes. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1997.


--- PAGE 394 ---
Bibliography 373
lariby, Farid. Hater l’exigence. Par is: hourglass editions, 1990.
———. Homage a Farid Lariby. Par is: hourglass editions, 1990.
la rose, John. Foundations: A Book of Poems. P ort of Spain: new Beacon Publications, 
1966.
lautréamon
t, Comte de (isidore Ducasse). Les chants de Maldoror. Paris: Éditions de 
la renaissance
, 1967 (1869).
———. Poèsies. london: allison & Busby, 1978.
lebel, J.-J., and Tristan Sauvage. Front unique. Milan, 1959.
lebo
vics, herman. T rue France: The W ars over Cultural Identity, 1900–1945. ithaca, n.Y .: 
Cornell university Press, 1992.
lecherbonnier, Bernard. Surréalisme et Francophonie; la chair du verbe: Histoire et poétique des 
surréalismes de langue française. Montreal: Éditions Publisud, 1992.
legrand
, Gérard. Preface au système de l’eternité. Par is: losfeld, 1971.
———. Puissances du jazz. Par is: arcanes, 1953.
leiner, Jacqueline, ed. Soleil éclaté: Mélanges offerts à Aimé Césaire à l’occasion de son soixante-
dixième anniversaire / par une équipe internationale d’artistes et de chercheurs.  Tübingen: 
G. narr, 1984.
leiris, Michel. Wifredo Lam. n ew Y ork: abrams, 1972.
lemaitre, Georges. From Cubism to Surrealism in French Literature.  Cambridge, Mass.: 
harvard university Press, 1945.
leperlier, François. “la solution poétique.” in andré Breton, Oeuvres complètes, edited 
by Marg
uerite Bonnet et al. vol. 3. Paris: Gallimard, 1998.
léro, etienne, et al. Légitime défense. T ranslated by alex Wilder. Arsenal: Surrealist Sub-
version, no. 2 (1973).
léro
, Yva. Peau d’ébène: Poèmes. Martinique: Copyrapid Carbet, 1979.
lima
, Jorge de. Invenção de Orfeu. r io de Janeiro: livros de Portugal, 1952.
———. A pintura em pânico. r io de Janeiro: J. de lima; Tip. luso-Brasileira, 1943.
lima, Sérgio. A aventura surrealista. 4 vols. Campinas, S.P ., Brazil: editora de univer-
sidade estadual de Campinas; São Paulo, S.P , Brazil: Fundação para o Desen-
volvimento da uneSP: editora uneSP; Petrópolis, r.J., Brazil: editora vozes, 
1995–.
———. O corpo significa. São Paulo: eDarT, 1976.
lippard, lucy, ed. Surrealists on Art. e nglewood Cliffs, n.J.: Prentice-hall, 1970.
litweiler, John. The Freedom Principle: Jazz after 1958.  new Y ork: William Morrow, 
1984.
———. Ornette Coleman: A Harmolodic Life. n ew Y ork: Da Capo Press, 1994.
lomax, alan, and raoul adbul, eds. 3000 Y ears of Black Poetry. new Y ork: Dodd, 
Mead, 1984.
low, Mary, and Juan Breá. La saison des flûtes. Par is: arabie-sur-Seine, 1987.
Mabille, Pierre. Egrégores, ou la vie des civilisations. Paris: Jean Flory, 1938.
———. Le miroir du merveilleux. Par is: les Éditions du Minuit, 1962.
Magloire-Saint-aude, Clément. Dialogue de mes lampes et autres textes. Paris: Jean Michel 
Place, 1998.


--- PAGE 395 ---
374 Black, Brown, & Beige
Maisonet, luis a. Arte para la escuela elemental. San Juan, P .r.: editorial del Departa-
men
to de instrucción Pública, estado libre asociado de Puerto rico, 1955.
Malcolm X. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. n ew Y ork: Ballantine Books, 1973.
———. By Any Means Necessary. edi ted by George Breitman. new Y ork: Pathfinder, 
1970.
Mansour, Joyce. Le bleu des fonds. Par is: le Soleil noir, 1968.
———. Ça. Paris: le Sol eil noir, 1970.
———. Carré blanc. Paris: le Sol eil noir, 1965.
———. Flash Card. Cambr idge, Mass.: Cherry valley editions, 1978.
———. Les gisants satisfaits. Paris: Société des Éditions Jean-Jacques Pauvert, 1958.
———. Histoires nocives: Jules César îles flottantes. Paris: Gallimard, 1973.
———. Jules César. Paris: Pierre Seghers, 1958.
———. Phallus et Momies. Paris: Daily-Bul, 1970.
———. Prose and Poésie. Par
 is: actes Sud, 1991.
———. Rapaces. Paris: Pierre Seghers, 1960.
———. Screams. Sausalito
 , Calif.: Post-apollo Press, 1995.
Marat, Jean-Paul. “Du droit qu’ont nos colonies de secouer le joug tyranique de la 
metropole.” Front Unique 1 (1959).
Masson, 
andré. Anatomy of My Universe. n ew Y ork: C. valentin, 1943.
———. Nocturnal Notebook. n ew Y ork: C. valentin, 1944.
Matthews, Marcia M. Henry Ossawa T anner: American Artist. Chicago: u niversity of 
Chicago Press, 1969.
McCulloch, Jock. In the T wilight of Revolution: The Political Theory of Amílcar Cabral. lon-
don: routl
edge & Kegan Paul, 1983.
McKay, Claude. Banjo: A Story without a Plot. n ew Y ork: harper & Brothers, 1929.
———. A Long W ay from Home: An Autobiography. int roduction by St. Clair Drake. 
new Y ork: harcourt, Brace & World, 1970 (1937).
Melham, D. h. Heroism in the New Black Poetry: Introductions & Interviews.  lexin gton: 
university Press of Kentucky, 1990.
Mendes de almeida, Fernando. Carrussel fantasma. São Paulo: editora Spes, 1937.
Ménil, rené. T racées: Identité, négritude, esthétique aux Antilles.  P aris: robert laffont, 
1981.
Meyrelles, isabel, et al. Inácio Matsinhe: T ransformei-me em tartaruga para resistir. Colecção 
art
istas de Moçambique. lisbon: Casa viva, 1974.
Michel, Jean-Claude. Les ecrivains noirs et le surréalisme.  Sherbrooke, Qué., Canada: 
naaman, 1982.
Michel, Jean-Paul. Mohammed Khaïr-Eddine (1941–1995).  Bordeaux: William Blake, 
1995.
Miller, eugene e. V oice of a Native Son: The Poetics of Richard Wright. J ackson: university 
Press of Mississippi, 1990.
Millette, James. “The Black revolution in the Caribbean.” in Is Massa Day Dead? Black 
Moods in the Caribbean, orde Coombs, comp. Garden City, n.Y.: anchor, 1974.
Miner, luke. Jazz in Paris. n ew Y ork: The little Bookroom, 2005.


--- PAGE 396 ---
Bibliography 375
Missir, Marie-l aure. Joyce Mansour, une étrange demoiselle.  Paris: Jean-Michel Place, 
2005.
Monnerot, Jules. Les faits sociaux ne sont pas de choses. Paris: Gallimard, 1946.
———. Inquisitions. Paris: librairie José Corti, 1974.
———
. La poésie moderne et la sacré. Paris: Gallimard, 1945.
———. Sociology of Communism. T ranslated by Jane Degras and richard rees. West-
port, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1976 (1949).
Mudimb
e, v. Y., ed. The Surreptitious Speech: Présence Africaine and the Politics of Otherness, 
1947–1987. Chicago: u niversity of Chicago Press, 1992.
nadeau, Maurice. The History of Surrealism. n ew Y ork: Macmillan, 1965.
ndiaye, Jean-Pierre. La jeunesse africaine face l’impérialisme.  Paris: François Maspero, 
1971.
neal, larry. Hoodoo Hollerin’ Bebop Ghosts.  W ashington, D.C.: howard university 
Press, 1974.
———. Visions of a Liberated Future: Black Arts Movement Writing: Poetry and Prose. edi ted 
by Michael Schwartz. new Y ork: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1989.
nichols, Grace. I Is a Long Memoried W oman. london: Kar nak house, 1983.
nielsen, aldon lynn. Black Chant: Languages of African American Postmodernism.  Cam-
bridge: Cambridge university Press, 1997.
———, and lauri ramey, eds. Every Goodbye Ain’t Gone: An Anthology of Innovative 
Poetry by African Americans. Tuscaloosa: university of alabama Press, 2006.
noel, Bernard. Marseilles/New Y ork: A Surrealist Liaison. Marsei lles: andré Dimanche, 
1985.
ok
eke, uche. Drawings. i badan, nigeria: Mbari Publications, 1961.
orsenna, erik. L’Exposition coloniale. Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1988.
ort
iz, Fernando. Wifredo Lam y su obra. ha vana: Publicigraf, 1993.
Pastoureau, henri. Ma vie surréaliste. Par is: Maurice nadeau, 1992.
Paulino, ana Maria. Jorge de Lima. São Paulo: universidade de São Paulo, 1995.
Peters, nancy J. “Philip lamantia.” in ann Charters, ed., The Beats: Literary Bohemians 
in Postwar America. Detroi t, Mich.: Gale research; Bruccoli Clark, 1983.
Pierre, José. “Cárdenas ou l’exigence et la grace.” in José Pierre, L’Abécedaire. Paris: 
losfe
ld, 1971.
———. Cogollo: Le monde d’un Nohor. Par is: Éditions Georges visat, 1973.
———, ed. T racts surréalistes et declarations collectives (1922–1939). Par is: losfeld, 1980.
Pitcher, oliver. Dust of Silence. n ew Y ork: Troubadour Press, 1958.
Portalatín, aída Cartagena. Culturas africanas: Rebeldes con causa.  Santo Domingo, 
Dom. rep.: Taller, 1986.
———. Y ania Tierra: Poema documento—Document Poem. Translated by M. J. Fenwick 
and rosabelle White. Washington, D.C.: azul editions, 1995.
Puma, Fernando, ed. 7 Arts. Garden City, n.Y .: Permabooks, 1954.
rabéarivelo, Jean-Joseph. 24 Poems. i badan, nigeria: Mbari Publications, 1962.
racine, Daniel. Léon-Gontran Damas: L’Homme et l’oeuvre. P aris: agence de Coopération 
Culturelle et Technique, 1970.


--- PAGE 397 ---
376 Black, Brown, & Beige
ragon, Michel. Atlan.  Copenhagen: Éditions ejnar Munksgaard, 1950.
r
andolph, Pascal Beverly. After Death: The Disembodiment of Man. B oston: randolph & 
Company, 1870.
redmond, eugene 
B. “introduction: The ancient and recent voices within henry 
Dumas.” Black American Literature Forum 22, no. 2 (Summer 1988).
redpa
th, James. Echoes of Harper’s Ferry. Boston: T hayer and eldridge, 1860.
reed, ishmael. Mumbo Jumbo. n ew Y ork: avon Books, 1978.
———. Shrovetide in Old New Orleans. Garden Ci ty, n.Y.: Doubleday, 1978.
———. Writin’ Is Fightin’: Thirty-Seven Y ears of Boxing on Paper. new Y ork: atheneum, 
1990.
renton
, David. “Georges henein: Surrealism and Socialism.” in Dissident Marxism: 
Past V oices for Present Times. london: Z ed Books, 2004.
richardson, Michael. Refusal of the Shadow: Surrealism and the Caribbean.  Translated by 
Michael 
richardson and Krzysztof Fija Kowski. london: verso, 1996.
robinson, Jontyle Theresa, and Wendy Greenhouse. The Art of Archibald J. Motley, Jr. 
Chicago: Chicago h
istorical Society, 1991.
rochester, Myrna Bell. “ rené Crevel: Critic of White Patriarchy.” Race T raitor 9 
(1998).
rodney, Walter. The Groundings with My Brothers. london: B ogle-l’ouverture Publi-
cations, 1969.
———. How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.  W ashington, D.C.: howard university 
Press, 1974.
roediger, David r. Black on White: Black Writers On What It Means to Be White.  new 
Y ork: Schocken Books, 1998.
———. Colored White: T ranscending the Racial Past. B erkeley & los angeles: university 
of California Press, 2002.
———. History against Misery. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2006.
———. How Race Survived US History: From Settlement and Slavery to the Obama Phenome-
non. london: verso, 2008.
———. “Plotting against eurocentrism: The 1929 Surrealist Map of the World.” in 
Colored White: T ranscending the Racial Past. Berkeley & los angeles, university of 
California Press, 2002.
———. Revolution in the Service of the Marvelous: Surrealist Contributions to the Critique of 
Miserabilism. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2004.
———. “Three Days that Shook the new World order: The los angeles rebel-
lion of 1992.” Race T raitor, no. 2 (Winter 1993).
———. The W ages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American W orking Class. new 
Y
ork: verso, 1991.
———. W orking toward Whiteness: How America’s Immigrants Became White. new Y ork: 
Basic Books, 2005.
roger, Bernard. A la découverte de l’alchimie. Paris: Éditions Dangles, 1988.
rosemont
, Franklin. From Bughouse Square to the Beat Generation: Selected Ravings of Slim 
Brundage. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 1997.


--- PAGE 398 ---
Bibliography 377
———. “George herriman (Krazy Kat).” in Franklin rosemont, ed., Surrealism & Its 
Popular Accomplices. San Francisco: Cit y lights, 1980.
———. Jacques V ache and the Roots of Surrealism. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2008.
———. Open Entrance to the Shut Palace of Wrong Numbers. Chicago: Surrealist editions, 
2003.
———. Revolution in the Service of the Marvelous. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2004.
———. “Surrealist, anarchist, afrocentrist: Philip lamantia Before and after the 
Beat Generation.” in Jennifer Guglielmo and Salvatore Salerno, eds., Are Italians 
White? How Race Is Made in America. n ew Y ork: routledge, 2003.
———, ed. “Surrealism: revolution against Whiteness.” Race T raitor 9 (Summer 
1998), special issue.
———, and Charles radcliffe, eds. Dancin’ in the Streets: Anarchists, IWWs, Surrealists, 
Situationists and Provos in the 1960s, As Recorded in T he rebel Worker and hea twave. 
Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2005.
rosemont, Franklin, with Penelope rosemont and Paul Garon, eds. The Forecast Is 
Hot! T racts and Other Declarations of the Surrealist Movement in the United States, 1966–1976. 
Chicago: Black Swan Press, 1997.
rosemont, Penelope. Dreams and Everyday Life: André Breton, Surrealism, Rebel W orker, SDS 
and the Seven Cities of Cibola: Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2008.
———. Surrealist Experiences: 1001 Dawns, 221 Midnights. F oreword by rikki Ducornet. 
Chicago: Black Swan Press, 2000.
———, ed. Surrealist W omen: An International Anthology. aust in: university of Texas 
Press, 1998.
roumain, Jacques. Masters of the Dew.  T ranslated by langston hughes and Mercer 
Cook. new Y ork: reynal and hitchcock, 1947.
———. When the T om-T om Beats: Selected Prose and Poetry. Translated by Joanne Funga-
roli and ronal
d Sauer. Washington, D.C.: azul editions, 1995.
Sakolsky, ron. “Jayne Cortez.” in ron Sakolsky, ed., My Revolution in the Service of the 
Marvelous. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2004.
———. “Jayne Cortez: The language of Freedom.” in ron Sakolsky, ed., My Revo-
lution in the Service of the Marvelous. Chicago: Charles h. Kerr, 2004.
———, ed. “Surrealism in the uSa.” Race T raitor 13/14 (Summer 2001), special 
issue.
———. Surrealist Subversions: Rants, Writings and Images by the Surrealist Movement in the 
United States. For eword by Franklin rosemont. new Y ork: autonomedia, 2002.
Saunders, Frances Stonor. Who Paid the Piper? The CIA and the Cultural Cold W ar. lon-
don: Granta Books, 1999.
Schwarz
, arturo. I surrealisti. Milan: Mazzotta, 1989.
Schwarz, Dieter. Sonja Sekula, 1918–1963. n ew Y ork: The Swiss institute, 1996.
Seligmann, Kurt. The History of Magic. n ew Y ork: Pantheon, 1948.
Senghor, léopold Sédar. Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache de langue française. 
Par
is: Presses universitaires de France, 1969.
Shapiro, norman r., ed. and trans. Négritude: Black Poetry from Africa and the Caribbean. 
new 
Y ork: october house, 1970.


--- PAGE 399 ---
378 Black, Brown, & Beige
Sherman, Joan r. Invisible Poets: Afro-Americans of the Nineteenth Century. Chicago: u ni-
versi
ty of illinois Press, 1989.
Short, robert Stuart. “Contre-attaque.” in Ferdinand alquié, Entrétiens sur le surréal-
isme. Paris: Mouton, 1968.
———. 
“The Politics of Surrealism.” in raymond Spiteri and Donald laCoss, eds., 
Surrealism, Politics and Culture. Burli ngton, vt.: ashgate, 2003.
Sidran, Ben. Black T alk. Foreword by ar chie Shepp. new Y ork: Da Capo, 1983.
Simon, François-rené. John Coltrane. Par is: vade retro, 1996.
Smethurst, James edward. The Black Arts Movement: Literary Nationalism in the 1960s and 
1970s. Chapel hill: university of north Carolina Press, 2005.
Sp
ady, James G. “The interstellar Connection.” Free Spirits (1983).
———. 
“negritude, PanBanegritude, and the Diopian Philosophy of african his-
tory.” Current Bibliography of African Affairs, 5, no. 1 (January 1972).
———. Sterling A. Brown: A UMUM T ribute. int roduction by Dr. albert huff Fauset. 
Philadelphia: Black history Museum, uMuM Publishers, 1976.
———. “Surrealism and the Marvelous Black Plunge in Search of Y emanga and the 
human Condi
tion.” Cultural Correspondence, nos. 12–14 (Summer 1981).
Spector, Jack J. Surrealist Art & Writing, 1919–1939. Cam bridge: Cambridge university 
Press, 1997.
Spe
llman, a. B. Black Music. n ew Y ork: Schocken Books, 1970.
———. Black Music, Four Lives. n ew Y ork: Schocken Books, 1970.
———. Four Lives in the Bebop Business. n ew Y ork: Pantheon, 1966.
Stephens, ruth, and John Stephens, eds. The Tiger’s Eye: On Arts and Letters (1940–1949). 
Westport, Conn.: 1940–1949.
Stich, Sidra. Anxious Visions: Surrealist Art. B erkeley, Calif.: university art Museum, 
1990.
Stone-r
ichards, Michael. “The Political in the Culture of Surrealism.” in raymond 
Spiteri and Donald laCoss, eds., Surrealism, Politics and Culture.  B urlington, vt.: 
ashgate, 2003.
Stovall, Tyler. Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Light. B oston: houghton Miff-
lin, 1996.
Suleiman, Susan. Subversive Intent.  C ambridge, Mass.: harvard university Press, 
1990.
Surya, Michel. Georges Bataille: An Intellectual Biography. london: verso, 2002.
Sylla, Cheikh Tidiane. “Surrealism and Black african art.” Arsenal/Surrealist Subversion, 
no. 4 (1989).
———. “Symposium on the Future of Surrealism.” Cultural Correspondence, nos. 12–14 
(1981).
Tarnaud, Claude. De . . . la face cachée d’un aventure afro-américaine. P aris: l’Écart absolu, 
2003.
———. De: The Hidden Face of an Afro-American Adventure. Par is: l’Écart absolu, 2003.
Tashjian, Dickran. A Boatload of Madmen: Surrealism and the American Avant-Garde.  new 
Y
ork: Thames & hudson, 1995.


--- PAGE 400 ---
Bibliography 379
Thirion, andré. Revolutionaries without Revolution. n ew Y ork: Macmillan, 1975.
Tengour, habib. “Maghrebian Surrealism.” Peuples Méditerranéens, no. 17 (1981).
Thir
ion, andré. Revolutionaries without Revolution. n ew Y ork: Macmillan, 1975.
Thomas, Darryl C., ed. “ race and Class: Cedric robinson and the Philosophy of 
Black resistance,” Race and Class, 47 , no. 2 (october–December 2005).
Thomas, John Jacob. Froudacity: W est Indian Fables Explained. int roduction by C.l.r. 
James. london: new Beacon, 1969 (1889).
———. The Theory and Practice of Creole Grammar. Port-of-Spain, Trin.: Chronicle Pub-
lishin
g office, 1869.
T omich, Dale. “aimé Césaire and negritude.” in ron Sakolsky, ed., Surrealist Subver-
sions: Rants, Writings and Images by the Surrealist Movement in the United States. Foreword 
by Frankli
n rosemont. new Y ork: autonomedia, 2002.
———. Slavery in the Circuit of Sugar: Martinique and the W orld Economy, 1830–1848. Balti-
more
, Md.: Johns hopkins university Press, 1990.
———. Through the Prism of Slavery: Labor, Economy and W orld Economy. oxf ord: row-
man & l
ittlefield, 2004.
T oomer, Jean. Cane. n ew Y ork: Boni & liveright, 1975.
———. Essentials. Chicago: lak eside Press, 1931.
T ropiques: Collections complètes. Paris: Éditions Jean-Michel Place, 1978.
Tutuola, amos. The Palm-Wine Drinkard and His Dead Palm-Wine T apster in the Dead’s T own. 
new Y ork: Grove Press, 1953.
u’Tamsi [u Tam’si], Felix T chicaya. Brush Fire. ibadan , nigeria: Mbari Publications, 
1964.
———. Le mauvais sang. honfleur , France: P . J. oswald, 1970 (1955).
———. Selected Poems. Transla ted by Gerald Moor. london: heinemann, 1970.
valorbe, François. Carte noire. Paris: Éditions ar canes, 1953.
van DeBurg, William. New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American Cul-
ture, 1965–1975. Chicago: u niversity of Chicago Press, 1992.
vidales, luis. Suenan timbres. Bogotá: editorial Minerva, 1926.
viot, Jacques. Poèmes de guerre. Paris: Jean-Michel Place, 1994.
Waldberg, Patrick. Surrealism. Skira, 1962.
Warlick
, M. e. Max Ernst and Alchemy. a ustin: university of Texas Press, 2001.
Warner, Keith Q. Critical Perspectives on Léon-Gontran Damas. Washington, D.C.: Three 
Continents Press, 1988.
Warren, Paul. Next Time Is for Life. n ew Y ork: Dell, 1953.
Wixson, Douglas. W orker-Writer in America: Jack Conroy and the T raditions of Midwestern 
Literary Radicalism, 1898–1990. u rbana: university of illinois Press, 1994.
Woodson, Jon. “Jayne Cortez.” in Dictionary of Literary Biography,  vol. 41. Detroit, 
Mich.: Gale research, 1985.
Woolman, David S. Rebels in the Rif.  Stanf ord, Calif.: Stanford university Press, 
1968.
Wright, richard. Black Power. n ew Y ork: harper & Brothers, 1954.
———. Eight Men. n ew Y ork: avon, 1961.


--- PAGE 401 ---
380 Black, Brown, & Beige
———. Lawd T oday. n ew Y ork: avon, 1963.
———. The Long Dream. Garden Ci ty, n.Y.: Doubleday, 1958.
———. T welve Million Black V oices: A Folk History of the Negro in the United States. new 
Y
ork: viking Press, 1941.
Yuen, eddie, Daniel Burton rose, and George Katsiaficas, eds. The Battle of Seattle: The 
New Challenge to Capitalist Globalization. n ew Y ork: Soft Skull Press, 2001.
Zangana, haifa. Through the V ast Halls of Memory. Par is: hourglass, 1991.


--- PAGE 402 ---
abercrombie, Gertrude, 243–244, 
250n8, 282
Abomunist Manifesto, The (Kaufman), 
222–225, 230–232
afr
ica, 1, 28; and aída Cartagena Por-
talatín, 109; exhibitions in, 254; 
independence, 237, 238, 247, 257; 
influence on 
aimé Césaire, 51, 188, 
298; influence on surrealism, 6–11, 
15, 144, 326–327, 333; influence on 
Wi
fredo lam, 31–32; and Jayne 
Cortez, 318, 333, 345; and John 
Jacob Thomas, 110; Joyce Mansour 
in
, 138–140, 165; leo Frobenius  
on, 63; and L’Etudiant Noir, 28; the  
Maghreb
, 140–141; Philip laman-
tia i
n, 205; rené Ménil on, 83–84; 
sub-Saharan, 144, 146; surrealism in, 
135–138, 146n1; and Ted Joans, 220, 
228–230, 317, 350. See also individual 
countries and individual writers
alai
lly, ikbal el, 143, 146n1, 149, 157–159
alexandrian, Sarane, 17n25, 146n2, 149
alexis, Jacques Stephen. See Jean-
al
exis, Stéphane
algeria: surrealists from, 9, 140, 143, 
174, 175, 177, 178, 179, 206; war in, 
7, 170
Alice in W onderland (Carroll), 137
alice i
n Wonderland (character), 31, 
287
all
en, ron, 318, 333–336
anderson, Georgette: excerpt by, 91–
92; in T ropiques, 63
anderson 
iii, T. J., 321n2, 327–329
angola, 144, 183, 184–188, 287, 303,  
345
an
toine, régis: and légitime Défense, 
26, 33n1, 33n3, 33n10, 33n14, 34n18; 
on Simone Y oyotte, 24
arab Surr
ealist Group, 141, 143, 174
arab Surrealist Movement in exile, 141, 
143, 150, 174, 287
aragon, 
louis, 6, 18n30, 153, 298; and 
formation of surrealism, 6, 9, 298; 
work of, 26, 36, 136
argent
ina, 14, 61, 198, 358
arizona, u.S., 204, 254, 301
arp, Jean, 170, 177, 197, 326
art and Freedom, 136–137, 149, 151, 160, 
163
artaud
, antonin, 2, 16n3, 67, 197, 203
atkins, russell, 205, 206; excerpt from, 
217–218
atlan, J
ean-Michel: and Cobra move-
ment, 141, 146; and Continuity group, 
197; excer
pt from, 177; and légi-
time Défense, 22
Index


--- PAGE 403 ---
382 Black, Brown, & Beige
ayler, albert: in Chicago, 264; as in-
spiration, 283, 314, 318, 337, 356; and 
ornet
te Coleman, 276, 293
Baldwin, James, 2, 207, 233, 259, 293
Baltimore, Maryland, 5, 221, 234
Banjo: A Story without a Plot (McKay), 21, 
29, 54, 131. See also McKay, Claude
Baraka
, amiri, 190, 235; and Beat poets, 
221, 239; at the Black radical Con-
gress, 295; on Bob Kaufman, 230; 
in De, 293; excerpt by, 283–284; 
on h
enri Dumas, 355, 360n16; on 
music, 281; on other surrealists, 233; 
publicat
ions by, 267; and robin 
D. G. Kelley, 351; and surrealism, 
239–240, 241, 250n3, 315, 353, 356–
357, 359n4, 361nn19–22; writing by, 
250n3, 267, 360n18, 361nn20–21
Bataille, Georges, 11, 12, 25, 33n15, 46, 
331
Batista, Fulgencio, 28, 33, 238. See also 
Cuba
Baudelaire, Charles, 78, 117, 188, 213, 
353, 360n10
Baya, 141, 178, 179
Ba
y area. See San Francisco, California
Bearden
, romare, 30, 196, 206, 210n24, 
217, 326
Beat Generation, the, 234, 248, 250n10; 
and a
miri Baraka, 239; and Black 
arts movement, 237, 326; and Bob 
Kaufman, 225, 312; and new Y ork 
surrealist refugees, 205; and Ted 
Joans, 220–222, 228–230, 317, 350
Bédouin
, Jean-louis, 226, 249, 251n21
Bélance, rené, 66, 73n4, 99, 105–107
Benayoun, robert: and american 
surrealists, 207, 210n15, 241, 250n5; 
excerpts from, 168–173; and journal 
publications, 115; and psychoanaly-
sis, 13; and Surrealist Group, 138, 
141, 201, 206; translations of, 292
Biro, 
adam, 18n28, 19n45, 73n6, 
209n10, 210n20, 251n17, 296n3
Black ar
ts movement, 263; in Chicago, 
244, 249; and henry Dumas, 355; 
and léon-Gontran Damas, 128; and 
surrealism, 238–241, 250n2, 251n13; 
and Ted Joans, 228; and V oices of 
Negritude, 257. See also n
 egritude
Black Power. See Black ar ts movement; 
Joans, Ted; Malcolm X
Blackwell
, rachel, 49, 82, 106, 153
Blount, herman “Sonny.” See r a, Sun
blues. See jazz
Booth
, hilary, 201, 202, 294
Boula. See a lailly, ikbal el
Bracey, John; and Beat scene, 221, 
227n7; and Chicago surrealists, 
247–248, 295; published works by, 
241; and St. Clair Drake, 256
Brauner
, victor, 312; and Juan Breá and 
Mary low, 26; and music, 200–201, 
273, 276; in T ropiques, 64
Braxton
, anthony, 239, 264, 271–273
Brazil: dance in, 130; Decollage, 344; 
Fer
nando Mendes de almeida in, 
125; jazz in, 316; João da Cruz e 
Souza in
, 120; Jorge de lima in, 
126–127; rosário Fusco in, 122; Sosí-
genes Costa in, 123; surrealist group 
in, 115–116, 118n1, 245
Breá, Juan: excerpts from, 55–58; and 
journal publications, 203; and Mary 
low
, 25–27, 94; politics of, 31, 32, 
33n17, 59–60; and Red Spanish Note-
book, 59, 72; reissues of, 292
Br
eton, andré, 1, 44, 318; and aimé 
Césaire, 51, 61–65, 91, 298–299; 
an
thony Joseph and, 337; and Black 
arts movement, 12, 18n37, 18n39, 
18n40, 28, 240–241; and Chicago 
Surrealist Group, 169, 242, 245–
246, 248, 250n7; in the Dominican 
republic, 6
7, 69, 73n9, 108; and


--- PAGE 404 ---
Index 383
etienne léro, 35; and formation of 
surrealist movement, 5–6, 8, 16n2, 
17n14, 17n16, 17n20, 17n26, 18n27, 
18n31, 18n33, 18n41, 19n48, 33n16, 
34n2
8, 208, 311, 331, 356; in haiti, 
66–67, 73nn4–5, 73nn7–8, 93–94, 
99, 101, 105–106, 332; influences 
of, 7
–9, 12, 17n25, 46, 101; interna-
ti
onal Federation of independent 
revolutionary art (Fiari), 137; 
and Jacques roumain, 99–100; and 
Jacques vaché, 155, 157; and jazz, 
200, 209n14; and Joyce Mansour, 
138, 146n4, 165, 167; Juan Bréa 
and Mary 
low, 26–28; and légi-
time Défense, 21–22, 24–25, 36; 
and Man r
ay, 193; in Mexico, 59; 
in new Y ork, 198–199, 204, 207, 
209n9; and Paris Surrealist Group, 
98, 115, 136, 143, 149, 168–171, 207, 
209n6, 210n28, 244–246, 261; and 
psychoanalysis, 12–13, 324, 361n21; 
and rené Mén
il, 81; and richard 
Wright, 196–197; robin D. G. 
Kelley on, 349; and Suzanne Cé-
saire, 61–65; and Ted Joans, 220, 
222, 228, 229, 350; and Wifredo 
lam, 2
8, 31–32, 94; work dedicated 
to, 76, 153; works by, 3, 113, 141, 144, 
175, 178, 202, 203, 209n7, 210nn18–
19, 261, 292, 331
Br
eton, elisa: and aída Cartagena 
Portalatín, 108; in Chicago, 242, 
250n7; and music, 200, 209n14; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 94
Brown, Frank london, 256, 268–269, 
315
Brown, Sterling, 211, 307; influence on 
other surr
ealists, 8, 23, 117; léon 
Gontran-Damas on, 128–131; and 
neg
ro renaissance, 30, 258; and St. 
Clair Drake, 256
Brussels, Belgium: and Chicago surreal-
ist group, 246; Juan Breá and Mary 
low i
n, 26, 56; and music, 201; 
surrealist group in, 5, 61, 245
Br
utus, Dennis, 118; at Black radical 
Congress, 295; excerpt from, 189–
191; new editions of, 316; on surreal-
ism, 318–320; at surrealist exhibi-
tions, 288; in surrealist publications, 
146, 146n1, 241, 294
Buchar
est, romania, 5, 26, 56, 61, 201
Buenos aires, argentina, 5, 32, 135, 246
Bugs Bunny, 146, 211, 287
Buhl
e, Paul: and C. l. r. James, 59, 
118; publications by, 180, 191, 240, 
250n12
Buñue
l, luis, 4, 16n9, 198, 209n9
Burroughs, Margaret, 244, 250n5
Cabral, 
amílcar, 186–187, 188
Cabrera, lydia, 28, 64, 91, 203
Caillois, roger, 25, 46, 197, 261
Cairo, egypt, 149, 151, 156; surrealist 
group in, 135–138, 157–158, 161–163, 
201; T ropiques in, 65
Cairo, 
illinois, 219, 228, 350. See also 
Joans, Ted
Calas, 
nicolas: and Chicago Surreal-
ist Group, 246, 249; and critics of 
surrealism, 13–14, 19n52; on Marti-
ni
que, 62; and new Y ork surrealists, 
170, 200, 202–204, 209n13
Camacho, Jorge, 8, 17n25, 102, 201
Cárdenas, 
agustín, excerpt by, 98–99; 
and Paris Surrealist Group, 206; sur-
realist morality, 291, 296n9
Caribbean, the. See individual countries
Carr
ington, leonara, 170, 243, 248, 315
Césaire, aimé: influences of, 59; influ-
ence on other writers, 89–91, 101, 
117, 128, 186, 188, 324, 327, 337, 345, 
349, 351; as leader of Surrealism, 26, 
11
5, 197, 199, 291; and negritude, 
7, 28–29, 49, 51–53, 118, 131, 258;


--- PAGE 405 ---
384 Black, Brown, & Beige
poetry of, 107, 203, 242, 289, 315; 
and politics, 87, 220, 332; studies 
of, 1, 16n1, 34n24, 61, 72, 73n1; 
translations of, 202, 240, 292, 316; 
and Wi
fredo lam, 32, 94; work of, 
51–53, 62–65, 74–78, 80–81, 241, 
298–300, 322, 359n5
Césaire, Suzanne, 73n2, 351–352; as 
leader of surrealism, 199, 203; and 
neg
ritude, 49; and politics, 87, 315; 
works of, 61, 63–64, 79–81, 89, 91, 
332
Cesariny, Mário, 144, 182, 287
Chicago, 1
19n1, 213, 270; andré Breton 
in, 250n7; anti-Poetry Club, 248–
249; Claude Tarnaud and, 293; 
contemporary surrealists in, 144; 
exhibitions in, 96, 143, 146, 174, 180, 
183, 185, 190, 274, 287–290, 296n10; 
and Fenton Johnson, 211; Franklin 
rosemont and
, 349; jazz in, 271–
272, 276, 288, 319; Joseph Jarman 
in, 265; publishing in, 239, 291–292, 
318; and 
richard Wright, 195, 197; 
and robert Benayoun, 169–171; 
and St. Clair Drake, 246–247, 256; 
surrealist groups in, 5, 7, 28, 67, 72, 
107, 112, 117, 118, 140, 141, 158, 177, 
181, 237, 242–246, 251n16, 263, 264, 
285–286, 295; surrealists from, 15, 
194, 200, 260, 268, 308, 311, 324; 
and Ted Joans, 228, 240
Chicago Group. See Surrealist Group
Chile, 67, 197; surrealist groups in, 5, 
198; T ropiques in, 65
Cit
y lights Bookstore (San Francisco), 
246; and Abomunist Manifesto, 223, 
225; publications by, 241
Clev
eland, ohio, 205, 217, 354
Cogollo, heriberto: excerpt from, 133; 
influence on other surrealists, 117; 
Ted Joans and, 312–314, 317
Coleman
, ornette: and Black arts 
movement, 239, 314; excerpt by, 
276–277; influence on others, 264, 
270, 271, 281, 293, 337; publications 
by, 241
Colombia: 
heriberto Cogollo in, 133, 
312–314; surrealism in, 116–117, 119n2
Colonial 
exhibition, 10, 18n34, 332
Coltrane, John, 318, 356; and Black arts 
movement, 239, 314; influence on 
others, 271, 284, 293, 307, 314, 337; 
and or
nette Coleman, 276, 281
communism, 10–11, 38, 225, 332
Communist Party, 10–11, 25, 29, 36, 46, 
356
Comte de laut
réamont, 9, 17n12, 
17n22, 31; influence of, 7, 21, 29, 36, 
51, 78, 117, 120, 144, 213, 299; and 
poetry, 4, 357; studies of, 63, 136; 
works of, 65, 78, 246, 295
Congo, 181–182, 220
Cooper, Wayne, 5, 19n53, 19n55, 29, 
34n25
Corsiglia, 
laura, 78, 317, 349
Corso, Gregory, 221, 230, 233
Cortez, Jayne, 3, 16n6, 349; and Damas, 
118; and music, 201, 274, 292, 318; 
and politics, 239, 315; and studies 
of, 250n6; and Surrealist move-
ment, 59, 286, 287, 295; works of, 
31, 240–242, 254–256, 301–306, 318, 
345–348
Cortor
, eldzier, 325
Cosseri, albert. See Cossery, albert
Cosser
y, albert, 148, 160, 163
Costa, Sosígenes, 115, 123–125
Crev
el, rené, 13; influence on black 
surrealists, 21, 28, 30; and jazz, 200; 
and Légitime Défense, 36; studies of, 
136, 294; translations of, 67
Crowder
, henry, 15, 19n57, 30
Cruzeiro Seixas, artur do, 115, 144, 
146n1, 182, 187–188, 202
Cruz e Souza, João da, 115, 120–121


--- PAGE 406 ---
Index 385
Cuba, 1, 24, 91; and agustín Cárdenas, 
98, 206; and Fernando ortiz, 110; 
and Joyce Mansour, 138; and Juan 
Br
eá, 26, 55–56; and Mary low, 28; 
revolution in, 201, 238; as surrealist 
ref
uge, 62, 91; and Wifredo lam, 
28, 31–33, 94–96, 314, 325, 350, 352
Cuban rev
olution. See Cuba
Cubism, 3, 31, 144
Cullen, Countee, 15, 131, 258
Cumberbatch, Judy, 160, 162, 163
Cunard, 
nancy; and henry Crowder, 
15; and Negro Anthology, 18n37, 30–31, 
194; and surrealism, 34n26, 219
Cymbalista, Célia, 119n1, 121, 122, 126, 
127
Dada, 3, 48, 116, 144, 193, 195, 220, 239, 
265
Dalí, Salvador, 36, 41, 220, 229, 320
Damas
, léon-Gontran, 115; and aimé 
Césaire, 51; biographical informa-
ti
on, 117–118, 119n3; and etienne 
léro, 35; excerpts from, 138–142; as 
inspiration to other surrealists, 304–
30
5, 326; and légitime Défense, 
22–23, 28, 33n1, 33n5, 34n23, 54, 
79; and l
ucie Thésée, 85; and Paris 
Surrealist Group, 29; and richard 
Wright, 197; translations of, 240
Decollage (group), 116, 318, 344
Depest
re, rené, 66, 99, 298
Desnos, robert, 28, 67, 118, 128, 200
Detroit, Michigan, 5, 205, 239, 249, 
290, 318, 329
Diop, Birago, 29, 131, 256
diPrima, Diane, 221, 227n6, 227n10, 
233, 295
Documents 34, 11, 35, 41, 44
d’oli
vet, Fabre, 8, 17n24
Dolphy, eric, 239, 271, 276
Dominican republic, 67, 69, 108–109
Drake, St. Clair: and black anthro-
pology, 246–247; excerpt from, 
256–257; as influence, 215, 248
Du B
ois, W. e. B., 293; influence on 
surrealists, 23, 247, 258, 315; in Negro 
Anthology, 30; and Pan-negro Con-
gr
ess, 131; on u.S. surrealism, 289, 
292, 296n4
Ducasse
, isidore. See Comte de 
lautréamon
t
Duchamp, Marcel, 29, 242, 261, 326
Ducornet, Guy: translations by, 44; on 
Zora 
neale hurston, 194, 208n1, 
209n3, 209n5
Dumas
, henry, 342–344, 353, 355–356, 
360nn15–17, 361n21
Dunham, Katherine, 207, 244, 
260–262
Éditions Surréalistes, 26, 56, 292
edwards
, Melvin: excerpts by, 263–
264; illustrations by, 241, 318; on 
léon
-Gontran Damas,118
egypt, 157; ancient, 8, 178; art and 
Freedom, 149, 151–152; Cairo Sur-
realist Group, 135–138, 146n1; Joyce 
Mansour in, 165, 206; manifesto, 
148–149; surrealists in, 160, 161, 162, 
163, 198
eg
yptian Surrealist Group. See ar t and 
Freedom
ellison
, ralph, 193, 353; excerpt from, 
216–217; and Guy Ducornet, 290; 
and jazz and blues, 196, 209n5; 
larr
y neale on, 240, 250n4; riddle 
of, 309–310
Éluard, Paul, 9, 28, 36, 225
en
gland, 31, 190; exhibitions in, 183; 
surrealist group in, 3, 26, 198; sur-
realists in, 162, 165, 170
ernst
, Max, 148, 204, 209n1
ethiopia, 10, 137, 143–144, 206
exquisite Corpse: exhibition, 291; 
game, 11, 228


--- PAGE 407 ---
386 Black, Brown, & Beige
Fanon, Frantz, 65, 306; aimé Césaire 
and, 299–300; and richard Wright, 
197; writing of, 256, 354
Forman, James, 237, 247, 256, 315
Fort-de-France, Martinique, 46, 51, 62, 
87, 322
France, 32
2; agustín Cárdenas in, 98; 
andré Breton, 115, 220; Comte de 
lautrémont in, 120; contemporary 
surrealists in, 173, 174, 308, 327; ex-
hibitions in, 133; jazz in, 6, 270–271; 
Jo
yce Mansour in, 138, 165; nazi 
occupation, 197, 198; Philip laman-
tia in, 205, 226; psychoanalysis in, 
24; surrealism in, 7, 10, 16n1, 18n34, 
25, 206, 285, 326, 332; surrealist 
education in, 35, 44, 100, 128. See also 
Paris, France
Franco, Francisco, 13, 27, 31, 69, 113, 
170, 288
Freedom Dreams (Kelley), 73n3, 309, 315, 
323, 324, 353
“Fr
ee nelson Mandela” (demonstra-
tion), 118, 190, 291
French Guyana. See Damas, léon-
G
ontran; Guyana
Freud, Sigmund, 12–13, 358; and black 
surrealists, 21, 36, 59, 148; and 
richard W
right, 196; and socialism, 
351
Froudacity, 73n12, 110, 112
Garon, Paul, 13, 200, 201–202, 209n44, 
210n17
Garvey, Marcus, 23, 30, 131
Gascoyne, David, 3, 7, 16n4
Germany: attitude on surrealism, 13, 
14
8; and heriberto Cogollo, 132; 
and Jacques roumain, 100; surrealist 
publications in, 67, 158, 201, 292; 
and Worl
d War ii, 35, 41, 155
Ghana, 146n3, 256, 354
Gillespie, Dizzy, 198, 301; and Chicago 
surrealists, 243–244; excerpt from, 
281–282; at Minton’s Playhouse, 200
Ginsb
erg, allen, 221, 226, 230, 233, 243
Glissant, Édouard, 65, 98, 206
Goldfayn, Georges, 168, 201, 202
Gonzales, “Babs,” 220, 279–280
Grane
ll, eugenio Fernández: and 
Chicago surrealists, 246, 287; and 
La Poesía Sorpendida, 67, 73n9, 108; 
in Puer
to rico, 69, 113–114; and 
Wifredo lam, 31, 94
Gratiant, Georges, 63–64, 87–88, 131
Great Britain. See e
 ngland
Greenwich village, 219, 222, 228, 237, 
243, 278, 349–350
Gr
upo h, el. See h -Group
Guyana, 7, 22, 28, 326; excerpts from, 
117–118, 128–132
Guyton, Tyree, 290–291, 292, 341–342
hait
i, 1, 7; and andré Breton, 99–100, 
203–204, 332; art of, 325, 327; and 
Clémen
t Magloire-Saint-aude, 101–
105; dances of, 130, 132; and hervé 
Télémaque, 107–108, 206; Katherine 
Dunham, 260–262; and politics, 21, 
24; and 
rené Bélance, 105–107; and 
surrealist movement, 30, 65–67, 93, 
201, 288, 318; voodoo, 132, 194; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 32, 94; Zora neale 
hurston, 214–215
hare, David, 198, 200, 204, 218
harlem renaissance, 15, 54, 247; com-
parison to surrealism, 24; writers of, 
117, 128, 131, 214
harr
is, William J., 360n18, 361n20
harris, Wilson, 59, 118, 132, 241
hatillo, Puerto rico. See Puerto rico
ha
wkins, adrienne. See Kennedy, 
adri
enne
hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 10, 
12, 21, 36, 59, 84, 200, 212
hei
ne, Maurice, 9, 18n28, 158


--- PAGE 408 ---
Index 387
henderson, David, 210n24, 225, 227n11
henein, Georges, 213; biographical 
information, 149–150; excerpt from, 
150
–157; and ikbal el alailly, 157–
158; and surrealist group in Cairo, 
135–138, 143, 146nn1–3, 148, 161, 162, 
165; translations of, 292, 316
her
riman, George, 194, 209n2, 
212–213
h-G
roup, 24–26, 55
hill, herbert, 199, 200, 209n12, 256
hitler, adolf, 13, 43, 161
holland, 183, 198, 279
hughes, langston: and black expatri-
ates, 258; as inspiration to surreal-
ists, 2
1, 23, 89, 117, 218; and negri-
tude, 30, 131; in Paris, 15; poetry of, 
45; and Ted Joans, 220, 317, 350; 
work by, 100
hurston
, Zora neale, 23, 30, 246; 
studies of, 16n11, 19n47, 316, 324–
325; and surrealism, 194, 209n3, 
214–215, 247
hyp
polite, hector, 67, 73n8, 291
illinois, 118, 195; Ted Joans in, 219, 228, 
350
iraq, 14
1, 143, 174, 237, 287
italy, 10, 94, 98, 136, 183, 205
Jablonski, Joseph, 8, 17n25, 202, 241, 
295
Jager, Marjolijn de, 76, 92, 108, 133, 
152, 154, 172
Jaguer, Édouard, 143, 146n1, 161, 287, 
292
Jamaica, 54, 194; music of, 130, 319; 
surrealism in, 29–30
Jam
es, C. l. r., 69, 72, 110, 198; poli-
tics, 27, 137, 241; studies of, 73n11–
12, 118, 241; and surrealists, 11, 23, 
247–248, 315, 316; works of, 59–60, 
111, 112
Janab
y, abdul Kader el, 141, 143, 146n1, 
287
Japan, 308; attitude toward surreal-
ism, 13; and Chicago Group, 287; 
surrealists in, 14, 98, 209n10, 332; 
surrealist translations in, 291
Jar
man, Joseph; and Black arts move-
ment, 239, 295; in Chicago, 271, 
288; excerpt by, 264–266; in journal 
publications, 286
jazz
, 11; aimé Césaire and, 75; and 
black power, 291; and Bob Kauf-
man, 226; and Chicago surrealists, 
243–244, 250n8, 268, 288; Dizzy 
Gill
espie and, 281–282; etienne 
léro and, 23; Georges henein on, 
152; in harlem, 199–201; influence 
on surrealists, 6, 253, 319–320, 333; 
Jayne Cortez and, 254, 301, 318; and 
neg
ritude, 130; in new Y ork, 293; 
ornette Coleman and, 276–277; 
in Paris, 15, 17n15, 207, 210nn16–17; 
Pony Poindexter and, 270–271; 
rené Méni
l on, 84–85; richard 
Wright and, 195–197; in the sixties, 
237
, 280–281; Sun ra and, 277–279; 
Ted Joans and, 219, 220–223, 230, 
312, 317, 350–351, 359n2; Thelo-
nious Monk and, 273–274, 341; T. J. 
anderson 
iii and, 327; Zora neale 
hurston and, 214
Jean-alexis, Stéphane, 63, 93–94
Joans, Ted, 33n12, 72; and Black arts/
Black Power, 237–238, 240, 241, 
249, 250n5, 251n20, 286, 315; and 
et
ienne léro, 23, 35; influence on 
other writers, 242, 253, 270, 274, 
317, 329, 336, 337, 346, 349–351, 
359nn1–3; influences of, 118, 273, 
276; studies of, 1, 16n1; and surrealist 
movement, 59, 107, 117, 140, 143, 181, 
201, 206–207, 287, 288, 291; trans-
lations of, 292; works of, 133, 168,


--- PAGE 409 ---
388 Black, Brown, & Beige
219–222, 226n1, 227nn3–5, 227n8, 
227n10, 228–230, 252, 312–314
Johnson, Fenton, 194, 211–212
Johnston
, Percy edward, 221, 234–235
Jones, edward a., 240, 257–258
Jones, leroi. See Baraka, amiri
J
oseph, anthony, 72, 73n12, 315; as 
contemporary surrealist, 318; ex-
cerpt from, 336–338; on music, 201; 
translations of, 292
Joub
ert, alain, 115, 143, 285, 296n1; and 
the Black arts, 247, 251n14; and 
foundation of surrealism, 4, 16n10, 
207, 210n25, 226n2, 245
Kame
l, anwar, 137, 148, 160
Kamel, Fouad, 149, 151, 162
Kamrowski, Gerome, 198, 204, 207, 
209n12, 210n27, 287, 289
Karanja
, ayana, 4; and psychoanaly-
sis, 12; work of, 324–325; on Zora 
neal
e hurston, 16n11, 19n47, 209n3, 
214, 316
Kaufman, Bob, 219, 247, 293; bio-
graphical information, 227n10, 230; 
excerpt from, 231–232; as inspira-
tion, 237, 240, 241, 270, 274, 315; 
published works by, 250n5, 292; 
and surrealist underground, 222–
226, 227n11, 227n13; and Ted Joans, 
221, 228, 312; translation of works 
by, 240
Ke
lley, robin D. G., 73; afterword by, 
349–359; essays on surrealism, 295–
296; excerpts from, 309–311, 322–
324; Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical 
Imagination, 315; on henry Dumas, 
3
42; on Ted Joans, 317
Kennedy
, adrienne, 339–340, 353–355, 
360nn12–13, 361n21
Kerouac, Jack, 221, 230, 233, 270, 350
Keste
loot, lilyan, 21–23, 33n1, 33n9, 54
King, Martin luther Jr., 237, 245, 322
Kréa, henri, 141, 175–176, 206
lam, Wifredo, 1, 16n1, 91, 210n18, 291, 
360nn7–8; and Black arts/black 
radicalism, 241, 288, 314, 315, 355; 
and foundation of surrealism, 26, 
62, 65, 101, 115, 143, 170, 199, 203–
204, 243; influence of, 325, 326, 
349, 350, 352; life of, 31–33, 34n27, 
34n2
9, 94–96; and Mary low, 28; 
and Ted Joans, 220; work of, 95
lamant
ia, Philip, 8, 17n25, 270, 319; 
and Bob Kaufman, 226, 227n10, 
23
0; influence on andré Breton, 
198; and new Y ork group, 204–
205, 210n22; and surrealism, 208, 
210n28, 287, 295
larib
y, Farid, 141, 143, 174–175, 206, 288
la rose, John, 72, 73n12, 112–113, 118, 
336
lautréamon
t. See Comte de 
lautréamon
t
lebanon, 143, 174, 237
Légitime Défense: and black surrealism, 
28, 131, 315, 332; formation of, 21–
25; Manifesto, 36–38; studies of, 
33nn1–2
lég
itime Défense (Self-defense), 36–
38; and andré Breton, 64; and black 
surrealism, 26; formation of, 21–24; 
group members, 40, 45, 46, 49, 81; 
and harl
em renaissance, 19n54; 
Manifesto, 36–38; and Martinique, 
61
legrand
, Gérard, 8, 17n25, 18n28; and 
Clément Magloire-Saint-aude, 
203–204, 210n20; and jazz, 201, 
210n17; publications of, 107, 168
leiner
, Jacqueline, 66, 73n1, 73n6, 299
leiris, Michel: and Inquisitions, 25; 
inspiration to other surrealists, 349;


--- PAGE 410 ---
Index 389
and jazz, 200; and negritude, 28, 
128; and richard Wright, 197; and 
Wifredo lam, 32, 34n27, 34n29
léro, etienne, 45; biographical infor-
mation, 35; and black surrealism, 
28
–29, 117, 241, 315; and légi-
time Défense, 18n37, 18n39, 21–26, 
33nn1–2; Légitime Défense, 131, 299; 
lég
itime Défense Manifesto, 36–38; 
and léon-Gontran Damas, 117; and 
Martinique, 61; and rené Ménil, 81; 
and Thélus léro, 87; translations of, 
292; and West indian poetry, 131–
132; and Yva léro, 49
léro, Thélus, 38, 49, 87
L’Étudiant Noir, 23
 , 25, 53; and aimé Cé-
saire, 51, 131; history of, 28–29, 89; 
and l
éon-Gontran Damas, 117, 128
lewis, norman, 205, 206, 325, 326
lima, Sérgio: in Brazil, 118n1, 120, 123, 
126; in Paris, 115; works by, 116
lisb
on, Spain, 182; exhibitions in, 290; 
jazz in, 201; surrealist groups in, 5, 
237, 245, 287. See also Spain
lock
e, alain, 15, 30, 257, 258
london, united Kingdom: and Chi-
cago Surrealist Group, 246, 287; 
contemporary surrealists in, 162, 
170, 318, 336; exhibitions in, 290; 
jazz and
, 201; John la rose in, 112, 
118; surrealist group in, 5, 7, 30–31, 
67, 72, 73n12, 135, 143, 237, 245; 
surrealist publications in, 27, 59, 65, 
149, 292; as surrealist refuge, 62; 
Ted J
oans in, 229; Wilson harris 
in, 132
los a
ngeles, California, 193, 264, 270, 
273, 292, 301, 309, 318
low
, Mary: excerpt by, 58; and jazz, 
315; journal publications by, 295; 
and Juan Breá, 25–28, 55–56; poli-
tics of, 31, 32, 33n17, 34n19; and Red 
Spanish Notebook, 59–60, 72; reissues 
of works by, 292; translations by, 
57, 99
, 203; and Wifredo lam, 94
luca, Gherasim, 13, 26, 32, 246
lumumba, Patrice, 220, 235, 240, 293, 
354
lycée Scho
elcher (Martinique), 35, 51, 
87, 128
Mabill
e, Pierre, 8, 17n25, 194; and an-
dré Breton, 332; influence on other 
writers, 101; and psychoanalysis, 
13; publications of, 64, 248; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 28, 32, 203
Maddox, Conroy, 146n1, 287, 290
Madrid
, 5, 9; and heriberto Cogollo, 
133; surrealist group in, 245, 290, 
29
4; Wifredo lam in, 31, 94, 352. 
See also Spain
Maghreb, the, 140, 173, 179
Magloire, Clément. See Magloire-Saint-
aude
, Clément
Magloire-Saint-aude, Clément, 24, 
210n20; and Black arts movement, 
241, 286; and influence on surreal-
ism, 6
7, 73n7, 332; and Jacques rou-
main, 99; translations of, 292; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 32; works of, 101–106
Magritte, rené, 168, 244, 312
Maisonet, luis a., 69, 73n10; work of, 
113–114
Malcolm X: and Black ar
ts movement, 
237, 296n8, 315; as inspiration, 240, 
293, 306, 309–311; philosophy of, 
291; and Ted Joans, 220, 317, 350
Mallarmé, Stéphane, 64, 92, 117, 120, 
331
Mandela
, nelson, 118, 190, 291
Mansour, Joyce, 16n1, 287; biography 
of, 3
16; and Black arts movement, 
241, 285–286; excerpts by, 165–167, 
28
9, 319; and heriberto Cogollo,


--- PAGE 411 ---
390 Black, Brown, & Beige
117; importance of, 138–140, 333; 
journal publications of, 115; and Sur-
realist Group, 165, 206; translations 
by, 143; translations of, 240, 292, 
296n1
Marcuse
, herbert, 10, 241, 285, 357
Marseilles, France, 54; Marseilles 
Game, 31, 34n28, 94; as surrealist 
refuge, 31, 94, 198
Mart
inique, 1, 7; and aimé Césaire,  
28, 32, 35–38, 51–53, 80–81, 89,  
117, 203, 322; and black music,  
20
1; and etienne léro, 22; and  
Georges Gratiant, 87–88; and  
Jules M
onnerot, 46–49; and légi-
time Défense Group, 21–22; and 
léon
-Gontran Damas, 128; and 
negritude, 130; and rené Ménil, 
81–85; and Simone Y oyotte, 24, 40; 
and surrealism, 61–65, 198, 206; and 
Suzanne Césaire, 79–81, 89; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 32, 94
Marvelous, the, 4–6, 91, 353; and aris-
tide Maugée, 89; and Bob Kaufman, 
226, 312; definition of, 193; as essen-
tial to surrealism, 82, 116, 120; and 
Jayne Cortez, 242, 318; and jazz, 
84–85, 281, 319, 355; and John Jacob 
Thomas
, 110; and larry neal, 307; 
and poetry, 103, 123, 208; and ralph 
ellison, 144, 217; and rené Ménil, 
63; and richard Wright, 144, 196; 
ron allen, 333; and Suzanne Cé-
saire, 351–352, 359n6; symbolism 
and, 92; and Ted Joans, 314, 317, 
350; and W
ifredo lam, 352; and 
Zora neale hurston, 194
Marvelous Freedom/Vigilance of Desire, 183, 
185, 286, 288
Marx, Karl: influence on surrealism, 21, 
59, 151, 351; surrealist readings of, 
10, 12; works by, 150, 225
Masson, 
andré: definition of surreal-
ism, 2, 16n3; and Martinique, 61–62; 
in Paris, 200; publications of, 202, 
203, 218
Matanzas, Cuba, 98. See also Cuba
Matsi
nhe, inácio, 146, 182–184, 287, 288
Matta, roberto, 170; illustrations by, 
175, 204; and jazz, 200, 201, 210n16, 
273
Maugée, 
aristide, 29; excerpts by, 89–
91; and negritude, 131; in T ropiques, 
62–64
McKay, Claude: excerpts by, 54–55; 
and harl
em renaissance, 15, 19n53, 
19n55; and influence on black 
writers, 131, 258 and influence on 
et
ienne léro, 21, 23; relationship 
with surrealism, 29–30, 34n25
Meinecke, Tristan, 244, 250n12, 287
Melhem
, D. h., 250n6, 302, 303
Ménil, rené, 45; and black surrealism, 
79, 201; and Common Front group, 
87; excerpts from, 81–85; and Légi-
time Défense, 21–23, 33nn1–2, 33n6, 38, 
299; reprints, 292; and T ropiques, 51, 
61–63, 91
Mesens, 
e. l. T., 26, 67, 103, 170
Mexico, 343; andré Breton in, 59, 199; 
and Jacques roumain, 100; Juan 
Breá in, 26; and leon Despres, 243; 
surrealist exhibitions in, 290; as sur-
realist refuge, 62, 91, 113, 198, 205; 
and Ted Joans, 228, 291
Milan
, italy, 141, 175, 237, 286
Mills, Clark, 32, 203, 210n18
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 180, 290, 311, 
321n2, 338
Mingus, Charles, 12, 239, 293, 337
Minotaure, 23, 24, 41, 96, 219, 228
Miró, Joan, 170, 200, 218
miserabilism, 6, 17n14, 316, 331
Missir, Mar
ie-laure, 285, 296n1, 316
Mitchell, roscoe, 239, 264–265, 271
Monk, Thelonious Sphere, 200; cult


--- PAGE 412 ---
Index 391
of, 201, 269, 293, 341; excerpt by, 
273–274
Monnerot, Jules-Marcel, 45; excerpt 
by
, 46–49; and légitime Défense, 
23–25, 38, 299; and Paris Surrealist 
Group, 30; and Simone Y oyotte, 40
Morocco, 9, 140, 168–173, 206
Moyen Congo. See Congo
Mozambique, 182–184, 185, 188, 287, 
327
music. See jazz
Mussolini, Benito, 43, 136, 137
nadeau
, Maurice, 19n49, 197–198
nardal, andré, 23, 35, 54, 258
nardal, Paulette, 23, 35, 54, 131
neal, larry, 237; and Black arts move-
ment, 239, 240, 250n4; James G. 
Spady on, 307; Jayne Cortez on, 
306; works b
y, 292; on Zora neale 
hurston, 194
negritude, 12, 84; and aimé Césaire, 7, 
28–29, 49, 51–53, 118, 131, 258; and 
Jacques 
roumain, 100; and João da 
Cruz e Souza, 120; and Katherine 
Dunham, 260; and Légitime Défense, 
23
, 26; and léon-Gontran Damas, 
28–29, 118, 128–132, 304–305, 326; 
and l
éopold Sédar Senghor, 28–29, 
118; and Pan-africanism, 257–258, 
305; and St. Clair Drake, 247, 
256–257; and Sterling Brown, 117, 
129–130; and surrealism, 130–132; 
and Suzanne Césaire, 79–81; and 
T ropiques, 84, 109; and Yva léro, 
4
9–50
Negro Anthology (Cunard), 18n37, 30–31, 
34n26, 194
new 
orleans, louisiana, 204, 230, 
270, 271
new 
Y ork, 270, 326; and andré Breton, 
7, 242; and Chicago Group, 242, 
249, 287; and Claude McKay, 29, 
54; Claude Tarnaud in, 170, 246; 
contemporary surrealists in, 259, 
265, 267, 308, 309; Dada, 193; De, 
293; exhibitions in, 91, 96, 98, 195, 
287
, 339; henri Dumas in, 355–356; 
hervé Télémaque in, 107; Jayne 
Cortez in, 254; jazz in, 200, 273, 
28
0; and Juan Breá and Mary low, 
27; ralph ellison in, 216; richard 
Wright in, 195–197; surrealist group 
in, 199–200, 204–206; surrealist 
publications in, 65, 100, 239; as 
surrealist refuge, 62, 69, 198, 202; 
surrealist underground in, 219–221, 
223, 227n3; Ted Joans in, 220, 228–
23
0, 237, 317; and Wifredo lam, 94
ngwenya, Malangatana valente, 184–
186, 327
Padmore, George, 11, 30, 72, 247
Pan
-africanism, 12, 72, 257, 305
Parent, Mimi, 115, 143, 287
Par
is, France, 4; african americans in, 
14–15, 19n50, 253, 257–258, 270, 
27
6; aimé Césaire in, 51; and the 
arab Surrealist Movement in exile, 
174; Claude McKay in, 54; etienne 
léro in, 21–22, 35; exhibitions 
in, 67, 98, 131, 161, 178, 263, 286, 
290; Frankli
n rosemont in, 244–
246; George heinen in, 135, 149, 
158; jazz in, 200–201, 276; Joyce 
Mansour in, 138, 165; Juan Bréa 
and Mary 
low in, 25–28, 55–56; 
Katherine Dunham in, 261; légi-
time Défense group, 22, 28–29; 
léon
-Gontran Damas in, 28–29, 
128; Man ray in, 193; Martinicans 
in, 61, 81, 87, 89, 304; politics in, 7, 
10, 13–14; postwar, 206–207, 209n6, 
209n14; publications in, 181, 240, 
26
7, 292, 316; richard Wright in, 
196–197; robert Benayoun in, 168,


--- PAGE 413 ---
392 Black, Brown, & Beige
169, 171; Surrealist Group, 5, 30, 35, 
40–41, 49, 59, 98, 107, 115, 116, 133, 
141, 143–144, 146, 163, 177, 179, 198, 
210n25, 237, 249, 294–295, 329, 
331, 356; Suzanne Césaire in, 79; 
Ted Joans in, 228–230, 240, 287; 
Wi
fredo lam in, 94, 352
Paris Group. See Surrealist Group
Parker, Charlie “Bird”: and Chicago 
Group, 243–244; and Dizzy Gil-
lespie, 281; as inspiration, 269, 271, 
314; at Minton’s Playhouse, 200; and 
Ted Joans, 220–221, 317, 350
Pascal, Blaise, 144, 213, 225
Passeron
, rené, 18n28, 19n45, 73n6, 
209n10, 210n20, 251n17, 296n3
Pastour
eau, henri, 22, 33nn7–8, 41,  
177
Péret, Benjamin, 11–12, 18n37, 19n44; 
and a
imé Césaire, 63; in Brazil, 115; 
and influence on surrealism, 225, 
242, 349; journal publications, 197, 
20
3, 248; and légitime Défense, 21, 
36; and Negro Anthology, 30; and Ted 
Joans, 220; translations of, 136, 143; 
and Wi
fredo lam, 26–28, 32, 91
Peters, nancy Joyce, 210n22, 227n10, 
295
Picasso, Pablo, 14, 283; influence 
on surrealists, 148, 178, 195; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 31, 94, 96, 352
Pierre, José, 18n34, 98, 117, 291, 296n9
Pi
tcher, oliver, 205, 206, 221, 267
Poesía Sorprendida, La, 67, 69, 73n9, 108, 
109
Poindexter, Pony, 207, 239, 270–271
Por
talatín, aída Cartagena, 67, 108–
109, 292
Portugal, 116, 182, 186, 188
Postell, T om, 221, 233–234, 240, 250n3
Poston, Tim. See Postell, T om
Powell, Bud, 243, 244, 314
Prague
, Czech republic, 5, 144, 295; 
exhibitions in, 107, 161, 290; and 
Joyce Mansour, 285; Juan Breá and 
Mary 
low in, 26, 56; and music, 
276; publishers in, 292; surrealist 
group in, 61, 245, 246, 329
Prague Surrealist Group. See Prague, 
Czech republic; Sur
realist Group
Puerto rico, 1; luis a. Maisonet in, 
113–114; in Negro Anthology, 30; sur-
realism in, 69–71, 73n10–11
Quitman, Maurice-Sabas, 38, 45–46
ra
, Sun, 239, 277–279, 356
rabéarivelo, Jean-Joseph, 146, 188–189
racine, Daniel, 33n5, 34n23, 119n3
radcliffe, Charles, 202, 249n1, 294
ray, Man, 15, 29, 193, 200
redmond, eugene B., 342, 355, 360n15, 
360n17
Red Spanish Notebook: The First Six Months 
of the Revolution and the Civil W ar (Breá 
and lo
w), 27, 56, 59–60
reed, ishmael, 8, 17n26, 259–260
reich, Wilhelm, 24, 357–358, 361n25
Révolution Surréaliste, La, 5, 10, 11, 173, 
197–198
ri
f, the, 9, 18n32, 229
rimbaud, arthur: as inspiration to sur-
realists, 7, 78, 89, 107, 117, 144, 188; 
as precursor to surrealism, 29, 36, 
51, 132, 226, 299
ri
o de Janeiro, Brazil, 115, 120, 126. See 
also Brazil
riz
, angelo de, 135, 136, 148
roach, Max, 200, 239, 243, 271, 293
rochester, Myrna Bell: journal publica-
tions of, 294; translations by, 40, 49, 
50, 58, 81, 87, 109, 156, 157, 159, 168, 
175, 178, 179, 251n21, 298, 299
roediger
, David, 16n8, 17n14; and 
C. l. r. James, 59; publications of, 
248, 293, 294, 295


--- PAGE 414 ---
Index 393
rome, italy, 148, 149, 354
rosemont, Franklin, 17n25, 190, 250n11, 
349; and aimé Césaire, 29, 188; on 
Bob Kaufman, 223, 225, 227nn6–7; 
and C. l
. r. James, 59; and the FBi, 
209n9; friends of, 270; interviews 
by, 34n20, 209n12, 321n3; letters 
to, 3
3nn7–8, 119n2; and Mary low, 
33–34n17, 34n19; and robert Bena-
youn, 169–171; translations by, 46, 
91
, 101–103, 105, 129, 176; and u.S. 
surrealist group, 245, 332; works 
by, 208–209nn1–2, 210n22, 249n1, 
250n10, 251n12, 251n21, 296n12, 
320n1
rosemont
, Penelope, 349; and aimé 
Césaire, 29; and andré Breton, 
244, 250, 245; on surrealist women, 
33n13, 34n26, 73n2, 147n5, 210n21, 
226n2, 359n6; on T oyen, 16n5
roumain
, Jacques, 24, 30, 99–100
roussy, Jeanne aimée Marie Suzanne. 
See Césaire, Suzanne
Sakolsky
, ron: on surrealism in the 
2000s, 17n13; Surrealist Subversions, 
34n24, 226n2, 251n16, 295, 296n7, 
296n12, 311, 338; on Tyree Guyton, 
290
Salgado, Marcus, 121, 124, 345
San Francisco, California, 243; and Bob 
Kaufman, 222–226, 228, 230, 237; 
Phi
lip lamantia in, 204, 230; publi-
cations in, 239; surrealist group in, 
219; Ted Joans in, 220–222
Santiago, Chile, 5, 65, 67, 201; and 
Chicago Group
, 249; City lights 
Bookstore, 246; Pony Poindexter 
in, 270
São Paulo
, Brazil, 122; and african 
art, 144; exhibitions in, 107, 126, 
286; publications in, 316; surrealist 
groups in, 5, 115–116, 120, 237, 318, 
344; and Tyree Guyton’s collages, 
290
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 35, 153, 196, 197, 
209n6
Scottsboro case, 10, 18n37, 37
Seattle, Washington, 291, 292, 306, 309
Seligmann, Kurt, 8, 13, 17n25
Senegal, 7
, 11, 133; and légitime 
Défense, 22; and léopold Sédar 
Senghor, 28, 51, 128; works from, 
180–181; writers from/in, 256, 290, 
346
Senghor
, léopold Sédar: and etienne 
léro, 23, 35; as inspiration to other 
surrealists, 186, 197; and L’Étudiant 
Noir, 128; and negritude, 28–29, 51, 
1
18, 131, 258
Shepp
, archie, 233, 253, 293, 295, 356
Short, robert, 16n1, 16n3, 19n46
Smethurst, James edward, 250n2, 
251n13, 295
Socialism, 10–11, 351. See also 
communism
South a
frica, 146n1, 169, 189–191, 317
South america, 1, 35, 219, 343; works 
from, 115–118. See also individual 
countries
Spady, James G., 239, 240, 241, 307
Spai
n, 13; and C. l. r. James, 59–60; 
and heriberto Cogollo, 133; and 
Jacques roumain, 100; and Juan 
Breá and Mary low, 26–27, 56, 59; 
and Philip lamantia, 205; and sur-
realist refugees from, 67, 113; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 94, 96, 352
“Speech to Y oung haitian Poets” 
(Breton), 73n4, 99, 203
Stalin, Joseph, 10, 13, 27, 161, 209n6
Stein, Gertrude, 177, 233–234
Stich, Sidra, 11, 16n7, 18n42
St. 
louis, Missouri, 5, 243, 250n11
Stockholm, Sweden, 5, 207, 292
Stone-r
ichards, Michael, 329, 331–333


--- PAGE 415 ---
394 Black, Brown, & Beige
surrealism: african americans and, 
194–198, 211–218; african influence 
on, 6, 10–12, 16n7; arab Surrealist 
Movement in exile, 141, 143; Beat 
scene and, 205, 221, 225, 230, 312; 
and Black ar
ts movement, 237–241, 
250n2, 251n13; at the Black radical 
Congress, 295–296; black surreal-
ism, 10–12, 15, 315–316, 319, 349–351, 
357; in Brazil, 115–116, 118n1, 120, 
122, 126; in Cairo, 135–140, 146n1; 
in Chicago, 5, 7, 15, 28, 67, 72, 107, 
112, 117, 118, 140, 141, 158, 177, 181, 
194, 200, 237, 242–249, 251n16, 260, 
263, 264, 268, 285–286, 289, 295, 
308, 311, 324; in Colombia, 116–
117; in Congo, 181; definition, 1–5, 
16nn1–2, 19n48, 103; in the Domi-
nican 
republic, 67–69; future of, 
17n13, 251n12, 319–320, 349–359; in 
Guy
ana, 117–118, 128; in haiti, 66–
67; influences on, 7–8, 29; and jazz, 
6, 15, 17n15, 200–202, 207, 210nn16–
17, 243–244, 250n8, 253, 268, 288, 
319–32
0, 333; and légitime Défense 
group, 22–23, 35, 36, 54; in Marti-
ni
que, 61–65, 198, 206; negritude 
and, 130–132; in new Y ork, 65, 100, 
199–200, 204–206, 219–221, 223, 
22
7n3, 239; in north africa, 140–
141; in northeast africa, 143–144; 
politics and, 14, 16n3, 24–25, 207–
208, 209n10; psychoanalysis and, 13; 
in Puer
to rico, 69, 73n10; in Sene-
gal, 18
0; in Sub-Saharan africa, 144, 
146; in Trinidad, 71–72; vernacular 
surrealism, 194, 212, 247, 251n18, 
279. See also individual people
Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution, Le, 
23, 24, 35, 39, 49, 292
Surr
ealist Group, 2, 3; and arab Sur-
realist Group, 149, 158; in Cairo, 
135–136, 138, 157, 161; in Chicago, 
7, 72, 107, 118, 146, 171, 180, 181, 
183, 228, 242–246, 248–249, 256, 
263, 265, 285, 287, 289; in Cuba, 
28; in exile, 198; influences of, 6; 
influences on
, 67; interest in africa, 
9–11; and jazz, 286, 288; and Juan 
Br
eá and Mary low, 26; in lisbon, 
182; in london, 30, 31, 67, 72, 318, 
336; members of, 29; and nazis, 61; 
in new Y ork, 199–200, 204–206; 
in Paris, 22, 26, 30, 40, 41, 46, 56, 
67, 98, 115, 165, 168, 190, 206, 207, 
210n25, 245, 249, 294, 295; in Por-
tugal
, 187; in Puerto rico, 113; as 
radical/revolutionary, 13; in São 
Paulo, 115–116, 120, 344; and Ted 
Jo
ans, 204, 240; and Wifredo lam, 
94
Surrealist Manifestoes (Breton), 1, 3, 7; 
influence on other surrealists, 36, 
177, 299, 311
Switzerland, 100, 204, 293
Sylla, Cheikh Tidiane, 146, 180–181, 
201, 241, 290
Syria, 143, 174, 206, 237
Tanguy, Yves, 4, 26, 202, 312
Tanner
, henry ossawa, 14, 15, 258
Tarnaud, Claude: and Chicago surreal-
ists, 246; De: The Hidden Face of an 
Afro-American Adventure, 293, 296n12; 
and jazz, 200–201, 246, 273; in the 
un
ited States, 170; and Wifredo 
lam, 32
Taylor, Cecil, 288; and Black arts 
movement, 239; on Bob Kaufman, 
227n10; excerpt by, 274–276; as 
inspiration, 264, 265, 271; published 
work by, 286; and Ted Joans, 220
T education (Joans), 23, 33n12, 133, 317, 
350, 359n2
Télémaque, 
hervé, 67, 107–108, 206
Telmisany, Kamel al-, 136, 148, 162


--- PAGE 416 ---
Index 395
Thésée, lucie, 64, 85–87, 241
Thomas, John Jacob, 72, 73n12, 110– 
112
Thr
eadgill, henry, 239, 264, 271, 
288–289
Timbuktu, Mali, 107, 228, 229, 287,  
350
T okyo, Japan, 135, 198, 237, 287
T omich, Dale, 29, 34n24, 53, 59
T oomer, Jean, 89; excerpt from, 213–
21
4; and harlem renaissance, 15; 
and influence on black writers, 131, 
258; publications of, 194
T oyen, 3, 16n5, 26, 315, 349
Tr
inidad: anthony Joseph in, 318, 
336–337; John Jacob Thomas in, 110; 
John 
la rose in, 112; music of, 130; 
in Negro Anthology, 30; surrealists of, 
71–72, 73n12, 110–113
T ropiques, 23, 73n1, 213; and aimé Cé-
sair
e, 61, 74–78, 80–81, 87, 89, 91, 
20
3; and aristide Maugée, 89–91; 
founding of, 51, 61; and Georges 
Gratiant, 87–88; and Georgette 
anderson
, 91–92; importance of, 
292, 296, 315, 332; and lucie Thé-
sée, 8
5–87; and rené Ménil, 24, 
33n6, 61, 81–85, 87, 91; and Sté-
phane J
ean-alexis, 93–94; and 
Suzanne Césaire, 79–81, 87, 89, 332; 
T ropiques Group, 61–72, 85, 94; and 
Wi
fredo lam, 32
Trotsky, leon, 137, 197, 243
Tunisia, 140, 174–175
Turner, Patrick, 290, 338–339
T zara, Tristan, 21, 25, 28, 36
un
ited Kingdom. See e ngland; lon-
don, u
nited Kingdom
united States. See Chicago; n ew Y ork; 
and individual cities
u T
am’si, T chicaya, 181–182, 240
vaché, Jacques, 4, 6, 273; in Georges 
henein’s work, 154–156; journal 
publications of, 137, 246
valen
te, Malangatana ngwenya, 146, 
184–186, 287, 288
voodoo, 32, 132, 169, 194, 260
We
llington, Darryl lorenzo, 294–295
West indies, 30, 36, 74, 90, 130
Wilder, alex, 38–39, 75, 79, 114, 130, 
177
Wi
lliams, robert F., 237, 293
Wood, Peter, 143, 151, 166, 167
Worl
d War ii, 61, 162, 163, 193, 197, 257
Wright, richard, 355, 360n9, 360n11; 
Black Boy, 203; and Black Power, 238; 
and Chicago surrealists, 247, 248; 
excerpts, 215–216; influence of sur-
realism on, 195–198, 209n6, 209n8, 
322, 349, 352–353; as inspiration to 
black writers, 207, 216, 315; work by, 
6, 14, 250n11, 256, 316
writing, automatic, 11, 40, 213, 344–345
Younane
, ramses, 136, 149, 151, 161–162
Y oyotte, Pierre, 45; excerpt from, 40–
44and 
légitime Défense, 23–25, 33; 
and Paris Surrealist Group, 30
Y oyotte, Simone, 45; excerpt from, 
40; and 
légitime Défense, 23–25; 
poetry of, 33n13
Zan
gana, haifa, 141, 143, 147n5
Zora Neale Hurston (Karanja), 16n11, 
19n47, 209n3, 316, 324

