=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Black americans and achievement Booker T Washington.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 159
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:55:34.808777
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Black Americans of Achievement
LEGACY EDITION
Booker T. Washington
EDUCATOR AND RACIAL SPOKESMAN
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  15/12/04  15:50  Page i


--- PAGE 3 ---
Muhammad Ali
Frederick Douglass
W.E.B. Du Bois
Marcus Garvey
Alex Haley
Langston Hughes
Jesse Jackson
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Malcolm X
Thurgood Marshall
Jesse Owens
Rosa Parks
Colin Powell
Sojourner Truth
Harriet Tubman
Nat Turner
Booker T. Washington
Black Americans of Achievement
LEGACY EDITION
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  15/12/04  15:50  Page ii


--- PAGE 4 ---
Black Americans of Achievement
LEGACY EDITION
Booker T. Washington
EDUCATOR AND RACIAL SPOKESMAN
Alan Schroeder
With additional text written by 
Anne Beier
Consulting Editor, Revised Edition
Heather Lehr Wagner
Senior Consulting Editor, First Edition
Nathan Irvin Huggins
Director, W.E.B. Du Bois Institute
for Afro-American Research
Harvard University
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  10/1/07  1:53 PM  Page iii


--- PAGE 5 ---
Booker T. W ashington
Copyright © 2005 by Infobase Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any infor-
mation storage or retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the publisher.
For information contact:
Chelsea House
An imprint of Infobase Publishing
132 West 31st Street
New Y ork, NY 10001
ISBN-10: 0-7910-8253-9
ISBN-13: 978-0-7910-8253-9
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schroeder, Alan.
Booker T. Washington : educator and racial spokesman / Alan Schroeder with additional
text by Anne Beier.
p. cm.—(Black Americans of achievement)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Audience: Grades 9–12.
ISBN 0-7910-8253-9 (hardcover)
1. Washington, Booker T., 1856–1915—Juvenile literature. 2. African Americans—Biogra-
phy—Juvenile literature. 3. Educators—United States—Biography—Juvenile literature.
I. Beier, Anne. II. Title. III. Series.
E185.97.W4S243 2005
370'.92—dc22                                                                                                2004021264
Chelsea House books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk quantities
for businesses, associations, institutions, or sales promotions. Please call our Special Sales
Department in New Y ork at (212) 967-8800 or (800) 322-8755.
Y ou can find Chelsea House on the World Wide Web at http://www.chelseahouse.com
T ext and cover design by Keith Trego
Printed in the United States of America
Bang  21C 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
All links and web addresses were checked and verified to be correct at the time of publica-
tion. Because of the dynamic nature of the web, some addresses and links may have
changed since publication and may no longer be valid.
COVER: Racial spokesman Booker T. Washington at his Tuskegee Institute.
To my mother, Dorothy C. Singer.
And in memory of my grandmother, Laura Cole Kramer and my father Donald K. Singer.
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  10/1/07  1:53 PM  Page iv


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
Introduction vi
Atlanta, 1895 1
A Child of Slavery 8
The Desire to Learn 17
Hampton Institute and 
the Dignity of Labor 28
Tuskegee 42
Brick by Brick 54
A Private Man 65
“A Safe Leader” 73
Dinner at the White House 83
Washington and His Critics 92
“The Modern Moses” 104
“Leading the Way Backward” 113
A New Frankness 122
Chronology 138
Further Reading 140
Index 142
About the Contributors 150
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  15/12/04  15:50  Page v


--- PAGE 7 ---
Nearly 20 years ago, Chelsea House Publishers began to publish
the first volumes in the series called B LACK AMERICANS OF
ACHIEVEMENT.T his series eventually numbered over a hundred
books and profiled outstanding African Americans from
many walks of life. T oday, if you ask school teachers and school
librarians what comes to mind when you mention Chelsea
House, many will say—“Black Americans of Achievement. ”
The mix of individuals whose lives we covered was eclectic,
to say the least. Some were well known—Muhammad Ali
and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., for example. But others, such
as Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth, were lesser-known
figures who were introduced to modern readers through these
books. The individuals profiled were chosen for their actions,
their deeds, and ultimately their influence on the lives of others
and their impact on our nation as a whole. By sharing these
stories of unique Americans, we hoped to illustrate how
ordinary individuals can be transformed by extraordinary
circumstances to become people of greatness. We also hoped
that these special stories would encourage young-adult readers
to make their own contribution to a better world. Judging from
the many wonderful letters we have received about the B
LACK
AMERICANS OF ACHIEVEMENT biographies over the years from
students, librarians, and teachers, they have certainly fulfilled
the goal of inspiring others!
Now, some 20 years later, we are publishing 18 volumes of
the original B
LACK AMERICANS OF ACHIEVEMENT series in revised
editions to bring the books into the twenty-first century and
Introduction
vi
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  30/12/04  15:03  Page vi


--- PAGE 8 ---
make them available to a new generation of young-adult readers. The
selection was based on the importance of these figures to American
life and the popularity of the original books with our readers. These
revised editions have a new full-color design and, wherever possible,
we have added color photographs. The books have new features,
including quotes from the writings and speeches of leaders and
interesting and unusual facts about their lives. The concluding
section of each book gives new emphasis to the legacy of these men
and women for the current generation of readers.
The lives of these African-American leaders are unique and
remarkable. By transcending the barriers that racism placed in their
paths, they are examples of the power and resiliency of the human
spirit and are an inspiration to readers.
We present these wonderful books to our audience for their
reading pleasure.
Lee M. Marcott
Chelsea House Publishers
August 2004
INTRODUCTION vii
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  15/12/04  15:50  Page vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
CH.BAA.BTW.aFM.Final.q  15/12/04  15:50  Page viii


--- PAGE 10 ---
On the morning of September 18, 1895, Booker T. Washington
arose early in an Atlanta, Georgia, boardinghouse and began to
dress. He had slept poorly the night before, and as he buttoned
his shirt, his fingers trembled slightly. After he had combed his
hair and adjusted his tie, he picked up a handwritten sheet of
paper and began to study it quietly. The paper contained the
speech he was scheduled to give that afternoon at the opening
of the Cotton States and International Exposition.
Washington knew the words by heart; nevertheless, he read
them again, trying in his mind to hear them for the first time.
He understood that his speech had to be absolutely right. He
could not afford to make a bad impression at the opening
ceremony of the exposition. There would be many whites in
the audience who would enjoy watching a black man make a
fool of himself in front of thousands of people. Washington
was determined not to let that happen.
Atlanta, 1895
1
1
CH.BAA.BTW.C01.Final.q  15/12/04  15:51  Page 1


--- PAGE 11 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
After studying his speech, the 39-year-old educator knelt
and said a short prayer, as he always did before making any
public address.
An hour or so later, a committee of distinguished black
men arrived at the boardinghouse to escort Washington and
his family to the exposition. Hundreds of gaily decorated
carriages and wagons jammed the streets of Atlanta. The heat
that morning was intense, and during the long and bumpy
ride, Washington must have wondered how much controversy
his presence at the opening-day ceremony would cause. “It
was only a few years before that time, ” he later wrote, “that
any white man in the audience might have claimed me as
his slave....I  k n e w ,t o o ,that this was the first time ...that a
member of my race had been asked to speak from the same
platform with white Southern men and women on any
important National occasion. ”
The dirt road became so crowded with horses and pedes-
trians that it took three hours for Washington’s carriage to
arrive at the exposition. “When we reached the grounds, ” he
remembered, “the heat, together with my nervous anxiety,
made me feel as if I were about ready to collapse, and to
feel that my address was not going to be a success. ” With his
wife and children in tow, Washington squeezed his way
through the crowd until he reached the main building where
the opening remarks were to be delivered. The auditorium, he
discovered, was packed from top to bottom; thousands of
people milled outside, unable to get in.
THE ATLANTA EXPOSITION
By early afternoon, it was time for the exposition to officially
begin. With appropriate pomp, “The Star-Spangled Banner”
was played, immediately followed by “Dixie, ” the rousing
anthem of the South. As the dignitaries filed onstage, the crowd
began to cheer loudly. Washington was one of the last men to
enter. As soon as he became visible, the white members of the
2
CH.BAA.BTW.C01.Final.q  15/12/04  15:51  Page 2


--- PAGE 12 ---
Atlanta, 1895 3
audience abruptly ceased their cheering and shouting. Bewil-
dered voices filled the auditorium. An angry man could be
heard above the din: “What’s that nigger doing on the stage?”
Washington did his best to hide his embarrassment and
discomfort. He took his seat with the others, folded his hands
on his lap, and waited patiently through a long series of invo-
cations and opening remarks. The air in the auditorium was
stifling. After a while, the audience began to grow restless as
the dignitaries droned on.
Looking out at the crowd, Washington knew that, for his
speech to succeed, it would have to appeal to a broad cross-
section of people: white Northerners, white Southerners, and
all black Americans. This would not be easy. For weeks, he had
diligently worked on his address, reading aloud the various
drafts to his wife Maggie and the faculty at his black school in
Tuskegee, Alabama. T o his relief, everyone had seemed pleased
with the final version.
At last, it was Washington’s turn to speak. He was graciously
introduced by former Georgia governor Rufus Bullock: “We
shall now be favored with an address by a great Southern
educator. ” The fatigued members of the audience began to
applaud. Washington rose from his seat and made his way
to the front of the stage. Instantly, the applause died. No
one in the auditorium could believe that the “great Southern
educator” was black. Washington faced the crowd nervously.
He knew that he had reached a critical moment in his career.
SPEAK PROUD
His first words were appropriately benign. He reminded his
listeners that one-third of the Southern population was black
and that never before had the value “of the American Negro
been more fittingly and generously recognized than by the
managers of this magnificent Exposition ....I t  i s  a  r e c o g n i t i o n
that will do more to cement the friendship of the two races
than any occurrence since the dawn of our freedom. ”
CH.BAA.BTW.C01.Final.q  15/12/04  15:51  Page 3


--- PAGE 13 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
So far, so good. The white members of the audience—their
anger thus defused—settled back to hear what the black
educator had to say. In a quiet but firm voice, Washington
encouraged Southern blacks to make every effort to get along
with their white neighbors. Economically and politically, he
4
Booker T. Washington was well known throughout the South
as an educator, but he gained national prominence as a
black leader after his 1895 speech at the Cotton States and
International Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia.
CH.BAA.BTW.C01.Final.q  30/12/04  15:04  Page 4


--- PAGE 14 ---
Atlanta, 1895 5
said, their interests were the same. For the common good of
the South, they should join hands “in agriculture, mechanics,
in commerce, in domestic service, and in the professions.”
At the same time, Washington reminded blacks to become
educated. Until the race could read and write, the majority of
Southern blacks would have to earn their living as common
laborers. This, on the other hand, was no cause for shame. In
Washington’s opinion, any black man who considered himself
too good for manual labor was a stubborn fool.
“No race can prosper, ” he told the crowd, “till it learns that
there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem.
It is at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top. ”
This last remark especially please d the white members of the
audience, who by this time were paying close attention. They,
too, believed that blacks should start at the bottom. (Unfortu-
nately, they also believed that blacks should stay there.)
Washington had words of advice for the whites as well. He
reminded them to help and encourage Southern blacks, “the
most patient, faithful, law abiding, and unresentful people that
the world has seen. ” At this point, Washington’s speech waxed
sentimental: “As we have proved our loyalty to you in the past,
in nursing your children, watching by the sick-bed of your
mothers and fathers, and often following them with tear-
dimmed eyes to their graves, so in the future, in our humble
way, we shall stand by you ...r e a d y  t o  l a y  d o w n  our lives, if
need be, in defence of yours, interlacing our industrial,
commercial, civil, and religious life with yours in a way that
shall make the interests of both races one. ” The Southern
portion of the audience was deeply moved, and Washington’s
words were interrupted by a spontaneous outburst of applause.
The sunlight, meanwhile, was shining directly into Washington’s
eyes, but he continued to stare straight ahead. “The sinews
stood out on his bronzed neck,” a reporter later wrote, “and his
muscular right arm swung high in the air with a lead pencil
grasped in the clenched brown fist. ” Washington went on to say
CH.BAA.BTW.C01.Final.q  15/12/04  15:51  Page 5


--- PAGE 15 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
that any effort made by whites to advance the black race would
be amply rewarded. “We shall constitute one-third and more of
the ignorance and crime of the South, ” he warned, “or one-third
its intelligence and progress; we shall contribute one-third to
the business and industrial prosperity of the South, or we shall
prove a veritable body of death, stagnating, depressing, retarding
every effort to advance the body politic. ” Again, Washington
warmly thanked everyone present for already having done so
much to educate the Southern black population especially
“Northern philanthropists, who have made their gifts a constant
stream of blessing and encouragement.”
As he neared the end of his speech, Washington touched
upon the sensitive issue of black civil rights. It would be
“the extremest folly,” he said, for blacks to agitate for social
equality at the present time. Taking this idea one step further,
Washington made it clear that he believed civil rights for
blacks should be earned and not simply given. “It is important
and right that all privileges of the law be ours, ” he said, “but it
is vastly more important that we be prepared for the exercises
of these privileges.”
THE BIRTH OF A NEW LEADER
In essence, Washington was telling Southern blacks to be
patient, to put aside the question of civil rights temporarily,
and to concentrate instead on education and other forms of
self-improvement. This was a program for racial progress
that Southern whites could fully support, and the moment
Washington finished his speech, the audience rose to its feet,
cheering and shouting. According to one account, “Handker-
chiefs were waved, canes were flourished, hats were tossed
in the air. The fairest women of Georgia stood and cheered. ”
Bullock, a former slave owner, rushed across the stage and
began to pump Washington’s hand enthusiastically. “I received
so many and such hearty congratulations, ” Washington
remembered,“that I found it difficult to get out of the building. ”
6
CH.BAA.BTW.C01.Final.q  15/12/04  15:51  Page 6


--- PAGE 16 ---
Atlanta, 1895 7
Two days later, he returned with his family to his home in
Tuskegee. By this time, the effects of Washington’s speech
had reverberated across the nation; everywhere, people were
discussing the Atlanta Compromise. No longer was Booker T.
Washington an obscure Southern educator. Overnight, he had
become the most celebrated and respected black American of
his generation.
CH.BAA.BTW.C01.Final.q  15/12/04  15:51  Page 7


--- PAGE 17 ---
According to a family Bible, which has since been lost, Booker T.
Washington was born a slave in the state of Virginia on
April 5, 1856. From the moment of his birth, he was the legal
property of James Burroughs, a respectable landowner who
got along well with his slaves.
For the first nine years of his life, Booker lived with his
mother and siblings in a squalid cabin on Burroughs’s 207-acre
farm. The “plantation, ” as Booker called it, was located near
the village of Hale’s Ford, in the rolling hills of northeast
Franklin County, at the foot of the Blue Ridge Mountains.
Booker’s mother, a slave named Jane, was the plantation’s
cook. The identity of his father remains uncertain. “Whoever
he was, ” Booker wrote, “I never heard of his taking the least
interest in me or providing in any way for my rearing.” Like
his elder brother, John, Booker was a mulatto baby, with
medium brown skin, grey eyes, full lips, and reddish hair. His
A Child of Slavery
2
8
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 8


--- PAGE 18 ---
A Child of Slavery 9
father was almost certainly a white man, possibly the son of a
neighboring landowner or a field hand.
Around 1860, when she was 40, Booker’s mother married
Washington Ferguson, a 51-year-old slave from a neighboring
plantation. By necessity, the marriage was informal. Ferguson’s
master was a cruel man, and only on rare occasions was
Ferguson able to slip across the road to visit his wife. It was
not until after the Civil War that Booker came to know his
stepfather well.
When they were not laboring in the fields, the half-dozen
slaves on the Burroughs estate were confined to two log
Washington was born a slave, and grew up in this tiny cabin on a 
plantation in Franklin County, Virginia. The cabin and surrounding farm
are now designated the Booker T. Washington National Monument.
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 9


--- PAGE 19 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
cabins and a tiny yard overgrown with weeds. A stone’s throw
from the slave quarters stood the “big house, ” where 62-year-
old James Burroughs lived with his wife, Elizabeth, and their
14 children (half of whom had moved away by 1856, the year
Booker was born).
James Burroughs was a man of neither wealth nor influence.
He was a self-sufficient farmer living from one season to the
next. T obacco was his primary crop, but he grew other things as
well, including wheat, corn, oats, flax, and sweet potatoes. Like
many white Southerners, Burroughs and his sons found it
necessary to work side by side with their slaves in the corn and
wheat fields. “In this way, ” Booker recalled, “we all grew up
together, very much like members of one big family.”
Naturally, Booker and the other slaves did not eat as well or
live as comfortably as the master and his children. The dismal
cabin where Jane and her family lived was cramped and filthy.
In the center of the dirt floor, there was a deep pit, covered
with boards, where sweet potatoes were stored during the
winter. The cabin door—“that is, ” Booker recalled, “something
that was called a door”—hung dejectedly on rusty hinges.
Gaping holes in the walls served as windows. There was hardly
any furniture and no stove.
All year long, Jane sweated in front of the open fireplace,
cooking three meals a day for 20 hungry people. In July and
August, the heat in the cabin was overpowering, and Booker
spent most of his time outside in the yard, playing marbles
and hide-and-seek with his brother, John, and his younger
sister, Amanda.
At night, after the fire had been extinguished, the family
slept on three or four grain sacks strewn across the dirt floor.
There were no beds in the slave cabins; such luxuries were
reserved for the master and his family. Booker was 10 years old
before he slept in a bed for the first time.
Food was scarce in the slave quarters, and according to
B
ooker, he took his meals where he could find them. Sometimes,
10
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 10


--- PAGE 20 ---
A Child of Slavery 11
when no one was looking, he would snatch a sweet potato
from the hole in the dirt floor. Other days, he would eat the
boiled corn that was supposed to have been fed to the hogs.
One evening, in fearful silence, the family cooked and ate
a chicken, which Jane had somehow managed to steal from
the barnyard.
Because she was constantly busy with her cooking, Jane
was not able to give much attention to her young children.
As toddlers, Booker and John spent much of their time sitting
in the yard, watching the other slaves go about their chores.
As soon as their fingers were strong enough to grip a hoe,
however, they were put to work feeding the hogs and toting
pails of water to the men in the fields.
THE DISCOVERY OF EDUCATION
It was around this time that Booker first became aware of
his desire to learn. Education in the South, even among the
upper classes, was not considered a high priority. The school
year lasted less than four months, attendance was spotty, and
too often the instructors themselves were poorly educated.
Nevertheless, James Burroughs sent his daughters to the local
schoolhouse to learn what they could. Booker was occasionally
told to follow behind the girls and carry their books for them.
He did not mind doing this because it gave him an opportu-
nity to peek into the small schoolhouse, where he saw rows of
white children obediently reciting the alphabet and reading
aloud from their primers. This sight, he recalled, “made a deep
impression upon me, and I had the feeling that to get into a
schoolhouse and study in this way would be about the same as
getting into paradise. ”
In the South, however, it was illegal to teach a slave how to
read and write, and it is unlikely that anyone would have
encouraged Booker’s educational dream. His mother made a
point of telling him that reading was a “dangerous” business
only meant for white folks. The word dangerous fascinated
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 11


--- PAGE 21 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Booker, and he resolved that someday he would learn to read
and write, even if he had to teach himself how.
In general, life in Franklin County was slow and uneventful.
There were no large cities nearby, and the monotony was
broken only by an occasional lawsuit or a runaway horse or
the appearance of a public speaker. Most people went around
barefoot; men chewed tobacco, and it was not unusual for
women to smoke corncob pipes and dip snuff.
THE BREAKOUT OF A VICIOUS WAR
The tranquility of this rural life was shattered, however, by the
outbreak of the Civil War, which swiftly became the bloodiest
conflict in the nation’s history. The first shots were fired in South
Carolina on April 12, 1861, when Booker was five years old. By
12
James and Elizabeth Burroughs, Washington’s owners until the outbreak
of the Civil War. The Burroughs were neither wealthy nor cruel, and they
worked next to their slaves in the fields in order to produce enough
crops to make a living.
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 12


--- PAGE 22 ---
A Child of Slavery 13
the end of April, a total of 11 Southern states, including Virginia,
had seceded from the Union. Though many factors were
involved, the war was being fought primarily over the contro-
versial issue of slavery: The North wanted to abolish it, and the
South, for social and economic reasons, wished to preserve it.
Everyone in Franklin County followed the events of the
war c losely. Only a handful of blacks were able to read the
newspapers, but there was an effect ive oral network called the
“grapevine telegraph” that kept everyone informed. News passed
from kitchen to kitchen, and field to field, with surprising speed.
“Often, ” Booker recalled,“the slaves got knowledge of the results
of great battles before the white people received it. ”
Booker’s master, James Burroughs, died in July 1861, three
months after the start of the war. By this time, Booker and his
brother were considered old enough and strong enough to
take on some of the heavier chores around the farm. Accord-
ing to Booker, one of his weekly duties was to take the corn to
the mill to be ground. “This work I always dreaded, ” he later
wrote. “The heavy bag of corn would be thrown across the
back of the horse, and the corn divided about evenly on each
side. ” During the three-mile journey to the mill, however, the
grain would usually shift weight, causing the bag to tumble to
the ground. Booker was not strong enough to pick up the load,
so he had no choice but to sit by the roadside, in tears, waiting
for someone to come along and lend a hand.
Returning home from the mill was even more traumatic.
Along the way, Booker had to pass through a dense and shad-
owy forest. “I was always frightened, ” he remembered. “The
woods were said to be full of soldiers who had deserted from
the army, and I had been told that the first thing a deserter did
to a Negro boy when he found him alone was to cut off his ears. ”
THE EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION
By the summer of 1862, more than 100,000 Americans had
been killed or wounded in the Civil War. Deeply grieved by
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 13


--- PAGE 23 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
the ongoing conflict, President Abraham Lincoln drafted a
sweeping measure that he hoped would cripple the South’s
economy and eventually bring the fighting to an end. On
September 22, 1862, with the approval of his cabinet, Lincoln
issued the Emancipation Proclamation. This important piece
of legislation declared that, as of January 1, 1863, all slaves
living in the Confederate South were to “be then, thencefor-
ward, and forever free. ” In theory, this proclamation liberated
millions of blacks who had spent their life in bondage. The
majority of Southern whites, however, did not recognize the
legality of Lincoln’s order, and slavery continued to flourish.
Two years later, in September 1864, the city of Atlanta,
Georgia, was invaded by Union troops led by General William
T. Sherman. After torching Atlanta, Sherman’s men began to
march victoriously toward Savannah, leaving behind them a
bloody wake of death and destruction. Everywhere, Southerners
were thrown into a state of panic and confusion. Banks and
businesses closed; cities were evacuated; food prices tripled,
then quadrupled. Armed groups of white men patrolled the
roads, searching for runaway slaves. Despite the increased
surveillance, Booker’s stepfather, Washington Ferguson,
managed to escape his master’s tyranny, slipping across the
border into the new state of West Virginia to live as a free man.
(For additional information on General Sherman and his
involvement in the Civil War, enter “General William Sherman”
into any search engine and browse the sites listed.)
Meanwhile, 3.5 million slaves hoped and prayed for the
defeat of the Confederate army. “As the great day drew nearer,”
Booker recalled, “there was more singing in the slave quarters
than usual. It was bolder, had more ring, and lasted later into
the night. ”
In April 1865, the Union army seized the Confederate capital
of Richmond, Virginia. This was a crushing blow to the
Southerners, and a week later, on April 9, the Confederate
commander, Robert E. Lee, formally surrendered to the
14
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 14


--- PAGE 24 ---
A Child of Slavery 15
commander of the Union army, Ulysses S. Grant. T o the relief of
the shattered nation, the Civil War had at last come to an end.
RECONSTRUCTION OF A DEVASTATED NATION
A day or two after Lee’s surrender, a government official rode
up to the veranda of the Burroughs home. Before the assembled
group of masters and slaves, he made a short speech, then began
to read from a sheet of paper, presumably the Emancipation
Proclamation. “After the reading, ” Booker remembered, “we
were told that we were all free, and could go when and where
we pleased. My mother, who was standing by my side, leaned
Hoping to cripple the Southern economy and end the Civil War, President
Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, stating that as
of January 1, 1863, all slaves in rebel states would be free. Though the
South did not recognize the legislation, it was important in showing the
Union’s commitment to ending slavery, not just reuniting the country. In
this engraving, a Union soldier reads the proclamation to a slave family.
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  30/12/04  15:04  Page 15


--- PAGE 25 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
over and kissed her children, while tears of joy ran down her
cheeks. ...F o r  s o m e  m i n u t e s  t h e r e  was great rejoicing, and
thanksgiving, and wild scenes of ecstasy. ”
After the initial jubilation had worn off, however, a strange
feeling of seriousness, even gloom, began to descend upon
some of the former slave population. A new and somewhat
disturbing thought had occurred to them. Financially, they
were now responsible for themselves. They could no longer
rely on their masters for food and shelter. As free people, they
had to find their place in society.
According to Booker, “It was very much like suddenly
turning a youth of ten or twelve years out into the world to
provide for himself ....S o m e  o f the slaves were seventy or
eighty years old; their best days were gone. They had no
strength with which to earn a living in a strange place and
among strange people....G r a d u a l l y ,o n e  b y  o n e ,s tealthily at
first, the older slaves began to wander from the slave quarters
back to the ‘big house’ to have a whispered conversation with
their former owners as to their future.”
16
CH.BAA.BTW.C02.Final.q  15/12/04  15:52  Page 16


--- PAGE 26 ---
During the weeks that followed the conclusion of the Civil War,
many former slaves (or freed slaves, as they were called)
temporarily left their plantations and farms. It was important
for them to feel that they could come and go as they pleased—
to “try their freedom on, ” as Booker T. Washington called it.
Many returned after a day or two, bewildered by the
prospect of having to find new employment. The majority of
freed slaves were illiterate and therefore unable to compete in
the urban marketplace. For many, it was easiest to work out
some sort of arrangement with their former master that would
allow them to stay on the plantation. There was safety and
comfort in familiarity. There were many who were young and
able bodied, however, who took a resourceful approach about
beginning their new lives.
Booker’s stepfather was more fortunate than most. After
escaping to the state of West Virginia in 1864, Washington
The Desire to Learn
3
17
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 17


--- PAGE 27 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Ferguson had managed to find work as a salt packer in the
small town of Malden. By 1865, he had saved some money, and
after the war, he wrote (or had someone write) to his wife,
telling her to join him there. Jane and the children promptly
loaded their few possessions into a wagon, and after bidding
farewell to the Burroughs family, they began their journey
west. Because Jane’s health was beginning to fail, she rode in
the wagon; the three children followed behind on foot.
Two weeks later, exhausted but optimistic, they arrived in
Malden, a river town eight miles from Charleston. As they
made their way up the main street, they must have been
discouraged by what they saw. The neighborhood where
Washington Ferguson lived was crowded and filthy; the smell
of rotting garbage and animal dung permeated the air. Poor
blacks and poor whites lived side by side in mutual squalor.
18
Many of the newly freed families became the pioneers of the westward
expansion. The government offered pioneers free land in the hope that they
would successfully develop the land into profitable farms and invigorate an
economy that suffered badly as a result of the Civil War.
These opportunities led to a sense of enthusiasm and hope for those who
owned profitable farmland. Many had the experience and skills from working
on the plantations, and this was exactly the type of work Booker T. Washington
was encouraging newly freed slaves to use in starting their new lives.
Ex-slaves were able to handle the rough elements of the pioneering life
because of the poor living conditions they endured as slaves. Some, however,
were unsuccessful because they could not afford to buy farming equipment.
Also, some of the territory west of the Mississippi was dry and not conducive
to farming crops and raising farm animals that were indigenous to the South.
Many male ex-slaves joined the cattle drives involved in the westward
expansion because they were accustomed to taming and breaking wild
horses for their former masters. The use of tamed horses was essential in
the movement of large herds of cattle among the many ranches throughout
the northwest and southwest.
Freed Slaves
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 18


--- PAGE 28 ---
The Desire to Learn 19
According to Booker, “Drinking, gambling, quarrels, fights,
and shockingly immoral practices were frequent. ”
The cabin where the family lived was just as small and
uncomfortable as the one on the Burroughs farm. It was also
twice as dirty. For obvious reasons, nine-year-old Booker took
an immediate dislike to the community of Malden.
Within a matter of days, he and John were put to work at
the salt furnace where their stepfather earned wages as a
packer. All day long, the boys shoveled dried salt into large
wooden barrels, pounding down the loose salt until each
barrel weighed a standard amount. The job was backbreaking,
Washington and his family moved to this home in Malden, West Virginia,
following the Civil War. Booker was disappointed to find their new cabin
no more comfortable than their slave quarters and the neighborhood
dirty and filled with gamblers and drinkers.
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 19


--- PAGE 29 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
and Washington Ferguson pocketed what little money his
stepsons earned.
BOOKER TEACHES HIMSELF HOW TO LEARN
At the end of each day, the salt barrels were numbered accord-
ing to who had done the packing. The Fergusons’ number was 18.
A bright boy, Booker quickly learned what the number 18
looked like, drawing it in the dirt with a stick. In time, he
probably began to recognize other numbers as well. The letters
of the alphabet, however, remained a mystery to him.
Like many freed slaves, Booker had a burning desire to read
and write. Working every day at the salt furnace, though,
allowed him no time to pursue an education. The salt packers
began work at dawn, and they never left the furnace before
dusk. In addition to this, packing salt was hard and heavy
work, and every night when Booker returned home, he felt
exhausted. Nevertheless, he understood that he had to become
educated. It was the only means by which he could escape his
life of drudgery.
A SPECIAL GIFT
One evening, to Booker’s surprise, his mother presented him
with a copy of a Webster’s spelling book. From then on,
whenever he was at home, Booker could be found studying
the alphabet, putting letters together, forming words and
simple sentences. In this crude way, without any assistance,
he managed to teach himself most of the alphabet.
His determination to learn was not unusual. During the
postwar period known as Reconstruction, an increasingly
large number of freed slaves began to seek an education. They
believed that if they could learn to read and write, they could
get better jobs, begin to buy property, and eventually win the
right to vote. As Booker later put it, “A whole race [was]
beginning to go to school for the first time ....F e w  w e r e  t o o
young, and none too old, to make the attempt to learn ....
20
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 20


--- PAGE 30 ---
The Desire to Learn 21
Day school, night school, Sunday school, were always crowded,
and often many had to be turned away for want of room. ”
Not long after Booker’s arrival in West Virginia, a black
school was established in the nearby community of Tinkersville,
one mile from Malden. The school excited a great deal of
interest; according to Booker, it was the first of its kind in
the area. His stepfather, however, would not let him attend.
Booker was told that every dime he earned as a packer was
needed to put food on the table. This was probably true, and
yet it was during this supposedly lean period that Booker’s
parents decided to adopt a fourth child, an orphan boy whom
they named James B. Washington.
Naturally, Booker was discouraged by his stepfather’s
decision, but he refused to give up his goal of acquiring an
education. As soon as it could be arranged, he began to attend
night school, an experience he found to be so rewarding “that
The era of Booker T. Washington’s prominence, from the 1870s
through World War I, was a difficult time for African Americans.
The legal end of slavery came with the end of the Civil War,
but Jim Crow laws and racial violence kept blacks from truly
becoming equal citizens. However, during this period, blacks
began to attend schools in unprecedented numbers. The major-
ity of African Americans were literate by the twentieth century,
and many received degrees from institutes of higher learning.
Booker T. Washington earned his degree from Hampton Institute,
a black college in Virginia, in 1876. His experience at Hampton
spurred him to lead the Tuskegee Institute to become a force
in black education. Washington was later bestowed with an
honorary degree from Harvard University in 1897 and from
Dartmouth College in 1901. He was also honored for his accom-
plishments in education by being the first African American
elected to the New York University Hall of Fame for Great
Americans, in 1945.
DID YOU KNOW?
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 21


--- PAGE 31 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
I think I learned more at night than the other children did
during the day. ”
THE TINKERSVILLE SCHOOL
The first evening that Booker attended the Tinkersville school,
he was asked to recite his name. This request perplexed him.
As a slave child, he had never been called anything but Booker.
He had no idea what his full name was or if he even had
one. Perhaps thinking of his stepfather, the name Booker
Washington sprang to his lips, and this was what he called
himself for the next few years. Later, when Booker was a
teenager, his mother told him that his middle name was
Taliaferro (pronounced T ol-uh-ver). Only then, when he was
about 16, did he begin to call himself Booker T. Washington.
After a while, when it became clear that Booker was serious
about pursuing his education, his stepfather changed his
mind, and together they worked out an arrangement that
permitted Booker to attend school during the day. “I was to
rise early in the morning, ” Booker remembered, “and work in
the furnace till nine o’clock, and return immediately after
school closed in the afternoon for at least two more hours of
work.” This proved to be a grueling schedule, however, and
after a month or two, Booker returned to night school.
Like most black schools in the South, the one in Tinkersville
was very small. Until suitable quarters could be found, classes
were held in the bedroom of a local home. The teacher was
a young educated black man, a Civil War veteran named
William Davis. Charismatic and extremely conscientious,
Davis was largely responsible for the school’s success.
Within two years, attendance had risen from approximately
30 to 79 students.
Initially, the school received no funding from the state or
county. Each black family, therefore, was asked to contribute
a small amount of money to pay for books and supplies. It
was also agreed that the teacher, William Davis, could “board
22
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 22


--- PAGE 32 ---
The Desire to Learn 23
‘round,” living with a different family each day of the month.
Booker always looked forward to the evening when his family
could entertain the learned Mr. Davis.
Eventually, the county began to set aside funds for the
Tinkersville school—but such al locations were usually small
William Davis, Washington’s first teacher. Davis’s small
school for black students in Tinkersville, West Virginia, was
very successful despite meager funding and supplies.
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 23


--- PAGE 33 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
and grudgingly given. According to one principal in nearby
Charleston, the local school board was made up of “ignorant,
coarse-minded men” who could not see the necessity of provid-
ing desks in black classrooms. The situation in Tinkersville
was no better. “General apathy prevails, ” stated William Davis,
“where there is not decided prejudice and opposition.”
During this period, Booker was sent to work in a nearby coal
mine. He hated this job even more than shoveling salt. The
work was dirty and exhausting, and according to Booker, there
“was always the danger of being blown to pieces by a premature
explosion of powder, or of being crushed by falling slate. ”
BOOKER’S STRATEGY TO EARN HIS EDUCATION
One day, while working in the mine, Booker happened to
overhear two men talking about a large black school that had
recently been established in Virginia. Booker crept up to listen
to their conversation. The name of the school was Hampton
Normal and Agricultural Institute (Normal meaning that it
prepared its students to become teachers). Crouching in the
darkness, Booker found it hard to imagine a black school any
larger or grander than the one in Tinkersville. “I resolved at
once to go to [Hampton], ” he later wrote, “although I had no
idea where it was, or how many miles away, or how I was going
to reach it. ”
Shortly thereafter, Booker heard of a vacant houseboy
position in the home of General Lewis Ruffner, one of the
wealthiest and most influential men in town. He applied for
the job, and to his relief he was hired at $5 a month. For a
while, Booker continued to live with his family, though he
eventually moved into the well-appointed Ruffner home.
From the beginning, Booker knew that his job was not
going to be easy. The general’s wife, Viola Ruffner, had a sharp
tongue and a reputation for strictness; few servants were able
to live up to her high standards. Booker was determined to
keep his position, and he listened carefully as Viola Ruffner
24
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 24


--- PAGE 34 ---
The Desire to Learn 25
explained to him what she expected from her houseboy: “I
[learned] that, first of all, she wanted everything kept clean
about her, that she wanted things done promptly and system-
atically, and that at the bottom of everything she wanted
absolute honesty and frankness. Nothing must be sloven or
slipshod; every door, every fence, must be kept in repair. ”
AN EDUCATIONAL BENEFACTRESS
Booker worked hard to please Viola Ruffner, and they eventually
became close friends. Realizing that Booker was a serious and
trustworthy young man, Ruffner took it upon herself to further
mold his character. She taught him to take pride not only in his
work but in his personal appearance. Self-improvement, clean-
liness, and good order characterized the Ruffner household;
Like many fellow former slaves, Booker T. Washington desperately wanted
to acquire an education and take advantage of the new, though limited,
opportunities available to African Americans following the Civil War. Here,
in a excerpt from his autobiography Up From Slavery, Washington describes
his feelings after learning of the existence of a black college:
ONE day, while at work in the coal-mine, I happened to overhear two miners
talking about a great school for coloured people somewhere in Virginia.
This was the first time that I had ever heard anything about any kind of
school or college that was more pretentious than the little coloured school
in our town . . .
As they went on describing the school, it seemed to me that it must
be the greatest place on earth, and not even Heaven presented more
attractions for me at that time than did the Hampton Normal and Agricultural
Institute in Virginia, about which these men were talking. I resolved at once
to go to that school, although I had no idea where it was, or how many miles
away, or how I was going to reach it; I remembered only that I was on fire
constantly with one ambition, and that was to go to Hampton. This thought
was with me day and night.
IN HIS OWN WORDS…
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 25


--- PAGE 35 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
during his stay there, Booker was encouraged to adopt these
characteristics for himself. As an adult, looking back on his
relationship with Viola Ruffner, he maintained that the lessons
she had taught him as a boy “were as valuable to me as any
education I have ever gotten anywhere since.”
Viola Ruffner had once been a teacher, and quite naturally
she took an interest in Booker’s educational pursuit. She
provided him with books, and during the winter she allowed
him to attend the Tinkersville school for a few hours each
day. “He was always willing to quit play for study,” she remem-
bered. “He never needed correction or the word ‘Hurry!’ or
‘Come!’ for he was always ready for his book. ” Ruffner also
noticed that her houseboy “seemed peculiarly determined to
emerge from his obscurity. He was ever restless, uneasy....‘ A m
I getting on?’—that was his principal question. ”
In March 1870, the Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution was ratified, guaranteeing black men the right
to vote.A  large parade was held in Charleston to celebrate,
and it is likely that Booker was among the thousand blacks
who flocked to the city for the daylong festivities.
THE JOURNEY TO HAMPTON INSTITUTE
In 1872, when he was 16, Booker decided to leave the Ruffner
household to become a student at Hampton Institute in
Virginia. His mother had mixed feelings about his decision.
Jane was pleased that her son was ambitious, but at the same
time she did not think it was necessary for him to pursue his
education. In any event, the family did not have enough money
to cover Booker’s traveling expenses, let alone his tuition.
Fortunately, help came from an unexpected source. When
the black community in Malden heard about Booker’s desire
to attend Hampton Institute, a collection was taken up.
Families gave what they could—a nickel here, a dime there—
and before long, enough money had been raised for Booker
to begin his journey.
26
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 26


--- PAGE 36 ---
The Desire to Learn 27
His last hours in Malden were melancholy. Ever since the
end of the war, Jane’s health had been steadily failing, and as
Booker boarded the train for the first leg of his trip, he did not
expect to see his mother alive again. “She, however, was very
brave through it all, ” he remembered. (Jane Ferguson died
two years later, in the summer of 1874. Booker’s brother
broke the news to him. It was, Booker recalled, “the saddest
and blankest moment in my life.”)
Halfway to Hampton, Booker began to run out of money. T o
his dismay, he had to continue his journey by foot. One evening,
he arrived in Richmond, Virginia, tired and hungry. He was still
82 miles from Hampton and flat broke. For several hours, he
wandered the streets, peering into store windows, unable to buy
even a loaf of bread to satisfy his hunger. Then, by chance, he
happened to notice a portion of the board sidewalk that was
elevated a foot or two above the street. “I waited for a few
minutes, ” he recalled, “till I was sure that no passers-by could
see me, and then crept under the sidewalk and lay for the night
upon the ground, with my satchel of clothing for a pillow.
Nearly all night I could hear the tramp of feet over my head. ”
When Booker awoke the next morning, he knew that he had
to earn some money to buy food. Once again, he used his
resourcefulness, as he had when he was determined to learn to
read and write. He happened to be near the wharf, where a
large shipment of pig iron was being unloaded. The captain
took a liking to him, and for the next week or so, Booker
worked as a stevedore until he had saved enough money to
continue his journey.
At last, on the morning of October 5, with only a few cents
in his pocket, Booker arrived at Hampton Institute. Staring
up at the handsome brick building, he was filled with a
tremendous sense of pride and accomplishment. “The sight of
it seemed to give me new life, ” he recalled. “I felt that a new
kind of existence had now begun—that life would now have a
new meaning. I felt that I had reached the promised land. ”
CH.BAA.BTW.C03.Final.q  15/12/04  15:53  Page 27


--- PAGE 37 ---
Later that day—October 5, 1872— Booker T. Washington presented
himself before Mary F. Mackie, “lady principal” at Hampton
Institute. Washington recalled that Mackie was taken aback
by his dirty clothing and his lean, hungry appearance: “I felt
that I could hardly blame her if she got the idea that I was a
worthless loafer or tramp. ”
As she did with all new pupils, Mackie asked Washington
a few questions about his education. Though she seemed
pleased with his answers, she could not decide whether to
admit the teenager as a student or not. Washington lingered
in her anteroom for more than an hour, nervously waiting for
her decision. At last, Mackie turned to him and said briskly,
“The adjoining recitation-room needs sweeping. Take the
broom and sweep it. ”
Washington understood at once that this was to be his
“entrance exam. ” Seizing the broom, he swept the recitation
Hampton Institute and 
the Dignity of Labor
4
28
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 28


--- PAGE 38 ---
Hampton Institute and the Dignity of Labor 29
room three times. Then, with a thoroughness that Viola
Ruffner would have admired, he took a dusting cloth and
went over every square inch of woodwork four times. No spot
was overlooked.
A bit later, Mackie strode into the room, took out a linen
handkerchief, and wiped it across a section of woodwork, then
across one of the tables, then along the row of wooden
benches. Finally, bending down, she dragged the delicate
hankie across the floor. When it came up clean, Mackie rested
her eyes upon Washington. “I guess you will do to enter this
institution, ” she said quietly. “I was one of the happiest souls
on earth,” Washington remembered.
ORIENTATION AT THE HAMPTON INSTITUTE
After Mackie had assigned the new student a room, she
discussed with him the matter of finances. Washington was
greatly surprised when she told him that his tuition would be
paid by an outside source. (He later learned that this was a
common practice at Hampton Institute.) Mackie stressed,
however, that the students had to cover their own meals,
books, and room. These costs, she explained, could be paid in
one of two ways: either “wholly by work, or partly by work and
partly in cash. ”
Because Washington had only 50 cents in his pocket, Mackie
told him that, if he liked, he could perform janitorial chores to
cover his room and board. It sounded like a fair arrangement,
and in this way, 16-year-old Washington became Hampton’s
janitor. “I had a large number of rooms to care for,” he later
wrote, “and had to work late into the night, while at the same
time I had to rise by four o’clock in the morning, in order to
build the fires and have a little time in which to prepare my
lessons. ” The work, he admitted, “was hard and taxing, but I
stuck to it.”
Booker T. Washington stayed at Hampton Institute for three
years. Nearly all of the instructors were white, and Washington
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 29


--- PAGE 39 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
30
At the age of 16, Washington decided he wanted to attend Hampton
Institute in Virginia, and he was so committed to this idea that he
traveled much of the 200 miles from his hometown to the school
by foot, with little money for food or lodging. This photograph shows
Washington around the time he enrolled at Hampton.
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  30/12/04  15:05  Page 30


--- PAGE 40 ---
Hampton Institute and the Dignity of Labor 31
was continually amazed at the unselfish manner in which
these men and women had dedicated their life to the cause of
black education. By the end of his first year at Hampton, he
had come to the conclusion that “those [individuals] who are
happiest are those who do the most for others. This lesson I
have tried to carry with me ever since. ”
WASHINGTON’S MENTOR
Shortly after his arrival at Hampton, Washington met the head
of the school, General Samuel Chapman Armstrong. He was
From a Letter to Darwin W. Esmond, Malden, WV
September 13, 1879
This letter, written to the benefactor who paid for Washington’s education
at Hampton, demonstrates the resourcefulness and foresight that Booker T.
Washington had in developing his education into legal studies. He
understood that knowledge of the law would help him in working toward
obtainment of legal rights for all.
Mr. Esmond: 
I learn through Miss Mary Mackie that I am indebted to you for your
kindness in securing law-books for me.
My greatest difficulty since I began the study of law has been the want
of books.
The books that you secured for me will be very valuable help to me, and
I feel very grateful to you for your kindness.
I have been receiving instruction this summer from a white lawyer, but
not very regularly.
I expect to go to Hampton in two weeks, where I shall teach this year. I
think I shall have a very good oportunity to study there. Any help that you
can give me there will be gladly received. The advice that you wrote to me
a year or two ago has been very va[l]uable to me.
With many thanks, I am
Yours truly
B.T. Washington
IN HIS OWN WORDS…
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 31


--- PAGE 41 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
instantly struck by the former general’s athletic, commanding
presence. In Washington’s words, Armstrong was “the most
perfect specimen of man, physically, mentally and spiritually”
he had ever seen. T o Washington, the general was “more than
a father”; he was, without question, “the noblest, rarest human
being that it has ever been my privilege to meet. ” (For addi-
tional information on General Armstrong and Hampton,
enter “General Samuel Armstrong Hampton” into any search
engine and browse the sites listed.)
Armstrong was 33 years old when Washington first came to
Hampton. Intelligent and ambitious, he had been one of the
youngest generals to fight in the Civil War. He had founded
Hampton Institute in 1869, and to some degree he ran his
school like a military academy, complete with morning and
evening bells, cadet drills, marching exercises, and daily
clothing inspections. “Shoes had to be polished, ” Washington
remembered, “there must be no buttons off the clothing, and
no grease-spots. ”
Armstrong also insisted that his students pay close attention
to their hygiene. The general believed that a clean body and
a clean mind went hand in hand. Accordingly, Washington
became acquainted with the bathtub, the comb, the napkin,
and the toothbrush during his first weeks at Hampton.
By nature, Armstrong was cheerful, unselfish, and immensely
popular with the female instructors. From the beginning, he
took a fatherly interest in the young men and women at
Hampton Institute, all of whom were exceptionally fond of
him. According to Washington, the general was “worshipped
by his students....T h e r e  i s  almost no request that he could
have made that would not have been complied with. ”
Despite the close rapport he enjoyed with his students,
Armstrong did not believe that blacks and whites were
necessarily equals. Most blacks, he felt, were incapable of
grasping complex issues and therefore unfit to take an active
role in American society. The average black person, he
32
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 32


--- PAGE 42 ---
Hampton Institute and the Dignity of Labor 33
contended, was still “in the early stages of civilization” and
inclined to laziness if unsupervised. For this reason, Armstrong
and his staff saw to it that the students were kept as busy
as possible. “Every hour was occupied in study or work, ”
Washington recalled.
General Samuel C. Armstrong, founder and head of Hampton
Institute. Washington was in awe of Armstrong and considered
Armstrong a mentor for the rest of his life.
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 33


--- PAGE 43 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
DAILY LIFE AT THE HAMPTON INSTITUTE
One day was very much like any other at Hampton Institute.
Every morning, the students rose at five o’clock for a military
drill. Breakfast was served at six. The balance of the day was
spent studying a wide variety of subjects: natural philosophy,
arithmetic, grammar, geography, history, civil government,
moral science, elocution, and bookkeeping. Prayers were
held twice a day; there was little time for rest and relax-
ation. The evening hours, according to Armstrong’s wishes,
were to be spent “in an atmosphere of Christian influence
and sympathy.” It was this influence, presumably, that led
Washington to become interested in the Bible. He found
its lessons deeply inspirational, and for the rest of his
life he tried to begin every day by reading a page or two
of Scripture.
GENERAL ARMSTRON G’S GOALS FOR THE STUDENTS
The majority of Armstrong’s students were studying to become
schoolteachers. The higher branches of education, however,
were not emphasized at Hampton Institute. For the most
part, students learned the basics, but not much more. As
Armstrong saw it, the strengthening of “character is the true
objective point in education. ” By and large, he believed that
blacks lacked not only self-discipline but a sense of morality.
Morality, in the general’s opinion, was like cement it held the
soul together. Without a sense of morality, a person could never
become truly “civilized. ” This was the primary reason that
higher education was not stressed at Hampton Institute—not
because the general disapproved of it but because other, more
basic things had to be learned first.
At the heart of Hampton’s curriculum was what the general
called the “routine of industrious habits. ” Every student, male
and female, was taught that labor was dignified and that great
satisfaction (as well as moral improvement) could be derived
from performing a task well. Under Armstrong’s guidance,
34
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 34


--- PAGE 44 ---
Hampton Institute and the Dignity of Labor 35
Washington wrote, “[I] learned to love labour, not alone for
its financial value, but for labour’s own sake. ”
The general also required his students to learn a profession
other than teaching. Printing, sewing, carpentry, and shoe-
making were a few of the vocations offered. During his
three-year stay at the school, Washington learned every aspect
of janitorial work. By teaching his students a practical trade,
Armstrong believed he was equipping them with the skills
that would allow them to become useful members of society.
This, in turn, would gradually earn them the respect and
love of their white neighbors. Such was the general’s long-
range plan for improving race relations in the South.
Armstrong also advised his students to rely upon themselves,
and not the courts, if they wished to end racial discrimi-
nation. “Patience, ” he wrote, “is better than politics, and
Students taking part in a trade class at Hampton. The institute promoted
the dignity of hard labor and students mastered a variety of subjects,
from civil government and bookkeeping to more practical vocationssuch
as carpentry, sewing, and janitorial work.
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 35


--- PAGE 45 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
industry a shorter road to civil rights, than Congress has in
its power to make. ”
GRADUATION WITH HONOR
By the end of his third year at Hampton, Washington had
eagerly absorbed all of the general’s doctrines concerning
self-reliance, the dignity of labor, and the importance of
personal cleanliness. In addition to these principles, he had
acquired a basic elementary school education, had picked
up a bit of legal knowledge, and had also learned the art of
public speaking, for which he had a natural talent. All in all,
Washington considered his education at Hampton equal or
superior to any he could have received at Y ale or Harvard.
In J une 1875, Washington was pleased to be among the
graduating students chosen to speak at the Hampton com-
mencement exercises. Before a large and receptive audience,
he outlined the various reasons why the island of Cuba,
located less than 100 miles south of Florida, should not be
annexed by the United States. A reporter from the New York
Times happened to be present, and a day later, the 19-year-
old graduate was praised in the Times for his “terse, logical
and lawyer-like argument” against Cuban annexation.
As the graduating students prepared to leave the institute,
Armstrong reminded them to be thrifty and industrious, to
vote w isely, to command the respect of their neighbors, and
to educate their children. “Remember that you have seen
marvelous changes ....I n  v i e w  o f that be patient—thank
God and take courage. ”
TEACHING AT TINKERSVILLE
On leaving Hampton, Washington returned to his home in
Malden. A few months later, he received his teaching cer-
tificate, and to his relief he was given a job at the black
school in Tinkersville. The salary was low, but Washington
was not discouraged. On the contrary, this was, he said
36
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 36


--- PAGE 46 ---
Hampton Institute and the Dignity of Labor 37
later, “the beginning of one of the happiest periods of
my life.”
At the Tinkersville school, Washington put into practice
many of the lessons he had learned under the general. He
taught his pupils not only how to read and write but how
to polish their boots and comb their hair. Every morning,
just as the general had done, Washington inspected his
students to make sure that their pants were clean, their
jackets buttoned, and their teeth properly brushed. (In time,
he became fanatical about the value of the toothbrush—
it was, in his words, nothing less than a cornerstone “of
civilization. ”)
WORK AND MARRIAGE
In one respect, Washington’s educational approach differed
slightly from the general’s. The head of Hampton Institute was
convinced that “the true objective” of any school should be
the formation and strengthening of character. Washington’s
primary goal, however, was to assimilate blacks peacefully into
white society—to make the black man “so skilled in hand, so
strong in head, so honest in heart, that the Southern white
man cannot do without him. ”
Washington worked tirelessly to accomplish his goal. In
addition to his daytime classes, he opened a night school; the
evening sessions became so popular that their attendance
soon equaled that of the day school. He also taught two
Sunday school classes, gave private reading and spelling
lessons, became active in the affairs of the church, and
even set up a small pub lic reading room, which he kept
stocked with a fresh supply of newspapers and magazines.
He was willing to teach anyone who wanted to learn, and
wherever he went, Washington stressed the importance of
education and self-help.
By 1876, he was teaching nearly 200 students, all of
whom were learning at a different pace. Among his pupils,
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 37


--- PAGE 47 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
presumably, were his brother, John, and his adopted brother,
James, both of whom later enrolled at Hampton Institute.
(While at Hampton, neither of Washington’s brothers distin-
guished himself academically, but they both graduated and
went on to become teachers.) Among Washington’s other
students who would later attend Hampton was an attractive
young woman named Fanny Smith. Washington fell in love
with her, and several years later, she became his wife.
Like everyone in Tinkersville, Fanny must have been aston-
ished by Washington’s store of energy. He even managed
to find the time to organize a debating society, and before
long, tournaments were being staged throughout the county.
Washington often participated in the debates, impressing
his listeners with his forceful speaking style and the sweep of
his intellect.
Most of the blacks who attended Washington’s school had
never received any type of education, and they looked up to
their teacher as a great source of inspiration. Washington
knew, of course, that most of his students would never escape
from the coal mines and salt furnaces of the Kanawha Valley.
Yet this knowledge, however discouraging, did not prevent
him from devoting three years of his life to the communities of
Tinkersville and Malden. He worked unselfishly and without
complaint. Whenever he felt overworked or unappreciated, he
reminded himself that he was toiling not for personal gain but
for the betterment of his race “to help the people of my home
town to a higher life, ” as he phrased it.
POLITICAL, COMMUNITY, AND RELIGIOUS INVOLVEMENT
In addition to his teaching duties, Washington occasionally
involved himself in local politics. During the summer of
1877, for instance, he embarked on a speaking tour, trying
to convince the black residents of West Virginia that in the
upcoming election Charleston should be chosen as the
permanent state capital. A newspaper reporter heard one
38
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 38


--- PAGE 48 ---
Hampton Institute and the Dignity of Labor 39
of Washington’s speeches and commended him for expressing
“his idea in a clear manner and with appropriate words.” On
August 7, Charleston was voted the permanent state capital. It
was a small victory, politically unimportant, but gradually
Washington was learning that he could influence others
through the power of his words.
The speaking tour was such a success that for a brief period
Washington was tempted to give up his teaching post to
pursue a career as a lawyer. In his spare time, he began to
study the law, but he eventually abandoned the idea. A law
career, he sensed, would be too limiting and not a good use
of the broad education he had acquired at Hampton.
Still, Washington was nagged by a feeling of restlessness
and indecision. In the summer of 1878, after three years of
teaching, he abruptly left his post in Tinkersville and traveled
to Washington, D.C., where he enrolled as a student at the
Wayland Seminary, a Baptist theological school. His reasons
for doing so remain obscure. Washington had never shown
much interest in organized religion, and it is unlikely (though
not impossible) that he would have decided to give up teach-
ing to become a Baptist minister.
In any event, Washington did not find what he was seek-
ing at the Wayland Seminary. Though he got along well
with several of the teachers, he found the curriculum too
intellectual and abstract for his taste. The students, he
complained, were very handy at Greek and Latin, but they
were learning nothing “about life and its conditions. ”
Washington also felt that many of the students were super-
ficial, more concerned with their clothing and appearance
than the quality of their education. It upset him to see young
black men who earned no more than $4 a week hiring buggies
on Sunday afternoon “to ride up and down Pennsylvania
Avenue in order ...t o  c o n v i n c e  the world that they were worth
thousands.” After half a year of religious study, Washington
left the seminary in disgust.
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 39


--- PAGE 49 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
THE HAMPTON INSTITUTE PROFESSOR
Shortly thereafter, in February 1879, Washington received a
letter from General Armstrong asking him to return to Hampton
to speak at the commencement ceremony in May. Washington
agreed, and the rousing speech that he delivered to the
graduating class, “The Force That Wins, ” went over extremely
well with students and faculty alike. It was, Washington
admitted, “the best address that I was capable of. ”
A month or so later, he received a second letter from the
general asking him to return to Hampton once again, this time
to serve on the faculty. “I will allow you $25.00 per month, ”
Armstrong wrote, “for your services here as teacher and
assistant in study hour. ” Washington wrote back at once,
accepting the position.
When he began teaching at the institute in the fall of 1879,
the school had just entered its 10th year of existence. In
educational circles, Hampton was considered a model industrial
school, and Washington was proud to be counted among its
faculty. Y et, even here, in this safe and familiar environment,
there were subtle signs of racial discrimination. Washington’s
salary was less than that of the white teachers, and he was
expected to eat in a separate dining room, away from the
other instructors.
Shortly after Washington’s arrival, Armstrong asked him
to take over the night school, which Washington agreed to
do. A small number of students at Hampton were so poor
that they had to work all day long to pay their room and
board and could only attend school during the evening
hours. Naturally, these students were exhausted by the time
they got to class, and Washington assumed they would have
trouble staying awake while he explained the complexities of
civil government.
Happily, this was not the case. Though few in number, the
evening students were a bright and highly motivated group.
Their eagerness to learn was contagious, and to Washington’s
40
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 40


--- PAGE 50 ---
Hampton Institute and the Dignity of Labor 41
surprise, his happiest and most vigorous hours at Hampton
were spent in the company of his night students. The atmo-
sphere was so stimulating that Washington’s pupils frequently
begged him to continue teaching after the “retiring bell” had
packed everyone else off to bed.
Appropriately, the night students were nicknamed the Plucky
Class, and within a matter of months, evening attendance
had more than tripled. In later years, Washington took great
pride in the fact that the night school, “which started with only
twelve students, now numbers between three and four hundred,
and is one of the permanent and most important features of
the institution. ”
CH.BAA.BTW.C04.Final.q  15/12/04  15:54  Page 41


--- PAGE 51 ---
In May 1881, General Samuel Armstrong received  a letter from
a group of educational commissioners in Tuskegee, Alabama.
Would the general, they asked, be able to recommend a
suitable white man to become the principal at their new,
tuition-free black school? Armstrong wrote back, saying that at
the moment he had no white man to recommend, but if a black
man was acceptable, he would send Booker T. Washington,
“a very competent capable mulatto ....T h e  b est man we ever
had here. ”
Aw eek later, during chapel service, the commissioners’ reply
arrived at Hampton Institute. Armstrong read the telegram
aloud before the assembled students: “Booker T. Washington
will suit us. Send him at once. ” “There was,” Washington
remembered, “a great deal of joy expressed among the students
and teachers, and I received very hearty congratulations. I
began to get ready at once. ”
Tuskegee
5
42
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 42


--- PAGE 52 ---
Tuskegee 43
AN ENTREPRENEURIAL EDUCATOR
The 25-year-old Washington arrived in the small town of
Tuskegee on June 24. He had never visited the Deep South
before, and his first impression of Tuskegee, situated at the
extreme southern end of the Appalachian mountain chain,
was agreeable. The following day, he sent a cheery postcard to
his friends at Hampton: “The place has a healthy and pleasant
location—high and hilly. Think I shall like it. ” The seat of
Macon County, Tuskegee was a quiet, sleepy town of 2,000
residents, half of whom were black. According to Washington,
race relations there were generally pleasant.
Before the Civil War, when cotton had reigned as king,
Macon County had been one of the richest regions in the
state. The ravages of the war and the subsequent infiltration
of Northern money and Northern values had changed
everything, however. Throughout the railroad-hungry South,
cotton plantations were giving way to steel factories, and
Tuskegee had been slipping into economic stagnation for
more than a decade.
In February 1881—four months before Washington’s arrival-
—the Alabama state legislature had passed a bill to set aside
$2,000 annually to “establish a Normal School for colored
teachers at Tuskegee. ” The businessmen of Macon County
hoped that the construction of a black school would stimulate
the local economy. They were also hoping that it would stem
the flow of local blacks who were leaving Tuskegee in alarming
numbers for the wider plains of nearby Kansas.
AN UNPLEASANT SURPRISE
When Washington arrived at Tuskegee on June 24, he
discovered to his surprise that the school had not yet been
built. Though the educational bill had been passed in early
February, state funding would not be made available until the
first of October. T o complicate matters, Washington soon
learned that the state allocation “could be used only for the
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 43


--- PAGE 53 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
payment” of the instructors’ salaries and that no provision
had been made by the state for the securing of “land, build-
ings, or apparatus. ” This meant that for the time being he was
unable to purchase books, maps, quills, ink, blackboards,
desks, or writing charts—the tools he regarded as essential for
44
In 1881, Washington was selected to become principal at a
new tuition-free black school in Alabama. Unfortunately,
when he arrived in Tuskegee, he found there were no school
facilities or supplies, and that state funding could only be
used for teachers’ salaries.
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 44


--- PAGE 54 ---
Tuskegee 45
providing a proper education. “The task before me,” he later
wrote, “did not seem a very encouraging one. ”
Washington would not admit defeat. Once again, Washington’s
resourcefulness overcame his sense of disappointment. He
was determined to take what he was given, and turn it into a
great opportunity.
Originally, he had planned to open his school in early
July, and he was determined to keep to that plan. On June 28,
four days after his arrival, he sent a letter to Hampton
Institute, requesting whatever books and supplies the school
could spare. “Y ou know what I need, ” he wrote to Hampton’s
business manager, “and any thing that you can send me I will
be thankful for. ”
BUILDING AN INSTITUTION WITH HELPING HANDS
In the meantime, Washington began to search for a suitable
location for his school. Within a few days, he had discovered
a 100-acre farm south of town that seemed promising. The
land was extremely hilly, and only one-quarter of it had been
cleared. On the positive side, there was a large orchard where
vegetables could be grown and cotton could be planted. There
were also several dilapidated structures that could be turned
into small classrooms.
The owner, William Bowen, was willing to sell the farm for
$500—$200 to be paid immediately, the balance to be paid
within a year’s time. Washington wanted to close the deal at
once, but, maddeningly, the state allocation could not be
used to purchase land. Somehow, he would have to raise the
money himself.
In general, the residents of Macon County looked forward
to the opening of the new black school. Washington recalled,
however, that there were “not a few white people in the vicinity
...w h o  l o o k e d  with some disfavour upon the project. They
questioned its value to the coloured people, and had a fear that
it might result in bringing about trouble between the races. ”
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 45


--- PAGE 55 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
To  alleviate potential hostility, Washington did everything
he could to cultivate the goodwill of the Tuskegeans. During
his first week in town, he became acquainted with as many
people as possible—farmers, businessmen, ministers,
schoolteachers, bankers, and physicians. Everywhere he went,
he greeted the locals with a handshake and a smile. In his every
word and gesture, Washington attempted to make himself
appear so useful and so beneficial “that every man, woman and
child, white and black, would respect me and want me to live
among them.”
Shortly after his arrival, Washington learned that there
were two black churches in town, one Methodist, the other
Baptist. On Sunday, June 26, he appeared before each congre-
gation, explaining to the churchgoers who he was and what he
was trying to achieve. The black people of Tuskegee warmly
supported the idea of a black school in their community. After
the service, they came forward, offering their help and
encouragement.
Each afternoon, when Washington returned to his boarding-
house, he found a large number of blacks waiting for him,
asking to be enrolled in his school. After giving the matter
some thought, he decided that it would be wisest “to receive
only those who were above fifteen years of age, and who had
previously received some education.” The majority of appli-
cants, he discovered, were already public school teachers, many
of whom had performed poorly on their state examination.
They were hoping that by attending Washington’s school they
could learn enough to receive a higher grade of teaching
certificate, which would allow them to earn more money. In the
end, approximately 30 students were selected for enrollment,
half men and half women.
THE OPENING OF TUSKEGEE INSTITUTE
To  the astonishment of nearly everyone, Booker T. Washington
opened his normal school on July 4, 1881, 10 days after his
46
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 46


--- PAGE 56 ---
Tuskegee 47
arrival in Tuskegee. Until the Bowen farm could be purchased,
classes were held in a large shack next to the African
Methodist Episcopal church. The shanty, as Washington
called the shack, was in such poor condition that “whenever
it rained, one of the older students would very kindly leave
his lessons and hold an umbrella over me while I heard the
recitations of the others.”
Obviously, this arrangement was inadequate for Washington’s
purposes. By mid-July, he had managed to borrow $200, enough
to make the down payment on the Bowen property. On
July 16, he sent a jubilant note to the treasurer of Hampton
Institute: “We now have the farm under control.” An astute
businessman, Washington specified that the land be deeded to
the trustees of the school—“not to be held as state property. ”
That way, if the government ever withdrew its funding, the
school would not have to close.
Originally, Tuskegee Institute was to have been tuition-free.
The paucity of state funding, however, forced Washington to
charge his students a small tuition as well as a monthly fee
of $8 for their room, meals, and laundry. Keeping in mind
the tremendous amount of work that needed to be done on
the farm, he set up a labor system identical to the one at
Hampton, enabling the students to pay off the cost of their
room and board by performing various chores. Most of the
pupils at Tuskegee—however grudgingly—took advantage of
this arrangement.
As soon as Washington received the deed to the Bowen
farm, he and his students began to repair the half-dozen
wooden structures, all of which were in pitiful condition.
Within a matter of days, the stable and the henhouse were
thoroughly cleaned, and with the addition of a few boards
and a coat of paint, they were turned into classrooms. A
handful of students were put to work building desks, tables,
and chairs; others were given the responsibility of nailing
down the uneven plank flooring.
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 47


--- PAGE 57 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
In the meantime, the citizens of Tuskegee began dropping
by,d onating whatever items they thought might be useful.
In this way, the school acquired a small supply of blankets,
farming implements, and kitchen utensils. T o Washington’s
relief, a shipment of books and newspapers arrived from
Hampton Institute.
STUDENT PARTICIPATION
To  make the school as financially independent as possible,
Washington decided to plant cotton, which he hoped would
provide a steady source of income. Before any planting could
be done, however, a large area of land had to be cleared. One
day, after class, Washington told everyone to pick up an ax and
follow him to the woods. The students stared at him in silence.
When they realized that Washington was serious, they made it
clear to him that they had come to Tuskegee to become better
teachers, not better farmers. In any event, they considered a
“cutting bee” undignified.
Washington held his temper. Quietly but firmly, he told his
students that manual labor was beneath the dignity of no one.
All work, he insisted, was good for the spirit (and, he might have
added, good for the school). Then, without another word, he
picked up an ax and went outside. A few minutes later, distant
chopping could be heard. At that moment, Washington gained
the respect of every student at Tuskegee. One by one, they each
picked up an ax and headed for the woods to join him.
For the next several weeks, Washington and his pupils
worked every afternoon, chopping wood and burning under-
growth, until 20 acres had been cleared. Unfortunately, the
land proved to be too hilly and the soil too sandy to produce
high-quality cotton. Wisely, the students decided to concentrate
their efforts on planting vegetables instead. Before long, a large
and healthy garden was thriving on campus.
From the beginning, Washington ran his school very much
like Hampton Institute. The Puritan work ethic was strongly
48
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 48


--- PAGE 58 ---
Tuskegee 49
emphasized, as was the importance of personal cleanliness.
The female students were expected to keep their hair combed
and their clothing tidy; the young men had to wear collars and
neckties. Everyone became acquainted with the toothbrush.
TUSKEGEE INSTITUTE’S EARLY SUCCESS
By November 1881, enrollment at the school had jumped
from 30 to 88. The administrative workload became too much
for Washington to handle; at his request, instructors from
Washington ran Tuskegee like Hampton, instituting programs of manual
labor in addition to academic courses so the students could help
construct the school while earning tuition money and learning the value
of hard work. Here, Tuskegee students dig the foundation for the
C.P. Huntington Memorial Building.
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 49


--- PAGE 59 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Hampton came to Tuskegee to relieve him of some of the duties.
Among the new arrivals was a graceful 27-year-old woman
named Olivia Davidson. A talented and clever instructor, she
was quickly assigned the post of lady principal.
It was Davidson’s uncanny ability to raise money, though,
that impressed Washington most. During her first year at
Tuskegee, Davidson organized a number of benefits, suppers,
and “literary entertainments.” She also encouraged her students
to go from door to door, soliciting contributions. According
to Washington, Davidson “never seemed happy unless she
was giving all of her strength to the cause” of black education.
Slowly, but surely, the Tuskegee coffers began to fill.
Naturally, the black residents of Macon County took a lively
interest in Washington’s school. Most of them were too poor
to give money, but they contributed what they could: a pig, a
quilt, a pitcher of fresh cream. One day, an elderly black
woman arrived at the school, dressed in rags. According to
Washington, she hobbled forward on a cane and said to him,
“I knows what you an’ Miss Davidson is tryin’ to do....I  a i n ’ t
got no money, but I wants you to take dese six eggs, what I’s
been savin’ up, an’ I wants you to put dese six eggs into de
eddication of dese boys an’ gals. ” Washington was deeply
touched by the woman’s gift.
Before the school was even a year old, contributions began to
arrive in the mail, a large percentage of them from the North.
A woman from Boston, for instance, who had donated $35,000
to Hampton Institute, sent $100 to Tuskegee. Washington was
careful to keep the school’s expenses to a minimum, and by
April 1882 the Bowen farm had been completely paid for.
The campus, however, still looked crude and temporary,
more like a farm than a school. The converted stable and
henhouse could accommodate only a limited number of
students, and for the first year, nearly all of Tuskegee’s classes
were held at the black public school and in the broken-down
shanty next to the church.
50
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 50


--- PAGE 60 ---
Tuskegee 51
Boarding was an even greater problem. All of the students
at Tuskegee had to live with charitable black families in town,
an arrangement that did not suit Washington. Like General
Armstrong, he wanted his students to spend all their time at
the school, where it would be easier to discipline their behavior
and to impress upon them the Puritan virtues of cleanliness
and self-help.
As soon as the Bowen farm had been paid for, Washington
began to draw up plans for a large wooden building to be erected
on campus. As he envisioned it, the building would contain
administrative offices and classrooms as well as a dormitory
on the third floor for the women students. (For the time being,
the young men would continue to live in town.) The cost of
construction would run close to $6,000—“a tremendous
sum, ” Washington admitted, but a necessary expenditure. A
central building would not only give the school a stronger
sense of identity; it would allow Washington and the rest of the
faculty to carry out their duties in a more professional manner.
To  raise the required money, Washington and Olivia
Davidson spent two months touring the Northern states,
soliciting contributions. Armed with letters of introduction,
they called upon the homes of known philanthropists to whom
they explained the importance of industrial education. They also
spoke before a number of church groups and social organiza-
tions. By the end of May 1882, they had collected more than
$3,000, enough to begin construction on the new building.
That summer, after the cornerstone had been laid,
Washington returned briefly to his hometown of Malden,
where he married his longtime sweetheart, Fanny Smith.
Years earlier, in 1876, Fanny had been one of his pupils at the
Tinkersville school. A bright student, she had later enrolled at
Hampton Institute, graduating in May 1882. Three months
later, on August 2, she and Washington were married at
the Zion Baptist Church in Tinkersville. When Washington
returned to his post at Tuskegee, Fanny accompanied him.
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 51


--- PAGE 61 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Little is known of their married life. According to Washington,
his first wife “earnestly devoted her thoughts and time to the
work of the school, and was completely one with me in every
interest and ambition. ” Despite her education, Fanny was not
assigned any teaching duties at Tuskegee. (The school records
52
Washington’s first wife, Fanny Smith. Smith and Washington
had been sweethearts since he taught her at the Tinkersville
school, and they married in 1882 after she graduated from
Hampton. They had a daughter, Portia, together in 1883, before
Smith died of unknown causes in 1884.
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 52


--- PAGE 62 ---
Tuskegee 53
list her simply as “Housekeeper. ”) In 1883, she gave birth to a
daughter, Portia. The following year, in the spring of 1884,
Fanny Washington died. The cause of her death has eluded
biographers, though she may have suffered fatal injuries after
falling from a wagon.
At the age of just 28, much to his grief, Booker T. Washington
was a widower.
CH.BAA.BTW.C05.Final.q  15/12/04  15:55  Page 53


--- PAGE 63 ---
The early years of the Tuskegee Normal School were among the
busiest and most satisfying of Booker T. Washington’s career.
The campus continued to enlarge, the faculty and the student
body increased, and Washington gradually began to incorporate
into the curriculum the fundamentals of industrial education.
These were also the years when Washington first began to
establish himself not only as a fine educator but as a wise and
conservative spokesman for the black race.
TUSKEGEE INSTITUTE THRIVES
In the fall of 1882, after six months of hammering and sawing,
the first permanent building was inaugurated at Tuskegee
Institute. It was named Porter Hall, after one of the school’s
most generous donors, businessman Alfred Haynes Porter. In
addition to administrative offices, classrooms, and sleeping
quarters, the barnlike building contained a library, chapel,
Brick by Brick
6
54
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 54


--- PAGE 64 ---
Brick by Brick 55
dining room, kitchen, laundry, and a small commissary where
the students could buy various items. Rising to a height of
three stories, Porter Hall was the tallest building in Macon
County, and according to Washington, “the whites seem about
as proud of it as the colored.”
The support and encouragement of white Tuskegeans,
Washington knew, was vital to the long-term survival of the
institute. Week after week, he tried to convince the leery white
residents of Macon County that his school was not a threat to
the existing social order but rather a vital and beneficial part
of the community. As the institute began to receive statewide
attention, white Tuskegeans naturally felt a hometown pride,
and to Washington’s relief, he was regarded as an ally, someone
who could be trusted.
If there was one difficulty that characterized the early
years of Tuskegee Institute, it was the school’s chronic lack
of money. As the student body continued to grow, the need
for additional buildings and teachers became acute. For
increasingly long periods of time, Washington found himself
touring the Northern cities, trying to raise the necessary funds.
He was generally successful, but it was an exhausting and
worrisome task.
Fortunately, the school’s academic reputation helped
lighten the financial burdens. In 1883, only two years after
Tuskegee’s founding, the Alabama state legislature saw fit to
allocate an additional $1,000 a year to cover the instructors’
salaries. Almost immediately thereafter, the school received
funding from two philanthropic organizations, the Slater
Fund for Negro Education and the Peabody Fund, both of
which were committed to the cause of black education.
As soon as the school was on firmer ground financially,
Washington began to alter the look of the campus and shift the
educational emphasis. For the first two years of its existence,
the primary function of the institute was to prepare its students
to teach in black elementary schools. The courses taught at
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 55


--- PAGE 65 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Tuskegee were for the most part traditional. In addition to
history, geography, and mathematics, the students were
encouraged to study literature, astronomy, botany, electricity,
bookkeeping, composition, grammar, and penmanship.
Around 1883, however, Washington began to broaden the
curriculum, gradually incorporating the fundamentals of
industrial education. The changing nature of the school was
emphasized in the 1883–84 Tuskegee catalog: “There are
hundreds of institutions, North and South, to which students
can go and receive extended mental training, but those where
young men and women can learn a trade in addition to other
training, are few. At present the industries of the institution
are farming, brickmaking, carpentering, printing, black-
smithing; and housekeeping and sewing for girls. ” Within a
few years, numerous other vocations were added to the list:
cabinetry, shoemaking, painting, broom making, wheel-
wrighting, mattress making, wagon building, and tinsmithing.
Like his mentor, Samuel Armstrong, Washington saw to it
that all the trades offered at his school were relevant to the
postwar Southern economy. Industrial education, he declared,
should “fit us for the work around us and demanded by the
times in which we live. ”
Whenever possible, the academic courses at Tuskegee were
given a practical slant. The mathematics students, for instance,
were required to measure the length and width of their class-
room to determine how much carpet would be needed to
cover the floor. In composition class, students were told to
write essays on cabinetry, dressmaking, and wheelwrighting.
“An ounce of application, ” Washington once said, “is worth a
ton of abstraction.”
In keeping with this belief, Latin and Greek were not
taught at the institute. Although Washington recognized
their academic value, he considered them useless subjects as
far as everyday life was concerned. There would be many
more occasions, he insisted, when a Southern black would
56
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 56


--- PAGE 66 ---
Brick by Brick 57
need to know how to shoe a horse than to quote the works of
Virgil or Ovid.
As mentioned in the school catalog, brickmaking was
among the skills offered to the male students at Tuskegee. This
trade was not casually introduced into the curriculum; rather,
it was a conscious effort on Washington’s part to combine his
ideas about self-reliance and industrial education. Washington
repeatedly told his students that if a black man could offer a
useful skill to his community, he would eventually be shown
the respect and recognition he deserved “as a man and as a
citizen.” When deposits of brick clay were discovered on the
As Tuskegee began to receive sufficient funding and build better facilities,
Washington incorporated into his curriculum more industrial courses that
were relevant to the Southern economy, including farming, blacksmithing,
and wagon building. In this photograph from 1909, Tuskegee students
work in the school’s print shop.
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 57


--- PAGE 67 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Tuskegee campus, an opportunity arose for Washington to put
this belief into action.
His plan was relatively simple. Washington knew that if the
students could make their own bricks, any future buildings
on campus could be constructed out of brick, and not wood,
thereby ensuring the school’s longevity. There was no brick-
yard in town, and Washington was correct in assuming that
any leftover bricks could be sold to the farmers and merchants
of Tuskegee, providing a much-needed source of income for
the school. Brickmaking would teach the students a trade and
would offer visible proof to the local whites that black education
was not only beneficial to blacks but to the entire population
of Macon County.
Writing to Armstrong, Washington estimated that he and
his students could build a kiln and begin to fire bricks for
about $200. He was wrong. The first attempt was a disaster:
25,000 handmade bricks refused to burn properly and had to
be discarded. The second attempt also failed, for reasons that
Washington did not understand. The third experiment was
going well until the kiln collapsed in the middle of the night,
ruining thousands of bricks.
At this point, the students became quarrelsome; no one
could agree on what should be done. The work, Washington
remembered, “was hard and dirty, and it was difficult to get
the students to help....M o r e  than one man became disgusted
and left the school. ”
Washington refused to give up, however. In his mind, brick-
making became symbolic of everything he was trying to
achieve at the institute. T o raise additional money, he pawned
his watch for $15, and ignoring the protests of others, he and
a handful of students set about reconstructing the collapsed
kiln. T o everyone’s relief, the fourth attempt at brickmaking
was successful. From then on, all of the buildings on campus
were constructed of handmade brick, and the people of
Tuskegee began to order bricks in great quantities from the
58
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 58


--- PAGE 68 ---
Brick by Brick 59
institute. (By 1900, the kiln was turning out more than a
million high-quality bricks a year, which were sold for a good
price throughout Macon County.)
During this period of growth and progress, Washington
brought his brother, John, and John’s wife, Susie, to Tuskegee.
After graduating from Hampton, John had worked briefly as a
teacher at the black school in Tinkersville. He had later found
employment with the U.S. Corps of Engineers, which had
assigned him a succession of low-paying, menial jobs. John
welcomed the move to Tuskegee, where he acted as business
agent for a salary of $30 a month.
OLIVIA DAVIDSON: ACTIVIST AND WIFE
In 1885, one year after the death of his wife, Washington
married the institute’s lady principal, Olivia Davidson. Her
commitment to the school was as strong as Washington’s,
and it is not difficult to understand their mutual attraction.
Despite Olivia’s often frail condition, she bore two children:
Booker T. Washington, Jr., nicknamed “Baker” (born in 1885),
and Ernest Davidson Washington (born in 1889).
“During our married life, ” Washington wrote, “[Olivia]
continued to divide her time and strength between our home
and the work for the school. She ...also kept up her habit of
going North to secure funds. ” As lady principal, Olivia took
an active interest in the female students at Tuskegee. In a
motherly way, she reminded them to keep up their appearance
and maintain an air of decency in their actions. When a group
of y oung women went into town, she warned them not to
loiter in saloons, dip snuff, gossip, or listen to off-color jokes.
In addition to her work at the institute, Olivia traveled
around Macon County, meeting with groups of rural women
and trying, with some success, to organize reading societies
and home-improvement clubs. “She literally wore herself out,”
Washington remembered, “in her never ceasing efforts in
behalf of the work that she so dearly loved. ”
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 59


--- PAGE 69 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
THE GROWTH OF WASHINGTON’S REPUTATION
It was also during this period, around 1885, that Washington
began to establish himself as a spokesman for the black race.
Just as he had done at his school in Tinkersville, he encour-
aged his students to assimilate themselves peacefully into
Southern white society. This, Washington believed, was the
safest and most prudent course for blacks to take. While he
admitted that “the Negro is a much stronger and wiser man
than he was” during slavery, he could still not “afford to act
in a manner that will alienate his Southern white neighbours
from him.”
With this conciliatory attitude, it is easy to understand why
many whites supported Washington’s beliefs, sought out his
company, and contributed money to his school. His racial
ideas sounded reasonable and nonthreatening, and before
long he was winning friends in high places, especially in
the Alabama legislature, which continued to appropriate
ever-increasing sums to Tuskegee Institute. As early as 1883,
Washington’s efforts were being praised on the floor of the
U.S. Senate. In time, state officials began to seek out
Washington’s advice, and during his first years at Tuskegee,
he was able to make recommendations that improved the
quality of black education in many parts of the South.
In July 1884, Washington was invited to speak at the annual
meeting of the National Education Association (NEA) in
Madison, Wisconsin. T o the surprise of his audience, he did
not confine his speech to educational issues but chose instead
to tackle “the broad question of the relations of the two races. ”
The matter, as he saw it, was extremely simple: “Any move-
ment for the elevation of the Southern Negro, in order to be
successful, must have to a certain extent the cooperation of
the Southern w hites.” Washington assur ed his listeners that
Southern blacks were anxious to contribute to society, that
Southern whites were good and decent people, and that the
answer to racial strife lay in the continuing education of black
60
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 60


--- PAGE 70 ---
Brick by Brick 61
men and women. “Good schoolteachers and plenty of money to
pay them, ” he said, “will be more potent in settling the race ques-
tion than many civil rights bills and investigating committees. ”
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1875
Though he did not explicitly say so, Washington had little or
no faith in federal legislation as far as black progress was
concerned. A year earlier, in 1883, the U.S. Supreme Court
had struck down as unconstitutional the Civil Rights Act of
1875, which had guaranteed black citizens the right to equal
In 1866, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act and the Fourteenth Amendment
to the Constitution, which granted equal rights to all citizens. Almost a year
later, the same rights granted to them began to erode because of political
manipulation and public bullying.
Through the next 25 years, these rights were further jeopardized. The
combination of Jim Crow laws, disfranchisement, beatings, lynchings, and
terrorism by the Ku Klux Klan caused outrage and anger within the African-
American community. For some, the natural instinct was to speak out and
demand action. As a result, two distinct African-American factions began
to develop.
One group became known as “militant.” This group was involved in violent
clashes with groups of whites who wanted to maintain a sense of superiority
and power in the government. Many of the white organizers who caused the
friction and violence were agitated by their loss of jobs to equally capable
African Americans, who accepted less pay.
The other faction took a moderate attitude toward the dissatisfaction
caused by the loss of their rights. This was a stronger method of
communication about their discontent than Booker T. Washington’s
accommodation. The discontent of moderates was often shown through
less-violent means, such as speeches, written publications, coalitions,
and politicians. As the 1900s progressed, moderates used labor strikes,
demonstrations, organized marches, and the legal process to challenge
injustices in the court system.
Discrimination and Civil Rights
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 61


--- PAGE 71 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
treatment in theaters, inns, and other public facilities. The
Supreme Court ruling was a crushing blow to blacks through-
out America. “We have been, as a class, grievously wounded,”
said Frederick Douglass, the nation’s most distinguished
black spokesman. At the NEA meeting, Washington did not
challenge the court’s ruling; on the other hand, his emphasis
on black self-reliance seemed more timely than ever.
In his speech, delivered before 4,000 black and white
educators, Washington showed that he was a pragmatist, not
an idealist. As a black man and former slave, he thought he
knew exactly where he stood in relation to the Southern whites
and how best to overcome their feelings of prejudice. Most
comforting to whites, he appeared to place the responsibility for
black progress squarely on the shoulders of the black people
themselves. “Brains, property, and character for the Negro, ”
Washington declared, “will settle the question of civil rights. ”
It was an effective speech, delivered by a man who was
becoming remarkably adept at public relations. Washington
later called his appearance at the NEA meeting “the beginning
of my public-speaking career. ”
During the months that followed, Washington received a
number of speaking invitations from groups throughout the
North. He accepted as many as he could, often combining
these engagements with fund-raising trips. Many white
Northerners, he discovered, were curious to hear his opinions
on racial matters, and the more he spoke, the more he had to
clarify in his own mind exactly how he felt about the trouble-
some issue of race relations.
As his schedule became increasingly hectic, Washington
did not seem to realize that he was pushing himself too hard.
In addition to his speaking engagements, he was teaching at
his school, making all of Tuskegee’s administrative decisions,
overseeing campus construction, trying to raise a family, and,
with the help of his wife, touring the Northern states to raise
funds. He was also devoting some of his time and energy to
62
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 62


--- PAGE 72 ---
Brick by Brick 63
the Alabama State T eachers Association, which he had helped
found in 1882.
The strain proved too much. Shortly after his wedding, in
October 1885, Washington suffered a nervous collapse that
kept him in bed for 10 days. “He is not as strong, physically, as
Olivia Davidson, lady principal at Tuskegee. Davidson and
Washington worked together closely, securing funds for the
school and mentoring students. They decided to marry in
1885 and had two children, Booker T., Jr. and Ernest Davidson,
but Olivia was extremely frail and died in 1889, shortly after
giving birth to Ernest.
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 63


--- PAGE 73 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
he was two years ago, ” Olivia wrote to a friend, “and I am sure
it is due to his close application to his work. ” From Hampton
Institute, General Armstrong sent his former pupil a stern
warning: “Y ou are in some risk of a break down—if your
health fails your position will be bad!”
It was Olivia’s health that failed first. Even before coming to
Tuskegee, her condition had been strangely frail. On several
occasions, she had checked herself into the hospital, but each
time, to her dismay, the doctors were unable to determine
the nature of her illness. After the birth of her second son,
Ernest, Olivia’s frailty became so severe that she was moved
to Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, where she died
three months later, on May 9, 1889.
Washington was profoundly grieved by the death of his
second wife. During the weeks and months that followed, his
friends and colleagues noticed that he had taken on a new
sadness, and for the first time in his life his thoughts became
cynical. Nothing seemed certain anymore. He and Olivia
had planned to spend their life together working side by side,
and now she had been taken from him, suddenly and for no
apparent purpose. He did not understand, and he would never
be the same man again.
64
CH.BAA.BTW.C06.Final.q  15/12/04  15:56  Page 64


--- PAGE 74 ---
By 1890, Booker T. Washington had become a popular speaker
on the educational circuit. “His style is mostly conversational, ”
observed one Northern listener. “Now and then as he becomes
especially eloquent his voice rises and his form expands ....
He has a limitless store of original anecdotes gleaned from
personal experience with which he keeps his audience in a
constant roar.” Laughter (often at the expense of blacks) was
an important component of Washington’s speeches.
A MAN OF DIFFERENT PERSONAS
Because he was unpretentious in his public manner, many
whites assumed that Booker T. Washington was a simple man.
This was not the case. There were many aspects of his person-
ality that were not immediately apparent to his listeners—
that, indeed, did not become fully known until decades after
his death.
A Private Man
7
65
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 65


--- PAGE 75 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Although Washington came across as warm and folksy
when speaking to an audience, many of his students found
him cold and distant. A stern administrator, he was more likely
to point out a student’s faults than to praise his or her accom-
plishments. Washington, moreover, tended to be suspicious of
anyone who did not support his plans wholeheartedly. If a
student or a member of the faculty disagreed with him, he or
she was expected to keep silent, at least in public. In the privacy
of his office, Washington would listen to anyone’s complaint,
but in the end he ran his school exactly as he wished.
Those who knew Washington well may have noticed that his
private behavior did not always match his public statements.
Though he frequently advised his students to stay away from
politics, Washington could not resist the lure of bureaucracy.
He enjoyed conversing with state officials, making educational
recommendations, and, most of all, quietly pulling strings to
ensure a political appointment or to hinder unfavorable
legislation. There was yet another side to his personality that
would have surprised many people. Despite his fervent support
of black education, Washington could be competitive and even
unfriendly toward rival black universities.
When he learned in 1887, for instance, that a black state
college was thinking of relocating to Montgomery, Alabama—
only 40 miles from Tuskegee—Washington felt threatened. He
feared that the new school would steal away his student body
and possibly affect the $3,000 he was receiving each year from
the state legislature. Working quietly and taking only a few
people into his confidence, he did everything he could to make
sure that the relocation did not happen. He wrote letters, hired
a lobbyist to put pressure on the governor of Alabama, and
purchased the editorial support of a black newspaper. He also
slipped money into the pockets of those politicians he felt
could most effectively redirect the school elsewhere.
To  Washington’s disappointment, Montgomery was chosen
as the new site for the state college. “We will waste no time
66
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 66


--- PAGE 76 ---
A Private Man 67
worrying over it, ” Washington advised one of his teachers,
“but throw our energy toward making Tuskegee all the better. ”
Politically, the incident was unimportant; it did, however, reveal
much about Washington’s personality, his fears, and his early
reliance on behind-the-scenes maneuvering. This secrecy would
become increasingly important to him in the years ahead.
THE REPERCUSSIONS OF A SPEECH
In the summer of 1890, Washington was invited to speak to
the graduating students at Fisk University, a black school in
Nashville, T ennessee. For his subject, the 34-year-old educator
chose “The Colored Ministry: Its Defects and Needs. ” In this
speech, Washington asserted that the black ministry was
hopelessly out of touch with the rural masses and that the
majority of black ministers were for the most part uneducated.
He also claimed that the average minister was far more
concerned with his salary than the salvation of his congregation.
In his most blistering statement, Washington asserted that
“three-fourths of the Baptist ministers and two-thirds of the
Methodists are unfit, either mentally or morally, or both, to
preach the Gospel to any one or attempt to lead any one. ”
Washington’s speech, which was published a few weeks
later in the black press, created a firestorm of controversy.
Theologians, in particular, were outraged by his caustic
remarks. T o the surprise of many people, Washington refused
to retract any of his statements. In a letter to an Indianapolis
newspaper, he insisted that he was not attacking organized
religion; he was only attempting to separate ministers into
two groups, “the upright and the immoral, the weak and the
strong. ” The more he tried to explain himself, however, the
angrier his foes must have become.
To  this day, historians have been unable to explain satisfac-
torily why Washington should have chosen this moment to
attack the colored ministry. As a black educator eager to secure
the favor of whites, one of his guiding principles was to avoid
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 67


--- PAGE 77 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
any form of notoriety; now, for a brief moment, he seemed to
be inviting it. Perhaps he was still distraught over the death
of his wife Olivia; perhaps, for fund-raising purposes, he
was trying to prove to Northerners that his school was not
affiliated with any organized religion.
If so, the result was ironic. Shortly after his speech, two
wealthy sisters, Olivia and Caroline Stokes, endowed Tuskegee
Institute with a $2,000 scholarship fund. The money, they
instructed Washington, was to be used “to help in the
education of colored men of good moral character, particu-
larly those who have the ministry in view. ” Later, the Stokes
sisters contributed enough money to build a small chapel on
the Tuskegee campus as well as a Bible school for the training
of future ministers.
68
By the turn of the century, Washington had built Tuskegee into a
renowned educational institution. In addition, he had developed a 
reputation as a popular, though sometimes controversial, public speaker.
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 68


--- PAGE 78 ---
A Private Man 69
To Washington’s relief, the repercussions from his Nashville
speech were short-lived. Within a few months, the controversy
had died down, and he was able once again to devote his
full attention to his administrative duties at Tuskegee. By
this time, the school had developed an excellent reputation
academically, and Washington was often held up in educational
circles as an outstanding example of black progress.
To generate additional publicity for the institute, Washington
constantly encouraged philanthropists and politicians to visit
the school whenever they liked. Those who came to Tuskegee
were usually impressed by what they saw, and this, in turn,
reflected well on Washington. An Alabama legislator went so
far as to call him “one of the best men in the United States, ” a
rare compliment for a white man to pay a black man in the
1890s. When the editors of Outlook magazine compiled a list
of the nation’s 28 leading college presidents, Washington’s
name was prominently featured, along with the presidents of
Harvard, Y ale, and Princeton universities.
Despite these accolades for Washington and his school, the
importance of black education was not generally heeded in
the South. The state of Alabama, in particular, was extremely
poor, and many of its citizens questioned the wisdom of
allocating $3,000 a year to the institute. There were others in
Alabama who were vehemently opposed to any form of state-
supported black education, and legislation was regularly
introduced to abolish all funding for it. These skeptics, there-
fore, must have been irritated that Washington ran his school
in a professional and thrifty manner. No dollar was ever
wasted at Tuskegee Institute.
WALKING A FINE LINE
To further mollify his critics, Washington was extremely careful
not to antagonize the local whites. The cordial relationship
that existed between his students and the whites of Macon
County was understandably delicate and could easily be
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 69


--- PAGE 79 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
damaged by a thoughtless remark or indiscreet action. T o
prevent this from happening, Washington closely monitored
the behavior of his students. When they had occasion to go
into town, he told them to mind their manners, to show
respect to the white shopkeepers, and to avoid at all costs any
discussion that would “tend to stir up strife between the races. ”
For many years, this policy served Washington well. If, for
some reason, a student attempted to challenge it, the educator
was known to react swiftly. In 1887, one of his graduates began
publishing a newspaper in the town of Tuskegee that contained,
according to the Montgomery Advertiser , “incendiary articles
against the white race. ” In no uncertain terms, Washington
requested that The Black Belt cease publication. Students who
persisted in uttering statements of an “agitating character”
were advised to leave the school. Such occurrences were rare,
however, and most pupils were content to follow Washington’s
patient and peaceful example.
TUSKEGEE CELEBRATES
In 1891, the school celebrated its 10th anniversary. Looking
around, Washington could feel proud of what he had accom-
plished. The size of the campus had increased dramatically,
from 100 acres to nearly 540. The number of students had
also jumped, from 30 to more than 500. There were many new
buildings on campus; the vegetable gardens and barnyards
were thriving; the brickyard was turning out thousands of
quality bricks daily. As a symbol of black progress, the student-
built water tower rose 65 feet into the air, the highest point in
Macon County. The students were even publishing their own
bulletin, the Southern Letter ,w hich enjoyed a wide readership
among Tuskegee’s growing circle of friends. A casual observer
could see that the institute was no longer a tiny rural school; it
had, in fact, become a small town.
As the campus continued to grow in size, the financial burdens
increased proportionately. T o his annoyance, Washington found
70
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 70


--- PAGE 80 ---
A Private Man 71
himself on the road for weeks at a time, calling upon Northern
businessmen, trying to convince them to contribute money
toward the cause of black education. Because he was so
frequently away from home, the task of raising his three
children fell to his brother, John, and his sister-in-law, Susie.
During this period, Washington’s adopted brother, James, also
came to live at Tuskegee. James brought his wife and children
with him, and over the years he served in various positions,
including teacher, postmaster, and part-time football coach.
A friendly and humorous man, he became a well-liked
member of the Tuskegee community.
A NEW WIFE
In the autumn of 1892, Washington married for the third and
final time. His wife was 27-year-old Margaret James Murray.
Maggie, as she was often called, had come to Tuskegee as an
English teacher in 1889, shortly after Olivia’s death. A year
later, in 1890, she was appointed lady principal. A graduate of
Fisk University, Maggie was a witty and well-groomed mulatto
woman who shared Washington’s conservative views and his
commitment to black education. Like most people, she was
intimidated at first by the formality of Washington’s speech
and bearing; even after they had become intimate, she had
trouble calling him by his first name.
On the whole, the Washingtons’ marriage was a peaceful
and happy one. Without much complaint, Maggie cared for
her stepchildren, accompanied her husband on his fund-
raising trips, and, as head of women’s industries, supervised
the female students at Tuskegee. In later years, after the children
had grown, she became active in numerous black women’s
organizations, eventually serving as president of the National
Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs.
THE LOSS OF A ME NTOR
In 1893, General Samuel Armstrong paid a two-month visit to
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 71


--- PAGE 81 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Tuskegee. Washington must have been shocked by his mentor’s
appearance: Two years earlier, Armstrong suffered a massive
stroke that had paralyzed much of his body. When he spoke,
his words were garbled and difficult to understand. He was no
longer able to walk and had to be moved about in a wheelchair.
Nevertheless, the students at the institute stood in awe of the
54-year-old educator. They had heard Armstrong’s praises
sung so often that to many he seemed an almost mythic figure.
Despite the general’s frailty, his mind was still alert, and as
he toured the campus, he was extremely pleased with the
progress that Washington had made with his students. The
self-help philosophy was alive and well at Tuskegee.
“[Washington] is kind, just and fair, ” Armstrong reported to
his own pupils upon returning to Hampton. “If you find
something not right in the world, act as Mr. Washington has. ”
Af ew months later, Washington received word that the
general had died. He was deeply grieved, and for the rest of
his life he did everything he could to keep alive the memory
of Hampton’s distinguished founder. “[Armstrong] was, in my
opinion, the rarest, strongest, and most beautiful character
that it has ever been my privilege to meet, ” he later wrote in his
autobiography. “ . . . One might have removed from Hampton
all the buildings, class-rooms, teachers, and industries, and
given the men and women there the opportunity of coming
into daily contact with General Armstrong, and that alone
would have been a liberal education. ”
72
CH.BAA.BTW.C07.Final.q  15/12/04  15:57  Page 72


--- PAGE 82 ---
In the autumn of 1895, Booker T. Washington was invited to
speak at the Cotton States and International Exposition in
Atlanta. The speech that he delivered, which came to be known
as the Atlanta Compromise, was not particularly original, but
it was forceful and timely. Addressing an audience of several
thousand people, Washington acknowledged that it would be
“folly” for black Southerners to agitate for civil rights at the
present time. Social equality would eventually be granted to
blacks, he said, but any privileges that “come to us must be the
result of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial
forcing. ” The Atlanta audience understood “artificial forcing”
to mean laws or constitutional amendments, any legal device
that would allow blacks to obtain their civil rights. Murmurs
of white approval could be heard throughout the auditorium.
Halfway through his address, Washington tackled the issue of
racial animosity in the South. There was a painless solution to
“A Safe Leader”
8
73
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 73


--- PAGE 83 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
the race problem, he implied, one that required no change in the
existing social order.“In all things that are purely social, ” he said,
“we can be as separate as the fingers”—here he raised his hand,
each finger clearly separated from its neighbor—“yet one as the
hand in all things essential to mutual progress. ” Dramatically,
his fingers closed together in a fist of solidarity and power.
Washington finished his speech by urging Southern whites
to give their black neighbors a fair chance to compete in the
economic marketplace. By working together, he said, black
hand joined with white, a new period of prosperity and racial
harmony would be delivered “into our beloved South. ”
According to one person in the audience, “an ovation followed
[such] as I had never seen before and never expect to see
again. ” Hats and canes were waved in the air; women hurled
flowers onto the stage. The multitude, said one reporter, “was
in an uproar of enthusiasm....I t  was as if the orator had
bewitched them. ”
A NEW CELEBRITY
It was not until the following day, however, that Washington
began to realize how deeply his words had affected the citizens
of Atlanta. As he walked through the business district, people
pointed him out. Soon, he was surrounded by a crowd of
men eager to shake his hand. “This was kept up on every
street on to which I went, ” Washington recalled. Embarrassed,
he hurried back to his boardinghouse.
The newspapers, meanwhile, were treating his Atlanta
address as a major story. “The speech of Booker T. Washington
...s e e m s  t o  h a v e  d w a r f e d  a l l  the other proceedings and the
Exposition itself, ” said the B oston Transcript.“ The sensation
that it has caused in the press has never been equalled. ”
According to one Southern editor, Washington’s address was
“the beginning of a moral revolution in America.” The Atlanta
Constitution perhaps summed it up best: “The speech stamps
Booker T. Washington as a wise counselor and a safe leader. ”
74
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 74


--- PAGE 84 ---
“A Safe Leader” 75
The text of the Atlanta Compromise was widely reprinted
in newspapers, and within a short time Washington had come
to be regarded by whites and blacks alike as the successor to
Frederick Douglass, who had died a few months earlier. It was
an honor that took Washington by surprise. “I never had the
remotest idea that I should be selected or looked upon ...a s  a
leader of the Negro people, ” he later confessed.
Shortly after returning to Tuskegee, Washington received a
letter from President Grover Cleveland. “I have read [your
speech] with intense interest, ” the president wrote from his
home in Buzzards Bay, Massachusetts. “Y our words cannot
Washington spoke at the 1895 Cotton States and International Exposition
in Atlanta, suggesting that blacks and whites should work together to
achieve progress in industry and agriculture, but that blacks should not
expect integration or try to artificially force privileges through laws or
amendments. Following the speech, Washington was viewed around the
world as the leader of the African-American race. Here, a crowd eager
to hear Washington speak fills a baseball stadium.
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 75


--- PAGE 85 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
76
From The Atlanta Cotton Speech
Booker T. Washington delivered his “Atlanta Compromise” speech on
September 18, 1895, in front of a racially mixed crowd at the Cotton States
and International Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia. In what would become
one of the most famous speeches in American history, Washington suggested
an accommodationist strategy for race relations that encouraged blacks
to accept gradual economic and social advancement. Most Americans,
including African-American leaders, reacted to Washington’s ideas with
enthusiasm, but the speech’s critics, like Washington’s fellow scholar
W.E.B. Du Bois, were outraged by Washington’s words, which seemed to
suggest that blacks should accept their inferiority in society, rather than
fighting to quickly achieve equality.
One-third of the population of the South is of the Negro race. No enterprise
seeking the material, civil, or moral welfare of this section can disregard
this element of our population and reach the highest success. I but convey
to you, Mr. President and Directors, the sentiment of the masses of my race
when I say that in no way have the value and manhood of the American
Negro been more fittingly and generously recognized than by the managers
of this magnificent Exposition at every stage of its progress. It is a recogni-
tion that will do more to cement the friendship of the two races than any
occurrence since the dawn of our freedom.
Not only this, but the opportunity here afforded will awaken among us a
new era of industrial progress. Ignorant and inexperienced, it is not strange
that in the first years of our new life we began at the top instead of at the
bottom; that a seat in Congress or the state legislature was more sought than
real estate or industrial skill; that the political convention or stump speak-
ing had more attractions than starting a dairy farm or truck garden . . . 
Our greatest danger is, that in the great leap from slavery to freedom we
may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live by the productions
of our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall prosper in proportion as
we learn to dignify and glorify common labor, and put brains and skill into
the common occupations of life; shall prosper in proportion as we learn to
draw the line between the superficial and the substantial, the ornamental
gewgaws of life and the useful. No race can prosper till it learns that there
is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. It is at the bottom
of life we must begin, and not at the top. Nor should we permit our
grievances to overshadow our opportunities.
IN HIS OWN WORDS…
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 76


--- PAGE 86 ---
“A Safe Leader” 77
fail to delight and encourage all who wish well for your
race.” Cleveland and Washington soon became good friends;
according to Washington, the president contributed money
to T uskegee Institute and used his influence to secure the
donations of others.
By mid-October, the volume of Washington’s mail had
increased dramatically. Every week, he received letters and
telegrams from newspaper editors asking him to submit articles.
He was also besieged with numerous offers from lecture
bureaus across the country. “T o all these communications, ” he
later wrote, “I replied that my life-work was at Tuskegee; and
that whenever I spoke it must be in the interests of the
Tuskegee school and my race, and that I would enter into no
arrangements that seemed to place a mere commercial value
upon my services. ”
Most of Washington’s speeches for the next 20 years were
simply variations on his Atlanta Compromise address. Again
and again, he reminded Southern blacks to become educated
and to stop “fretting and fussing” over the issue of civil rights.
He was telling white Americans exactly what they wanted to
hear, and for this reason he was regarded as an unusually wise
man. Wherever he spoke, the auditorium was filled to capacity.
Black Americans, on the other hand, were not sure how they
felt about the Great Accommodator, as Washington was being
called. Naturally, some blacks were thrilled by his success. “It
looks as if you are our Douglass, ” declared T. Thomas Fortune,
editor of the New York Age,“ the best equipped of the lot of us
to be the single figure ahead of the procession. ”
Other blacks were decidedly less enthused. Many were
discouraged and disappointed, this caused confusion and
worry about whether equal rights would ever be restored
during their lifetime. They felt that Washington had been
too accommodating in Atlanta, too willing to sacrifice black
dignity for the short-term benefits of economic opportunity
and interracial harmony.
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 77


--- PAGE 87 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
The editor of the Washington Bee criticized Washington’s
speech: “He said something that was death to the Afro-American
and elevating to the white people. ” Another newspaper, the
Atlanta Advocate, minced no words: “We doubt if the Tuskegee
normal school will receive any benefit from Prof. Bad Taste’s
sycophantic attitude but there is no doubt in our minds that
his race will suffer.”
Usually, Washington was able to steer clear of his adversaries-
—but not always. In May 1896, the governor of Alabama,
William Oates, was invited to speak at the Tuskegee commence-
ment. He used the opportunity to dash cold water on any
78
Frederick Douglass and Booker T. Washington began their lives as slaves.
They witnessed and lived through the terror and punishment of slavery and
were determined to escape.
Frederick Douglass did escape slavery, often putting his life at risk by
taking on other identities. Washington was freed through the Emancipation
Proclamation and started his new life at the end of the Civil War. Both men
knew at a young age that a good education, and its use in a positive
way, was key to improving their lives. They both were self-educated racial
activists, and both eventually became influential leaders respected by
both races.
Frederick Douglass was older and more outspoken and gained much
experience about equal rights as an abolitionist, nationally and abroad.
Both men were outraged by the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn the
Civil Rights Act of 1875, which guaranteed black citizens equal rights and
treatment. Publicly and politically, Frederick Douglass and Booker T.
Washington fought very hard to gain equal rights and integration through
their many publications and speeches, which put them in a position of
leadership in the United States and overseas.
Booker T. Washington achieved public success and notoriety through
the Tuskegee Institute. This positioned him to evolve as the successor to
Frederick Douglass after Douglass’s death in February 1895, seven months
before the 1895 Atlanta Cotton States International Exposition.
Frederick Douglass
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 78


--- PAGE 88 ---
“A Safe Leader” 79
hopes that may have been raised by the Atlanta Compromise.
“I want to give you niggers a few words of plain talk and
advice, ” he told the assembled students. “Y ou might as well
understand that this is a white man’s country, as far as the
South is concerned, and we are going to make you keep your
place. Understand that. I have nothing more to say to you. ”
To  avert an ugly situation, Washington cut short the rest of
the ceremony. “Ladies and gentlemen, ” he said good-naturedly,
“I am sure you will agree with me that we have had enough
eloquence for one occasion ....W e  w i l l  n o w  rise, sing the
doxology, and be dismissed. ” Washington had no desire to pick
a fight with Governor Oates. Confrontation was not his style.
A month later, in June 1896, Harvard University conferred
on Washington an honorary Master of Arts degree, the first
time the eastern school had given this distinction to an
African American. Receiving the degree, Washington recalled,
was “the greatest surprise that ever came to me. ” The event was
well publicized and did much to enhance his reputation as a
wise and conservative black leader. A Boston newspaper was
careful to note that the Harvard degree had been conferred
upon Washington not because he “is a coloured man, or
because he was born in slavery, but because he has shown . . .
a genius and a broad humanity which count for greatness in
any man, whether his skin be white or black. ”
As Washington’s prestige continued to increase, it became
easier for him to attract the attention of Northern philan-
thropists, who began to associate the success of the black
race w ith the success of Washington’s school. Nearly every
department at Tuskegee benefited from Northern philanthropy,
but it was in the field of agriculture that the results were
most rewarding.
For nearly 15 years, Washington had hoped to make the
study of agriculture an important part of the Tuskegee
program, but to his regret he had never been able to secure
the necessary funding. In 1896, the Slater Fund for Negro
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 79


--- PAGE 89 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Education provided the institute with enough money to
establish a separate agricultural school. At once, Washington
began to look for a suitable black man to run the depart-
ment, finally settling on a 31-year-old agriculturist named
George Washington Carver.
At the time, Carver was teaching at Iowa State College
and working toward his master’s degree in agriculture.
Naturally, he was flattered to receive Washington’s invitation
to teach at Tuskegee. He hesitated to accept, however, explain-
ing that he wanted to finish his degree first. Washington agreed
to wait, and to sweeten the deal, he offered Carver a yearly
salary of $1,000 plus board—considerably more than most
teachers at Tuskegee were receiving. In his letter of acceptance,
Carver wrote, “I am looking forward to a very busy, very
pleasant and profitable time at your college. ”
On arriving at Tuskegee in the fall of 1896, Carver was
assigned an unusually heavy work load. In addition to over-
seeing the new agriculture department, he was expected to run
the school’s two farms; direct a 10-acre agricultural experiment
station; and teach classes in botany, chemistry, and agricultural
science. It was also understood that Carver would function as
Tuskegee’s veterinarian and, in his spare time, do what he
could to beautify the campus.
Though he had every reason to feel overworked, Carver
did not complain. It was well known among the faculty that
Washington had no patience for whiners; lazy teachers at Tuskegee
soon found themselves looking for a new job. Keeping this in
mind, Carver did everything he could to please Washington,
and within a year’s time he had established himself as one of
Tuskegee’s most popular and inspirational teachers.
Carver was fascinated by all aspects of agricultural research,
and years later his work in that field would bring international
recognition to Tuskegee Institute. During his first decade at
the school, Carver carried out dozens of scientific experiments,
most of them designed to help Southern farmers improve
80
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 80


--- PAGE 90 ---
“A Safe Leader” 81
their crop yield. In the laboratory and in the fields, he studied
different varieties of cotton, tested organic fertilizers, and tried
to discover ways to restore worn-out soil. His observations
were published in a series of easy-to-read bulletins that
received wide distribution in the South. These publications
were especially valuable to black farmers, the majority of
whom were unaware of the various ways in which they could
improve their methods of farming.
To  Washington’s pleasure, Carver also became a guiding
force of the Tuskegee Negro Conference, an annual gathering
of farmers that Washington had inaugurated a few years
earlier, in 1892. Here, at Tuskegee Institute, black share-
croppers were able to obtain advice on a variety of agricultural
issues. Many of the farmers were already familiar with Carver’s
Farmers and sharecroppers arriving at the Tuskegee Negro Conference,
an annual gathering of black agricultural workers. Washington started
the conference in 1892, as a way to share the institute’s resources with
local blacks who could not enroll.
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  30/12/04  15:07  Page 81


--- PAGE 91 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
experiments through his bulletins and were eager to hear what
he had to say. Carver showed the men his experiment station,
held simple demonstrations, and did his best to answer their
questions concerning fertilization and crop diversity. He even
passed out free seeds, which had been supplied to the school
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
In time, the Tuskegee Negro Conference became an impor-
tant forum for blacks throughout the South. Washington
usually served as chairman, and throughout the day he acted
as the voice of black self-help. He urged the farmers to buy
land; to raise more food supplies; to keep out of debt; and to
send their children to school, if only for a few months each
year. A tiny amount of education, Washington insisted, was
better than none.
At each gathering, Washington tried to learn as much as he
could about the farmers. He asked them detailed questions
about their families, their schools, their churches, their burial
services. He wanted to know whether or not they could read,
how large their cabins were, and how many black people in
their district were allowed to vote. In this way, he was able to
reacquaint himself on a yearly basis with the true condition of
Southern black life—information he needed to know if he was
to effectively serve as spokesman for the black race.
Naturally, Washington used the Tuskegee Negro Conferences
to promote his ideas concerning black accommodation. By
and large, the farmers, ministers, and schoolteachers who
attended the annual event were receptive to his message.
According to one participant, Washington’s racial philosophy
sounded extremely reasonable: “Keep out of politics, make
any concession consistent with manhood. Let white men
know you are glad you are a Negro. Don’t push, but be proud
of your blood. ”
82
CH.BAA.BTW.C08.Final.q  15/12/04  15:58  Page 82


--- PAGE 92 ---
In the autumn of 1898, Booker T. Washington was invited to
make a speech at the Chicago Peace Jubilee, a large event
celebrating the end of the Spanish-American War. On the
evening of October 16, Washington spoke to a capacity crowd
of 16,000 people. Among the dignitaries present, he recalled,
were President William McKinley, “the members of his
Cabinet, many foreign ministers, and a large number of army
and navy officers, many of whom had distinguished them-
selves in the war which had just closed. ”
POLITICAL PROGRESS AT HOME AND ABROAD
On this occasion, Washington’s words were more forceful than
usual. Taking advantage of the patriotic mood, he spoke of the
numerous times when black soldiers had fought valiantly in
defense of the United States. A race that was willing to die for
its country, Washington declared, should also “be given the
Dinner at the White House
9
83
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 83


--- PAGE 93 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
highest opportunity to live for its country.” Racial prejudice,
he went on to say, was “a cancer gnawing at the heart of the
Republic, that shall one day prove as dangerous as an attack
from an army without or within.”
During his stay in Chicago, Washington lunched twice
with McKinley’s presidential party, a breach of social custom
that annoyed many people. Several newspaper editors put
Washington on the spot, demanding to know whether he
believed blacks and whites should mingle socially. Washington’s
answer was guarded. Both races, he responded, “have enough
problems pressing upon us for solution without adding a
social question, out of which nothing but harm would come. ”
He added that prejudice was “something to be lived down
not talked down.” The incident quickly passed from public
memory, though it foreshadowed a much more controversial
event that would occur three years later, during Theodore
Roosevelt’s administration.
In the spring of 1899, Washington traveled to Europe
with his wife Maggie. By this time, his hectic schedule was
beginning to take its toll. Physically, Washington felt drained,
and he welcomed the prospect of an extended vacation. As
the steamship pulled away from the harbor, he remembered,
the load of “responsibility which I had carried for eighteen
years began to lift itself from my shoulders at the rate, it
seemed to me, of a pound a minute. ” Washington’s exhaustion
was so extreme that he slept for 15 hours a day for the next
30 days.
While in Europe, he and his wife met with a variety of
celebrities and world leaders, including writer Mark Twain,
painter Henry Tanner, feminist Susan B. Anthony, and African
explorer Sir Henry M. Stanley. In Paris, Washington was the
guest of honor at a banquet attended by former president
Benjamin Harrison. In London, he paid a visit to Windsor
Castle, where he had tea with Queen Victoria. During his stay
in England, he also addressed numerous schools and social
84
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 84


--- PAGE 94 ---
Dinner at the White House 85
organizations, including the Women’s Liberal Club and the
Royal College for the Blind.
THE HORRORS OF RACIAL PREJUDICE
Washington thoroughly enjoyed his three-month European
holiday, an experience that broadened his outlook and
strengthened his already formidable public reputation. Y et
he could not entirely forget his worries at home. A few days
before he departed for Europe, a brutal lynching had taken
place in Palmetto, Georgia. A black man, Sam Hose, had been
accused of rape and murder, and the infuriated white residents
Booker T. Washington arriving in Copenhagen, Denmark. Washington and
his wife finally took a vacation in 1899, traveling across Europe, speaking
to various organizations and meeting with dignitaries and celebrities, from
Queen Victoria to Mark Twain.
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 85


--- PAGE 95 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
of Palmetto had strung him from a tree and burned him alive.
The charred pieces of the body were later distributed among
the populace.
Blacks throughout the nation were horrified by the incident,
and before leaving for Europe, Washington was asked to make
a public statement. Aware of the delicacy of his position, he
refused to do so. “I feel constrained to keep silent, ” he told
reporters, “and not engage in any controversy that might react
on the work to which I am now lending my efforts. ” He did
add, however, that education would offer “the permanent
cure”f or such ugly behavior as lynching. (For additional
information on the Hose murder, enter “Sam Hose” into any
search engine and browse the sites listed.)
DISCONTENT GROWS—A RACE DIVIDES
This was not the answer that most blacks wanted to hear. A
few months later, Washington’s ambivalent response to the
Hose murder was hotly debated at the annual meeting of
the Afro-American Council, a militant black organization
founded in 1898. (The Council, in turn, was an offshoot of an
earlier group known as the Afro-American League, of which
Washington had been a nonparticipating member.) Upon
returning from Europe, in August 1899, Washington traveled
to Chicago, where the annual meeting was taking place. His
friends, however, recommended that he stay away from the
convention, which he did.
Within the committee room of the Afro-American Council,
there was angry talk of passing a resolution against Washington
for not attending the meeting. A white reporter happened to
be present at one of the evening sessions, and soon it was being
reported in white newspapers across the nation that the Afro-
American Council had formally repudiated Washington and
his racial philosophy.
This report alarmed the leading members of the council,
who hastened to assure the white press that the story was
86
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 86


--- PAGE 96 ---
Dinner at the White House 87
inaccurate, that the council firmly supported Washington’s
good work on behalf of the black race. Washington, meanwhile,
had traveled to Saratoga to deliver a speech. There, he put an
end to the controversy by assuring reporters that when he had
left Chicago, there had been “the very happiest understanding”
between himself and the members of the council.
Privately, however, Washington knew that his standing
with the Afro-American Council had been seriously jeopar-
dized. He decided, therefore, to create his own organization,
the National Negro Business League (NNBL), which held
its first annual meeting in August 1900. The purpose of the
NNBL was to promote the achievements of black business-
men, to protect consumers against fraud, and to teach
enterprising but poor blacks how to gain an economic foothold
in society.
Though Washington would not admit it, his idea for the
NNBL had been borrowed from a similar division of the
Afro-American Council. That league had died a quick death,
the victim of infighting and misunderstandings. Washington’s
group, on the other hand, was an immediate success. More
than 300 professionals attended the first meeting in Boston,
and within a few years, NNBL branches were being founded in
major cities across the country. For black entrepreneurs, the
league proved to be an effective method of obtaining practical
information and advice; for Washington, it would serve as a
useful instrument to guard himself against his critics, most of
whom were congregated in the North.
WASHINGTON’S MAJOR PUBLICATIONS
In a further effort to solidify his role as a black spokesman,
Washington wrote several books during this period, including
two autobiographies. The first, The Story of My Life and Work
(1900), was ruined by hasty writing and sloppy copyediting.
His second autobiography, however, has come to be recognized
as an American classic.
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 87


--- PAGE 97 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
In Up from Slavery (1901), Washington recounted the story
of his life, from his birth near Hale’s Ford, Virginia, to his
European visit in 1899. For social historians, the book has
the added value of presenting, in a clear and forceful style,
Washington’s ideas concerning the black man’s place in
American life—ideas that were occasionally diluted or altered
by turn-of-the-century newspaper reporters.
Unlike his first autobiography,Up from Slaveryis a compelling
rags-to-riches story, told with warmth and wisdom and
numerous anecdotes. Many critics called it one of the most
important books of the year. It was “stimulating, ” “stirring, ”
“one of the most cheerful, hopeful books that we have had the
privilege to read. ”
Financially, Up from Slavery was a modest success. Its sales
were never astonishing, but it continued to be popular for
many years, long after other bestsellers had gone out of print.
People from all walks of life were deeply moved by the
Tuskegee educator’s struggle and eventual triumph. “I want to
tell you what an immediate influence [your book] had on our
nine year old boy, ” one woman wrote to Washington. “He
showed me with great pride, the other day, a rack ...h e ’ d  b e e n
making of hard wood, and said ‘I’d never have got that more
than half done, mother, if I hadn’t kept thinking all the time
how Booker Washington made up his mind he’d do things!’ ”
During Washington’s lifetime, Up fr om Slavery was trans-
lated into many languages, including Swedish, German, Zulu,
Russian, Chinese, Arabic, and Braille. The book was especially
popular in India, where it was used as a text in some schools.
To  this day, Up from Slavery can be found in numerous paper-
back editions; among historians, it is regarded as one of the
most inspiring books ever written by a black American.
The success of Washington’s autobiography brought a certain
measure of financial stability to Tuskegee Institute. The book
found its way into the hands of numerous philanthropists,
many of whom had never given much thought to the cause of
88
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 88


--- PAGE 98 ---
Dinner at the White House 89
black education. The response of George Eastman, a wealthy
camera manufacturer, was typical. “I have just been re-reading
your book, ” he wrote to Washington, “...a n d  h a v e  c o m e  t o  t h e
conclusion that I cannot dispose of five thousand dollars to
any better advantage than to send it to you for your Institute. ”
(Years later, after Washington’s death, Eastman contributed
$250,000 to Tuskegee’s memorial fund.)
By the autumn of 1901, Washington had reached the apex
of his distinguished career. He was respected by whites and
blacks alike, and his educational work at Tuskegee was often
praised in newspapers and magazine articles. Nearly 1,100 pupils
were enrolled at the school, and the total worth of Tuskegee’s
assets exceeded $325,000. Because of his fame and his enviable
budget, Washington was able to bring to his school some of
the nation’s finest black instructors. He was also able to attract
a number of notable speakers, including Secretary of War
William Howard Taft and industrialist Andrew Carnegie.
One of the most popular speakers to appear at Tuskegee was
feminist Susan B. Anthony, who paid a visit to the campus in
the spring of 1903. According to the school paper, “The welcome
accorded Miss Anthony was warm and enthusiastic to the last
degree, a sea of snowy handkerchiefs greeting her with the
‘Chautauqua salute’ when she arose to begin her address. ” The
83-year-old feminist had followed the school’s progress for
many years, and before leaving, she promised to raise $100 for
the new broom factory that Washington was hoping to build.
DINNER WITH PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT
Perhaps the greatest honor of Washington’s life occurred in
October 1901, when he was invited to dine with President
Theodore Roosevelt at the White House. A popular and
charismatic leader, Roosevelt had known Washington for
several years, and on more than one occasion he had solicited
Washington’s advice on matters of racial importance. Roosevelt
confessed to a friend that he had felt a moment’s hesitation
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 89


--- PAGE 99 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
about inviting a black man to dine at the White House; then,
feeling ashamed of himself, he sent the invitation.
Washington arrived in the nation’s capital on the afternoon
of October 16, and that evening he dined with the president
and the first family. After supper, Washington and Roosevelt
discussed a variety of issues, including black and white relations
in the South. The conversation went well, and a few hours
later, Washington departed by train for New Y ork City.
Two days later, when the story was printed in the press, there
was an immediate public outcry. Most whites, especially those
90
Washington was friendly with President Theodore Roosevelt, and the two
men discussed issues of racial importance on several occasions. In
1902, Roosevelt honored Washington with an invitation to dine with him
at the White House, but the public reaction to the president dining with 
a black man was so negative that Roosevelt never invited Washington or
any other black person back to the White House.
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 90


--- PAGE 100 ---
Dinner at the White House 91
in the South, were shocked at the idea of a black dining at the
White House with the president. Even white liberals drew back
in amazement—it seemed incredible to them that Roosevelt
was consulting a black man on matters of national importance.
Black leaders, of course, were very pleased. They saw the
White House dinner as a significant step forward in the fight
against racism, and the president’s action was warmly praised
by the black press. Roosevelt, meanwhile, was surprised that
the dinner was creating such a stir. Sending an invitation to
Washington, he recalled, had seemed to him “so natural and
so proper.”
While it lasted, the debate over the White House dinner was
intense. For weeks, Washington was pestered by reporters, all
of whom demanded a statement. When he refused to answer
any questions, the Brooklyn Eagle printed a fake interview,
putting words into Washington’s mouth. The Richmond Times
went so far as to suggest that, by inviting a black man to the
White House, Roosevelt was subtly advocating interracial
marriage—an appalling idea to most white Americans.
Roosevelt did what he could to defend himself. Privately, he
saw nothing wrong with the dinner, and it saddened him that
the White House should be off limits to a distinguished citizen
simply because of skin color. After giving the matter consider-
able thought, the president was unable to decide if he had
made a mistake by inviting Washington to dinner. “Looking
back, ” he confided to a friend, “it may be that it was not worth
while to consult him. Y et I am not sure. ”
One thing, however, was clear: Never again did Roosevelt
invite Washington, or any other black person, to the White House.
CH.BAA.BTW.C09.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 91


--- PAGE 101 ---
Despite the controversy that Booker T. Washington’sdining at the
White House had caused, it solidified his position as the most
important black man in America, the undisputed leader of his
race.E ven his critics were temporarily stilled. Bishop Henry
M. Turner, who had earlier lashed out against Washington’s
moderate racial policy, was now full of enthusiastic admiration.
“You are about to be the great representative and hero of the
Negro race, ” he wrote to Washington. “...I  thank you, thank
you, thank you. ”
For the next several years, Washington quietly continued to
advise President Theodore Roosevelt, especially in the matter
of appointing blacks to minor government positions. The
educator was pleased when Roosevelt agreed with him that a
black man, William Crum, should be made collector of the
port at Charleston, South Carolina. Crum’s appointment,
however, set off a bitter debate among members of the Senate,
Washington and His Critics
10
92
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 92


--- PAGE 102 ---
Washington and His Critics 93
who wanted to give the post to a white man. Roosevelt refused
to give in to his opponents, and after a two-year battle, he
managed to persuade Congress to confirm Crum’s appoint-
ment. Washington was elated.
In many respects, however, his alliance with Roosevelt was
frustrating. The president acted upon some of Washington’s
suggestions, but he ignored others, and there were occasions
when the educator feared that Roosevelt was not acting in the
best interests of the black race. During one conversation, their
words became so heated that Washington feared “that there
might be a break between [Roosevelt] and myself. ”
Although the president liked and respected Washington, he
did not wish to associate himself too closely with the contro-
versial issue of black civil rights. An experienced politician,
Roosevelt knew that if he wanted to be reelected to office
in 1904, he would need the support of the Lily-Whites, an
influential group of Southern Republicans who, during the
1890s, had successfully eliminated blacks from almost every
arena of American politics. They had managed to do this
through a discriminatory, yet legal, process known as disfran-
chisement. (For additional information on this political faction,
enter “republican lily whites” into any search engine and
browse the sites listed.)
THE FIFTEENTH AMENDMENT
Ratified in 1870, the Fifteenth Amendment prohibited states
from denying the vote on the basis of race. After its passage, a
large number of black men in the United States began to vote,
enjoying for the first time a measure of political equality.
Beginning in 1890, however, Southern white politicians passed
a series of legal measures that made it almost impossible for
blacks to vote. By 1910, the South had effectively disfranchised
almost all its black residents.
Washington had mixed feelings about the subject. He
believed that the property-holding class of blacks should be
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 93


--- PAGE 103 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
allowed to vote but that the majority of poor blacks (and poor
whites, for that matter) were too uneducated to be responsible
voters. Nevertheless, he did what he could to stem the tide of
disfranchisement, working behind the scenes and banding
together those politicians who might make a difference.
In 1899, Washington and his supporters attacked a disfran-
chisement bill facing the Georgia legislature. T o their disgust,
they received almost no support from the black population
they were trying to help. “I have been corresponding with
leading people in the state but cannot stir up a single colored
man to take the lead in trying to head off this movement, ”
Washington complained to his friend T. Thomas Fortune.
“...T h e y  w i l l  not even answer my letters.”
Washington continued the fight, however, and to his aston-
ishment, the Georgia bill was defeated, 137 to 3. According to
Fortune, it was “the only substantial victory we have had in
the South in a long time. ”
Two years later, in 1901, the issue of disfranchisement
was debated at the Alabama Constitutional Convention. This
time, Washington’s strategy was less successful. A few days
before the convention opened, he met with a small group of
conservative blacks and drew up a statement that was meant
to calm the fears of bigoted whites in Alabama: “The Negro
is not seeking to rule the white man. The Negro does ask,
however, that since he is taxed ...is punished for crime, [and] is
called upon to defend his country, that he have some humble
share in choosing those who shall r ule over him, especially
when he has proven his worthiness by becoming a tax-payer
and a worthy, reliable citizen. ”
The statement failed to achieve its purpose: Disfranchise-
ment was legally adopted in Alabama. Recognizing defeat,
Washington chose to remain silent. As he later explained to
British novelist H.G. Wells, “The only answer to it all is for
coloured men to be patient, to make themselves competent,
to do good work, [and] to live well. ” (Then again, Washington
94
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 94


--- PAGE 104 ---
Washington and His Critics 95
could afford to be patient. He was one of the few black men in
Macon County who continued to vote despite disfranchisement.)
By 1903, a growing number of blacks were beginning to
criticize Washington’s plodding approach to the race problem.
The social harmony he had promised in Atlanta had not come
to pass. Lynchings had not been eradicated; railway cars and
other public places were still segregated; and each year, dis-
franchisement inched its way farther north. Gradually, black
politicians were becoming a thing of the past. There were no
black senators, no black governors; in some states, blacks were
not even allowed to attend conventions as delegates. For all
practical purposes, black Americans had lost their political
voice. They looked to Booker T. Washington to protect their
interests and came away disappointed.
RIOTS IN BOSTON
In July 1903, Washington was scheduled to speak at a black
church in Boston. It was a hot night, and the feisty crowd,
peppered with Washington’s opponents, was in no mood to
hear his speech. “We don’t like you, ” someone shouted from
the back. A moment later, catcalls and hissing began. Several
fistfights broke out and one man was stabbed before police
were able to break up the melee. Dozens of newspapers seized
upon the story, and for the first time, whites became aware of
the serious breach that was beginning to form within the ranks
of America’s black leadership.
Privately, Washington was deeply disturbed by the Boston
riot. Publicly, however, he shrugged it off as a matter of no
importance: “The mere fact that I know there is a group here
and there watching for mistakes on my part makes me more
valuable I think to the race. ”
As opposition to Washington continued to mount, the black
community gradually splintered into two factions. One camp,
the Bookerites, believed that Washington was doing everything
he could for the race; the other camp, consisting largely of
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  15:59  Page 95


--- PAGE 105 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Northern, college-educated blacks, maintained that the Great
Accommodator was an embarrassment and a hindrance to
black progress. William Monroe Trotter, outspoken cofounder
of the Boston Guardian,f ell into the latter camp. “Is the rope
and the torch all the race is to get under [Washington’s]
leadership?” he demanded. In September 1903, there was even
96
William Monroe Trotter, black activist and cofounder of the
civil rights newspaper the Boston Guardian. By the early
1900s, Washington began to face criticism from fellow
black leaders who felt he made too many concessions to 
the white majority and hindered black progress. Trotter, one
of Washington’s most outspoken critics, was involved in a riot
during one of Washington’s speeches and even a possible
assassination plot.
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 96


--- PAGE 106 ---
Washington and His Critics 97
talk among Trotter’s associates of assassinating Washington in
a Cambridge, Massachusetts, church where he was scheduled
to speak. The plot was discovered, however, and the conspira-
tors fled in fear.
WASHINGTON’S LEADERSHIP STYLE IS CHALLENGED
After the Boston riot, Washington began to adopt a variety of
tactics to protect himself against his opponents. He made
every effort to suppress articles in black newspapers that were
critical of his leadership. He also started up three newspapers
of his own, all of which were designed to showcase Tuskegee
Institute and his own racial philosophy. Espionage formed
an important part of Washington’s strategy. He wanted to
know what his critics were doing, when and where they were
meeting, and what was being said about him behind his back.
By 1904, Washington had surrounded himself with a large
group of loyal supporters who could be depended upon to
supply him with the information he needed. This network,
which came to be known as the Tuskegee Machine, had
tentacles extending as far as Chicago and as high as the White
House. For Washington, the Machine served as an effective
system for rewarding his friends and sabotaging the careers
of his enemies. Among his “lieutenants,” Washington was
regarded with a mixture of respect and fear. One of his spies,
Melvin Chisum, was in the habit of addressing him as “your
Eminence.” More commonly, Washington was referred to as
“the Wizard” (though never to his face).
Paranoia lubricated the gears of the Tuskegee Machine.
Washington went so far as to draw up a list of his enemies, men
who were attempting to thwart his racial policy and topple him
from his lofty position of power. One of the names on his list
was William Edward Burghardt Du Bois, a member of the
faculty at Atlanta University. Washington was convinced that
Du Bois had been one of the ringleaders behind the riot in
Boston (although this does not appear to have been the case).
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 97


--- PAGE 107 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
THE SCHISM IN THE AFRO–AMERICAN COMMUNITY GROWS DEEPER
A decade earlier, Du Bois had warmly supported Washington’s
address at the Atlanta Exposition, claiming that it “might be
the basis of a real settlement between whites and blacks in the
South. ” Around 1902, however, Du Bois began to agree with
Washington’s critics, among them William Monroe Trotter,
who had been arrested and jailed for his participation in the
Boston riot. Du Bois did not necessarily agree with Trotter’s
tactics, but he could not help admiring the Boston journalist’s
“indomitable energy.” (For additional information on Trotter,
enter “William Monroe Trotter” into any search engine and
browse the sites listed.)
In 1903, Du Bois’s third book was published, The Souls of
Black Folk , an incisive collection of essays examining various
aspects of black culture. The chapter that caught everyone’s
attention was entitled “Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and
Others. ” In this essay, Du Bois attempted to analyze Washington’s
platform and why it was an ineffective solution to the race
problem. While admiring some of Washington’s self-help ideas,
Du Bois criticized his “unnecessarily narrow” vision as far as
black education was concerned. By discouraging blacks from
attending college, Du Bois asserted, Washington was stunting
the intellectual growth of the race. He also disapproved of
Washington’s mild-mannered response to such injustices as
lynching and segregation. “We have no right to sit silently by, ”
Du Bois wrote, “while the inevitable seeds are sown for a
harvest of disaster to our children, black and white. ”
The Souls of Black Folk was warmly reviewed by the national
press, and within the black community people began to speak
of the Trotter–Du Bois faction (though after the Boston riot
and his subsequent jail sentence, Trotter’s credibility was
temporar ily destroyed). Du Bois’s followers tended to be
young Northern intellectuals, black men and women who
were eager to overthrow Washington’s “namby-pamby policy”
of accommodation. Picking up where Trotter had left off,
98
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 98


--- PAGE 108 ---
Washington and His Critics 99
Du Bois declared that the time had come for blacks to demand
their civil rights in a straightforward and unequivocal way. T o
act otherwise, he said, would do a great disservice not only to
blacks but to the nation as a whole.
Naturally, Washington distrusted Du Bois and his faction,
whom he regarded as “a noisy, turbulent and unscrupulous set
of men.” Washington was a pragmatist, however; he knew he
would have to act quickly to avoid a bitter power struggle, one
that might result in public humiliation. In January 1904, he
invited his supporters and his opponents to come together for
a three-day meeting at Carnegie Hall in New Y ork City. The
conference, according to Washington, would offer the two
sides a chance “to agree upon certain fundamental principles
Both Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois developed their different
viewpoints from the experiences of their early lives.
Booker started life out as a slave, learning about life from his experiences
of doing physical labor and observing others. He sought out a way to earn
his education, became a professional educator, and bought land to start a
school. It was uncommon then for an African American to take on such an
entrepreneurial endeavor. As an educator of such high esteem, it gave him
an entree into the world of politicians and philanthropists.
From Washington’s perspective, this was how his race would obtain equal
rights and become part of the political decision making process. He knew
that it was an attractive idea to step from a position of slavery into a political
legislature position, but unrealistic.
Du Bois’s early experiences were entirely different. He did not come from
a background of slavery and was given his education from an early age. His
school experiences in Massachusetts were integrated. He was considered
one of “the talented tenth” and went to college with white students who
later became politically and economically wealthy. Equal rights and political
clout came more easily to him than to most other African Americans. As
a result, he therefore had trouble supporting Washington’s concept that
equality grew from accommodation and patience.
Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 99


--- PAGE 109 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
and to see in what way we ...misunderstand each other and
correct mistakes as far as possible. ”
Du Bois took a dim view of the event and at first refused to
come. “The conference is yours,” he wrote to Washington, “and
you will naturally constitute it as you choose. ” The 36-year-old
scholar and activist had no desire to participate in what he
called a “BTW ratification meeting. ”
Although Du Bois eventually changed his mind, the
Carnegie Hall conference was not a success. Neither side
trusted the other, and when the meeting came to a close on
January 8, nothing substantial had been achieved—the two
camps were as far apart as ever. Washington, however, deluded
himself by refusing to acknowledge that a serious breach
continued to exist. “I am quite sure, ” he wrote to a friend, “that
several of the members, perhaps the majority of those who
have been in opposition, are either silenced or won over to see
the error of their way. There were others of whom this cannot
be said, but will have to be watched in the future. ” He was
referring, of course, to Du Bois, who for the next decade would
continue to be Washington’s harshest and most eloquent critic.
There were few racial issues upon which the two men could
agree. On the subject of black voting rights, the Tuskegee
educator acknowledged the injustice of disfranchisement, but
he also recognized that for the time being there was nothing
he could do about it. Du Bois, on the other hand, was outraged
by the actions of the Lily-Whites. He maintained that “in a
democratic republic the right to vote is of paramount impor-
tance” and that until all black men were able to cast ballots, he
and his supporters would “never cease to protest and assail
the ears of America.”
On educational matters, Washington and Du Bois were
not as far apart as they seemed to think. Du Bois basically
supported the idea of industrial education, but as both a Fisk
and Harvard graduate, his sympathies naturally lay with those
students who sought advanced education. He called them the
100
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 100


--- PAGE 110 ---
Washington and His Critics 101
“Talented T enth, ” the 10 percent of college-educated black
Americans who “must be made leaders of thought and
missionaries of culture among their people. ” Washington,
however, was more concerned with the nine-tenths of black
Americans who needed to learn to read and write and master
some industry that would allow them to become “worthy,
reliable” citizens.
Unfortunately for Washington, his attitude toward higher
education was largely misunderstood. In his speeches and
writings, he tried to make it clear that he was not opposed to
black men and women going to college. (Indeed, his daughter,
Portia, had enrolled at Wellesley College in the fall of 1901.)
Still, Washington did not believe it was necessary for the
majority of blacks to do so.
Personal experience, moreover, had convinced him that
most university graduates were a spineless lot. This, he felt,
was particularly true of Du Bois and his followers. “In most
cases, ” Washington wrote to Theodore Roosevelt, “someone
has taken these men up and coddled them by paying their way
through college. At Tuskegee a man works for everything that
he gets, hence we turn out real men instead of artificial ones. ”
With such fundamental differences in outlook, it was
inevitable that Du Bois and Washington would regard each
other as enemies. In July 1905, 18 months after the failure of
the Carnegie Hall conference, Du Bois and his compatriots
founded a civil rights organization known as the Niagara
Movement. As Du Bois envisioned it, the all-black movement
would provide “aggressive action on the part of men who
believe in Negro freedom and growth. ” The first meeting,
attended by 29 black intellectuals, took place at Fort Erie,
Ontario, near Niagara Falls.
After much discussion, Du Bois, Trotter, and their colleagues
drew up a straightforward declaration of principles, which
was printed a few days later in the Boston Transcript .T h e
most far -reaching of Niagara’s ob jectives was “the abolition
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 101


--- PAGE 111 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
of all caste distinctions based simply on race or color. ” Du Bois’s
group was also committed to “freedom of speech and criticism, ”
a clear warning to Washington and the members of the
Tuskegee Machine.
The formation of the Niagara Movement troubled
Washington. At first, he tried to ignore it, and he encouraged
the press to do the same. “The best of the white newspapers in
the North have ...taken no account of its meetings or its
protestations, ” reported Washington’s private secretary,
Emmett Scott. It was Scott’s belief that by refusing “to take the
slightest notice of [the Niagara Movement] that the whole
thing will die aborning. ”
Washington’s secretary was wrong. When the Niagara
Movement met for its second annual meeting, in the summer
of 1906, it boasted a membership of 170—small compared to
the Tuskegee Machine but large enough to irritate Washington,
who sent one of his lieutenants to spy on the proceedings. The
meeting took place at Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, where in
1859 the abolitionist John Brown had tried, unsuccessfully,
to lead a slave rebellion. From this symbolic setting, Du Bois
and his followers issued a blunt proclamation: “We claim for
ourselves every right that belongs to freeborn Americans—
political, civil and social ....W e  want full manhood suffrage,
and we want it now, henceforth and forever.”
The meeting at Harpers Ferry was widely covered by the
press, and Washington was forced to admit that it would no
longer be practical to ignore Du Bois and his “scoundrels, ” as
he called them. The real purpose of the Niagara Movement,
Washington was convinced, was “to defeat and oppose every
thing I do. ” He felt justified, then, in using any tactic to crush
Du Bois, Trotter, and the others. He sent spies to infiltrate
Niagara’s meetings. He attempted to suppress a black magazine
that was showing signs of becoming a mouthpiece for Niagara’s
philosophy. He even hired detectives to investigate the personal
life of various Niagara members.
102
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 102


--- PAGE 112 ---
Washington and His Critics 103
Washington’s tactics were successful. Despite its militant
tone (or perhaps because of it), the Niagara Movement failed
to achieve any importance as a civil rights organization. The
few victories that Du Bois enjoyed were for the most part
inconsequential. T oo much of his time was spent fighting
the Bookerites, and this left little opportunity for tackling
the bigger issues of segregation and disfranchisement. By
confining its membership to the Talented T enth, the Niagara
Movement alienated itself from middle- and lower-class
blacks, most of whom continued to subscribe to Washington’s
self-help philosophy. Nor did the Niagara Movement have a
central headquarters, a paid staff, or the financial support of
influential whites, as did Washington. In almost every respect,
Du Bois’s organization was poorly positioned to carry out its
noble objectives.
Thirty years later, Du Bois admitted that he was partly to
blame for the collapse of the Niagara Movement, which formally
disbanded in 1910. “I was no natural leader of men, ” he wrote
in his book Dusk of Dawn. “I could not slap people on the back
and make friends of strangers. ” Booker T. Washington could,
and the Tuskegee Machine rolled on, leaving in its wake
W.E.B. Du Bois and the wreckage of the Niagara Movement.
CH.BAA.BTW.C10.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 103


--- PAGE 113 ---
Booker T. Washington never enjoyed much of a family life.
He spent half his time on the train, traveling from one city
to another, checking in and out of boardinghouses, sifting
through his correspondence, preparing speeches, giving news-
paper interviews, and meeting with black community leaders.
He rarely wrote to his wife or children when he was on the
road, relying instead on his private secretary, Emmett Scott,
to keep him informed of all that was happening at Tuskegee.
When he was at home, Washington was too often preoccupied
with his work to pay close attention to family matters.
“We joke ...a b o u t  father’s silence,” his daughter, Portia, told
the Boston Globe in 1901. “I suppose he is thinking always of
the work when he is at home. But the public sees him at his
best. When he loses himself in his subject he is much more
animated than in the family circle. ”
“The Modern Moses”
11
104
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 104


--- PAGE 114 ---
“The Modern Moses” 105
Booker T. Washington with children Ernest (left) and Booker T., Jr.,
and niece Laura Murray Washington. Washington’s family life 
suffered as a result of his constant travel and commitment to work.
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 105


--- PAGE 115 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Beginning in 1905, Washington embarked on a series of
well-publicized state tours. As one historian has noted, oratory
“was the chief form of public entertainment in Washington’s
day, and he almost always put on a good show. ” The news that
Washington’s train was approaching the station was enough to
generate plenty of interest and excitement. Most Americans
were eager to see the Great Accommodator in person, and the
churches, banquet halls, and fraternal lodges were usually
packed when he spoke.
Just as he had done in the past, Washington often combined his
speaking engagements with fund-raising trips. In the Northern
cities of Philadelphia, Boston, and Chicago, he sought out
white philanthropists to whom he explained the value of black
education and the good work being done at Tuskegee. Many
of these businessmen were already familiar with Washington’s
accomplishments through Up from Slavery;r eaching for their
pocketbooks, they assured him they were eager to do what they
could for the advancement of the black race. The abuses that were
regularly heaped upon Washington by his black critics meant
little or nothing to his white supporters, the majority of whom
had never heard of W.E.B. Du Bois or the Niagara Movement.
During the final 15 years of Washington’s life, a number of
distinguished millionaires donated money to Tuskegee
Institute, most notably John D. Rockefeller and Andrew
Carnegie, both of whom lived in New Y ork. Considering his
humble origin, Washington felt surprisingly at ease associating
with the movers and shakers of American capitalism. There
was nothing extraordinary about his ability to raise funds. As
Du Bois shrewdly observed, when Washington called upon a
philanthropist, “he sat there and found out what the white man
wanted him to say, and then as soon as possible he said it. ”
BUILDING TUSKEGEE’S ENDOWMENT
Oil millionaire John D. Rockefeller never visited Tuskegee,
but each year he donated $10,000 toward its support. In 1902,
106
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 106


--- PAGE 116 ---
“The Modern Moses” 107
a handsome brick building was erected on campus named
Rockefeller Hall. Washington made every effort to keep down
the cost of construction, and when the last brick had been
laid, he returned $249 to Rockefeller’s son, explaining that the
building had not gone over budget. John, Jr., was impressed
by Washington’s honesty, and, politely, he refused to accept
the money.
Andrew Carnegie was another multimillionaire who had
enjoyed reading Up fr om Slavery .T he steel baron admired
Washington’s self-help philosophy, and beginning in 1902, he
gave $10,000 a year to the institute. He also supplied the funds
for a two-story brick library, which the Tuskegee students
built themselves.
In April 1903, a Tuskegee fund-raising rally was held at
Madison Square Garden in New Y ork. Among the guests
present were former president Grover Cleveland and Andrew
Carnegie. Before this moneyed crowd, Washington chose his
words carefully. “Y ou of the North owe an unfulfilled duty
to the Negro,” he declared, “and equal duty to your white
brethren in the South in assisting them to help to remove the
load of ignorance resting upon my race. ” Later that evening,
Andrew Carnegie passed forward a slip of paper agreeing to
give the school $600,000—a tremendous sum in 1903—but
only if Washington was willing to set aside $150,000 for his
personal needs.
Washington was deeply moved by Carnegie’s generosity, but
the $150,000 gift troubled him. He feared—with justification-
—that it would affect his ability to raise funds in the future
and that it might inflame the resentment of his white Southern
neighbors. After giving the matter considerable thought, he
and two of his trustees made an appointment to visit Carnegie
at his New Y ork mansion. There Washington explained that
he could not possibly accept such a large sum for his own
use. Carnegie listened in silence; then, nodding, he said,
“You go back there into my library, re-write my pledge to suit
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 107


--- PAGE 117 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
yourselves, bring it back to me and I’ll sign it. ” Washington did
so, and the deal was concluded.
Carnegie had nothing but admiration for the self-made
educator, author, and racial diplomat. “T o me, ” he wrote at the
time, “[Washington] seems one of the foremost of living men
because his work is unique. The modern Moses, who leads his
108
Andrew Carnegie, an American immigrant who amassed a
tremendous fortune after launching the steel industry in 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Carnegie was one of several 
philanthropists who admired Washington’s work and 
generously donated to the Tuskegee Institute.
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 108


--- PAGE 118 ---
“The Modern Moses” 109
race and lifts it through Education to even better and higher
things....H i s t o r y  i s  t o  k n o w  t w o  Washingtons, one white, the
other black, both Fathers of their People.”
Carnegie’s endowment considerably eased the financial
burdens of Tuskegee Institute. The money also allowed
Washington to treat himself to a well-deserved European
vacation. Before his departure from New Y ork in September
1903, the newspapers reported that his health was failing.
The 47-year-old educator vigorously denied it. “As a matter
of fact, ” he told the press, “my general health was never better,
but I have had no vacation, and a number of my friends have
insisted that I take a short trip to Europe. I have yielded to
their wishes, but shall return on the same ship I sail upon,
and shall not be gone longer than three weeks altogether. ”
Washington had a way of making even his vacations sound
structured and businesslike.
WATCHING HIS BACK
Upon returning to the States in mid-October, Washington
continued his work with renewed energy. Though much of
his attention after 1903 was devoted to his ongoing battle with
Du Bois, Washington did not allow himself to forget that his
primary contribution to the race was his educational work at
Tuskegee. Even when he was on the road, he managed to keep
a close eye on everything that was happening at the institute.
Firing off detailed telegrams to Emmett Scott, Washington
wanted to know how well the students were eating; what books
the teachers were reading in their spare time; how many eggs
the chickens were laying; and how sanitary the kitchens and
outhouses were. Scott kept no secrets from the Wizard; if
someone at Tuskegee was breaking the rules, Washington was
sure to find out.
Around 1905, the administration decided that the industrial
aspect of the institute needed to be more strongly emphasized.
It was thus announced to the faculty that Tuskegee was going
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 109


--- PAGE 119 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
to become “a first class industrial school rather than a second
class academic. ” Naturally, this frustrated the academic teachers,
who considered literature more important than wheel-
wrighting and blacksmithing. Though Washington did not
realize it at the time, the shift in curriculum only served to
intensify the feelings of jealousy and ill will that already existed
between the two departments.
AN ACADEMIC FACTION DEVELOPS AT TUSKEGEE
Many instructors, moreover, resented Washington’s insistence
on what he called “dovetailing, ” his long-standing belief
that industrial and academic studies should be combined
whenever possible (composition students writing about
brickmaking, for instance). One of the academic teachers,
Ruth Anna Fisher, absolutely refused to compromise her
work in this way. She was promptly asked by Washington to
hand in her resignation.
There were other sources of faculty bitterness as well.
Washington set unusually high standards for himself and
everyone around him, and he did not hide his disapproval
when a teacher failed to live up to his expectations. In an angry
letter to his pastor, an instructor, G. David Houston, complained
about Washington’s oppressive personality: “[His] scheme is to
have such a control over his teachers that they will tremble at
his approach. Most teachers like to see the train puff out with
him and dread to hear the engine whistling his return. Relying
upon his absolute power, he reserves the right to discharge a
teacher at any time....T his is not all, he haunts that teacher
forever.” (Somehow, a copy of this letter fell into Washington’s
hands, much to Houston’s regret.)
Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that most
teachers refrained from criticizing Washington, even in private.
Good teaching jobs were hard to come by, and they had no
desire to begin looking for another one. Most instructors at
Tuskegee held their tongue and did their best to “dovetail. ”
110
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 110


--- PAGE 120 ---
“The Modern Moses” 111
Fortunately for Washington, the public was unaware of any
discord that existed at his school. Every year, hundreds of
visitors flocked to the institute, and nearly all came away
with the impression that it was a Southern oasis of harmony,
intelligence, and racial goodwill. Usually, visitors were shown
around the campus grounds, then taken through the class-
rooms and industrial workrooms, where they watched the
students repair wagons, iron linen, and grind cane into syrup.
In the afternoon, Maggie Washington invited the guests to
pause for tea and light refreshments. Later, as the shadows
began to lengthen, the visitors were taken to the chapel, where
a group of students sang spirituals and other plantation songs.
A plentiful dinner was served before the visitors departed. The
overall atmosphere of efficiency and cleanliness surprised
outsiders, most of whom had expected to find at least some
degree of squalor at an all-black institution.
Foreigners were especially fascinated by what they saw at
Tuskegee. Up fr om Slavery had been translated into most
major languages, and a surprising number of Cubans, Puerto
Ricans, Haitians, and Jamaicans showed up at the school,
asking to be enrolled. T ourists from Japan and China were
also in the habit of dropping in, eager to observe Tuskegee’s
educational and agricultural practices.
RACISM STILL PREVAILS
In April 1906, the institute celebrated its 25th anniversary.
Thousands of Southerners came by train, horse, and wagon
to join in the festivities. Andrew Carnegie was one of the
keynote speakers; to no one’s surprise, he talked about wealth.
“Money may be the root of all evil, ” he acknowledged, “...b u t
it is also the root of all Universities, Colleges, Churches and
libraries scattered thru the land. ” Carnegie then stressed the
importance of education, assuring the students that as soon
as they were properly educated, “all rights will ...b e  a d d e d
unto you in this country. ”
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 111


--- PAGE 121 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Another speaker that day was Secretary of War William
Howard Taft. The 48-year-old Republican’s speech was less
optimistic than Carnegie’s. While praising the industrial work
that was being performed at Tuskegee, Taft declared that blacks
were “not fit to enjoy or maintain the higher education. ” There
were many blacks in the audience who believed that Taft
would become the next president of the United States, and his
racist observation must have caused a momentary feeling of
dismay to settle over the otherwise jubilant crowd.
112
CH.BAA.BTW.C11.Final.q  15/12/04  16:00  Page 112


--- PAGE 122 ---
By the time he turned 50,Booker T. Washington had been accused
for years of being too friendly with white politicians, especially
President Theodore Roosevelt, who had been reelected to office
in the fall of 1904. As far as Washington’s opponents were
concerned, the educator was working hand in hand with
Roosevelt, who was doing little to protect the civil rights of
black Americans. Washington, of course, found himself in the
awkward position of being the president’s most intimate black
adviser. It would not have been convenient, or expedient, for
him to criticize Roosevelt’s occasionally racist policies.
RACIAL TENSIONS SPIN OUT OF CONTROL
Two events in 1906 sorely tested Washington’s faith in the
current administration. On the night of August 13, a spray of
gunfire caught the attention of everyone in the Mexican-
border town of Brownsville, T exas. One white man was killed;
“Leading the 
Way Backward”
12
113
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 113


--- PAGE 123 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
another, a police official, was wounded. No one knew who had
fired the shots, but the finger of guilt was pointed at the large
regiment of black soldiers stationed at nearby Fort Brown.
A federal investigation was launched, but nothing could be
proved one way or the other. The white citizens of Brownsville
insisted the black soldiers had “shot up the town, ” and the
soldiers denied it. At last, in October, the matter came to
Roosevelt’s direct attention. Washington begged the president
to delay any action until he, Washington, could bring forth
additional evidence regarding the case. Roosevelt’s reply was
impatient: “Y ou can not have any information to give me
privately to which I could pay heed, my dear Mr. Washington,
because the information on which I act is that which came out
in the investigation itself. ”
Shortly thereafter, Roosevelt instructed Secretary of War
William Howard Taft to dishonorably discharge 167 men of
the 25th Infantry Regiment. This was a blatantly discriminatory
action, and millions of black Americans were outraged. “Of
course, ” Washington wrote to a friend, “I am at a disadvantage
in that I must keep my lips closed. The enemy will, as usual,
try to blame me for all of this. They can talk; I cannot, without
being disloyal to [Roosevelt], who I mean to stand by through-
out his administration. ”
RACIAL VIOLENCE INCREASES
One month after the Brownsville shootings, the city of Atlanta,
Georgia, witnessed a bloody race riot. On September 22,
hundreds of angry white men armed themselves with guns,
clubs, and chains and, without warning, descended on Atlanta’s
black community. The mayor and police commissioner tried
unsuccessfully to reason with the mob. The rampage lasted
five days, and when it was over, 10 blacks and 1 white had
been killed. T o the dismay of Southern blacks, Roosevelt
claimed that he did not have the authority to send federal
troops to suppress the mob violence.
114
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 114


--- PAGE 124 ---
“Leading the Way Backward” 115
Washington was in New Y ork City during the Atlanta riot.
He immediately sent a letter to the New York World, urging “the
best white people and the best colored people to come together
in council and use their united efforts to stop the present
disorder. ” In addition, he begged the black citizens of Atlanta
“to exercise self-control and not make the fatal mistake of
attempting to retaliate. ” Washington’s critics considered this a
weak response. Even the educator’s friends were skeptical of such
a passive approach. “I cannot believe, ” wrote T. Thomas Fortune,
“that the policy of non-resistance in a situation like [this] can
result in anything but contempt and massacre of the race. ”
Like all black Americans, Du Bois was deeply disturbed by
the Brownsville incident and the Atlanta riot. For years, he had
insisted that the Great Accommodator was “leading the way
backward, ” and now a growing number of blacks began to
think that maybe Du Bois was right, that Washington’s policy
of accommodation was fundamentally flawed. Others thought
that it hadn’t changed enough over time to successfully alter
the negative effects left from disfranchisement and solidify
equality between the races. Moderation could not effectively
combat the forces of racism in America; nor, apparently, could
it bring the two races together in a meaningful way.
During the presidential campaign of 1908, Washington and
his lieutenants worked vigorously on behalf of the Republican
candidate, William Howard Taft. Buying the editorial support
of black newspapers was only one of the many ways in which
the Tuskegee Machine tried to convince black Americans that
Taft was a better presidential choice than Democrat William
Jennings Bryan, whose statements concerning blacks sounded
distinctly hostile. Du Bois, meanwhile, reluctantly supported
Bryan and urged others to do the same. “Use your ballots to
defeat ...the present dictatorship, ” he said. “Better vote for
avowed enemies than for false friends.” (For additional infor-
mation on this presidential candidate, enter “William Jennings
Bryan” into any search engine and browse the sites listed.)
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 115


--- PAGE 125 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Three months before the election, in August 1908, the
attention of the nation was once again seized by a race riot,
this one occurring in Springfield, Illinois, the hometown of
Abraham Lincoln. Among those who witnessed the violence
was a journalist named William English Walling, who wrote
an impassioned article about the riot for a Northern periodical,
the Independent .A t the same time, he urged a “large and pow-
erful body of citizens” to come to the aid of black Americans.
“We must come to treat the Negro on a plane of absolute
political and social equality, ” Walling wrote, a daring statement
for a Southern-bred white gentleman to make in 1908.
HELP WAS NEEDED
A number of Northern whites were moved by Walling’s article,
including New Y ork social workers Mary Ovington and Henry
Moskovitz. A few months later, in January 1909, Ovington,
Moskovitz, and Walling met in Manhattan to discuss what
might be done to help the blacks. They decided that a large
race conference should be held “for the discussion of present
evils, the voicing of protests, and the renewal of the struggle
for civil and political liberty. ”
An air of gloom must have hung over the small meeting.
The state of Georgia had just adopted disfranchisement, and
William Howard Taft was about to enter the Oval Office. In
one of his speeches, the president-elect had made it clear
that the federal government wanted “nothing to do with [the
question of] social equality. ” Taft had also stated, with no trace
of irony, that “the best friend that the Southern Negro can have
is the Southern white man. ” Taft’s apparent unwillingness to
help black Americans convinced Walling and his friends that it
was imperative to bring together all “believers in democracy”
to fight the ugliness of race prejudice.
Among those who supported Walling’s plan for a national
race conference was Oswald Garrison Villard, the dynamic
publisher of the New York Evening Post.I n  F e b ruary, Villard
116
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 116


--- PAGE 126 ---
“Leading the Way Backward” 117
printed a statement in his newspaper calling for such a
conference to be held in New Y ork City at the end of May.
The statement was issued, symbolically, on February 12, the
100th anniversary of Abraham Lincoln’s birth. It was signed
by 60 prominent Americans, including social worker Jane
William Howard Taft, secretary of war and Republican 
presidential candidate in 1908. Washington and the
Tuskegee Machine supported Taft in the election, despite
comments and actions by Taft suggesting his lack of concern
for civil rights. Many black Americans saw this as a sign that
Washington was becoming increasingly out of touch with
their needs and the goals of the civil rights movement.
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 117


--- PAGE 127 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Addams, journalist Ida B. Wells-Barnett, philanthropist J.G.
Phelps Stokes, and Du Bois. Realizing that their aims were
nearly identical to those of the ailing Niagara Movement, the
organizers of the conference encouraged Du Bois and his
supporters to attend.
As the date for the conference approached, there was argu-
ment over whether Booker T. Washington should be invited.
Villard had long admired Washington’s work at Tuskegee, and
five days before the conference, he took it upon himself to
write a letter to the educator, carefully explaining the nature of
the new organization. “It is not to be a Washington movement,
or a Du Bois movement, ” Villard wrote. “The idea is that there
shall grow out of it, first, an annual conference . . . [to discuss]
the conditions of the colored pe ople, politically, socially,
industrially and educationally. ” The tone of Villard’s letter was
cautiously respectful. The organizers of the conference, he
stated, “do not wish to embarrass you; they do not wish to
seem to ignore you, or to leave you out....O n  the other hand,
they do not wish to tie you up with what may prove to be a
radical political movement. ”
After giving it some thought, Washington decided not to
attend. As he explained to Villard, he feared that his presence
would inhibit discussion and possibly steer the organization in
a direction that would be detrimental to its long-range goals.
Nor did Washington have any desire to participate when he
learned that several members of the Niagara Movement would
be there. Instead, he sent one of his spies, Charles Anderson,
to report on the three-day conference, which opened at the
Henry Street Settlement in New Y ork City on May 30, 1909.
The meeting was a mixed success. Many of the black partici-
pants, including William Monroe Trotter, were suspicious of
their white colleagues, and by the final day of the conference,
the atmosphere was unusually tense. Nevertheless, some good
was accomplished. The group decided to name itself the
National Negro Committee (NNC), and before the conference
118
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 118


--- PAGE 128 ---
“Leading the Way Backward” 119
ended, on June 1, 40 people were appointed to carry out the
NNC’s work. Over the next few months, four additional
conferences were held, during the course of which the NNC
and the Niagara Movement formally merged. The second
annual meeting of the NNC was held in May 1910, at which
time the members agreed to adopt a new name: the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).
THE BIRTH OF THE NAACP
A handful of officers were duly elected. Moorfield Storey, a
respected Boston lawyer, became the first president of the
NAACP.Du Bois, the only black among the executive officers,
was appointed director of publicity and research. Soon after,
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, commonly
referred to as the NAACP, was born out of an earlier organization called the
National Negro Committee, or the NNC, in May 1910.
The NAACP was instrumental in the destruction of disfranchisement.
When the Fifteenth Amendment was ratified in March 1870, it granted all
black men the right to vote. During this 40-year period, white politicians
did what they could to make it almost impossible for African-American men
to exercise this critically important right. Some states created laws that
made an African-American man unable to vote unless he was a landowner.
These were referred to as “grandfather clauses.” Another example of this
type of discrimination occurred on voting days. Whites working at the polls
would threaten or create an environment of fear to deter African-American
men from casting their ballots. The unofficial loss of this right to vote caused
black men to lose any say in government policies and issues that affected
their lives.
The NAACP fought this unfair loss of voting rights through the court system.
In 1916, Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter helped eliminate the use of
these grandfather clauses because they were discriminatory. The power of
the NAACP and the wisdom of the court system restored this important right
to ensure the democracy of our nation.
The NAACP
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 119


--- PAGE 129 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
he moved to New Y ork, where he launched The Crisis,t h e
official publication of the NAACP . Under Du Bois’s editorship,
The Crisis became a powerful record of black protest and
racial progress as well as a pointed weapon to use against
Washington and the Tuskegee Machine.
From the beginning, Villard had hoped that Washington
and Du Bois would be able to put aside their personal differ-
ences and work together to make the NAACP a potent force
in American race relations. Washington, however, was deeply
suspicious of the new organization. Its members, he claimed,
were “bitter and resentful” people, frustrated intellectuals
whose only aim was to discourage “the fundamentals of
Hampton and Tuskegee and everything that we stand for. ”
Repeatedly, he made it clear he wanted nothing to do with
the NAACP or its militant policies.
In the summer of 1910, Washington sailed to Europe to
do research for a book comparing the social and economic
condition of black Americans with that of impoverished
Europeans. Near the end of his three-month trip, he stopped
in London, where he delivered a speech before the members
of the Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection Society. As
usual, he emphasized how well race relations were going in
the United States, glossing over such embarrassments as lynch-
ing, segregation, and disfranchisement.
When Du Bois learned of Washington’s speech, he wrote
an open letter “T o the People of Great Britain and Europe, ”
attacking the educator for “giving the impression abroad that
the Negro problem in America” was being satisfactorily solved.
It was one thing, Du Bois declared, to be optimistic. It was
quite another to deliberately “misrepresent the truth.”
Du Bois’s statement was signed by 32 prominent black
Americans, many of them members of the NAACP . It was
printed on NAACP letterhead, giving the impression that
the executive committee of the NAACP supported Du Bois’s
attack (which it did not). Washington and his supporters were
120
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 120


--- PAGE 130 ---
“Leading the Way Backward” 121
incensed by the letter, and though the incident was quickly
forgotten by the public, it solidified Washington’s antagonistic
attitude toward the NAACP . With all that needed to be done
concerning civil rights, he wrote to Villard, “it is difficult to see
how people can throw away their time and strength in stirring
up strife within the race. ”
Villard, naturally, was torn between his personal fondness
for Washington and his deeper allegiance to the NAACP .
Writing to Washington, he apologized for what had happened,
claiming that Du Bois’s letter “was absolutely accidental as
far as this office was concerned.” Then, gently, he reminded
the educator that his optimism was leading him astray and, as
a result, his popularity was slipping: “[A] greater and greater
percentage of the intellectual colored people are turning from
you and becoming your opponents, and with them a number
of white people as well. ” Though it pained Washington to
admit it, he knew that Villard was speaking the truth.
CHANGES IN AFRO–AMERICAN POLITICAL T HOUGHT
For the rest of his life, Washington publicly continued to
stress the importance of accommodation, education, and
economic advancement within the black community. Increas-
ingly, however, his message was falling upon deaf ears. Black
Americans who had once praised Up fr om Slavery for its
homespun wisdom were now subscribing to The Crisis for
its potent essays attacking racial injustice.
The formation and early success of the NAACP should
not have surprised Washington. The Brownsville incident,
the Atlanta and Springfield riots, and the subtle racism of the
Republican Party had all underscored the need in America
for a strong civil rights organization. Washington, however,
refused to heed the signs. In his personal vendetta against
Du Bois and the NAACP , he failed to realize that history was
passing him by.
CH.BAA.BTW.C12.Final.q  15/12/04  16:01  Page 121


--- PAGE 131 ---
On the evening of Sunday, March 19, 1911,Booker T. Washington
was in New Y ork City, where earlier that day he had given
two public speeches. After a light supper, he took the subway
uptown to the West Side, departing near the southern end of
Central Park. From there he walked to an apartment building
on West 63rd Street, a few blocks from the T enderloin, one
of New Y ork’s seediest neighborhoods. As Washington later
explained to the press, he had come to this questionable part of
town to visit Daniel C. Smith, the auditor for Tuskegee Institute.
THE ULRICH AFFAIR
Around nine o’clock in the evening, Washington entered the
lobby of the building where he had been told Smith was stay-
ing with friends. After checking the directory, he rang the bell
and waited. No answer. At this moment, an attractive young
A New Frankness
13
122
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 122


--- PAGE 132 ---
A New Frankness 123
woman passed him, heading for the street. A minute or so
later, Washington also went outside, where he paced up
and down the sidewalk, waiting for Smith to return. The
same woman passed him again. She would later claim that
Washington had spoken to her in a forward manner: “He
looked me right in the face and said, ‘Hello, sweetheart. ’”
After a while, Washington returned to the lobby, pressed
the bell, and waited. Still no answer. He went outside again,
walked a bit, returned again, and rang the bell. His behavior
must have looked suspicious to anyone observing him.
According to Washington, he had just put on his glasses
and was peering at the directory when a white man, Henry
Ulrich, burst in from the street. “What are you doing here?”
Ulrich demanded. “Are you breaking into my house? Y ou
have been hanging around here for four or five weeks!” With-
out waiting for an answer, Ulrich began to hit Washington
on the head with his fist. Washington tried to explain, but
the man was infuriated.
At last, bruised and battered, Washington fled through the
outside door and ran down the sidewalk, his assailant following
close behind. Seizing a cane from a passerby, Ulrich began to
rain blows upon Washington’s head. After running a block,
Washington tripped and fell, landing almost at the feet of a
policeman. Blood was streaming from his head and mouth.
“This man is a thief, ” Ulrich told the police officer.“I found him
with his hand on the door-knob and his eye at the keyhole. ”
Washington was arrested and taken to a nearby station
house. There, with difficulty, he managed to explain who he
was and what had happened. All charges against him were
immediately dismissed. Washington was then taken to the
hospital, where his wounds were treated. He might have let
the matter drop, but instead he charged Ulrich with felonious
assault (later reduced to simple assault). A trial date was set
for the following November.
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 123


--- PAGE 133 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
During his convalescence, Washington received dozens of
comforting letters and telegrams, including messages from
Theodore Roosevelt and President William Howard Taft. In
a halfhearted show of support, the NAACP passed a resolution
expressing “profound regret” at this “renewed evidence of
racial discrimination. ” Even William Monroe Trotter resisted
the urge to gloat over his rival’s misfortune. “Our opposition
to Mr. Washington ...is well known, ” he wrote in the Boston
Guardian,“ but we do not desire to take any advantage of
his present troubles. We want to fight men when [they are]
standing up. ”
As long as Washington’s head was swathed in bandages, the
public was sympathetic. By the time the Ulrich case came to
court, however, all sorts of rumors had begun to spread. It was
whispered that Washington had been drinking that night; that
it was he who had started the fight; that he had come to that
“free and easy” neighborhood seeking the companionship of
white women. Unfortunately, Washington was not able to
satisfactorily explain his presence at the apartment building.
Repeatedly, he insisted that he had gone there to meet Daniel
Smith, Tuskegee’s auditor—but Smith lived in New Jersey, not
New Y ork, and in any event Smith was at Tuskegee on the night
of the beating.
At the trial, which was held on November 6, Washington
and Ulrich stuck by their respective stories. It seemed obvious
to most people in the courtroom that Ulrich was stretching
the truth, but it seemed equally obvious that Washington
was being evasive. After evidence had been presented from
both sides, Ulrich was acquitted of the charge of assaulting
Washington. According to the New York Age, the audience in
the courtroom was “astounded” by the judges’ decision.
To this day, the Ulrich affair continues to mystify Washington’s
biographers. What was he doing in that particular neighbor-
hood on the night of March 19? The answer may never be
known. As far as Washington’s career was concerned, the
124
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 124


--- PAGE 134 ---
A New Frankness 125
sensational publicity surrounding the Ulrich case did no
lasting damage. Washington’s friends continued to support him,
and those who disliked him felt justified in their antipathy.
Nevertheless, it was a strange and troubling incident, one
that left an unfortunate blemish on Washington’s otherwise
spotless reputation.
By the time the Ulrich trial came to an end, the 1912
presidential campaign was getting under way. Most black
Americans were fearful that Taft might be reelected. In the
opinion of some, his administration had marked a low point
in the history of American race relations. Even before his
inauguration, Taft had begun the discriminatory process of
removing nearly all black men from Southern political office.
His first victim was William Crum, collector of customs in
Charleston, the black man for whose confirmation Theodore
Roosevelt had battled Congress for two years. After Crum,
Southern black officeholders began to fall like ninepins. The
few black men who continued to work for the government
held unimportant, low-visibility positions. On at least two
occasions, Taft implied to Washington that he had a long-
range plan that would please blacks; if this is true, it was never
revealed to the public. Taft’s strategy was to put off for as long
as possible the disagreeable task of dealing with what was
commonly called “the negro problem. ”
In the presidential campaign of 1912, Taft ran on the
Republican ticket. Former president Roosevelt, hoping to win
a third term, quickly formed the Progressive Party, which had
no room on its “progressive” platform for black civil rights.
Unwittingly, Taft and Roosevelt split the Republican vote,
giving the presidential victory to a Democrat, Woodrow Wilson,
who, during his campaign, had promised to treat blacks with
“absolute fair dealing. ” Less than three weeks after Wilson took
office, however, Washington was already expressing private
concern about the president’s sincerity: “I fear [his] high-
sounding phrases regarding justice do not include the Negro. ”
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 125


--- PAGE 135 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
RACIAL SEGREGATION DEEPENS
Washington was right: Wilson had no intention of improv-
ing the political or social status of black Americans during
his administration. He continued Taft’s strategy of removing
blacks from federal office, and to his chagrin, Washington
found he was no longer being consulted on matters relating
to race.I n the eyes of the Democratic Party, the Great
Accommodator was a nuisance and—after the Ulrich affair—
a potential liability. Through lack of use, the gears of the
Tuskegee Machine began to grow rusty.
Shortly after Wilson’s inauguration, a strict policy of
segregation was adopted by many branches of the federal
government, including the U.S. Postal Service, which had tradi-
tionally been a safe haven for blacks. Trotter, for one, was outraged
by the new policy, and in November 1914, he led a delegation
of blacks to the White House to accuse Wilson of breaking his
campaign promises and to force him “to square his actions with
his words. ” The meeting did not go well, with the conversation
descending into a heated series of accusations and denials.
The issue of segregation was one that had troubled
Washington since the beginning of his public career. In
November 1912—the month Wilson was elected president—
Washington wrote a bold article entitled “Is the Negro Having
a Fair Chance?” After examining the question from various
angles, he concluded that black Americans had little reason to
be satisfied, especially in the area of railway transportation.
“What embitters the colored people in regard to railroad
travel, ” he wrote, “is not the separation but the inadequacy of
the accommodations....I n  most cases, the Negro portion of
the car is poorly ventilated, poorly lighted, and, above all,
rarely kept clean. ” In addition to the miseries of railroad travel,
Washington explored such issues as lynching, disfranchisement,
and the inadequacies of black education.
The article, which appeared in Century magazine, was later
printed in pamphlet form and distributed to railroad officials
126
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 126


--- PAGE 136 ---
A New Frankness 127
throughout the South. Its frank tone took many people by
surprise, including W.E.B. Du Bois, who noted with pleasure
“that Mr. Booker T. Washington has joined the ranks. ” Though
Du Bois was overstating the case, it is true that after Woodrow
Wilson was elected to office, Washington began to speak out
against racism more forcefully than he had ever done before.
He was certainly no rabble-rouser, but in a variety of ways he
did make his feelings known.
On one occasion, in Tampa, Florida, Washington was
scheduled to address a large crowd. As soon as he entered the
theater, he saw a line of bed sheets hanging down the middle
of the aisle. Washington was clearly annoyed. “I have traveled
all over this country and in many foreign lands, ” he said firmly,
“but this is the first time that I have ever seen white people and
colored people separated by sheets. Now, before I begin my
remarks, I want that thing taken down from there. ” The sheets
were removed.
Unfortunately, Washington’s attempts to expose the ugliness
of racism were not strong enough or frequent enough to have
much impact. An accommodationist at heart, he could never
attack the system of white supremacy with any real vigor. For
too many years, his public statements concerning lynching and
other injustices had been frustratingly ambiguous, and to a
large degree this had undermined his effectiveness as a racial
spokesman. By 1913, a large number of blacks had turned
against him, and as the NAACP continued to grow in size and
prestige, the Tuskegee educator seemed to many an embar-
rassing relic from the past. Even Oswald Garrison Villard,
who liked Washington, was forced to admit privately that his
friend’s name “is getting to be anathema among the educated
colored people in the country, and he is drifting further and
further in the rear as a real leader. ”
Though Washington’s influence was declining, his level of
activity was not. During the last years of his life, he was as busy
as ever running his school, overseeing the Tuskegee Negro
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 127


--- PAGE 137 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Conference, keeping his eye on Du Bois and the NAACP ,
raising much-needed funds, and giving speeches throughout
the country. With the help of various collaborators and ghost-
writers, he turned out numerous books, including The Story of
the Negro (1909) and My Larger Education (1911). He also
wrote a biography of Frederick Douglass (1907) as well as a
book about his European travels and observations, The Man
Farthest Down (1912). None of these volumes duplicated the
success of Up fr om Slavery ,b u t  they were widely read and
helped maintain Washington’s position as the most famous
black man in the world.
128
Although Washington’s prestige diminished late in his life, Tuskegee
Institute remained world renowned and he drew deep satisfaction from
its success. Here, Washington leads the Tuskegee commencement
ceremonies for the class of 1911.
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 128


--- PAGE 138 ---
A New Frankness 129
In addition to his work with the National Negro Business
League, Washington began to give speeches on behalf of a new
organization, the National Urban League (NUL). Founded
in 1910, the NUL addressed the various problems faced by
Southern blacks who were moving in increasing numbers to
the Northern cities, where they hoped to find better living
conditions and greater economic opportunities. Because he
regarded the NUL’s approach as constructive, Washington was
able to give it his enthusiastic support, something he could
never do for the NAACP . (For additional information on the
history and current work of the National Urban League, enter
“National Urban League” into any search engine and browse
the sites listed.)
It was his ongoing work at Tuskegee, however, that gave
Washington his deepest satisfaction. In his 34-year career as
principal, he never lost interest in the growth and progress of
his school. Many mornings, he would don a pair of overalls
and stroll around the campus, jotting down his observations
in a notebook. He watched the cows and horses being fed; he
himself went to the henhouse and collected the eggs. He
loved his vegetable garden and swore that Tuskegee eggs and
fresh-grown Tuskegee carrots were superior to anything he
could order in a restaurant. He spent as much time as he
could around the pigpen. “The pig, I think, is my favorite
animal, ” he once wrote. “I do not know how this will strike the
taste of my readers, but it is true ...and it is a real pleasure to
me to watch their development and increase from month
to month.”
In April 1914, Washington celebrated his 58th birthday.
His health was beginning to fail, and, appropriately, it was
during this period that he turned his attention to the
neglected subject of health care for black Americans. That
year, he broadened the scope of the Tuskegee Negro Conference
to include a separate health conference, which was attended
by thousands of people. Among the issues discussed were
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 129


--- PAGE 139 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
water impurity, the dangers of alcohol, fraudulent medicines,
tuberculosis among blacks, and—a Washington touch—the
importance of daily bathing. Speaking to the crowd, he
encouraged whites to take greater interest in the subject of
quality health care for blacks. “The life of the humblest black
person in the South, ” he said, “in some way touches the life of
the most exalted white person in the South. ” The following
year, Washington founded National Negro Health Week,
March 21–27, 1915.
During the last year of his life, as World War I was being
fought in Europe, Washington single-handedly orchestrated
a letter-writing campaign against a wartime bill that would
prevent any European or dark-skinned person from immigrat-
ing to the United States after the war. Though the bill had
already been passed in the Senate, it was defeated in the House
of Representatives, 250 to 77. The success of Washington’s
letter-writing campaign raised the racial hopes of at least
one black newspaper, the Chicago Defender :“ Wouldn’t it
be a glorious thing if the Booker T. Washington faction,
the Du Bois faction, and the Monroe Trotter faction would
get together on a common ground and fight unitedly for the
things that they are now fighting singly for?”
Common ground presented itself sooner than anyone
expected. During the last months of Washington’s life,
he, Trotter, and the NAACP joined forces to denounce
D.W. Griffith’s The Birth of a Nation,a  brilliant but corrosive
film that, among other things, glorified the white supremacist
group the Ku Klux Klan. Despite vigorous protests, Washington
and his colleagues were unsuccessful in their attempt to ban
The Birth of a Nation,w hich at that time was the longest and
most elaborate motion picture ever made. That fall, there was
talk of turning Up from Slavery into a film, but Washington’s
death put an end to all negotiations.
It has been said, with some validity, that Washington killed
himself through overwork. Every day, whether he was at
130
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 130


--- PAGE 140 ---
A New Frankness 131
Tuskegee or on the road, he dealt with a tremendous amount
of personal and professional paperwork. Businessmen asked
for his advice; politicians asked for his endorsement; philan-
thropists wrote, requesting detailed reports about how
their money was being spent. Schools and other institutions
were eager to know how they, too, could tap into Andrew
Carnegie’s wealth.
Washington was flooded with speaking requests, invita-
tions, bills, with every sort of correspondence imaginable.
Could he recommend a suitable person for such and such a
position? Could he make a speech to the Negro Women’s
Club? T o the Loyal T emperance Union? T o the state convict
board? Could he give an interview to a Northern journalist?
As his own health failed, Washington turned his attention to the importance
of health care for black Americans. In 1914, he broadened the Tuskegee
Negro Conference to include a health conference, and in 1915 he instituted
a National Negro Health Week. Washington (front, center) sits with members
of the National Negro Health Week Committee.
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 131


--- PAGE 141 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
Would he be interested in contributing money toward the
establishment of an all-black town? The requests never
stopped coming, and Washington never stopped working. In
retrospect, it seems incredible that he was able to maintain his
pace for as long as he did.
Early in November 1915, his health finally broke. He was
in New Y ork City, raising funds for Tuskegee Institute and
making a number of public speeches. On November 4, he
planned to travel by train to Petersburg, Virginia, to make a
speech before a black organization. Before he could depart,
however, he became ill, and his New Y ork doctors convinced
him to enter St. Luke’s Hospital for observation. Washington
must have sensed that something was seriously wrong. On
November 5, he sent a telegram to his wife at Tuskegee, telling
her to “come at once.”
A handful of people knew that Washington was suffering
from kidney trouble and that his blood pressure was
extremely high. He was also prone to attacks of indigestion.
The exact nature of his illness, however, remains unclear.
Emmett Scott later wrote that during the last weeks of
Washington’s life he was “wasted by disease and suffering
almost constant pain. ”
From his hospital bed at St. Luke’s, Washington continued
to conduct business, firing off numerous telegrams to his staff
at Tuskegee. For nearly a week, his condition was a closely
guarded secret, but on November 10 the story hit the papers.
Washington was reported to be suffering the effects of a
nervous breakdown. His doctor told the press that his patient
was “ageing rapidly” and “extremely nervous. ” A rumor began
to spread that Washington was dying from syphilis. The
trustees at Tuskegee, meanwhile, admitted they had no one
in mind to replace Washington as principal.
Despite the care of several physicians, Washington grew
weaker every day. At last, realizing the gravity of his condition,
he insisted on returning to Tuskegee. “I was born in the South, ”
132
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 132


--- PAGE 142 ---
A New Frankness 133
Washington’s health rapidly declined toward the end of 1915, though
he continued to work constantly. Exhaustion and illness finally 
overcame him on November 14, 1915, when he died surrounded by
his family at Tuskegee.
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  30/12/04  15:08  Page 133


--- PAGE 143 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
he said, “I have lived and labored in the South, and I expect to
die and be buried in the South. ”
He and his wife Maggie took the train for Tuskegee on the
afternoon of November 13. Washington arrived, barely alive,
at approximately nine o’clock that evening. On the way to
the institute, he apparently lost consciousness. A few hours
later, in the presence of his family, he died at 4:45 
A.M., Sunday,
November 14, 1915. Shortly thereafter, the bells began to
peal on campus, calling the students to begin their day.
Gradually, the news spread that Washington had died. Every-
one was stunned. According to the M ontgomery Advertiser ,
there was throughout the city of Tuskegee a “feeling of personal
loss. Nobody is hiding his tears. Nobody is free from gloom. ”
The most powerful and most respected black man in the
United States was dead. One poet, Claude McKay, tenderly
expressed the sorrow felt by millions: “Death’s hand has torn
you from your trusting race, / And O! we feel so utterly alone. ”
THE LEGACY OF BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
In the December issue of The Crisis,D u  B ois attempted to put
Washington’s life into perspective. “He was the greatest Negro
leader since Frederick Douglass, ” Du Bois wrote. “On the other
hand, in stern justice, we must lay on the soul of this man, a
heavy responsibility for the consummation of Negro disfran-
chisement, the decline of the Negro college and public school
and the firmer establishment of color caste.”
There was some truth to what Du Bois said, and, histori-
cally, this is the image of Washington that has been perpetuated.
To  assess Washington properly, however, he must be viewed
in the context of his time. It is unlikely that he or any other
black leader could have ended the myriad forms of racism
that characterized the post-Civil War period. As one of his
biographers has observed, Washington “accepted half a loaf,
not as a permanent settlement, but as a means toward
obtaining the whole loaf later. T o criticize his methods is to
134
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 134


--- PAGE 144 ---
A New Frankness 135
make the facile assumption that he had some choice in the
matter. He did what was possible, given the time and place in
which he lived, and did it to the utmost. ”
Although Washington advocated a policy of black submis-
sion, he did not lead the way backward, as Du Bois so often
claimed; nor did he hate the NAACP , as many people assume.
Washington may not have approved of the NAACP’s methods
or personalities of its leaders, but he never questioned its
ultimate goal: to obtain equal justice under the law for every
black American.
The legacy of Booker T. Washington is marked by the
significant success of the Tuskegee Institute. More than
100 years ago, students attended classes in only one building.
Today, Tuskegee is a large university, with 70 buildings and
5 separate colleges.
Tuskegee’s alumni form an impressive roster of scientists,
judges, entrepreneurs, politicians, physicians, scientific
researchers, veterinarians, engineers, corporate executives,
lawyers, entertainers, and educators. Tuskegee graduates
more African-American aerospace engineers than any other
institute in the United States, and its alumni include a diverse
group of notable men and women, including Ralph Ellison,
author of Invisible Man, and Academy and Grammy award
winner Lionel Richie. Dr. Mary Starke Harper, a Tuskegee
graduate, helped develop The Mary Starke Harper Geriatric
Facility in 1996. Located in Alabama, the facility serves
patients in need of geriatric and psychiatric care, functioning
as both a treatment center and a teaching hospital.
The tireless work of Booker T. Washington became the
cornerstone for future generations of civil rights leaders. The
leaders who succeeded him were influenced by his political
philosophy and actions as “the Accommodator.” Some of them
chose completely different leadership styles. Other leaders took
some seeds of Washington’s political philosophy and invented
a new leadership style of their own.
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 135


--- PAGE 145 ---
BOOKER T. W ASHINGTON
136
Students sitting on the steps of the statue of Booker T. Washington
on the Tuskegee Institute campus. Though often criticized for being
too accepting of racism, his vision of education as the key to freedom
continues to inspire today.
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 136


--- PAGE 146 ---
A New Frankness 137
“More and more, ” Washington said, “we must learn to think
not in terms of race or color or language or religion or political
boundaries, but in terms of humanity. ” Seen in this light,
Washington’s message of brotherhood continues to be relevant
today. Each time two races or two nations attempt to forge
a bond of peace and understanding, the spirit of Booker T.
Washington lives on.
CH.BAA.BTW.C13.Final.q  15/12/04  16:02  Page 137


--- PAGE 147 ---
1856 Born on April 5 near Hale’s Ford, Virginia
1865 Moves with family to Malden, West Virginia
1872 Enrolls at Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute
in Hampton, Virginia
1875 Graduates from Hampton Institute; begins teaching at
black school in Tinkersville, West Virginia
1878 Attends Wayland Seminary in Washington, D.C.
1879 Returns to Hampton Institute as faculty member
1881 Opens Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute in
Tuskegee, Alabama
1882 Marries first wife, Fanny Smith
1883 Daughter, Portia, is born
1884 Fanny Washington dies
1885 Marries second wife, Olivia Davidson; son Booker T., Jr.,
is born
1889 Son Ernest Davidson is born; Olivia dies
1892 First Tuskegee Negro Conference is held; Washington
marries third wife, Margaret Murray
1895 Delivers Atlanta Compromise speech at the Cotton
States and International Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia,
on September 18
1899 Tr avels to Europe
1900 Founds National Negro Business League
1901 Publication of Up from Slavery;W ashington dines at the
White House on October 16
1903 Andrew Carnegie gives $600,000 to Tuskegee Institute;
Washington travels to Europe
1904 Organizes a three-day conference of black leaders at
New Y ork City’s Carnegie Hall; Washington adopts
niece, Laura Murray, after her mother’s death
CHRONOLOGY138
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 138


--- PAGE 148 ---
1906 Celebrates 25th anniversary of Tuskegee Institute
1909 Refuses to attend conference from which the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP) arises
1911 Publication of My Larger Education;W ashington 
is attacked by Henry Ulrich in New Y ork City
1915 Sponsors National Negro Health Week; dies on
November 14 in Tuskegee
CHRO NOLOGY 139
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  30/12/04  15:09  Page 139


--- PAGE 149 ---
Adair, Gene. George Washington Carver.N ew Y ork: Chelsea House,
1989.
Banfield, Susan. The Fifteenth Amendment: African Americans’ Right
to Vote. Springfield, NJ: Enslow Publishers, 1998.
Butler, B.N. “Booker T. Washington, W.E.B. Du Bois, Black Americans
and the NAACP . ”Crisis 85 (August 1978): 222–230.
Douglass, Frederick. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An
American Slave.N ew Y ork: Doubleday, 1989.
Du Bois, W.E.B. The Souls of Black Folk: Essays and Sketches . 1903.
Reprint. New Y ork: Vintage Books/Library of America, 1990.
Fox, Stephen R. The Guardian of Boston: William Monroe Trotter.
New Y ork: Atheneum, 1970.
Franklin, Robert Michael. Liberating Visions Human Fulfillment and
Social Justice in African-American Thought.M inneapolis, MN:
Fortress Press, 1990.
Harlan, Louis R. Booker T. Washington: The Making of a Black
Leader, 1856–1901.N ew Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1972.
——— . Booker T. Washington: The Wizard of Tuskegee, 1901–1915.
New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1983.
Harlan, Louis R. The Booker T. Washington Papers, Volume 3
1889–95.U rbana: University of Illinois Press, 1974.
Mathews, Basil. Booker T. Washington: Educator and Interracial
Interpreter.C ambridge: Harvard University Press, 1948.
McFeely, William S. Frederick Douglass. New York: W.W.N o r t o n  &
Company, 1991.
McKissack, Patricia, and Fredrick McKissack. Booker T. Washington,
Revised Edition. Berkeley Heights, NJ: Enslow Publishers, 2001.
Meier, August.Negro Thought in America, 1880–1915: Racial Ideologies
in the Age of Booker T. Washington.A nn Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1963.
Moss, Nathaniel.W .E.B. Dubois: Civil Rights Leader, Philadelphia:
Chelsea House Publishers, 1996.
FURTHER READING140
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 140


--- PAGE 150 ---
Pryor, T.M. Wealth Building Lessons of Booker T. Washington for a
New Black America. Edgewood, MD: Duncan & Duncan, 1995.
Scott, Emmett J., and Lyman B. Stowe. Booker T. Washington:
Builder of a Civilization. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1916.
Spencer, Samuel R., Jr.Booker T. Washington and the Negro’s Place 
in American Life.B oston: Little, Brown, 1955.
Stafford, Mark. W.E.B. Du Bois.N ew Y ork: Chelsea House, 1989
Steofoff, Rebecca. The Civil War and Reconstruction: 1863–1877.
Tarrytown, NY: Benchmark Books, 2003.
Washington, Booker T. My Larger Education. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, 1911.
——— . Up from Slavery. 1901. Reprint. New Y ork: Viking Penguin,
1986.
Washington, E. Davidson, ed.Selected Speeches of Booker T. Washington.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1932.
Weber, Michael.Civil War and Reconstruction.A ustin, TX: Raintree
Steck-Vaughn Publishers, 2001.
Weidt, Maryann N.Voice of Freedom: A Story About Frederick Douglass.
Minneapolis, MN: Carolrhoda Books, 2001.
Wintz, Cary D., ed. African American Political Thought 1890–1930:
Washington, Du Bois, Garvey, and Randolph .A r m onk, NY:
M.E. Sharpe, 1996.
WEBSITES
The Booker T. Washington Era.
http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/aaohtml/exhibit/aopart6.html
History Cooperative. 
www.historycooperative.org
Martin Luther King National Historic Site. “15th Amendment to the Constitution.”
www.nps.gov/malu/documents/amend15.htm
Tuskegee University. 
www.tuskegee.edu
FURTHER READING 141
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 141


--- PAGE 151 ---
Addams, Jane, 117–118
Afro-American Council, 86–87
Afro-American League, 86
Alabama, and disfranchisement,
94–95.
See also Tuskegee Normal and
Industrial Institute
Alabama State T eachers Association,
63
Anderson, Charles, 118
Anthony, Susan B., 84, 89
Anti-Slavery and Aborigines 
Protection Society, 120–121
Armstrong, Samuel Chapman,
31–33, 34–36, 37, 40, 42, 56, 58,
64, 71–72
Atlanta Advocate, 78
Atlanta Compromise, 1–7, 73–75,
77–79, 98
Atlanta Constitution, 74
Birth of a Nation, The (film), 130
Black Belt, The, 70
Bookerites, 95, 103
Boston, riots in, 95, 97, 98
Boston Globe, 104
Boston Guardian, 96, 124
Boston Transcript, 74, 101
Bowen, William, 45, 47, 50, 51
Brooklyn Eagle, 91
Brown, John, 102
Bryan, William Jennings, 115
BTW ratification meeting, 99–100,
101
Bullock, Rufus, 3, 6
Burroughs, Elizabeth, 10
Burroughs, James, 8, 9–10, 11, 13,
15, 19
Carnegie, Andrew, 89, 106,
107–109, 111, 131
Carnegie Hall, Washington’s confer-
ence of black leaders at, 99–100, 101
Carver, George Washington, 80–82
Century magazine, 126–127
Chicago Defender, 130
Chicago Peace Jubilee, Washington
speaking at, 83–84
Chisum, Melvin, 97
Civil Rights Act of 1875, 61–62
civil rights for blacks
and The Birth of a Nation, 130
and Civil Rights Act of 1875,
61–62
Du Bois on, 97–103, 106, 120–121
and lynchings, 85–87, 95, 98, 127
and National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored
People, 116–121
Roosevelt on, 89–91, 113–116,
124, 125
and segregation, 126–127
Taft on, 114, 116, 124, 125, 126
and Ulrich affair, 122–125
Washington on, 6, 60–62, 73, 77,
82, 85–87, 93–95, 98, 100,
113–116, 120–121, 126–127,
134–135, 137
Wilson on, 125–126, 127.
see also economic opportunity
for blacks; education for blacks;
racial animosity; self-reliance
for blacks; voting rights for
blacks
Civil War, 12–15, 32
Cleveland, Grover, 75, 77, 107
coal mine, Washington’s work in,
24
“Colored Ministry: Its Defects and
Needs, The, ” 67
Constitution, and Fifteenth
Amendment, 26, 93
Cotton States and International
Exposition, and Washington’s
Atlanta Compromise, 1–7, 73–75,
77–79, 98
INDEX142
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 142


--- PAGE 152 ---
Crisis, The, 120, 134
Crum, William, 92–93, 125
Cuban annexation, Washington’s
commencement speech against,
36
Davis, William, 22–23, 24
disfranchisement, 93–95, 100, 115,
116, 134
“Dixie, ” 2
Douglass, Frederick, 62, 75, 128,
134
dovetailing, at Tuskegee Institute,
110
Du Bois, William Edward
Burghardt, 97–103, 109, 130
on civil rights for blacks, 97–103,
106, 120–121
and National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored
People, 118, 119–121
and Niagara Movement, 101–103,
106, 118, 119
and Talented T enth, 100–101,
103
and Washington, 120–121, 127,
128, 135
and Washington’s death, 134
Dusk of Dawn, 103
Eastman, George, 89
education for blacks
Carnegie on, 111
Du Bois on, 100–101
Taft on, 112
Washington on, 5, 6, 37, 60–61,
66–67, 77, 82, 98, 100–101,
106, 134
Ellison, Ralph, 135
Emancipation Proclamation, 14,
15
Europe, Washington in, 84–85,
109, 120
Ferguson, Jane (mother), 8, 9, 10,
11–12, 15–16, 18, 20, 26, 27
Ferguson, Washington (stepfather),
9, 14, 17–18, 19–20, 21, 22
Fifteenth Amendment, 26, 93
Fisher, Ruth Anna, 110
Fisk University, Washington
attacking blac k ministry in
speech to, 67–69
“Force That Wins, The, ” 40
Fort Brown, and Brownsville
shootings, 114
Fortune, T. Thomas, 77, 94, 115
freed slaves, 17, 20–21
Georgia
and Atlanta race riot, 116–117,
121
and Civil War, 14
and disfranchisement, 93–94, 116
and lynching in Palmetto, 85–87
Washington delivering Atlanta
Compromise in, 1–7, 73–75,
77–79, 98
Grant, Ulysses S., 15
grapevine telegraph, 13
Great Accommodator, Washington
known as, 77, 96, 106, 115, 126,
135
Griffith, D.W., 130
Hampton Normal and Agricultural
Institute
and Armstrong as head, 31–33,
34–36, 37, 40, 42, 64, 71–72
and curriculum, 34–35
and daily life, 34
as model for Tuskegee Institute,
48–49, 51
and night school, 40–41
and racial discrimination, 40
and support to Tuskegee Institute,
45, 48, 49–50
INDEX 143
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 143


--- PAGE 153 ---
and Washington as janitor, 29
and Washington as teacher, 40–41
Washington attending, 24, 26–27,
28–29, 31–36
and Washington delivering 
commencement address, 40
and Washington graduating
with honor, 36
and Washington’s brothers
attending, 38
Harper, Mary Starke, 135
Harrison, Benjamin, 84
Harvard University, Washington
holding honorary Master of Arts
degree from, 79
Hose, Sam, 85–87
houseboy, Washington as, 24–26
Houston, G. David, 110
Illinois, and race riot in Springfield,
116
Independent, 116
Invisible Man (Ralph Ellison),
135
“Is the Negro Having a Fair
Chance?” , 126
Ku Klux Klan, 130
Lee, Robert E., 14–15
Lily–Whites, 93, 100
Lincoln, Abraham, 14, 116, 117
lynchings, Washington on, 85–87,
95, 98, 127
Mackie, Mary F., 28, 29
McKinley, William, 83, 84
Man Farthest Down, The, 128
Mary Starke Harper Geriatric
Facility, The, 135
Montgomery Advertiser, 70
Moskovitz, Henry, 116
My Larger Education, 128
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), 116–121, 124, 127,
128, 129, 130, 135
National Education Association (NEA),
Washington speaking at, 60–62
National Federation of Colored
Women’s Clubs, 71
National Negro Business League
(NNBL), Washington creating,
87, 129
National Negro Committee (NNC),
118–119.
See also National Association for
the Advancement of Colored
People
National Negro Health Week,
Washington establishing, 130
National Urban League (NUL), 129
New York Age,77, 124
New York Evening Post, 116
New York Times, 36
New York World, 115
Niagara Movement, 101–103, 106,
118, 119
Oates, William, 78–79
Outlook magazine, 69
Ovington, Mary, 116
Peabody Fund, 55
Plucky Class, 41
Porter, Alfred Haynes, 54
Porter Hall, 54–55
Progressive Party, 125
racial animosity
and Atlanta race riot, 116–117, 121
and Brownsville, T exas shootings,
113–114, 115, 121
and lynchings, 85–87, 95, 98, 127
and Springfield, Illinois race riot,
116, 121
INDEX144
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 144


--- PAGE 154 ---
railroads, segregation on, 126–127
Reconstruction, 20
Republican Party, 115, 121, 124,
125, 126
Richie, Lionel, 135
Richmond Times, 91
Rockefeller, John D., 106–107
Rockefeller Hall, 107
Roosevelt, Theodore, 89–91, 101,
113–116, 124, 125
Royal College for the Blind, 85
Ruffner, Lewis, 24
Ruffner, Viola, 24–26, 29
salt packer, Washington’s early job
as, 19–20, 21, 22
Scott, Emmett, 102, 104, 109, 132
segregation, 126–127.
See also civil rights for blacks
self-reliance for blacks, Washington
on, 56–59, 60, 62, 82, 98, 103
Sherman, William T., 14
Slater Fund for Negro Education,
55, 79–80
slaves/slavery
and Civil War, 12–15
and education, 11, 17, 20–21
and Emancipation Proclamation,
14, 15
freed, 17, 20–21
and Washington as slave, 8, 9–11,
13, 15–16
Smith, Daniel C., 122, 124
Souls of Black Folk, The(Du Bois), 98
Southern Letter, 70
Spanish-American War, 83
Stanley, Henry M., 84
stevedore, Washington as, 27
Stokes, J.G. Phelps, 118
Stokes, Olivia and Caroline, 68
Storey, Moorfield, 118
Story of My Life and Work, The
(autobiography), 87
Story of the Negro, The, 128
Supreme Court, and Civil Rights
Act of 1875, 61–62
Taft, William Howard, 89, 112, 114,
115, 116, 124, 125, 126
Talented T enth, 100–101, 103
“Taliaferro,” as Washington’s 
middle name, 22
Tanner, Henry, 84
Texas, and Brownsville shootings,
113–114, 115, 121
Tinkersville school
and Washington as teacher,
36–39
Washington attending, 21,
22–24, 26
“To the People of Great Britain
and Europe” (Du Bois), 120
Trotter, William Monroe, 96–97,
98, 102, 118, 124, 126, 130
Turner, Henry M., 92
Tuskegee Machine, 97–103, 115,
118, 120, 126
Tuskegee Negro Conference,
81–82, 127–128, 129–130
Tuskegee Normal and Industrial
Institute, 42–53, 54–60, 69–71,
79–82
agriculture at, 48, 70, 79–82,
129
Armstrong’s visit to, 71–72
and Atlanta Compromise, 3
and boarding, 51
and brickmaking, 56–59, 70
Carver at, 80–82
and curriculum, 48–49, 54,
55–59, 70, 79–82, 89, 101,
109–111
and Davidson as lady principal,
50, 51, 59
discord at, 109–111
dovetailing at, 110
INDEX 145
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 145


--- PAGE 155 ---
and early success, 49–53, 54–59
and enrollment, 46, 49, 54, 55,
70, 89
and first permanent building,
54–55
founding of, 43
and funding, 43–45, 47, 48,
50–51, 54, 55, 58–59, 60, 62,
66, 68, 69, 71–72, 79–80,
88–89, 106–109, 128, 132
and Hampton Institute as model,
48–49
and Hampton Institute support-
ing, 45, 48, 49–50
and industrial education, 54,
56–59, 70, 89, 109–111
and Murray as lady principal,
71
size of, 70
speakers at, 89
and 10th anniversary, 70
and Tuskegee Negro Confer-
ence, 81–82, 127–128,
129–130
and 25th anniversary, 111–112
visitors to, 111
and Washington as principal,
42
Washington building, 43–47,
50–51, 54–55, 58, 70,
106–107
Washington opening, 46–47
Washington’s family at, 59, 71
and Washington’s final years,
129, 131–132
and Washington’s legacy, 135
and Washington’s personality,
66, 97, 110
white Tuskegeans supporting,
43, 45–46, 55, 58, 69–70
Twain, Mark, 84
25th Infantry Regiment, and
Brownsville shootings, 114
Ulrich, Henry, 122–125, 126
U.S. Postal Service, 126
Up from Slavery (autobiography),
88–89, 106, 107, 111, 128, 130
Victoria, Queen, 84
Villard, Oswald Garrison, 116–117,
118, 120, 121, 127
Virginia
and Civil War, 14
and Washington’s childhood in
Hale’s Ford in Franklin County,
8–16
voting rights for blacks, 26
and disfranchisement, 93–95,
100, 115, 116, 134
Du Bois on, 100, 102, 115
and Fifteenth Amendment, 93
Washington on, 100, 134
Walling, William English, 116
Washington, Amanda (sister), 10
Washington, Booker T.
and adversaries, 3, 69, 77–79,
86–87, 95–103, 106, 109, 115,
120–121, 127, 135
on agriculture, 5
and Alabama State T eachers
Association, 63
and appearance, 8
and Atlanta Compromise, 1–7,
73–75, 77–79, 98
birth of, 8
and black ministry, 67–69
childhood of, 8–16, 17–24
children of, 53, 59, 71, 101, 104
on civil rights for blacks, 6,
60–62, 73, 77, 82, 85–87, 93–95,
98, 100, 113–116, 120–121,
126–127, 134–135, 137
and conference of black leaders,
99–100, 101
death of, 132, 134
INDEX146
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 146


--- PAGE 156 ---
and DuBois, 97–103, 106, 109,
115, 120–121, 127, 128, 134,
135
and early jobs, 19–20, 21, 22,
24–26, 27
on economic opportunity for
blacks, 4–5, 74, 77, 87
on education for blacks, 5, 6, 37,
60–61, 66–67, 77, 82, 98,
100–101, 106, 134
education of, 11–12, 20–22, 24,
26–27, 28–29, 31–36, 39,
100–101
and Europe, 84–85, 109, 120
and failing health, 129, 130–132
and family life, 104
family of, 8–9, 10–12, 14, 15–16,
17–18, 19–20, 21, 26, 59, 71
and final years, 127–132, 134
and full name, 22
as Great Accommodator, 77, 96,
106, 115, 126, 135
and health care for blacks, 49,
129–130
and honors and awards, 69, 79,
89–91
and legacy of, 134–135, 137
and marriages. See Washington,
Fanny Smith; Washington,
Margaret Murray; Washington,
Olivia Davidson
and National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored
People, 118, 120–121, 127,
128, 135
and National Negro Business
League, 87, 129
and National Negro Health
Week, 130
and National Urban League, 129
and nervous collapse, 63–64
and personal cleanliness for
blacks, 49, 130
and personality, 65–67, 71, 110
and politics, 38–39, 60, 66, 69,
75, 77, 78–79, 89–91, 92–93,
113–116, 124, 125–126, 130
on racial animosity, 4–6, 71,
73–74, 83–84, 85–87, 113–116,
127
and religion, 2, 34, 39, 67–69
on self-reliance for blacks,
56–59, 60, 62, 82, 98, 103
as slave, 8, 9–11, 13, 15–16
as spokesman for black race,
1–7, 40, 54, 60, 60–62, 65,
67–69, 73–75, 77–79, 81–82,
83–84, 92, 98, 106, 120, 122,
127, 128
and supporters, 6, 60, 62, 73–74,
75, 77, 79, 82, 89, 92–93, 95,
106–109, 115
as teacher, 36–39, 40–41
and Tuskegee Machine, 66,
97–103, 118, 120, 126
and Tuskegee Negro Conference,
81–82
and Ulrich affair, 122–125, 126
at White House, 89–91
and writings, 87–89, 103, 106,
107, 111, 128, 130.
See also Tuskegee Normal and
Industrial Institut
Washington, Booker T., Jr.
(“Baker”) (son), 59
Washington, D.C., Washington
attending Wayland Seminary
in, 39
Washington, Ernest Davidson
(son), 59
Washington, Fanny Smith (first
wife), 38, 51, 53
Washington, James B. (adopted
brother), 21, 38, 71
Washington, John (brother), 8, 10,
11, 13, 19–20, 27, 38, 59, 71
INDEX 147
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 147


--- PAGE 157 ---
Washington, Margaret James
Murray (“Maggie”) (third wife),
2, 3, 71, 84–85, 104, 111, 134
Washington, Olivia Davidson
(second wife), 50, 51, 59,
63–64, 66
Washington, Portia (daughter),
53, 101, 104
Washington, Susie (sister-in-law),
59, 71
Washington Bee, 78
Wayland Seminary, Washington
attending, 39
Webster’sspelling book, 20
Wells, H.G., 94–95
Wells-Barnett, Ida B., 118
West Virginia
and Washington as teacher in
Malden, 36–39
and Washington campaigning for
Charleston as capital, 38–39
Washington’s early years in,
17–27
Wilson, Woodrow, 125–126, 127
Women’s Liberal Club, 85
World War I, 130
INDEX148
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:03  Page 148


--- PAGE 158 ---
4: Tuskegee University Archives
9: © Gary W. Carter/CORBIS
12: Courtesy National Park Service,
Booker T. Washington National
Monument
15: Library of Congress,
LC-USZ62-5334
19: Tuskegee University Archives
23: Tuskegee University Archives
30: Hampton University Archives
33: Hampton University Archives
35: Hampton University Archives
44: Tuskegee University Archives
49: Library of Congress
52: Tuskegee University Archives
57: Library of Congress
63: Tuskegee University Archives
68: Library of Congress
75: Tuskegee University Archives
81: Photographs and Prints Division,
The New Y ork Public Library, Astor,
Lenox and Tilden Foundations
85: Photographs and Prints Division,
The New Y ork Public Library, Astor,
Lenox and Tilden Foundations
90: Tuskegee University Archives
96: Harvard University Archives
105: Tuskegee University Archives
108: Library of Congress
117: Library of Congress
128: Tuskegee University Archives
131: Tuskegee University Archives
133: Photographs and Prints Division,
The New Y ork Public Library, Astor,
Lenox and Tilden Foundations
136: © Time Life Pictures/Getty Images
PICTURE CREDITS 149
page:
Cover: Courtesy Library of Congress
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:04  Page 149


--- PAGE 159 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Alan Schroeder is the author of two other biographies published by
Chelsea House, Josephine Baker and Jack London.H e is also the
author of Ragtime Tumpie, an acclaimed account of Josephine Baker’s
childhood in St. Louis. Selected as one of the Best Books of the Y ear
by Parents magazine and the B oston Globe, Ragtime Tumpie was also
named a Notable Children’s Book of 1989 by the American Library
Association. Mr. Schroeder lives in Alameda, California.
AUTHOR OF ADDITIONAL TEXT, LEGACY EDITION
Anne Beier is the author of four other non-fiction books for elementary
school children. She earned her B.S. from Ithaca College, and her
M.B.A. from Syracuse University. Along with designing and making
custom quilts, she teaches creative writing, art, sewing and scrap
booking at the NWCA in Mt. Kisco, NY. Anne lives in Ossining, NY
with her husband and cat, and loves animals.
CONSULTING EDITOR, REVISED EDITION
Heather Lehr Wagneris a writer and editor. She is the author of 30 books
exploring social and political issues and focusing on the lives of
prominent Americans and has contributed to biographies of
Alex Haley, Langston Hughes, Colin Powell, and Jesse Owens, in the
B
LACK AMERICANS OF ACHIEVEMENT legacy series. She earned a BA in
political science from Duke University and an MA in government
from the College of William and Mary. She lives with her husband
and family in Pennsylvania.
CONSULTING EDITOR, FIRST EDITION
Nathan Irvin Huggins was W.E.B. Du Bois Professor of History and
Director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute for Afro-American Research
at Harvard University. He previously taught at Columbia University.
Professor Huggins was the author of numerous books, including
Black Odyssey: The Afro-American Ordeal in Slavery , The Harlem
Renaissance, and Slave and Citizen: The Life of Frederick Douglass .
Nathan I. Huggins died in 1989.
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS150
CH.BAA.BTW.zBM.Final.q  15/12/04  16:04  Page 150

