=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Black Leadership.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 259
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:45:28.122966
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Black Leadership


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
iii
C
Columbia University Press
new york
Black Leadership
Manning Marable


--- PAGE 5 ---
Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York      Chichester, West Sussex
Copyright © 1998 Columbia University Press
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Marable, Manning
Black leadership / Manning Marable.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-231-10746-3 — ISBN 0-231-10747-1 (pbk.)
1. Afro-American leadership. I. Title.
E185.615.M2783 1998
323.1'196073—dc21 97-32969
Casebound editions of Columbia University Press books are printed on
permanent and durable acid-free paper.
Printed in the United States of America
c 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
p 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


--- PAGE 6 ---
acknowledgments vii
introduction: Leadership in Black America xi
PART ONE Foundations of Inequality
1. The Racial Contours of the Constitution 3
2. Black History and the Vision of Democracy 13
PART TWO Ideology and Political Culture:
The Age of Segregation
3. Booker T. Washington and the Political Economy of
Black Accommodation 23
4. W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture 41
5. The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois 59
6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois 75
7. Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora 97
PART THREE The Politics of Peace and
Urban Empowerment
8. Peace and Black Liberation: The Contributions
of W. E. B. Du Bois 111
9. Harold Washington’s Chicago: Race, Class Conflict,
and Political Change 127
CONTENTS
v


--- PAGE 7 ---
PART FOUR Beyond Boundaries: The Future of
Black History in the Present
10. The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony 149
11. Black Fundamentalism: Louis Farrakhan and the 
Politics of Conservative Black Nationalism 161
12. Black Leadership and Organized Labor:
From Workplace to Community 183
notes 195
index 225
vi | Introduction: Leadership in Black America


--- PAGE 8 ---
Black Leadership is the product of an intellectual and political journey
toward an understanding of the political culture of black America. The
articles presented here were written over a period of fifteen years. Most of
them were originally published in academic journals or edited volumes.
Several were prepared specifically for this volume. And a few were drafted
in an essayist’s style, without the usual documentation of footnotes or bib-
liography. I decided after some reflection to keep these last largely as they
were, because the content and point of view expressed in them were close-
ly connected to their style and language of presentation. Of course, the
manuscript as a whole underwent extensive editing and revision.
The central concern of this book is an analysis of black leadership in the
twentieth century. Three topics are of primary interest: ideology, culture,
and politics. The intersection of these areas provides the foundation for
exploration into some of the personalities that have given shape and sub-
stance to contemporary black America. The articles in this volume were
never intended to represent a comprehensive overview of all major black
American political figures. The omission of such prominent leaders and
activists as Marcus Garvey, A. Philip Randolph, Ida B. Wells, Martin
Luther King Jr., Ella Baker, Malcolm X, Fannie Lou Hamer, and Jesse
Jackson in no way suggests their lack of significance. Similarly, a central
theme that runs throughout the entire fabric of black politics and culture
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
is the thought and leadership of African American women. One cannot
and should not ignore or underestimate their powerful and poetic voices or
their many contributions to the struggles for black freedom. Any detailed
analysis of the Civil Rights Movement as it was actually organized at a
community level illustrates that the effort was based largely on the work of
African American women activists. The Montgomery bus boycott, to cite
only one example, was sparked by the bold actions of Rosa Parks and was
organized largely by Jo Ann Robinson. Martin Luther King Jr. was only
the national spokesperson for this mobilization made possible by black wo-
men. Leith Mullings and I are currently at work on an anthology that ex-
plores in some detail the speeches, writings, and related political docu-
ments of many African American women leaders.
My limited objective here was to profile the ideas and leadership of four
significant figures in the social and political history of black America:
Booker T. Washington, W. E. B. Du Bois, Harold Washington, and Louis
Farrakhan. These four leaders symbolically represented very distinct ap-
proaches to the problem of black empowerment in a predominantly white
society. All of them operated within the contradictory context of a liberal
democratic state and a market economy. Each took a different path in
moving toward leadership for an oppressed community within this racial-
ized social formation. The remaining essays examine other dimensions of
the problem of leadership in American society, from the debates and com-
promises over slavery and race that were part of the adoption of the U.S.
Constitution in 1787 to the current search for new directions by black
Americans inside organized labor.
Every book is a product of many different contributions. I owe a special
debt to my editor at Columbia University Press, Kate Wittenberg, who from
the beginning of our early conversations several years ago about this book
has provided strong support and constructive criticism. To Jan McInroy, I
am indebted for her extraordinary ability in copyediting and for suggesting
several important changes in the manuscript. A friend of many years, Linda
Rocawich, was gracious enough to review the original drafts of the essays,
especially those that had been previously published several years ago. As for-
mer editor of Southern Exposure and former managing editor of the Progres-
sive, she possesses a clear understanding of the politics behind each of the
essays. Her skillful editorial revisions and suggestions for the entire manu-
script greatly improved its readability.
This book is also the most recent product of a research project sup-
ported by the Institute for Research in African-American Studies at Co-
lumbia University. Johanna Fernandez, a doctoral student in the Depart-
viii | Introduction: Leadership in Black America


--- PAGE 10 ---
ment of History, collected hundreds of articles and other reference mate-
rials that were essential to the development of the most recent essays.
Angela Zivkovíc, my secretary at the institute during the academic year
1996–1997, typed and proofread the entire manuscript with care. Special
thanks are also due Daria Oliver, my executive assistant at the institute,
who gave me the space and time to complete this book, and Theresa
Wilcox, who provided secretarial support during the final stages of copy-
editing and last-minute revisions.
Finally, and most important, I owe my greatest debt of thanks to Leith
Mullings. Three years ago, most of the articles in this book were part of a
much larger collection of my historical, cultural, and political writings.
Leith suggested that I divide the essays thematically and topically into two
very different works. The first volume, Beyond Black and White , was pub-
lished in 1995. This second volume is dedicated to her. As my intellectual
partner and political companion, she continues to open new doors to my
mind and spirit.
Introduction: Leadership in Black America | ix


--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 12 ---
Separated by almost exactlyone century, two significant public events
captured the essential problematic of black leadership in white America.
The first was Booker T. Washington’s Atlanta Compromise address of Sep-
tember 1895, which endorsed the “separate but equal” doctrine, spelling the
end of the brief experiment in biracial democracy throughout the South.
The second was Louis Farrakhan’s Million Man March of October 1995,
which called upon African American men to “atone” and to assume greater
leadership within their communities. To most historians and political sci-
entists, these two prominent figures in twentieth-century black America
appear to represent two fundamentally different visions about the politics of
race. At the time of Washington’s address, he was widely praised for his
conciliatory remarks and accommodation to racial segregation. As the
founder of the Tuskegee Institute, one of the nation’s largest agricultural and
vocational training schools for Negroes, Washington symbolically reassured
white America that blacks would not challenge its institutions. In contrast,
in 1995 most white observers were perplexed and unsure of how to respond
to the mass spectacle of a million black men who had been summoned to
Washington, D.C., by the head of the Nation of Islam. For many, Farrakhan
remained a racial demagogue, an advocate of hate.
Superficially, Washington and Farrakhan seem at opposite ends of the
political spectrum. But beneath their rhetoric, similar basic principles and
INTRODUCTION
Leadership in Black America
xi


--- PAGE 13 ---
goals characterized their worldviews. Both individuals came into public
prominence at times when racial liberalism was declining and when pol-
icies designed to safeguard civil rights and economic opportunities for
blacks were being dismantled. Both preached the doctrine of black self-
help, relying on resources found within black communities for group de-
velopment, rather than government handouts. Both were convinced that
African American entrepreneurship and property ownership held the keys
to black economic advancement. Washington and Farrakhan both, to vary-
ing degrees, favored the conservative economic and social policies of the
Republican Party. These parallels don’t make Booker T. Washington a
black nationalist separatist or Louis Farrakhan an accommodationist. They
do, however, illustrate that the underlying dynamics of blacks’ collective
efforts to achieve empowerment have been remarkably consistent for a
century. The striking similarities of the two leaders’ public positions have
little to do with their personalities, which were extremely different. Rather,
both men recognized and tried to address through their respective organi-
zations and political alliances the structural problems of inequality and
marginalization that every oppressed people suffers within a racialized
state and society.
Simply stated, the central political dilemma that has confronted black
America for several centuries now is whether and how the principles and
practices of liberal democracy can be extended and guaranteed to black peo-
ple. This question actually centers around two concepts: freedom and equal-
ity. Both were effectively denied to African Americans within the U.S.
Constitution as well as within the institution of slavery. During Recon-
struction, the promise of freedom finally existed. Black men won the right to
vote and became active in public affairs. Black Reconstruction established
schools and social and economic programs that benefited both racial groups.
Nevertheless, it would still take another century, filled with suffering and
struggle, to achieve the basic freedoms and democratic rights that most
white Americans took for granted. And then, after that Second Reconstruc-
tion, black people still questioned whether their newly won political rights
could lead to greater socioeconomic parity. Freedom without genuine equal-
ity of material conditions seemed empty, devoid of real meaning. Could
African Americans devise a plan to utilize their collective resources, to more
effectively address the structural crises that manifested themselves in the
hundreds of social and economic problems that plagued their communities?
Or was it possible to persuade a significant segment of the white popula-
tion—workers, intellectuals, liberals, and others—that the black commu-
nity’s historical struggle to enrich and expand the meaning of democracy, the
xii | Introduction: Leadership in Black America


--- PAGE 14 ---
egalitarian quest for social justice, was also in its interests? These and other
unresolved questions have been the terrain upon which nearly all black lead-
ers and social movements have sought practical solutions.
The leaders who have come from a series of black political and social
movements in the twentieth century represent very different personalities,
organizational affiliations, and political ideologies. There is, however, one
powerful model or tradition of leadership that has evolved within black
political culture. To some extent, this tradition has been characterized by a
charismatic or dominating political style. A number of black personalities
have possessed a powerful, magnetic presence and the ability to articulate
deeply held grievances and hopes among their people. Often these figures
have had considerable organizational skills and have inspired groups that
then promoted their ideas. Styles of charismatic leadership are amply rep-
resented in black political life: Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washington,
A. Philip Randolph, Marcus Garvey, Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X,
Martin Luther King Jr., Jesse Jackson. Some years ago, in my book Black
American Politics, I characterized this approach to leadership as the “black
messianic” style. The political culture of black America since slavery was
heavily influenced by the Bible, particularly the Old Testament saga of
Moses and Joshua as “deliverers” of an oppressed, enslaved people who
found themselves in a foreign land. The harsh material circumstances of
black survival and struggle contributed to a merger of the secular and the
spiritual: messianic leadership expressed itself as the ability to communicate
effectively programs that in some measure represented the interests of most
blacks, while also constructing bonds of collective intimacy through appeals
to the spirituality and religiosity among many African American people.
The political culture of the segregated South after slavery reinforced
the messianic and autocratic leadership tendencies within the black com-
munity. The principal social institution within every black community was
the church. Ministers occupied both spiritual and secular roles. As religious
leaders they inspired and motivated the faithful by their examples. The
churches were often social service and economic institutions, providing
goods and services to a wide constituency, and successful ministers had to
develop practical organizational skills. But as political leaders, the black
clergy were usually the primary spokespersons for the entire black com-
munity, especially during periods of crisis. As the political system became
more democratic and as more blacks were permitted to participate in vot-
ing, it was only a small shift from running a large church to running for
public office. With hundreds and sometimes thousands of devout church
members, black ministers could employ their religious constituency like a
Introduction: Leadership in Black America | xiii


--- PAGE 15 ---
secular political organization. Almost inevitably, black political organiza-
tions modeled themselves along the lines of African American churches:
rigid, patriarchal hierarchies with women largely confined to lower-level
organizational tasks; mass meetings designed to galvanize support and en-
thusiasm for the leadership’s objectives; public recognition ceremonies for
individual members, which helped to cement the intimate personal and
political bonds with the leadership; strict sanctions, such as isolation and
expulsion, for members who challenged or questioned the group’s public
positions and stated ideology; and the cultural and social construction of
the benevolent, committed leader who operated almost above the masses,
a visionary who sought to bend history toward his objectives.
Turning again to Booker T. Washington and Louis Farrakhan, we find
striking similarities between these two men. Washington was the most
powerful black leader of his era and arguably the most influential black
politician within the context of state power in the twentieth century. His
authority came not just from the philanthropic, corporate, and political
elites, which approved of his accommodationist policies and acquiescence
to Jim Crow. He also won considerable popular support among black
farmers and entrepreneurs through organizations like the National Negro
Business League. The league’s annual meetings had something of the
character of evangelical revivals, as individuals were presented with rib-
bons and rewards for their personal achievements. Washington used his
resources to advance the careers of his supporters among the masses
through the ownership or control of black newspapers. Farrakhan’s imme-
diate constituency is the Nation of Islam, a core of dedicated believers who
have faith in the organization’s doctrines and have been trained to obey di-
rectives. For Farrakhan’s larger constituency, his charismatic image and
popularity among many youth and an increasingly nationalistic segment of
the black middle class are aggressively promoted by a flood of publica-
tions, video- and audiotapes, and other consumer items. Farrakhan con-
sciously packages himself for black audiences as “one of their own,” as a
powerful and uncompromising leader who operates solely in the interests
of African Americans. The charismatic, autocratic style of these leaders
permitted both to make assorted deals and compromises with powerful
white Republicans and conservative interests, while keeping their core
constituencies safely in check.
An excellent insight toward an understanding of black leadership is pro-
vided by civil rights activist Ella Baker. As a former field secretary of the
naacp and the director of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference’s
national office during the Second Reconstruction, Baker worked closely
xiv | Introduction: Leadership in Black America


--- PAGE 16 ---
with Martin Luther King Jr., Ralph David Abernathy, Andrew Young,
Walter Fauntroy, and other leaders. From her practical experiences she con-
cluded that it was preferable to promote the development of “group-cen-
tered leaders” rather than “leader-centered groups.” For that reason, Baker
was critical of King’s charismatic style and the patriarchal, hierarchical pol-
itics of the sclc. She recommended to the idealistic young activists who
were forming the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (sncc) in
1960 that they should cultivate a more egalitarian, participatory approach to
politics. As historian Clayborne Carson observed in a 1994 article in Black
Scholar: “The most successful sncc projects unleashed the power of com-
munities, allowing residents to become confident of their collective ability
to overcome oppression.... The most effective organizers of the 1960s real-
ized that their job was to work themselves out of a job. They avoided replac-
ing old dependencies with new ones.”
The politics of a Harold Washington can be placed somewhere in the
middle of the continuum, between the charismatic paternalism of Booker
T. Washington and Louis Farrakhan and the transformationist, egalitarian
politics of sncc. Throughout much of his public career, Harold Washing-
ton was a member of one of the most corrupt political machines in Amer-
ican history, the Cook County Democratic Party organization. He thought
of politics largely in pragmatic terms, as the art of the possible. Yet he be-
came the spokesperson for a strong social movement for political reform
and democratic empowerment, based in the black and brown urban com-
munities of Chicago. Washington’s 1983 and 1987 campaigns for mayor
were not politics-as-usual but an outgrowth of grassroots mobilization
with the goal of utilizing elections to achieve social change. As I later argue
in this book, Washington’s victories came to symbolize for millions of
blacks and other progressive people throughout the country the possibility
of expanding and redefining electoral politics for the empowerment of
working-class and poor people.
But despite the strengths of this urban movement, it also exhibited ma-
jor contradictions. Washington had been trained in a paternalistic, auto-
cratic style of leadership, which profoundly affected his political behavior
and decision making. Instead of harnessing the tremendous energy and
activism generated by the electoral defeat of the local Democratic machine
by training and advancing new “group-centered leaders,” he retained his
primary commitment to practical politics. In Chicago, as elsewhere, that
meant taking positions and enforcing policies that sometimes were against
his constituents’ best interests. His charismatic, dominating public person-
ality became the cultural epoxy that bound together constituencies divided
Introduction: Leadership in Black America | xv


--- PAGE 17 ---
by racialized ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, language, nationality, and
class. When Washington died suddenly in late 1987 his movement imme-
diately stalled, then died.
W. E. B. Du Bois represents a very different kind of leadership model.
Unlike Booker T. Washington and Louis Farrakhan, he never command-
ed political or religious organizations. He was never personally comfort-
able with the informalities and public conversations that effective politics
requires. Unlike Harold Washington’s, Du Bois’s venture into electoral
politics, at the height of McCarthyism and the Cold War, was unsuccess-
ful. To those who did not know him well, he seemed aloof and arrogant.
Even his closest friends, such as educator John Hope, had difficulty under-
standing him. Du Bois worked for twenty-four years to build a national
organization, the naacp, but he lacked the skill and ability to save his posi-
tion or to rally his supporters when the leadership behind Walter White
pressured him to resign in 1934.
What Du Bois did accomplish, more than any other black leader, was to
remake and define how his people would interpret and understand the
world and themselves. Du Bois was a leader of ideas, not of organizations
and institutions. He first thought that social change would be possible if
scholars simply investigated social problems and came up with solutions.
Racism was largely a product of ignorance, and the remedy was to be found
in education and legal reforms. Gradually, Du Bois came to the conclusion
that beneath the color line of phenotypic and social differences lay a great-
er structure of class and economic interests. As he researched Black Recon-
struction, he came to understand that it was the masses of oppressed human
beings, not a privileged “Talented Tenth,” who through their struggles could
make new history. Du Bois also knew that black social thought should not
be defined or restricted by the rigid criteria of traditional academic disci-
plines. He had been trained at Harvard and Berlin as a historian, but he also
continued to produce sociological studies, political essays, journalistic com-
mentaries, plays, and poetry. For Du Bois, intellectual leadership was pro-
foundly cultural, in the broadest sense of the term: to encourage and sug-
gest new patterns of thought and life.
Leaders are essentially individuals who have the ability to understand
their own times, who express or articulate programs or policies that reflect
the perceived interests and desires of particular groups, and who devise in-
struments or political vehicles that enhance the capacity to achieve effec-
tive change. In very limited ways, leaders imprint their personal character-
istics or individual stamp on a given moment in time. Leaders do make
history, but never by themselves, and never in ways that they fully recog-
xvi | Introduction: Leadership in Black America


--- PAGE 18 ---
nize or anticipate. The social forces that define all historical conjunctures
create the opportunities or spaces for talented individuals to make them-
selves heard above others. For relatively brief moments, they may create an
illusion that it is they, and not the vast majority, who determine the possi-
bilities of the future. Black leaders have given their own particular style and
language to various phases and moments of American history, and they
will continue to do so. But it may be the measurement of our ability to
achieve a full redefinition of America’s democratic project if over time
black Americans are able to move away from the charismatic, authoritari-
an leadership style and paternalistic organizations toward the goal of
“group-centered leaders” and grassroots empowerment. In short, instead of
leadership from above, democracy from below. The time for all voices to be
heard is long overdue.
Introduction: Leadership in Black America | xvii


--- PAGE 19 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 20 ---
Black Leadership


--- PAGE 21 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 22 ---
PART ONE
Foundations of Inequality


--- PAGE 23 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 24 ---
3
The American Revolution spawned a political and moral movement to
eliminate the slave trade to the colonies. By 1780, consistent with the dem-
ocratic ideology of the Revolution, several states began to move toward the
general emancipation of all slaves. However, most political leaders, drawn
largely from the planter and merchant classes, were unwilling to extend
democratic rights to blacks and preferred to maintain a hierarchy based on
race, class, and economics. The sentiments of these leaders were reflected
as they drafted the United States Constitution. Thus the Constitution
halted the promise of democracy to all Americans and directly promoted
the Jim Crow codes subsequently passed by states and cities.
Paradoxically, the American Constitution represented an affirmation of
representative government and democracy as well as a confirmation of the
slave trade and human enslavement. This paradox can be explained only by
a survey of the racial and political relations between black and white
Americans during the mid- to late eighteenth century.
I
Before the American Revolution, laws throughout the colonies were de-
signed to perpetuate the supremacy of the merchant and planter classes.
1
The underlying purposes of discriminatory legislation in the colonial
period were the general suppression of all lower-class working people and
1
The Racial Contours of
the Constitution


--- PAGE 25 ---
small farmers, black and white alike, and the maintenance of a planter-
merchant elite that exercised nominal local authority.
2 The American
colonial frontier was no land of political democracy or economic oppor-
tunity for the majority of whites. Most were disfranchised by property re-
quirements.
3 In the Southern colonies, the slaveholding planter aristoc-
racy rigidly controlled all public decision making. Even in the Northern
colonies (many of them founded to preserve religious freedom), democ-
racy was virtually nonexistent.
4
Consequently, blacks and poor whites sometimes cooperated with each
other to challenge the conservative political status quo. 5 The American
Revolution deeply divided the white colonial elite and immediately un-
leashed a democratic and popular movement among the lower classes.
About a third of all whites remained loyal to the British Crown. But in the
ranks of those who favored independence, the powerless and enslaved sud-
denly seized the political initiative. Black Americans had an impact upon
national political culture and independent ideology that was stronger than
that of any other Americans. They expanded the democratic principles
underlying the white colonialists’ disagreements with British authorities,
and they carried these radical ideas to their logical conclusions.
Poet Phillis Wheatley and many other blacks likened British “tyranny”
to the enslavement of black Americans.
6 Similarly, a group of African
Americans living in Boston in 1773 petitioned the Massachusetts assem-
bly to abolish slavery and to permit the resettlement of blacks back to
Africa. Their petition declared: “On behalf of our fellow slaves in this prov-
ince,... the divine spirit of freedom seems to fire every humane breast on
this continent. . . . As the people of this province seem to be actuated by
the principles of equality and justice, we cannot but expect your house will
again take our deplorable case into consideration, and give us that ample
relief which, as men, we have a natural right to.”
7
In 1779 Connecticut slaves petitioned their legislature, using the rhet-
oric of the Enlightenment and Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Indepen-
dence: “Reason and Revelation join to declare that we are the creatures of
[God] . . . we perceive by our own Reflection, that we are endowed with
the same faculties [as] our masters . . . we are convinced of our right ...t o
be free . . . and can never be convinced that we were made to be Slaves.”
8
An unprecedented liberalization of race relations was the direct conse-
quence of the Revolution. Thomas Paine, the great democrat, bitterly
attacked his fellow white patriots: “If they could carry off and enslave some
thousands of us, would we think it just? One would almost wish they could
for once; it might convince more than reason, or the Bible.”
9
4 | The Racial Contours of the Constitution


--- PAGE 26 ---
In 1779 the First Continental Congress, meeting in Philadelphia, de-
clared: “We will neither import nor purchase any slave imported after the
first day of December next, after which time we will wholly discontinue the
slave trade and will neither be concerned in it ourselves nor will we hire our
vessels nor sell our commodities or manufactures to those who are concerned
in it.”
10 Philadelphia Quakers created the Society for the Relief of Free
Negroes Unlawfully Held in Bondage and barred membership in the Society
of Friends to all slaveholders. In 1776 Delaware’s constitution banned the
slave trade, and Vermont’s constitution outlawed slavery in 1777.
Even Southern whites who owned hundreds of slaves sought to dem-
onstrate their egalitarian and democratic credentials. When the British
army invaded South Carolina, John Laurens called for the enlistment of
three thousand slaves, with the promise of emancipation after the conflict.
White colonists in Darien, Georgia, issued several public resolutions de-
claring their “disapprobation and abhorrence of the unnatural practice of
Slavery in America.” Negro slavery was denounced as “highly dangerous to
our liberties (as well as lives), debasing part of our fellow-creatures below
men, and corrupting the virtue and morals of the rest.”
11 By the end of the
American Revolution, a substantial minority of white Americans deeply
believed that slavery was morally wrong. As historian Winthrop D. Jordan
observed: “It was perfectly clear that the principles for which Americans
had fought required the complete abolition of slavery; the question was not
if, but when and how.”
12
After formal independence from Great Britain was achieved, African
Americans continued to agitate for their democratic rights. State legisla-
tures received petitions from blacks calling for the gradual abolition of
slavery. In rural areas, runaway slaves and occasionally poor whites began a
series of attacks on plantations. For instance, in August 1782 Edmund
Randolph warned Virginia slaveowner James Madison of the “alarming
activities of a group of whites and fugitive slaves numbering about fifty
men” whose attacks on plantations represented “a serious menace to life
and property.”
13 A large number of runaway slaves built a stockade north
of Savannah, and for several years conducted guerrilla warfare against
white planters. In 1786 the militias of Georgia and South Carolina seized
the black fortress but suffered “heavy casualties” in the battle.
14 Blacks had
attempted to reason with white Americans for justice, and now growing
numbers were prepared to resort to violence in their pursuit of freedom.
As the rhetoric for independence subsided, the planter-merchant elite
that had been at the head of the patriotic movement began to question its
own political ideology. Had the demand for democracy gone too far?
The Racial Contours of the Constitution | 5


--- PAGE 27 ---
Should slavery be abolished gradually? Could black males with property be
permitted to vote? From 1780 to 1787, there was a period of ideological
ambiguity. Many prominent politicians continued to identify themselves
with the cause of gradual abolition.
15 Several state legislatures moved slow-
ly toward manumission.16
There was also, however, a significant trend toward racial retrenchment.
In New Hampshire black citizens drafted a petition urging “that the name
of slave may not more be heard in a land gloriously contending for the
sweets of freedom.”
17 Yet the state legislature refused to approve legislation
freeing New Hampshire’s black population. In 1784 Congress voted down
Jefferson’s proposal to keep slavery out of the western territories. Anti-
slavery efforts in Delaware were also defeated in 1786, as the state legisla-
ture voted against gradual manumission.
II
Several Southern politicians now began to speak out, privately and pub-
licly, against the democratic principle of black freedom. Chief among them
was George Washington. The master of Mount Vernon owned more than
two hundred blacks, and he constantly complained about their poor work
habits and destruction of his property. Blacks who were not in “awe” of
their white overseers, he wrote, would “of course do as they please.”
18 After
his election as president, Washington shipped some of his personal slaves
from the capital city of Philadelphia back to Mount Vernon after the
Pennsylvania Abolition Society tried to win their freedom. Washington
coldly justified their removal, declaring that “the idea of freedom [was sim-
ply] too great a temptation for them to resist.”
19
Even liberals began to doubt the democratic justification for black
emancipation. In Notes on Virginia, published in 1785, Jefferson continued
to deplore the existence of slavery. Yet he also openly expressed a deep ra-
cial prejudice toward all blacks. Jefferson argued that blacks had “a very
strong and disagreeable odour, and appeared to require less sleep” than
whites. On matters of sexuality, Jefferson suggested that black males “are
more ardent after their female: but love seems with them to be more an
eager desire, than a tender mixture of sentiment and sensation.”
20 On bal-
ance, blacks could never be integrated into white society: “Deeply rooted
prejudices entertained by the whites; ten thousand recollections, by the
Blacks, of the injuries they have sustained; new provocations; the real dis-
tinction which nature has made; and many other circumstances, will divide
us into parties and produce convulsions which will probably never end but
in the extermination of the one or the other race.”
21 Henceforth the Vir-
6 | The Racial Contours of the Constitution


--- PAGE 28 ---
ginia democrat refused to use his political prestige to push for emancipa-
tion in the North and was generally silent as slavery rapidly expanded into
the western territories.
Some liberal whites began to search for a solution to the “Negro Prob-
lem” that would permit them to adhere to their humanistic and democratic
principles. One British Quaker friend of Benjamin Franklin, John Fother-
gill, proposed the colonization of West Africa by newly freed blacks. In
1787 the Sierra Leone Company in Great Britain began to transport free
Negroes from Nova Scotia and England to the upper Guinea coast. The
concept of black colonization had occurred to Jefferson as early as 1777.
22
James Madison also endorsed the colonization concept, but only as an alter-
native to the general emancipation of slaves.
23 Madison and Jefferson as-
tutely recognized that emancipation would require the inevitable granting
of suffrage to blacks and, later, the full desegregation of civil and social rela-
tions between the races. This was the point at which democratic principles
collapsed and white supremacy came to the forefront. By shipping blacks
out of the country, liberal whites could accomplish two things. They could
applaud themselves for their humanistic act of freeing their slaves, which
was in keeping with their democratic ideology, and they could eliminate
potentially dangerous black rebels and thus better control and exploit those
blacks who still remained in bondage.
The fifty-five men who came to Philadelphia for the Constitutional
Convention in April 1787 belonged to “two basic groups, northern capital-
ists and southern plantation owners.” Historian Staughton Lynd observed:
“The Constitution represented not a victory of one over the other but a
compromise between them.”
24 Some Northern delegates came prepared to
challenge both the slave trade and slavery itself. New York politician Gou-
verneur Morris, a conservative, condemned the South’s “nefarious institu-
tion,” which damned Negro slaves “to the most cruel bondage.” Could such
practices be tolerated within a government “instituted for the protection of
rights of mankind”? Benjamin Franklin had agreed to present an antislav-
ery charter to the convention—but subsequently changed his mind. At least
twenty-five convention delegates owned slaves, and few of them were pre-
pared to part with their profits. South Carolina planter Charles Cotesworth
Pinckney warned that he would vigorously oppose the adoption of any
Constitution that did not protect slaveholders’ interests.
25 Another South
Carolina plantation owner, John Rutledge, informed his colleagues that the
convention “had no business dealing with religion or morality; the only
question was whether mutual interests would allow the southern states to be
parties to the Union.”
26
The Racial Contours of the Constitution | 7


--- PAGE 29 ---
In the end, the desire for compromise outweighed any consideration of
religion or morality. Originally, Pinckney had proposed that no ban on the
slave trade should be passed until the year 1800. But with the support of
some Northern delegates, Pinckney managed to push the date forward to
1808. Article I, Section 9, was deliberately worded ambiguously: “The
Migration or Importation of such Persons as any of the States now existing
shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by Congress prior to the
Year one-thousand-eight-hundred and eight, but a Tax or duty may be
imposed on such Importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.”
27
Delegates differed sharply over the meaning of the terms Migration,
such Persons, and Importation. Some argued later that Article I, Section
9, included white immigrants as well as Negro slaves; others insisted that
the section included both the transatlantic slave trade and the interstate
sale and transportation of slaves within the United States. New Jersey del-
egate Jonathan Dayton would claim that the phrase “such Persons” re-
ferred only to African American slaves, and the sole reason that the word
slaves was not specifically used was “that it would be better not to stain the
Constitutional code with such a term.”
28 Whatever the justification, this
section clearly established the legality of American Negro slavery and
illustrated beyond any doubt that the young republic would encourage hu-
man bondage.
III
In two additional sections, the Constitution affirmed the economic and
political interests of the slaveholding class. In Article I, Section 2, there was
the “three-fifths compromise”: those “bound to service for a Term of Years”
would be counted as “three-fifths of all other Persons” for the purposes of
apportioning “Representatives and direct Taxes.”
29 Article IV, Section 2,
states: “No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the Laws
thereof, escaping into another, shall in Consequence of any Law or
Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour, but shall be
delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or Labour may
be due.”
30 This latter provision was designed to overcome the legal legacy
of the 1772 Somerset decision, in which Lord Chief Justice Mansfield essen-
tially outlawed slavery in England. 31 Article IV, Section 2, was reinforced
by Congress several years later with the Fugitive Slave Law of 1793. 32 As
John Hope Franklin notes:
Masters could legally seize a runaway in any state and carry him
before any federal or state magistrate in the vicinity, and obtain a cer-
tificate warranting his removal to the state from which he had fled.
8 | The Racial Contours of the Constitution


--- PAGE 30 ---
This law allowed no trial by jury and required conviction only on the
oral testimony of the claimant or on an affidavit certified by a magis-
trate of the state from which the Negro was alleged to have fled.
33
The national debate over the ratification of the Constitution illustrates
the vagueness of the document’s clauses on Negro servitude—to the point
that they permitted diametrically  opposing viewpoints. Liberal Federalist
James Wilson of Pennsylvania, speaking before his state legislature, stat-
ed that Article I, Section 9, had established “the foundation for banishing
slavery out of this country; and though the period is more distant than I
could wish, yet it will produce the same kind of gradual change which was
pursued in Pennsylvania.” Wilson insisted that the new federal govern-
ment would soon outlaw the expansion of slavery in the west. But in the
South Carolina legislature, Federalists “swore that they would never have
agreed to confederate without winning agreement on the right to import
slaves.”
34
Few politicians were sufficiently principled to oppose the Constitution
primarily on the grounds that it perpetuated an evil and oppressive labor
system. One of the finest exceptions was Luther Martin of Maryland. A
proponent of gradual manumission, he immediately grasped that slavery
threatened to destroy the fragile bonds of unity between the North and the
South. Dismayed with the compromises over slavery, Martin boycotted the
final sessions and refused to sign the Constitution. Urging Maryland’s leg-
islature to oppose ratification, Martin declared that the controversial sec-
tions “ought to be considered as a solemn mockery of, and insult to that
God whose protection we had then implored, and could not fail to hold us
up in detestation, and render us contemptible to every true friend of liber-
ty in the world.”
35 The Constitution had given “national sanction and
encouragement” to the slave trade, Martin stated, and thus had exposed
the American people “to the displeasure and vengeance of Him, who is
equally Lord of all, and who views with equal eye the poor African slave
and his American master.”
36
IV
As subsequent events would illustrate, the passage of the Constitution
greatly reinforced the slave trade and slavery itself. Between 1780 and 1820
the African American slave population nearly tripled in size. From 1790 to
1800 Virginia’s black population increased by 17.8 percent, and the North
Carolina black population grew by 32 percent.
37 The invention of the cot-
ton gin in 1793 increased the amount of cotton planted across the South,
as well as the number of blacks demanded by the new frontier plantations.
The Racial Contours of the Constitution | 9


--- PAGE 31 ---
Between 1803 and 1808, for instance, South Carolina legally imported
almost 40,000 slaves.
38
As the peculiar institution became even more profitable, the vaguely
proslavery sentiments expressed by the Constitution contributed to even
more racist local and state legislation aimed at destroying any residual
rights the Negro people held. In 1792 Kentucky was admitted to the union
as a slave state, followed four years later by Tennessee. Northern states
established the first legal regulations of Jim Crow. Free blacks were fre-
quently denied the right to purchase public lands. They were refused ser-
vice in thousands of hotels and restaurants. In New York property and edu-
cational qualifications were imposed on free blacks’ electoral franchise.
Pennsylvania, Indiana, and other states denied all free black males the right
to vote. In 1805 Maryland prohibited blacks from selling wheat, corn, or
tobacco without a state license. Ohio legislators approved an 1807 law call-
ing for “the registering and bonding, in the sum of five-hundred dollars, of
every Negro.”
39
Free blacks acutely sensed that a political reaction against real democ-
racy had occurred, and they used every legal means to fight back. Massa-
chusetts Negroes, led by Methodist minister Prince Hall, demanded equal
educational facilities for their children. In 1791 free blacks in Charleston,
South Carolina, petitioned their state legislature, deploring the fact that
they were “debarred of the Rights of Free Citizens by being subject to a
Trial without the benefit of a Jury and subject to Prosecution by Testimony
of Slaves without Oath.”
40
What more humanistic alternatives might the drafters have employed?
We should not distort the evidence beyond its logical shape or actual his-
torical context in the pursuit of this question. Nevertheless, a close read-
ing of the historical facts suggests that more liberal and less racist possi-
bilities were achievable in the period between 1780 and 1800.
41 For exam-
ple, economic and political expansion in the western territories was not
dependent upon slavery per se, and a free labor market would have been
more efficient.
In addition, the Constitution could have provided measures for the
gradual elimination of slavery, with federal compensation to the slavehold-
ers, along the pattern of British manumission in the West Indies in the
1830s.
42 The Constitution also could have barred the future importation of
slaves, effective immediately, and provided a fund for the voluntary migra-
tion of freed Negroes to Africa. Moreover, the Constitution could have
defined all free blacks as citizens of the republic and granted them all legal
rights and privileges shared by whites in the various states.
10 | The Racial Contours of the Constitution


--- PAGE 32 ---
Even though these were workable alternatives, an “antiracist” Constitu-
tion could have existed only if the crucial provisions of the Fourteenth
Amendment had been inserted in the original draft: “No State shall make or
enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens
of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or
property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its juris-
diction equal protection of the laws.”
43 Winthrop D. Jordan suggests:
In retrospect, the pity of antislavery’s failure was that in the decade
after the Revolution, success against slavery seemed almost within
reach. If the Negro had been freed in the eighteenth century rather
than in 1863, if only in Virginia, he would have suffered far less
degradation....A f ter the Revolution, the Negro would have been
freed more for his fundamental equality and less because slavery
nagged the nation’s conscience as an anomaly in the civilized world.
A general emancipation . . . would have come as a glorious triumph,
the capstone of the Revolution; guilt could easily have been foisted
onto the British and the whole nation stirred with pride.
44
Unfortunately for black Americans—and indeed for all American peo-
ple—the 1787 Constitution marked the end, not the beginning, of a dem-
ocratic and egalitarian social movement.
The Racial Contours of the Constitution | 11


--- PAGE 33 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 34 ---
13
How do oppressed people come to terms with their exploitation? This is
the central theme of African American political history. As slaves, we were
aware of the immense contradiction between this nation’s democratic ide-
ology and its treatment of peoples of color. In the South we were legally
defined as private property, and in the North we faced racial discrimination,
disfranchisement, and legal segregation decades before the Civil War. The
literature of black abolitionism is filled with the cries of a people who
wished to participate in the democratic process yet found the door of
opportunity closed to them. “What to the American slave is your Fourth of
July?” asked Frederick Douglass in 1852. “In answer, a day that reveals to
him more than all other days of the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to
which he is the constant victim. To him your celebration is a sham; your
boasted liberty an unholy license; your national greatness, swelling vanity.”
Morris Marable, my great-grandfather, was not Frederick Douglass,
and yet he felt the same yearning to be free. My late grandmother Fannie
Marable often told me about Morris’s early life. The son of a black house-
hold worker and a white planter named Robinson, Morris was sold for five
hundred dollars in Rome, Georgia, at the age of nine. I have tried, without
success, to learn my great-great-grandmother’s name. Family folklore
reveals only that Morris’s mother wept bitterly when her son was sold from
her. She never saw him again. Morris became the property of a white plan-
2
Black History and the
Vision of Democracy


--- PAGE 35 ---
tation owner named Marable in 1854, and the boy was transported to the
Alabama Black Belt. He worked in the fields by day and at dusk was sent
to the slave quarters. Morris’s new extended family was the field slave pop-
ulation on the Marable plantation. From slave Johnson Adolphus, who
became his “elder brother,” he learned mechanic skills. From other slaves
he gained a sense of community and ritual, hope, and dignity. And from
the overseers Morris experienced the sting of the lash.
What did freedom mean to the slave? First, the absence of human ex-
ploitation. Blacks engaged in a variety of disruptive activities to retard the
production process. Slaves added rocks to the cotton they picked, to wreck
the cotton gin; they burned crops and sabotaged farm machinery. Morris
assumed the mask of the loyal slave but stole food from the whites’ kitchen
and passed it out in the slave quarters. Slaves attempted nearly every form
of day-to-day resistance, but always short of open rebellion. Still, slaves
constantly heard about conspiracies and even small revolts throughout
Alabama. In August 1854 a slave murdered his master at Mt. Meigs and,
according to white authorities, “boasted of his deed.” The black man was
burned alive, according to the Montgomery Journal , “from an imperative
sense of the necessity of an example to check the growing and dangerous
insubordination of the slave population.”
As the Civil War approached, Alabama slaves exhibited greater tenden-
cies toward rebelliousness. In Talladega County, Alabama, a slave conspir-
acy was discovered in August 1860. A roving band of “maroons,” runaway
slaves, was captured and executed. In the same month a white man in
Montgomery County was arrested for “holding improper conversations
with slaves.” And in December several hundred blacks in the central Black
Belt were uncovered in a conspiracy with several “poor whites.” The would-
be rebels had called for the redistribution of “the land, mules, and money.”
The Montgomery Advertiser commented on the conspiracy on December
13, 1860: “We have found out a deep laid plan among the negroes of our
neighborhood, and from what we can find out from our negroes, it is gen-
eral all over the county....T h e y  h a v e  g o n e  far enough in the plot to divide
our estates, mules, lands, and household furniture.” About twenty-five
blacks and four poor whites were executed.
Alabama white planters reinforced their social controls over the black
population. In 1853, the state legislature declared that any slave found with
the ability to read would receive a hundred lashes. The number of night
patrols was increased. These “patterrollers,” as the slaves called them, rode
the country lanes at night searching for secret meetings or runaway slaves.
Sometime during these years Morris met and fell in love with a household
14 | Black History and the Vision of Democracy


--- PAGE 36 ---
slave named Judy Brooks, who lived about eight miles distant on another
farm. Such relationships were difficult to maintain; either Morris or Judy
might be sold at any time. But over time Morris had carefully cultivated his
master’s trust, and he was permitted to close the barn and to repair broken
tools after dark. Quietly, he made his way into the pine woods, circling down
beyond a creek, and after running for well over an hour arrived at Judy’s
cabin. An hour before dawn he returned to his plantation. Morris performed
this feat with regularity, dodging patterrollers and their dogs. He was never
caught, and his master and overseer never knew. But the slaves did, and they
relished this small act of freedom. Perhaps they sang to themselves:
Run nigger run de patterroller get you,
slip over de fence
slick as a eel
White man catch you be de heel
Run, nigger, run.
Morris’s master permitted his slaves to hold regular religious services on
Sunday afternoons, and these gatherings often lasted well into the night.
The planter may have reasoned to himself that Christianity was good for
labor discipline. The Negro spirituals spoke of freedom only in the after-
life, and the Bible taught servants to respect and obey their masters. But
for the slaves the religious meetings were an assertion of their cultural au-
tonomy. Their songs of praise to the Lord revealed more than accommo-
dation to temporal suffering:
He delivered Daniel from de lion’s den,
Jonah from de belly ob de whale,
And de Hebrew children from de fiery furnace,
and why not every man? . . .
O blow your trumpet, Gabriel
Blow your trumpet louder;
And I want dat trumpet to blow me home
To my new Jerusalem.
To the slaves the Lord was not an impersonal force. He was real, and he
sympathized with them. The Bible was viewed not as a set of rigid doc-
trines but as a living, creative work, a set of parables by which people could
lead a moral life. Black prophetic Christianity gave spiritual freedom to the
slaves and a sense of humanity that transcended the slavery system.
The Union army did not reach central Alabama until 1864. Some slaves
may have left the Marable plantation, making their way to the Union lines.
Other slaves in nearby Troy, Alabama, organized a widespread conspiracy,
Black History and the Vision of Democracy | 15


--- PAGE 37 ---
which was discovered in December 1864. Morris, now nineteen years old,
waited for his opportunity. His master, an officer in the Confederate army,
was severely wounded near West Point, Georgia. Morris was ordered to
transport his master from the battle back to his home. Still trusted implic-
itly, he performed this service. But late one evening he gathered together
his personal items, took forty dollars in gold from the house, and somehow
escaped. Morris and Judy Brooks made their way into the sparsely popu-
lated hills of northeastern Alabama. This was no new Jerusalem, but free-
dom was theirs.
Like many other black freedmen, Morris understood that the best
guarantee of freedom was land ownership. He purchased a small section of
property near Wedowee, Alabama, and began to cultivate cotton. Through
careful savings and backbreaking labor, Morris was able to purchase more
than one hundred acres of farmland in two decades. This was no mean
achievement. In the 1880s the average Alabama farm was less than sixty
acres, of which about thirty-five acres were cultivated. Black tenant farm-
ers usually occupied less than one-third of that amount. Morris relied on
the labor power of his thirteen children to plant and harvest the crop.
When Judy Brooks Marable died in the early 1880s, Morris soon remar-
ried. His second wife, who had the curious name Warner Clockster, was a
descendant of the Creek Indians, who had lived in the region before the
1830s. Warner and Morris’s sixth child was my grandfather, Manning
Marable, born in 1894.
Morris’s skills as a mechanic, acquired during slavery, may have been
responsible for his later interest in business. Sometime during the early
1890s, Morris and his best friend and neighbor, Joshua Heard, raised
sufficient capital to start a cotton gin of their own. Most of the nearby
towns already had gins—Lafayette and Talladega, Alabama, and West
Point, Georgia—but whites owned the ginneries and warehouses. Black
producers were usually dependent upon white brokers, who cheated them
with regularity. Most of the farmers, black and white, purchased their
supplies and farm implements on credit, and according to Roger L. Ran-
som and Richard Sutch, annual interest rates charged by rural merchants
during the 1880s were about 60 percent. Since most farms yielded about
150 pounds of cotton per acre and cotton prices were then eight to nine
cents a pound, an average white farmer could expect to gross $250 to
$400 annually. Black sharecroppers, however, had to divide their profits
with their landlords—and after paying off their debts, they usually found
themselves with nothing. Morris was determined to break out of the
cycle of poverty and to compete against the white merchants. Black
16 | Black History and the Vision of Democracy


--- PAGE 38 ---
farmers soon supported Morris and his partner, and the ginning enter-
prise prospered.
During the 1880s, many black and white farmers in Alabama joined
the Alliance, a radical agrarian movement against the conservative business
and planter elite. Populism, which followed in the early 1890s, drew upon
the same small-farmer strata. Morris was attracted to the movement, per-
haps because of its racial egalitarianism. Throughout Georgia and Ala-
bama, black and white Populist Party members held joint picnics, rallies,
and speeches. Populist candidate Reuben F. Kalb actually won the state’s
gubernatorial contest in 1894, but the conservatives used extensive voting
fraud to swing the election. On the periphery of this activity, in his small
rural town, Morris Marable became sheriff with the support of blacks and
whites. He was intensely proud of his office and completed his duties with
special dispatch. According to family legend, he even carried out two pub-
lic executions—although the race of the victims is unknown. Morris car-
ried a small Bible in one coat pocket at all times and a revolver under his
coat. In either case, he always planned to be prepared.
My great-grandfather’s dream of freedom collapsed after the 1890s,
with the demise of Populism and the rise of racial segregation. Between
1882 and 1927, 304 lynchings occurred in Alabama. The Sayre Election
Law of Alabama made it illegal to assist voters in marking ballots—thus
effectively disfranchising thousands of il literate whites and blacks. Poll
taxes and county levies were initiated by 1901, and the vast majority of
poor and rural voters was eliminated. The total number of black voters in
the state fell to 3,700 in 1908. Many white Populists turned bitterly against
blacks at this time, and many rural blacks became the victims of white vig-
ilantes. My grandmother’s favorite tale about Morris concerns the harass-
ment of one of her cousins by local whites. For some real or imaginary
offense, the young man was being viciously beaten in the public streets.
Morris calmly walked into the mob, revolver in hand, and brought the boy
home. The whites had too much respect—or perhaps fear—to stop him.
After exercising the right to vote for more than thirty years, finally
Morris was turned away from the ballot box. Disgusted, he became a Re-
publican; he even named his last child Roosevelt, in honor of the presi-
dent, in 1905. If politics could not liberate black people, economic power
could. But the next blow came in 1914–1915. The boll weevil, introduced
into the United States in 1892, had made its way into southern Alabama
by 1910. In the summer of 1914, it reached the northeastern part of the
state. Cotton production in infested counties usually fell by 50 percent.
That autumn, with the outbreak of World War I, the European markets
Black History and the Vision of Democracy | 17


--- PAGE 39 ---
that had been the largest consumers of Southern cotton were closed.
Cotton prices immediately plummeted to five to eight cents per pound,
well below the earlier market price of thirteen cents. Large white mer-
chants and planters were able to obtain credit and store their cotton in
warehouses, but black entrepreneurs and small farmers were unable to
cope with the crisis.
As black farmers defaulted on loans, small black-owned banks and
businesses collapsed. The number of black banks in Alabama fell from
seven to one between 1911 and 1918; thousands of blacks lost their land,
forced to sell it for only a fraction of its real value. Between 1910 and 1920
the total number of farms in Alabama declined from 110,400 to 95,000.
The crisis of 1914–1915 was the beginning of a long decline in black land
tenure throughout the South. Black farm acreage in the South peaked at
more than fifteen million acres in 1910; sixty years later, the total was less
than six million acres. Morris had no choice but to sell the cotton gin, and
he abandoned business entirely. At his death in 1927, Morris was still in
debt, but his spirit remained unbroken.
Each successive generation of African Americans has pursued the goal
of freedom, the new Jerusalem, which would make the promise of democ-
racy a reality. Manning Marable’s road to freedom was the same as his fa-
ther’s. Manning married Fannie Heard, the soft-spoken but strong-willed
daughter of Joshua Heard, in 1916. Together they raised thirteen children,
and in the 1930s they started a small lumber company. With a little side
income from my grandfather’s illegal whiskey still, the lumber firm began
to grow. Manning repeatedly told his children that the means of achieving
racial independence was through business: “You have to beat the Southern
white man at his own game.” My father, James Marable, learned this les-
son and ultimately became a successful entrepreneur. But always there was
this moral commitment, born of the slavery and Reconstruction experi-
ence, that united most members of the community in pursuing common
goals: respect as human beings, unfettered participation in the economic
and political life of this country, full civil liberties, and equal protection
under the law.
Four generations removed from slavery, the vision of a just, democratic
society remains. Yet the structural barriers to economic equality are more
clearly discernible. In Macon County, Alabama, where most of the Mara-
ble extended family still resides, black entrepreneurs owned 234 business-
es in 1977, according to the Bureau of the Census. About 76 percent of
these firms, 178 in all, did not have a single paid employee. The 7 black
taxicab firms averaged $12,300 in annual gross receipts. The county’s 94
18 | Black History and the Vision of Democracy


--- PAGE 40 ---
selective services—everything from barbershops to pool halls—recorded
an average of $15,400 gross receipts and employed a grand total of 31 peo-
ple. In a county with 24,000 blacks, minority-owned firms employed only
119 workers. The dream of economic self-sufficiency may have been rea-
sonable to pursue under capitalist conditions in the late nineteenth centu-
ry, but as a grand strategy for black group advancement in the period of
monopoly capitalism, it represents a dead end.
Part of Morris Marable’s dream was realized during the Civil Rights
Movement. Black working people and the poor challenged the Jim Crow
system and won. This effort, like all significant black social movements,
was rooted simultaneously in a political and moral critique of institutional
racism. Just as the slaves developed a religious outlook that negated their
masters’ political power, civil rights activists of the 1960s led a crusade for
social justice that expressed a moral dimension. The workers in the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( sncc) sang this in the Albany,
Georgia, desegregation campaign of 1962:
Ain’t gonna let nobody turn me ’round
Turn me ’round, turn me ’round
Ain’t gonna let nobody turn me ’round
I’m gonna keep on walkin’, keep on a-talkin’
Marching up to freedom land.
Morris Marable would have understood at once the significance of these
words. Jim Crow meant inferior schools and political disfranchisement,
low-paying jobs and second-class citizenship. The pursuit of democracy
demanded a moral commitment on the part of the oppressed to organize.
No more Jim Crow, no more Jim Crow
No more Jim Crow over me
And before I’ll be a slave
I’ll be buried in my grave
And go home to my Lord and be free.
A generation has passed since the social upheaval called the Second
Reconstruction. There are now more than nine thousand black elected and
appointed officials throughout the United States. The highest number of
black officials in any state is in Mississippi. The murderer of Medgar Evers
has been convicted finally, many years after the crime. Two Southern pres-
idents have been elected to the White House since 1976, both of whom
received the overwhelming support of the African American electorate.
Despite these gains, there remains across the South the harsh reality of
racial bigotry and class inequality.
Black History and the Vision of Democracy | 19


--- PAGE 41 ---
Is the democratic vision an illusion for African Americans or a dream
deferred? The struggle has not been without hardship, but the faith of a
people in bondage remains the moral guide for their descendants. The
organic history of black Americans is a pattern of suffering and transcen-
dence, of sacrifice and hope for the future. It has its own language,
rhythms, and direction. It embraces the customs and collective experiences
of those who have known slavery, Jim Crow, and Reaganism. The moral
imperatives of the slave community still find their way into the discourse
and programs of a Jesse Jackson. An intimate knowledge of this history
and rich cultural legacy is essential to our collective struggles for a demo-
cratic society in the future.
20 | Black History and the Vision of Democracy


--- PAGE 42 ---
PART TWO
Ideology and Political Culture:
The Age of Segregation


--- PAGE 43 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 44 ---
23
Booker T. Washingtonwas the most influential black American educa-
tor in the early twentieth century. Born as a slave in 1856, he attended
Hampton Institute, an industrial and agricultural school for blacks and
American Indians. At the age of twenty-five, in 1881, he was appointed
principal of Tuskegee Institute, an industrial school that had recently been
created by the Alabama state legislature. Washington constructed a com-
prehensive economic and social program for black development within the
capitalist system during the period from 1880 to 1915. His achievements—
and those of black educators who accepted his ideas—were substantial.
Black schools were largely successful in improving literacy rates and health
standards and in promoting black land tenure and capital formation.
The limitations and problems inherent in Washington’s political strategy,
however, helped to establish a rigid system of racial inequality and segrega-
tion—termed Jim Crow—across the U.S. South. Many social dilemmas con-
fronting black American universities and educators today, a century later, are
rooted in the conceptual and programmatic contradictions of Washington’s
educational and economic paradigms.
I
The social forces that produced Booker T. Washington and an entire gen-
eration of conservative black educators stemmed from the American Civil
3
Booker T. Washington and the
Political Economy of Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 45 ---
War and the collapse of Reconstruction. During the Reconstruction peri-
od following the Civil War, from 1865 to 1877, the nation extended the
electoral franchise to black males and abolished slavery, and the newly
freed black laborers articulated two political demands above all others—
the right to universal education, including access to black colleges and vo-
cational institutes, which would have to be created, and “the acquisition of
the land they had tilled and developed and learned to think of as their
own.”
1 These central concerns were closely linked: capital accumulation
and a higher standard of living in a rural society were not possible without
land tenure, and an educated black community could develop its own re-
sources to extend credit and finance economic and social institutions.
The black college, as Benjamin E. Mays, former president of More-
house College, has written, was the social product of an “era of change.”
2
Only twenty-eight African Americans earned baccalaureate degrees at
white colleges before 1860.
3 As the “social forces” that “precipitated the
Civil War” emerged, as Mays noted, Lincoln University was founded in
Pennsylvania in 1854.
4 Seventeen black colleges were established between
1854 and 1890, including Morehouse College, Howard University, Hamp-
ton Institute, Atlanta University, and Tuskegee Institute. Most were pri-
vate training schools for teachers or focused primarily on industrial and
agricultural education. The growth of black institutions was retarded by
the U.S. government’s exclusion of blacks from funding under the Morrill
Act of 1862, which created land-grant colleges with direct federal subsi-
dies. In the 1890s, however, this policy was reversed, and a second group
of state-supported but racially segregated institutions was created in most
Southern states.
It is frequently and conveniently forgotten today that millions of white
Southerners vehemently opposed the creation of institutions of higher
education for blacks, even behind the barriers of Jim Crow. As Daniel C.
Thompson notes:
Almost everything was done to discourage the founding of Black
schools. State legislatures and local school boards tended to ignore
Blacks’ efforts to establish schools. The white masses often took dras-
tic steps to squash the school movement sponsored by the Federal
government, missionary groups, and a few private philanthropists;
teachers were beaten, schools were burned, the Black students and
their parents were frequently intimidated.
Such opposition was usually expressed in explicitly racist terms; at its
core, however, was the white South’s determination to suppress the entire
24 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 46 ---
labor force and to maintain blacks as a subordinate stratum beneath white
workers. As Thompson explains, “Underneath these apologies was the
white employers’ perennial belief that educated Blacks are largely unfit for
the dirty, menial, low-paying jobs traditionally assigned to them.”
5
By 1899 a total of eighty-one Negro colleges and institutions for agri-
cultural and vocational training had been established, seventy-five of them
in the South. The severe limitations of these schools can be understood
only against the harsh environment of black Southern economic and social
life immediately after Reconstruction. More than 90 percent of the black
population lived in the South, and 80 percent of all blacks in the region
lived in rural areas. The vast majority of black farmers rented their homes
and property—in 1890, 82 percent of black farmers were tenants, com-
pared with only 47 percent of whites. By the end of Reconstruction, fewer
than three million acres of land had been purchased by or redistributed to
black freedmen.
The rural black peasantry was caught in an almost impossible cycle of
penury. In 1890, 65 percent of them were illiterate. They had scant knowl-
edge of such modern agricultural techniques as crop rotation and soil con-
servation or the use of complex farm machinery. Barely one-fifth of them
could even afford fertilizers. As sharecroppers, they were forced to give half
of their annual crop to their landlords. Most had little capital left over after
selling their cotton and corn crops. Black farmers needed credit for canned
goods, farm equipment, seeds, and other supplies from rural merchants.
And according to economists Roger L. Ransom and Richard Sutch, white
merchants extended credit in the 1880s at an average annual interest rate
of 35 to 60 percent, and they usually refused credit to farmers who were
not producing cotton or corn. Consequently, only 3.7 percent of all black
farms produced any other cash crops. This economic dependence on cred-
it and the cotton market had several social effects. The per capita produc-
tion of sheep and swine dropped, and families suffered as a result. Al-
though the data are not conclusive, there is even some evidence that black
life expectancy at birth actually fell slightly from its level under slavery,
from an average of thirty-five years in 1850 to less than thirty-four years
in 1900. During the same period, white life expectancy increased from
forty to about fifty years.
6
Black oppression in the South was an essential component of class
exploitation throughout the region. The dominant Southern classes of the
period may be roughly subdivided into two major groups. The older elites
were located in the South’s “Black Belt,” an agricultural region noted for its
fertile black soil and high percentage of rural black workers, stretching
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 25


--- PAGE 47 ---
nearly a thousand miles from eastern North Carolina to Texas. About fifty
thousand white planters, only 2.5 percent of all Southern farmers, consti-
tuted this rural elite. These planters usually owned farms varying in size
from three hundred to three thousand acres and hired poor black and white
tenants, sharecroppers, or wage laborers to do their work.
7 A second group,
which emerged only after the Civil War, consisted of the new industrial-
ists—owners and managers of the South’s growing textile mills, railroads,
iron, coal, and timber resources.
These two factions of the South’s capitalist class were frequently in con-
flict over matters of electoral politics and regional economic policies, but
they shared common objectives regarding the black worker. Both required
a steady supply of workers and used state governments and the courts to
procure their labor quotas. The most infamous method was the “convict-
leasing” system, wherein prisoners were leased by state and local authori-
ties to private contractors for a fee. As the demand for labor increased,
states complied by enacting increasingly repressive legislation: in Missis-
sippi, for example, the theft of a pig was defined as “grand larceny,” pun-
ishable by up to five years’ imprisonment. Many white politicians grew
wealthy from the bonuses they received by leasing convicts. The state of
Georgia alone netted more than $350,000 in 1906.
8
Both planters and industrialists vigorously opposed the formation of
labor unions and were fearful of any signs of interracial coalitions develop-
ing among black and white workers, since such alliances might threaten
the status quo. Both groups also generally favored the creation of black ag-
ricultural and trade schools in the 1880s and 1890s. As Sterling D. Spero
and Abram L. Harris observed in their classic study The Black Worker:
To the proponents of Negro industrial education, an efficient worker
was one who was reliable, capable of giving the maximum return for
his wages, and loyal to his employer. Enlightenment on the problems
peculiar to the wage earner in modern industry had no part in the edu-
cation which the industrial schools gave to the future Black workers.
9
This was the socioeconomic background challenging the resources of
most black educators in the United States a century ago. Booker T. Wash-
ington advanced a strategy of black economic development through the re-
sources of black state-supported and private institutions. Washington under-
stood that growth in per capita income for blacks was possible only under
several conditions. Increased productivity was possible if labor were reorga-
nized along more efficient lines. The development and utilization of new
technologies and the reeducation of the labor force would also increase pro-
26 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 48 ---
ductivity. Nevertheless, sustained economic growth could not occur without
increased capital investment—that is, growth in the ratio of capital to labor.
How could the black colleges augment the process of black savings, rein-
vestment, and the general formation of capital?
II
The Tuskegee Institute approach to black development rested on four
key points.
First, it took the social and cultural transformation of the black South-
ern labor force to be a major responsibility of black educational institu-
tions. These schools tried to retrain the black peasantry by creating exten-
sion programs, establishing rural training centers, and holding colloquia,
where farmers learned the importance of agricultural diversification and
studied techniques of soil conservation and crop rotation. In a concerted
effort to reduce the level of black illiteracy, Tuskegee sent its students to
teach at rural primary and secondary schools. The institute also placed
great emphasis on personal hygiene, diet, and the improvement of residen-
tial quarters.
Tuskegee encouraged black farmers to break away from their depen-
dence on landlords by gradually purchasing their own lands. The problem
here was essentially one of credit. So long as black farmers relied on white
merchants for working capital at exorbitant interest rates, the growth of
black land tenure would be minimal. To provide an alternative credit
source, Tuskegee started a savings department, which functioned as a local
bank. Tuskegee graduates used these funds to initiate “social settlements”
in rural areas; after purchasing former plantation properties, they resold
them to black sharecroppers. Other black colleges and churches estab-
lished similar lending establishments, and by 1911 there were two black-
owned banks in Georgia, eleven in Mississippi, and seven in Alabama.
These banks and other black-owned lending institutions in the United
States did $22 million worth of business by 1910.
10
Second, Washington and the Tuskegee Institute staff tried to make
their school a model for all black educational institutions in the South. The
student population, drawn primarily from the rural black peasantry of Ala-
bama, Georgia, and Mississippi, was taught to respect authority without
debate. “We are not a college,” Washington informed students in an 1896
campus convocation, “and if there are any of you here who expect to get a
college training, you will be disappointed.” Washington reluctantly per-
mitted courses in sociology and psychology at Tuskegee, but he immedi-
ately put a stop to faculty efforts to start classes in Latin and Greek.
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 27


--- PAGE 49 ---
Male students scheduled rigorous courses in carpentry, printing, agri-
cultural economics, and other technical training, while females learned the
skills of laundry, sewing, and kitchen duties. Male students were even re-
sponsible for producing clay bricks in the institute’s kiln and constructing
all classroom buildings, dormitories, and faculty houses. Every aspect of
their work fell under Washington’s constant scrutiny. At mandatory reli-
gious exercises, all students had to pass by him for inspection. “His keen,
piercing eyes were sure to detect any grease-spots that were on the students’
clothes or any buttons that by chance were conspicuous by their absence
from the students’ clothing.” Every day, Washington received extensive fac-
ulty reports on the smallest aspects of campus life: the “daily poultry re-
port,” the “daily swine herd report,” the state of the latrines, the “condition
of the kitchens.”
Faculty who seemed to shirk their duties were strongly censured. Wash-
ington checked with the campus librar ian to learn which teachers had not
checked out books. The campus’s assistant principal, Warren Logan, main-
tained a list of “teachers who were conspicuously irregular in their atten-
dance upon prayers.” Louis R. Harlan, Washington’s biographer, com-
ments: “Washington was paternalistic and even dictatorial in the manner
of the planters and business tycoons for whom he always reserved his high-
est public flattery.” Despite such measures, the institute acquired a notable
reputation. By 1901, the school had 109 full-time faculty, 1,095 pupils, and
owned property valued at nearly $330,000. Many of black America’s lead-
ing researchers and scholars found employment at the institute: gifted
agricultural chemist George Washington Carver; architect Robert R.
Taylor; dramatist Charles Winter Wood; and Monroe N. Work, director
of records and research and the editor of the Negro Year Book.
11
The third component of Washington’s strategy was the development of
a black middle class, and in particular a highly organized black entrepre-
neurial stratum. According to records of the U.S. Bureau of the Census,
there were only 431 black lawyers, 909 black physicians, and 15,000 black
college, secondary, and elementary school teachers in 1890, out of a total
black population of 7.5 million. Barely 1 percent of the black labor force was
employed in clerical, professional, or business-related activities. In 1893
there were only 17,000 black-owned businesses in the United States, and
well over 80 percent did not have a single paid employee.
Washington and other black educators (such as W. E. B. Du Bois) be-
lieved that Negro college-trained students could form the core of an entre-
preneurial class, based on domination of the black consumer market. In
1900 Washington initiated the National Negro Business League, a black
28 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 50 ---
version of the Chamber of Commerce, to promote black private enterprise
and cooperative activities among black businessmen. The “Tuskegee spir-
it” was subsequently expressed in the creation of other black professional
societies: the National Bar Association in 1903, the National Negro Bank-
ers Association in 1906, the National Association of Funeral Directors in
1907, and the National Negro Retail Merchants Association in 1913. The
close cooperation between black educational institutions and the black pri-
vate sector in providing thousands of young entrepreneurs with business
and managerial skills and a modest access to capital was largely responsi-
ble for the creation of a new black elite in the early twentieth century. In
these years the number of black-owned drugstores rose from 250 to 695;
of black undertakers, from 450 to 1,000; of black retail merchants, from
10,000 to 25,000; and of black-owned banks, from 4 to 51.
12
The fourth aspect of the Tuskegee strategy was the cultivation of white
financial support for Negro education. During Reconstruction, several
Northern philanthropies had begun to make modest subsidies available to
black trade schools and colleges. Tuskegee’s first outside grant, amounting
to $1,000, was donated by the Peabody Education Fund in 1883. Most of
these funding sources were rather small and usually permitted the contin-
uation of existing programs rather than the development of new ones.
Booker T. Washington recognized that the conservative leaders of the
newly emerging industrial and commercial enterprises were potentially a
much greater funding base for black vocational education than the older
liberal philanthropic agencies with ties to the abolitionist tradition of the
northeastern United States. Washington’s relationships with camera man-
ufacturer George Eastman and steel industrialist Andrew Carnegie are
illustrative. After reading Washington’s Horatio Alger–style autobiogra-
phy, Up from Slavery , Eastman promptly sent $5,000 to “Tuskegee Insti-
tute.” From 1910 to 1915, Eastman gave $10,000 annually to Tuskegee,
and upon Washington’s death, he sent the school $250,000. After Carnegie
heard Washington speak at a public forum, he handed the Negro educator
ten $1,000 bills as a “secret gift.” In the spring of 1903, Carnegie gave Tus-
kegee Institute $600,000 in U.S. Steel Company bonds, stipulating that
one-quarter of that amount was for Washington’s personal use. Washing-
ton used these funds to build Tuskegee, but he also used much money to
subsidize other ventures, such as expansion of the Negro Business League
and the purchase of controlling shares in major black newspapers.
13
The apparent successes achieved by this strategy of educational politi-
cal economy—the development of black-owned commercial establish-
ments, the initiation of black private firms and small banks, and the depen-
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 29


--- PAGE 51 ---
dence upon funding from conservative capitalists—were difficult to refute.
In Macon County, Alabama, the home of Tuskegee, the number of black
landowners increased from 157 in 1900 to 507 by 1910.
14
Of course, many other examples of educational institutions’ promot-
ing black self-help also existed. In the early 1890s R. L. Smith, a gradu-
ate of Atlanta University and principal of the Oakland, Texas, Normal
School for Negroes, established the Farmers’ Improvement Society of
Texas. The society’s activities were many: it urged blacks to grow their
own food supplies and sell their produce cooperatively and to improve
their homes; it taught farmers the latest methods in agricultural produc-
tion; and it provided insurance to black families. By 1909, the society had
twenty-one thousand members in Arkansas, Texas, and Oklahoma and
had created a bank and a rural vocational college. Hampton Institute ini-
tiated the Negro Organization Society in 1909, which was soon joined by
local organizations representing 85 percent of the state’s black popula-
tion. The Virginia Society stressed the Tuskegee and Hampton Institutes’
philosophy of capital accumulation, land ownership, and patronage of
black-owned businesses, and it sponsored programs in family hygiene,
health care, and literacy.
15
The Tuskegee approach to the political economy of black education was
not confined to the United States. During a visit to London in 1899, Wash-
ington promoted a Pan-African conference organized by Trinidadian lawyer
Henry Sylvester Williams as a “most effective and far reaching event.” The
product of this 1900 conference was the modern Pan-Africanist movement,
which was later led by W. E. B. Du Bois and George Padmore.
16 Henry
Sylvester Williams had corresponded with Washington in 1899 and 1900
and asked him to distribute materials on the “proposed conference  ...a s
widely as is possible.”
17
Washington established an economic partnership with a private Ger-
man firm that held concessions in Germany’s African colonies. In January
1900 three Tuskegee graduates and one faculty member initiated an agri-
cultural project in Togo. Tuskegee graduates were employed in the Sudan,
Nigeria, and the Congo Free State. Inspired by Washington, Zulu Congre-
gationalist minister John Langalibalele Dube spoke at Tuskegee’s com-
mencement in 1897, and four years later started the Zulu Christian Indus-
trial School in Natal, South Africa.
18 The sage of Pan-Africanism, Edward
Wilmot Blyden, also endorsed Washington’s leadership. After reading a
speech by Tuskegee Institute’s principal, Blyden declared that Washing-
ton’s “words” and “work will tend to free two races with prejudice and false
views of life.”
19
30 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 52 ---
III
The political linchpin of the Tuskegee educational and economic agenda
was Washington’s philosophy of “racial accommodation.” His real rise to
national attention came in September 1895, when he delivered a speech at
Atlanta’s Cotton States and International Exposition. Washington observed
that one-third of the South’s population was black and that an “enterprise
seeking the material, civil or moral welfare” of the region could not disre-
gard the Negro. Blacks should remain in the South—“Cast down your
bucket where you are”—and participate in the capitalist economic develop-
ment of that area. During the Reconstruction era, blacks had erred in their
priorities. “Ignorant and inexperienced” blacks had tried to start “at the top
instead of at the bottom”; a congressional seat “was more sought than real
estate or industrial skill.”
To the white South, Washington pledged the fidelity of his race, “the
most patient, law-abiding, and unresentful people that the world has seen.”
And on the sensitive issue of racial integration and the protection of blacks’
political rights, Washington made a dramatic concession: “In all things
that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the
hand in all things essential to mutual progress .... The wisest among my
race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is the ex-
tremest folly.”
20 Washington’s social policy “compromise” was this: blacks
would disavow open agitation for desegregation and the political franchise;
in return, they would be permitted to develop their own parallel econom-
ic, educational, and social institutions within the framework of expanding
Southern capitalism. Obscured by accommodationist rhetoric, Washing-
ton’s statement was the expression of the nascent black entrepreneurial
elite, many black landholders, and some educators.
White America responded to Washington’s address with universal ac-
claim. President Grover Cleveland remarked that the speech was the foun-
dation for “new hope” for black Americans. More accurate was the editori-
al of the Atlanta Constitution: “The speech stamps Booker T. Washington as
a wise counselor and a safe leader.”
21 Within several years after the “Atlanta
Compromise” address, Washington had become the nation’s preeminent
black leader. Through his patronage, black and white supporters were able
to secure federal government posts, and his influence with white philan-
thropists largely determined which Negro colleges would receive funds.
The “Tuskegee Machine” never acquiesced in the complete political
disfranchisement of blacks; behind the scenes, Washington used his re-
sources to fight for civil rights. In 1900 he requested funds from white
philanthropists to lobby against racist election provisions in Louisiana’s
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 31


--- PAGE 53 ---
state constitution. He privately opposed Alabama’s racial disfranchisement
laws in federal courts and, in 1903–1904, personally spent “at least four
thousand dollars in cash” to advance “the rights of the Black man.”
22
Nevertheless, Washington’s entire public approach to racist policies in the
United States implied to whites that blacks were no longer interested in
political power or civil rights.
Washington cemented his alliance with white capitalists by making
polemical attacks on organized labor. Even before his rise to prominence,
Washington professed antilabor opinions. Strikes were caused by “profes-
sional labor agitators,” he commented critically in his autobiography. Strik-
ing workers must spend “all that they have saved” during their protests and
must later “return to work in debt at the same wages.”
23 Organized oppo-
sition to the demands of capital seemed foolish, even criminal, to Wash-
ington. He encouraged the Negro to seize the “opportunity to work at his
trade” by “taking the place” of striking white workers. “The average Negro
does not understand the necessity or advantage of a labor organization
which stands between him and his employer and aims apparently to make
a monopoly of the opportunity for labor,” Washington wrote in 1913.
Black laborers were “more accustomed to work for persons than for wages.”
The capitalist was the best friend of the unemployed Negro, not an enemy.
The black worker should “not like an organization which seems to be
founded on a sort of impersonal enmity to the man by whom he is em-
ployed.” The black man’s labor is “law-abiding, peaceable, teachable . . .
labor that has never been tempted to follow the red flag of anarchy.”
24
The most controversial incident to test Washington’s economic strategy
occurred in 1908, during the Alabama coal miners’ strike. The Alabama
United Mineworkers (umw) had twelve thousand members, six thousand of
them black miners. When U.S. Steel refused to renew the workers’ contracts
and ordered substantial wage cuts, the miners announced a strike. The state
government of Alabama assisted the company by sending convicts to work
in the mines. The conflict soon escalated: miners dynamited the homes of
non-union strikebreakers; police and company security guards shot and
physically assaulted umw leaders; the governor of Alabama ordered the
state militia to destroy the tent camps of black and white strikers; and hun-
dreds of labor leaders were imprisoned.
Washington did not hesitate to choose sides in the class struggle.
Negroes must not be “given to strikes,” he declared. The collective bar-
gaining process of unionism must be avoided as a “form of slavery.” As
thousands of white miners lost their jobs, non-union black laborers re-
placed them at lower wages. Following the collapse of the umw strike, the
32 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 54 ---
companies worked with Tuskegee Institute to initiate a form of non-union
“welfare capitalism.” U.S. Steel hired Tuskegee graduate John W. Oveltree
as its “efficiency social agent” to monitor the work habits of fifteen thou-
sand black laborers. The De Bardeleben Coal Company of Alabama em-
ployed another Tuskegee alumnus, R. W. Taylor, as its supervisor of black
coal miners. In gratitude, each year the company awarded several scholar-
ships to Tuskegee to children of its black employees.
The reaction of white miners to the strikebreaking tactics of Tuskegee
was predictable. By 1910 fewer than six hundred blacks were members of
the umw, and even those had no access to positions of union leadership.
Non-union blacks now constituted 75 percent of all miners in Alabama,
but their reduced wages left them only marginally above poverty.
25
Washington’s open alliance with white capitalists and public acceptance
of racial segregation could be justified to the small black petite bourgeoisie
in economic terms. “No race that has anything to contribute to the markets
of the world is long in any degree ostracized,” Washington observed.
26 As
white firms retreated from the black sections of towns and rural areas, the
graduates of Tuskegee Institute and other industrial schools were fully pre-
pared to assume their roles as entrepreneurs in the private-enterprise system.
Black consumers were poor, but collectively their market was large enough
to maintain a black petit bourgeois stratum. In turn-of-the-century
Montgomery, Alabama, for example, black entrepreneurs had established
twenty restaurants, twenty-three grocery stores, and three drugstores in a
town with only two thousand blacks. Montgomery’s black community also
included twelve building contractors and five physicians and could patron-
ize fifteen blacksmith shops and two funeral establishments of its own.
27
By 1913, fifty years after the abolition of slavery, a substantial black entre-
preneurial, professional, and landholding elite had developed. Black Ameri-
cans owned 550,000 homes and had accumulated $700 million in wealth.
The number of black-owned businesses had doubled in only thirteen years,
from 20,000 to 40,000. African Americans owned 15.7 million acres of land
across the South, and 200,000 of the nation’s 848,000 black farmers owned
their farms. As economic historian Gilbert C. Fite has noted: “When it is
considered that Blacks started out without capital or independent business
experience and faced severe racial discrimination . . . the record of black own-
ership by the early twentieth century was remarkable.”
28
IV
African American intellectuals, journalists, and college teachers were large-
ly alarmed by Washington’s immense influence. With some exceptions, they
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 33


--- PAGE 55 ---
did not reject Tuskegee’s economic strategy, but they did question its em-
phasis on rural development at the expense of the urban petite bourgeoisie.
Nor were they opposed to industrial and agricultural education for the vast
majority of Southern Negroes. Their principal objection was Washington’s
social policy of accommodation. Abandoning electoral politics and accept-
ing racial segregation in all public accommodations and civic life would,
they believed, make black advancement in economic and educational fields
extremely difficult, if not impossible.
They also perceived that the “Tuskegee Machine” had developed such
influence over national educational policy that nonvocational schools for
blacks were in serious jeopardy. The most articulate representative of the
anti-Washington tendency in Negro higher education was W. E. B. Du
Bois, who in 1910 founded the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People ( naacp). Du Bois thought that only the black liberal
arts colleges, not schools based on the Hampton-Tuskegee Institute model,
were capable of producing a stable, educated black middle class, or what he
termed the “Talented Tenth.”
Indeed, Du Bois argued in 1903, “to attempt to establish any sort of a
system of common and industrial school training, without first (and I say
first advisedly) providing for the higher training of the very best teachers,
is simply throwing your money away to the winds.” Further, he argued,
black America would only be “saved by its exceptional men,” those who
possessed “intelligence, broad sympathy, knowledge of the world that was
and is, and of the relation of men to it.” The Talented Tenth must “guide
their own and other races.”
29 Du Bois believed that industrial and agricul-
tural education was a “splendid thing. But when it is coupled by sneers at
Negro colleges whose work made industrial schools possible, when it is
accompanied by the exaltation of men’s bellies and depreciation of their
brains,” he declared, “then it becomes a movement you must choke to
death or it will choke you.”
30
Washington was totally unscrupulous in his attacks on Du Bois and
other black liberal critics. The Negro press aligned with Tuskegee printed
personal and political attacks against Du Bois. Black ministers and educa-
tors who favored an aggressive approach to civil rights were dismissed or
demoted by Washington’s surrogates. Spies were planted in civil rights or-
ganizations, and black colleges whose faculty or administrators opposed
the Tuskegee philosophy were denied funds from white philanthropies and
corporations. Even within his own ranks, Washington cautiously looked
for signs of insubordination. One Tuskegee Institute instructor expressed
misgivings about Washington’s authoritarian behavior to his pastor in Bos-
34 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 56 ---
ton. Washington’s aides managed to steal these personal letters, and the
teacher in question was promptly humiliated for actions that “were disloy-
al to the Institution.”
31
Washington’s many efforts to suppress free speech and civil rights reveal
his determination to play an aggressive role as “collaborator” with white
corporations, the state, and segregationists in controlling the status of the
Negro. As sociologist Oliver C. Cox suggested, “the term ‘Uncle Tom’ does
not seem to describe the role of the leadership of Washington. The ‘Uncle
Tom’ is a passive figure; he is so thoroughly inured to the condition of sub-
ordination that he has become tame and obsequious.” Washington, by con-
trast, projected himself as a mass leader, but he drew his effective power
from the white ruling class. Washington was “an intercessor between his
group and the dominant class,” Cox noted. He was “given wide publicity
as a phenomenal leader” precisely because “he demanded less for the Negro
people than that which the ruling class had already conceded.”
32
The contradictions in the Tuskegee approach to black development
became apparent only over several years. A public policy of compromise
and appeasement to white racism, for example, permitted white legislatures
to dismantle much of the black educational system that had been built a
generation earlier. In 1900 the state of Georgia spent about one-fourth as
much educating the average black child as it spent on a white child attend-
ing its public schools; in North Carolina the figure for black children was
approximately one-third; in South Carolina, about one-sixth. In Georgia
there were 108 black children per teacher compared to 51 students per
teacher in white schools; black teachers’ salaries were roughly one-half
those of white teachers.
By 1915 the educational gap between blacks and whites had widened
dramatically. The number of Southern four-year high schools had increased
from 123 to 509, but the ratio of white to black students was twenty-nine
to one. In 1917, North Carolina had 285 public high schools with a total
enrollment of 15,469 students. Its population was then 32 percent black,
but the total number of black students enrolled in high school throughout
North Carolina was nineteen. The disparity between school expenditures
per child for white and black students had also soared. In South Carolina,
for example, the average white child received $13.98 annually, and the aver-
age black child received $1.13—only about 8.1 percent of the amount
received by whites. Student-teacher ratios in Southern black public schools
were down slightly, to 95 to one; but in white schools, the figure was 44.6
to one.
33
This educational underdevelopment was replicated at the university
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 35


--- PAGE 57 ---
level. Southern whites of most social classes placed little value on higher
education generally and allocated marginal resources for the advanced
training of their own young adults. As historian C. Vann Woodward notes,
white Southern colleges were “pitifully” endowed. In 1901 the combined
endowments of all the colleges in eleven Southern states were “less than
half of the funds held by the colleges of New York State alone.” Harvard
University had a larger annual income in 1901 than the combined incomes
of “the sixty-six colleges and universities of Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Arkansas.” Few white
technical schools and graduate schools in the South were genuinely capa-
ble of doing research, and standards at the bachelor’s degree level were
barely above those of secondary school levels in the North.
34
Given the poverty of white higher education, it is not surprising that
black colleges and industrial schools fared poorly during the flood of white
supremacy. White critics complained that college and technical training
had made blacks “uppish” and “bumptious” and prompted them to “despise
work.”
35 State legislatures sharply cut into the budgets of black state-sup-
ported schools. In 1916 the segregated Negro Agricultural and Technical
College at Greensboro, North Carolina, received only one-thirteenth of
the amount appropriated to white state schools. Also in 1916, the black
public colleges in Virginia, Georgia, and the Carolinas “received from their
states less than one-eighth of the amount for whites in Virginia alone.”
36
Washington’s public position of accommodation to racial inequality
prepared the ideological ground for a series of repressive laws governing
race relations. Washington had hoped that a conservative social order
would respect the civil and political rights of Negro Americans. This was
unfortunately not the case. In Alabama, for example, there were 180,000
black adult males of voting age in 1900. After the ratification of Alabama’s
white supremacist state constitution in 1901, black voters almost disap-
peared. In 1908, only 3,700 black males in Alabama were registered vot-
ers; two decades later, the figure had fallen to 1,500. Other states carried
out similar measures. In Louisiana the black electorate declined from
130,000 in 1896 to fewer than 5,000 in less than a decade. In Virginia the
number of black voters dropped to 21,000, out of a black adult male pop-
ulation of 150,000. It is important to note that voting restrictions were
aimed at poor and working-class whites, as well as blacks. Nearly half of
all white male adults in Mississippi were barred from voting by literacy
tests and poll taxes.
The demand for white supremacy was extended to public accommoda-
tions. Georgia had racially segregated all public streetcars in 1891, and
36 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 58 ---
within a decade all other Southern states had followed suit. In 1905 the
“Separate Park Law” was approved by the Georgia State Assembly, re-
stricting blacks from public parks. By 1908 Atlanta’s major public build-
ings had racially segregated elevators. In later years Jim Crow restrictions
tightened. In 1922 Mississippi adopted a state Jim Crow law for all taxi-
cabs. Texas banned whites and “Africans” from boxing or wrestling togeth-
er in 1933. Oklahoma barred interracial fishing and boating in 1935. And
Birmingham’s city council barred blacks and whites from playing dominoes
or checkers together in 1930.
Such city ordinances and statewide legislation inevitably gave sanction
to racist violence. Alabama had 246 lynchings of Negroes between 1885
and 1918, well behind the national leader, Georgia, which held 381 lynch-
ings. Although the rate of lynchings declined gradually after 1900, these
vigilante crimes persisted. In 1915, the year of Washington’s death, Ala-
bama recorded 9 lynchings and Georgia had 18, including some in which
blacks were burned alive.
37
The critical weakness of Washington’s economic strategy was his fail-
ure to comprehend the negative effects of rigid segregation on all sectors
of the black labor force. Although the barriers of Jim Crow helped to gen-
erate a black consumer market, which was exploited by Negro entrepre-
neurs and professionals, the reality was that black workers suffered severe
income losses in other ways.
First, racial segregation permitted white employers to lower the gener-
al rates of wages to all workers. White laborers were protected from high-
er unemployment rates by the whites-first rule in vocational hirings, yet
they also suffered a reduction in wages. White union members frequently
accepted poor contracts with companies just to maintain the color line in
their industry.
38
Second, the anti-union philosophy of Tuskegee provided racists inside
organized labor with a justification for expelling black members. In the
early 1900s there were forty-three national unions with not even one black
member. By 1912 thousands of additional black trade unionists had been
removed: the national printers’ union had only 250 black members, the
lithographers’ one, the potters’ union none, the glass bottle blowers’ none,
the hatters’ union none, and the union of iron, steel, and tin workers had
only 2 or 3 blacks.
39
Third, thousands of black artisans and entrepreneurs who depended
solely or primarily upon white clients were displaced with the imposition
of Jim Crow. Many positions that had been defined as “Negro jobs” were
seized by whites. In 1870, according to Woodward, New Orleans “had list-
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 37


--- PAGE 59 ---
ed 3,460 Negroes as carpenters, cigar makers, painters, clerks, shoemakers,
coopers, tailors, bakers, blacksmiths, and foundry hands, [but] not 10 per-
cent of that number were employed in the same trades in 1904. Yet the
Negro population had gained more than 50 percent.”
40
On balance, Washington’s policies of accommodation and anti-unionism
retarded the accumulation of capital within black working-class households
and helped drive thousands of skilled black artisans out of the marketplace.
Tuskegee Institute’s curriculum did not adequately respond to the rap-
idly changing status of black workers in the labor force. Vocational schools
continued to train black students as blacksmiths, wheelwrights, masons,
plumbers, and for dozens of other trades that no longer offered employment
to blacks. Some of these skills became obsolete with the development of new
technologies, but many others, such as brickmasonry, eliminated blacks with
the expanding racial segregation of organized labor. With the rise in cotton
prices during the period 1900–1914, black farmers trained by Tuskegee’s
methods still had not adequately diversified their crop production. The clo-
sure of the European markets during World War I sharply reduced cotton
prices, leading to a chain reaction of default. Black rural tenants and land-
holders were unable to sell their crops at any price, and thousands went
bankrupt. By 1918 only one black-owned bank was left in Alabama—the
savings firm at Tuskegee Institute. The number of Mississippi black banks
declined to only two.
As credit disappeared or became more costly, many black farm families
trekked north, where the prospect of higher wages and life without rigid
Jim Crow barriers presented a more attractive alternative. The black exo-
dus during 1900–1910 was 170,000; by 1920–1930, it amounted to
749,000. The steady deterioration of the interracial environment, the ab-
sence of effective legal rights, and the continuation of vigilante violence
combined with economic factors to push many African Americans out of
the rural South and into the ghettos of the North.
41
What was Washington’s legacy to the educational and economic devel-
opment of black America? Writing in 1936, Du Bois suggested a partial
answer:
Washington was an opportunist, slow but keen-witted, with high
ideals. . . . He knew that the Negro needed civil and social rights. But
he believed that if the Negroes showed that they could advance despite
discrimination, that the inherent justice in the nation would gradual-
ly extend to deserving Negroes the rights that they merited. ...H e
expected that the Black owners of property would thus gain recog-
38 | Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 60 ---
nition from other property-holders and gradually rise in the scale
of society.
42
Washington was wrong—on his economic policies, on his authoritarian
measures of instruction at the institute, on his blind faith in petty-capital
accumulation for Negroes, and on his public capitulation to racism. Yet his
school still exists in Tuskegee, Alabama; his National Negro Business
League provides the leadership for today’s black American petty capitalists;
and his tactics of political accommodation with white corporations to gen-
erate funding for black social institutions are taken as normative behavior
among broad sectors of the black educational community. Booker T. Wash-
ington’s economic and educational insights remain, with their respective
strengths and contradictions, a permanent feature of African American so-
cial organizations and leaders.
Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 39


--- PAGE 61 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 62 ---
41
The most passionate and influential critic of racism in the twentieth
century was W. E. B. Du Bois. The African American intellectual is
known primarily for three distinct contributions to the political, social, and
educational transformation of American society.
I
Du Bois was the first American scholar to undertake the systematic analy-
sis of the African and African American experience. His doctoral disserta-
tion at Harvard University, The Suppression of the African Slave-Trade to the
United States of America, 1638–1870 , published in 1896, established the
foundations for scientific studies on the impact on slavery within the
Americas.
1 His 1899 sociological survey of black urban life, The Phila-
delphia Negro, was the first empirical critique of social class, educational,
economic, and cultural conditions of any black community. 2 Du Bois au-
thored a series of historical works outlining the connections between black
Americans and other people of African descent, including The Negro, pub-
lished in 1915, and Black Folk Then and Now: An Essay in the History and
Sociology of the Negro Race , published in 1939.
3 His most complex and
influential work, Black Reconstruction in America (1935), was a revisionist
interpretation of the role of African Americans after the American Civil
War, illustrating the role of race in disrupting the development of democ-
4
W. E. B. Du Bois and the
Politics of Culture
Ranking as he does among the foremost writers of true importance in
the country, one wishes sometimes (as a writer oneself ) that he could
devote all of his time to the accomplishment of that fine and moving
prose which distinguishes his books. But at the same time one realizes,
self-reproachfully, that with Dr. Du Bois it is a cause—an ideal—that
overcomes the personal egoism of the artist.
—Eugene O’Neill,
commenting on W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 63 ---
ratic institutions.4 Between 1898 and 1913 he edited a series of sociologi-
cal studies, the Atlanta University Publications, which examined in ex-
haustive detail various social, economic, and cultural problems within the
African American community.
Second, Du Bois was the central architect for the modern social protest
movement for freedom in the United States. Nearly a century ago, in an
era marked by widespread lynchings of blacks, political disfranchisement,
and the institutionalization of rigid racial segregation, he challenged the
black community to defend itself and to struggle for full civil rights. His
influential collection of essays, The Souls of Black Folk , published in 1903,
condemned the growing reality of institutional racism and the tendency of
black Americans influenced by educator Booker T. Washington to accom-
modate to social oppression and inequality.
5 In 1905 Du Bois initiated the
Niagara Movement, a group of reform-minded black educators, lawyers,
and intellectuals who criticized segregation laws and agitated for civil
rights. Within five years, elements of the Niagara Movement merged with
white liberals and socialists to create the National Association for the Ad-
vancement of Colored People (naacp). Du Bois left his faculty position at
Atlanta University, and for nearly a quarter century served as the editor of
the naacp journal, Crisis. His powerful political journalism shaped the
protest consciousness of an entire generation of African Americans en-
gaged in the effort to abolish racial segregation.
Third, Du Bois is also remembered widely for his contributions to the
political emancipation of Africa. In 1900 he was one of the founders of the
first Pan-African Conference, held in London, an attempt to coordinate
protest activities across Africa, the Caribbean, and black America. He initi-
ated a series of Pan-African congresses in the United States and Europe, in
1919, 1921, 1923, 1927, and 1945, which helped to spark modern indepen-
dence and liberation movements across the African Diaspora. For Kwame
Nkrumah, Jomo Kenyatta, Eric Williams, and a host of political leaders in
the Third World, Du Bois was the “Father of Pan-Africanism.” He left the
United States as a political exile in late 1961 and died in Nkrumah’s Ghana
at the age of ninety-five in 1963.
Seldom is Du Bois perceived outside of his immediate political context.
Yet the essence of this scholar—who was admittedly egotistic, elitist, aloof
from the masses, and arrogant—was the spirit of the artist. Motivating Du
Bois’s lifelong activities was a uniquely cultural vision of what American
and western European societies could become if freed from the shackles of
racial dogma and the ideology of economic domination. His cultural quest
was to construct a societal order in which the cultures of various social and
42 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 64 ---
ethnic groups could function on the basis of social and economic equality,
within a political framework of full, participatory democracy. When he
considered the basic questions challenging both people of color and white
Americans or Europeans to relate to each other as equals, he concluded
that they were fundamentally cultural.
For the oppressed, the central and overriding question was one of iden-
tity: who are we as a people, what is our cultural heritage, what values or
ideals can we share with other groups to enrich society as a whole, and
what do we have a right to expect from the state and civil society? Within
explorations of culture resides the kernel of an oppressed group’s con-
sciousness. So for Du Bois, the challenge was both to negate the existing
political, socioeconomic reality and to project a cultural construct that
would inform the evolution and development of people of African descent,
in a manner that reaffirmed their collective memory and their unique aes-
thetic sensibility.
Early in his writings Du Bois developed an approach toward the study
of cultural issues and group consciousness that would influence his subse-
quent research and scholarship. Throughout the nineteenth century, two
fundamental racial ideologies emerged among African American intellectu-
als—integration and black nationalism. The integrationists saw themselves
not as people of African descent but as American citizens who happened to
be black. They opposed any form of institutional separation based on racial
categories and agitated for full civil and political rights within the existing
system of capitalist democracy. Black nationalists, conversely, identified
themselves culturally and politically with other people of African descent in
the Americas and emphasized their connections with sub-Saharan Africa.
They were critical of alliances with white Americans and distrustful of the
government, and they stressed the necessity for blacks to develop their own
schools, as well as their own economic and cultural institutions. Between
these two racial ideologies stood Du Bois, who attempted to construct a
synthesis based on his cultural understanding of black identity.
His cultural formation was the “double consciousness” theory, expressed
in The Souls of Black Folk. He argued that the core consciousness of the black
American people was found within the unity of opposites, the dual reality
of their blackness and their American identity. The Negro American, Du
Bois insisted, was both “an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two
unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged
strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.” The entire history of the
black American was that of cultural and group psychological conflict, “this
longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into a
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 43


--- PAGE 65 ---
better and truer self.” Within his cultural metamorphosis, Du Bois wished
to maintain the critical elements of each original source:
He would not Africanize America, for America has too much to teach
the world and Africa. He would not bleach his Negro soul in a flood
of white Americanism, for he knows that Negro blood has a message
for the world. He simply wished to make it possible for a man to be
both a Negro and an American, without being cursed and spit upon
by his fellows, without having the doors of Opportunity closed rough-
ly in his face. This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker
in the kingdom of culture, to escape both death and isolation, to hus-
band and use his best powers and his latent genius.
6
The double consciousness theory helps to explain Du Bois’s entire po-
litical and academic career; he was constantly at odds with both the inte-
grationist and the black nationalist leaders and organizations. From his
position within the naacp, he championed struggles against all forms of
oppression, including sexism and anti-Semitism. He advocated the expan-
sion of full democratic rights to all American citizens. But unlike most of
his naacp colleagues who were integrationists, he also fully identified with
the cultures, heritage, and political resistance of people of color through-
out the Third World, particularly in the Caribbean and sub-Saharan Af-
rica. His academic research focused largely on the cultural and political role
of Africa in world civilization. Politically, he led the fight to achieve inde-
pendence and full self-determination for nonwhite nations. Domestically,
he also favored the continuation of all-black educational institutions, and
during the Great Depression he called for the development of all-black
consumer and producer cooperatives. Similarly, this existential duality or
double consciousness established the matrix for the construction of cultu-
ral forms of resistance and self-realization.
The development of an antiracist culture and society, for Du Bois,
meant the development of a cultural critique of the reality and foundations
of racism. What was racial inequality cultur ally, and how was it manifest-
ed within civil society? He consistently argued that racism was not derived
from the real or imputed biological or genetic differences between Euro-
peans and people of color. In 1914 he observed that “race antipathy is not
instinctive, but a matter of careful education.” Racism is socially construct-
ed and is reinforced by the system of unequal power and privilege exercised
by white people.
7
Several years later, in Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil, Du Bois de-
constructed what he termed “the Souls of White Folk.” Whiteness as a cul-
44 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 66 ---
tural identity was based upon a historical and hypocritical fraud. “The dis-
covery of personal whiteness among the world’s peoples is a very modern
thing,—a nineteenth and twentieth century matter, indeed,” he observed
critically. “The ancient world would have laughed at such a distinction....
This assumption that of all the hues of God whiteness alone is inherently
and obviously better than brownness or tan leads to curious acts” of op-
pression. The basis of racial privilege and white superiority is rooted with-
in the dynamics of capitalism, colonialism, and domination:
This theory of human culture and its aims has worked itself through
warp and woof of our daily thought with a thoroughness that few
realize. Everything great, good, efficient, fair, and honorable is
“white”; everything mean, bad, blundering, cheating and dishonorable
is “yellow”; a bad taste is “brown”; and the devil is “black.” The
changes of this theme are continually rung in picture and story, in
newspaper heading and moving-picture, in sermon and school book,
until, of course, the King can do no wrong,—a White Man is always
right and a Black Man has no rights which a white man is bound to
respect. There must come the necessary despising and hatreds of these
savage half-men, this unclean canaille of the world—these dogs of
men. All through the world this gospel is preaching. It has its litera-
ture, it has its priests, it has its secret propaganda and above all—
it pays!
8
Central to the process of perpetuating white racial identity was the cul-
tural apparatus of western societies. White America’s newspapers, radio
networks, and other communications systems perpetuated racial stereo-
types. The cultural institutions that produced popular music, theater, films,
professional athletics, and public amusements of all types reinforced white
superiority and black inferiority. White Americans as a group were so
heavily bombarded with racial stereotypes that their relations with blacks
as individuals and as a group were largely predetermined, structured on a
basis of antagonistic conflicts, competition, and hatred rather than within
the premises of the search for common human characteristics and mutual
respect. Any arguments contradicting the legitimacy of racial domination
were dismissed or ruthlessly oppressed. As Du Bois commented in Crisis
in 1930:
[Many Americans] have no conception of the meaning of the free-
dom of speech. They apparently assume that this is the right to ex-
press any opinion with which they agree, but that opinions with which
they disagree or which they regard as unsound or dangerous, must be
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 45


--- PAGE 67 ---
suppressed. Back of this willingness to silence those to whom men do
not wish to listen, lies stupidity, cruelty, oppression and disaster.
9
More devastating was the impact of white racial superiority upon non-
whites, fostering a sense of embitterment and self-hatred. For five hundred
years, “men had hated and despised and abused black folk. . . . We are
instinctively and almost unconsciously ashamed of the caricatures done of
our darker shades,” Du Bois noted in 1920. The deconstruction of race
required the articulation of the validity and integrity of African-derived
aesthetics and culture. “Off with these thought-chains and inchoate soul-
shrinkings,” he urged other African Americans, “and let us train ourselves
to see beauty in black.”
10
II
For African Americans to think of themselves in a new way, transcending
the imposed blinders of inferiority and self-doubt, Du Bois believed, cul-
ture must be seized as a creative, reconstructive tool. The clearest expres-
sion of Du Bois’s objectives in promoting a permanent, cultural revolution
among African Americans was his seminal 1926 essay, “Criteria of Negro
Art.” He challenged first those who insisted that former slaves had no right
to speak of art or aesthetics and that the pressing economic, social, and
political problems confronting black Americans were so severe that cultur-
al issues were secondary or superfluous. “What do we want? We want to
be Americans, full-fledged Americans, with all the rights of other
American citizens. But is that all?” he asked. “We who are dark can see
America in a way that white Americans can not. And seeing our country
thus, are we satisfied with its present goals and ideals?”
The struggle against racism was at its core a two-sided cultural conflict,
an attempt to undermine racist stereotypes and beliefs among whites and to
restore a sense of identity and pride among nonwhites. “The white public
today demands from its artists, literary and pictorial, racial pre-judgment.
The white public deliberately distorts truth and justice, as far as colored
races are concerned, and it will pay for no other.” Such prejudicial stereo-
types had to be challenged at every opportunity. The greatest burden was
not against the external oppressor, Du Bois cautioned, but rather within the
Negro group itself. Black Americans’ search for true self-consciousness was
a quest of culture:
Thus it is the bounden duty of black America to begin this great work
of the creation of beauty, of the preservation of beauty, of the realiza-
tion of beauty, and we must use in this work all the methods that men
46 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 68 ---
have used before. And what have been the tools of the artist in times
gone by? First of all, he has used the truth—not for the sake of truth,
not as a scientist seeking truth, but as one upon whom truth eternal-
ly thrusts itself as the highest handmaid of imagination, as the one
great vehicle of universal understanding .... The apostle of beauty
thus becomes the apostle of truth and right not by choice but by inner
and outer compulsion. Free he is but his freedom is ever bounded by
truth and justice; and slavery only dogs him when he is denied the
right to tell the truth or recognize an ideal or justice. Thus all art is
propaganda and ever must be, despite the wailing of the purists. ...I
do not care a damn for any art that is not used for propaganda.
11
In the field of music, Du Bois repeatedly emphasized the unique genius
of the African American spiritual and secular songs, illustrating that much
of white American music was based on rhythms and patterns derived from
Africa. In 1903 he produced A Bibliography of Negro Folk Songs at Atlanta
University, one of the first scholarly efforts to document African American
music.
12 That same year, in The Souls of Black Folk, he wrote of the religious
music generated by slaves: “The Negro folk-song—the rhythmic cry of the
slave—stands to-day not simply as the sole American music, but as the most
beautiful expression of human experience born this side of the seas ....I t
still remains as the singular spiritual heritage of the nation and the greatest
gift of the Negro people.”
13 In Crisis, he periodically reported on develop-
ments in black music. In May 1926, for example, he noted the pioneering
contributions of John Wesley Work, the artist who helped to “resurrect and
make eternal the Negro spiritual.”
14 In the black newspaper of Harlem, the
Amsterdam News, he urged readers to develop a personal “Negro music
library,” obtaining such works as James Weldon Johnson and J. Rosamond
Johnson’s Book of American Negro Spirituals, W. C. Handy’s Blues, and W. A.
Fisher’s Seventy Negro Spirituals.
15 Du Bois was one of the first critics to
highlight the activities of black artists Bert Williams, Carl Diton, and Will
Marion Cook.
Consistent with the double consciousness theory, however, Du Bois al-
ways stressed that African Americans were profoundly American and had
the democratic right to perform music drawn from the European experi-
ence. In 1933, when a New York Timesreviewer urged Negroes to sing “old-
time” darky songs from the plantation era, because they were not capable
of the finer expressions of art, he took prompt exception. African Amer-
ican people have the right to sing spirituals, blues, and other expressions
from their own cultural and aesthetic background, but this by no means
should exclude their creative impulses from other areas. “It is to be trusted
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 47


--- PAGE 69 ---
that our leaders in music, holding on to the beautiful heritage of the past,
will not on that account, either be coerced or frightened from taking all
music for their province and showing the world how to sing,” he insisted.
16
According to historian Gerald Horne, Du Bois practiced what he preached
aesthetically. He was a “patron” of the Harlem Opera Society. He loved
Negro spirituals, but as his second wife, Shirley Graham, observed, “his
favorite recording [was] the Ninth Symphony by Beethoven.”
17
Du Bois was similarly involved in other creative arts. Crisis informed
readers of the work of sculptor Elizabeth Prophet, a black American who
had studied at L’école Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris.
“Almost without money, without friends, and frail of physique,” Du Bois
commented, Prophet had produced sculpture that displayed a “fine artistic
sense and mastery in her field.” He used Prophet to chide the African
American community for its failure to provide adequate material resources
to creative artists. “Prophet has sacrificed both health and strength to her
art. She has starved herself and gone without proper clothing ....G r i m
and determined, she is still working on, without assistance, almost un-
known in America.”
18 In 1903 Du Bois wrote a short essay on black
painter Henry O. Tanner, noting that such artists and creative intellectuals
were part of “the advance guard of the race.”
19 Two decades later in Crisis,
its editor complained that only two African Americans had ever purchased
a Tanner painting. Du Bois urged every black church and cultural institu-
tion to purchase the works of Tanner and other painters.
20 Curiously, he
seldom wrote about black dance; in 1940, however, in the pages of Atlanta
University’s Phylon magazine, he noted with approval the successes of
“Katherine Dunham and her dance group” in the development of ac-
claimed “exhibitions of the Negro dance.”
21
III
Du Bois’s greatest aesthetic passion was for the theater. Always something
of a thespian in both public and private life, he was consistently attracted
by the lure of the stage. Crisis was frequently a forum for discussions of
innovations in Negro theater. “The Negro is essentially dramatic,” Du Bois
confirmed in 1916. “His greatest gift to the world has been and will be a
gift of art, of appreciation and realization of beauty.” To create theater,
playwrights and performers, individually and collectively, had to cultivate
an awareness of their political obligations to the masses of black people.
Once transcending the ghetto of “Negro minstrelsy,” with “the growth of a
considerable number of colored theaters and moving picture places, a new
and inner demand for Negro drama has arisen.”
48 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 70 ---
Du Bois argued that the obligation of the Negro drama was, in part, to
instruct blacks in “the meaning of their history and their rich, emotional
life through a new theater” while simultaneously revealing “the Negro to
the white world as a human, feeling thing.” Again, the duality of the artis-
tic objectives was rooted in Du Bois’s cultural matrix of the double con-
sciousness.
22 He expanded on this theme in 1924 in his brief essay “The
Negro and the American Stage.” The cultural struggle against racist ideol-
ogy had to be waged on the dramatic stage. Throughout America’s artistic
history, the African American role in performances “has been a lay figure
whose business it was usually to be funny and sometimes pathetic. He has
never, with very few exceptions, been human or credible. This, of course,
cannot last.” He observed yet again, “The most dramatic group of people
in the history of the United States is the American Negro”:
Any mention of Negro blood or Negro life in America for a century
has been occasion for an ugly picture, a dirty allusion, a nasty comment
or a pessimistic forecast. The result is that the Negro today fears any
attempt of the artist to paint Negroes. He is not satisfied unless every-
thing is perfect and proper and beautiful and joyful and hopeful ....
Happy is the artist that breaks through any of these shells for his is the
kingdom of eternal beauty. He will come through scarred and perhaps
a little embittered, certainly astonished at the almost universal misin-
terpretation of his motives and aims. . . . But it is work that must be
done. No greater mine of dramatic material ever lay ready for the great
artist’s hands than the situation of men of Negro blood in modern
America.
23
Du Bois’s enthusiasm for the theater began quite early in life. As a
youth in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, he participated in a high school
folk play, Old John Brown Had a Little Indian . At Harvard University six
years later, now more sophisticated, he helped organize a version of Aris-
tophanes’ The Birds in an all-black Boston church. At the age of ninety,
looking backward in warmth and affection, he wrote: “The rendition was
good, but not outstanding; not quite appreciated by the colored audience,
but well worth doing. Even though it worked me near to death, I was
proud of it.”
24 Within months of becoming editor of Crisis, he sensed that
the theater could serve his larger political objectives. After 1904 Du Bois
considered himself a socialist, and in 1911–1912 he briefly joined the
Socialist Party. In 1913 he became a contributor to the socialist-oriented
New Review , along with fellow naacp leaders William English Walling
and young (then radical) journalist Walter Lippmann. Many of these bo-
hemian leftists in New York were promoting theatrical pageants during
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 49


--- PAGE 71 ---
these years, to dramatize the plight of the oppressed working classes. In-
spired partially by his radical white colleagues, Du Bois in 1911 wrote his
own dramatic pageant, The Star of Ethiopia.
25
With a projected cast of 350 actors and participants, he single-handed-
ly raised sufficient funds for the pageant’s production. The premiere was
held in New York in 1913, at the Emancipation Exposition. Popular ac-
claim led him to restage the pageant in Washington, D.C., with 1,200 par-
ticipants. The event was well received, but Du Bois, who raised two thou-
sand dollars for the production, was still forced to spend five hundred dol-
lars of his own money. In 1916 in Philadelphia, The Star of Ethiopia was
performed by more than 1,000 participants at the one-hundredth anniver-
sary conference of the African Methodist Episcopal Church. Nearly ten
years later, on June 15 and 18, 1925,The Star was performed at the Holly-
wood Bowl in Los Angeles, with the proceeds going to the welfare bureau
of the Los Angeles branch of the naacp. Thousands of black Americans
witnessed these extravaganzas and were profoundly moved. Twelve thou-
sand people, including the daughter of the president of the United States,
attended the Washington pageant. Still, there were disappointments. The
project attracted little interest from the white public. Du Bois admitted,
“There have been within my own race the usual petty but hurting insinu-
ations of personal greed and selfishness as the real incentives behind my
efforts.” Nevertheless, he reaffirmed, “The great fact has been demonstrat-
ed that pageantry among colored people is not only possible, but in many
ways of unsurpassed beauty and can be made a means of uplift and educa-
tion and the beginning of a folk drama.”
26
After World War I, Du Bois’s interest and involvement in black the-
ater was revived. In his 1923 essay “Can the Negro Serve the Drama?” he
reiterated that the African American had the capacity to produce black
Ibsens and Molières.
27 He applauded the organization of the Ethiopian
Art Theater, under the direction of Raymond O’Neil, and its performance
of Salomé on New York’s Broadway. Although the play did not succeed
financially, Du Bois observed in Crisis, “dramatically and spiritually it was
one of the great successes that the country has seen.”
28 Following O’Neil,
Du Bois decided to become directly engaged with a black theatrical com-
pany. In 1925 he participated in the establishment of the Krigwa Players
in Harlem, which functioned for two years before disbanding. This direct
experience made him more aware of the inherent difficulties in organiz-
ing and financing theatrical productions that had larger political functions
and goals.
29
In a 1931 address, Du Bois observed that theater was potentially the
50 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 72 ---
most politically and aesthetically liber ating of all art forms. “Behind the
footlights one is permitted to examine and discuss truth,” he argued. But
this environment of potential freedom of expression was fundamentally
compromised and flawed. The spirit of art was not only “threatened ...b y
the well recognized fatty degeneration of musical comedy, but by that
secret, internal and devastating malady which attacks an art which is free
to treat the truth, and yet afraid to look it in the face.” Most playwrights
refused to confront the harsh realities of racism, preferring instead to “turn
the piteous tragedy of the Negro into cheap pornographic pathos.” The
Negro artist’s fellow actors “persistently [denied] him full recognition” for
any perceived talents or creativity. But the problem of cultural freedom was
directly linked to the issue of democracy, not simply for the Negro but for
all Americans. “A freedom unused is perverted or lost,” Du Bois warned.
“If the stage dare not frankly portray the Negro problem because of fear
and snobbery,” the American theater would eventually suppress the dis-
cussion of other controversial issues.
30
IV
Although aristocratic in temperament, Du Bois recognized the importance
of popular culture in the social and political development of most working-
class African Americans. Occasionally he commented on recent develop-
ments in filmmaking, popular humor, professional athletics, and popular
music. In 1943 he drafted a short essay called “The Humor of Negroes,”
which illustrated the political edge of black laughter. The “dry mockery of
the pretensions of white folk” embedded within black humor provided
both a critique of racial segregation and a confirmation of the human value
and self-worth of blacks against the weight of oppression.
31
Du Bois followed the careers of black athletes for his readers, illustrating
the disruptive role that racism played, frequently negating their achieve-
ments. For example, in 1914, commenting on controversial heavyweight
champion Jack Johnson, he observed that the recent expressions of white
public criticism concerning boxing “brutality” were based on racial antipathy
to domination by black athletes. In 1923 he commented that boxing was
indeed a brutal business, but it was preferable to armed warfare; besides, the
racist treatment of black athletes such as Jack Johnson was “beneath con-
tempt.”
32 In Phylon, Du Bois noted the pugilistic accomplishments of heavy-
weight champion Joe Louis and welterweight champion Henry Armstrong
and the growing white hostility toward black athletic excellence. “It is clear
with every successive battle that Louis wins,” he wrote in late 1941, “that the
attitude of the spectators is worse and worse. His victory receives slight ap-
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 51


--- PAGE 73 ---
plause and even minor advantages on the part of his opponents are greeted
with hysteria.”
The root cause of racial partisanship was the Jim Crow structure of col-
legiate and professional athletics. “Negroes have made brilliant records in
football but they are not allowed to compete in any major football leagues,”
Du Bois complained. “They have always been excluded from professional
baseball despite well-known cases of ability. In tennis no Negro can com-
pete except in his own racial organizations.”
33 When Jackie Robinson fi-
nally broke the color bar in professional baseball in 1947, Du Bois felt that
a significant political and cultural landmark had been achieved. He attend-
ed the fifth game of the 1947 World Series, in order to see Robinson in the
Brooklyn Dodgers’ lineup. But he constantly reminded African Americans
not to place excessive emphasis on athletic achievements at the expense of
the pursuits of knowledge and the creative arts. In May 1947 Du Bois
noted in his newspaper column for the Chicago Defender that the gradua-
tion of John Howard as “the first Negro college graduate of Princeton Uni-
versity” superseded Robinson’s accomplishment.
34
In the struggle to develop a vibrant cultural environment, special em-
phasis had to be placed on the nurturing and training of black children. Du
Bois dearly loved children, seeing in them all of the fullness of human hope
and possibility, the transcendence of hate and conflict. In one of his earli-
est essays, “The Problem of Amusement,” published in 1897, he encour-
aged black parents to create healthy and loving conditions for the raising
of their children.
35 Returning to this theme constantly in Crisis, Du Bois
argued that cultural transformation required a special place for children:
“Because to childhood we look for the salvation of the world. To childhood
we look for the triumph of justice, mercy, and truth. As the children of this
generation are trained, so will the hope of all men in the next generation
blossom to fruition.”
36
In subsequent essays, Du Bois’s advice to black parents was more pre-
scriptive. In 1912 he analyzed the impact of racial prejudice upon children,
discussing whether it was black parents’ obligation to shield their children
from hardship and discomfort. Some parents mistakenly endeavor to
“shield [their] children absolutely,” fearful of the knowledge that “cruelty
waits on each corner to shadow the joy of our children.” At the opposite
extreme, some “leave their children to sink or swim in this sea of race prej-
udice. ...O u t  o f  t h i s  m a y  c o m e  s t rength, poise, self-dependence, and out
of it too, may come bewilderment, cringing deception, and self-distrust.”
Both methods were to be avoided, Du Bois suggested. Children must not
be thrust into a racist society prematurely, without the proper foundation
52 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 74 ---
of self-respect, of knowledge and pride in their heritage. “The day will
dawn when mothers must explain but clearly why the little girls next door
do not want to play with ‘niggers’; what the real cause of the teachers’ un-
sympathetic attitude is, and how people may ride on the backs of street cars
and the smoker end of trains, and still be people, honest high-minded peo-
ple.” The deadly power of segregation attempted to negate even a child’s
perceptions of his or her own humanity, and for Du Bois, the sacrifices of
the parents in creating a new cultural and political environment were abso-
lutely essential for the future survival of African American people. “If the
great battle of human right against poverty, against disease, against color
prejudice is to be won, it must be won not in our day, but in the day of our
children’s children.”
37
Crisis initiated an annual “children’s issue” to offer feature stories de-
signed specifically for children and to assist black parents in matters of
family instruction. In January 1920 Du Bois founded the Brownies’ Book,
a monthly publication dedicated to “the children of the sun—designed for
all children, but especially OURS. It aims to be a thing of joy and beauty,
dealing in happiness, laughter and emulation, and designed especially for
the kiddies from six to sixteen.” The parables and poetry of the Brownies’
Book attempted to present black children in human terms, beyond the ster-
ile stereotypes of the racist literature of the day. They acquainted black
children with heroes from the African American past and with the cultur-
al, political, and social contributions of blacks to American society. Be-
neath the magazine’s training in racial history and culture lay an ethical
purpose: the Brownies’ Book sought to provide black children with “a code
of honor and action in their relations with white children.” Looking over
the publication’s various issues, one sees a mixture of children’s literature
and a political discourse that seems a bit beyond the capacity of juveniles
to assimilate. In August 1920, for example, Du Bois commented on the
wave of proletarian uprisings against capital: “There is a new general in the
world who is doing great things and you must know about him. His name
is ‘General Strike.”’ More effectively, in February 1921 Du Bois’s charac-
ter “the Crow” became for children the basis of a progressive political cri-
tique of racism, poverty, and capitalism: “There are things I do not under-
stand as I fly among men. There is food—they eat not; there are clothes—
they freeze; there is joy—they cry. Why—why—why?” The magazine was
too expensive to produce, however, and with considerable regret Du Bois
published the final issue in December 1921. Despite the cost, he was
proud of his effort to enrich the culture and education of black children.
38
In Dusk of Dawn, published in 1940, he recalled with “infinite satisfaction”
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 53


--- PAGE 75 ---
the “beautiful publication” for black children. 39 Critics and educators
agreed. One reviewer described the Brownies’ Book as a “magnificent pub-
lication . . . an effort to restore a sense of self-esteem to the black child,
our child of the sun. It brought satisfaction to the thousands of children
who knew it.”
40
V
Perhaps Du Bois’s greatest influence in reshaping African American cul-
ture was his writing in the areas of poetry, the novel, and literary criticism.
His appreciation for literature began as a child, as he was growing up in
New England’s Berkshire Mountains. As a teenager submitting a letter to
the black publication the New York Globe , he questioned the “absence of
literary societies” among Negro communities.
41 In late 1884 he reported
that a black “literary and social improvement” society, calling itself the
Sons of Freedom, had been formed in Great Barrington. Du Bois was
elected secretary-treasurer of the society.
42
During his first tenure as a professor at Atlanta University, he initiated
Moon, a journal of political and cultural commentary that included notes on
Negro literature. The March 1906 issue, for example, contained a brief essay
on African American literature and a bibliography of the poetry and other
works of Paul Laurence Dunbar.
43 Crisis published the works of young
black writers and encouraged their careers. Du Bois was one of the first
intellectuals in the post–World War I period to recognize the talent of a
younger generation of black writers who had begun to cluster in Harlem. In
April 1920 he applauded the latest writings of black literary artists and de-
clared: “A renaissance of American Negro literature is due.”
44 In June 1922
Crisis called for the establishment of “an Institute of Negro Literature and
Art,” which would encourage the development of black cultural creativity.45
In April 1931 Du Bois announced the creation of a “literary prize” compe-
tition for the sum of one thousand dollars. The award, named for himself,
was designed to foster “a more human and truthful portraiture of the Amer-
ican Negro in the twentieth century.”
46
Throughout his professional life, Du Bois expressed his political and
social ideals in the form of protest poetry and in a series of novels. His first
novel, The Quest of the Silver Fleece , published in 1911, was probably his
best. Through his two central characters, Blessed Alwyn and Zora, he at-
tempted to depict the social tragedy and political conflict of African Amer-
icans against the white ruling class in the South.
47 Dark Princess, published
in 1928, was a product of the late Harlem Renaissance period. Although the
plot focuses on the romantic relationship between a black man, Matthew
54 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 76 ---
Towns, and an Indian princess, Kautilya, the central issue is the political
conflict between oppressed people of color in the Third World and white
colonialism. For Du Bois, the novel was an effort to use fiction to project
his own vision of an international, nonwhite alliance, forming the basis for
democratic empowerment and cultural emancipation. The critics were
divided. Some viewed the novel as mechanical and melodramatic; others,
such as George S. Schuyler, praised the work as “a masterful . . . portrayal of
the soul of our people.”
48
A quarter century later, at the end of his life, Du Bois returned to the
novel form to express his political ideology. In a series of works titled The
Black Flame, he presented the fictional life of Manuel Mansart, relating the
character’s interaction with a host of important figures throughout African
American cultural and social history.
49 Taken as a group, Du Bois’s novels
do not represent great literature, but what they lack in artistry and tech-
nique, they compensate for in political and moral passion. The goal of cul-
tural intervention was to advance the boundaries of politics.
As creative works and as political broadsides, Du Bois’s collected poet-
ry was more effective than his novels. Two of his most influential works are
“The Song of the Smoke” and “A Litany at Atlanta.” “The Song of the
Smoke” was published in Horizon, a small political and cultural journal
edited by Du Bois after the termination of Moon. The poem captures his
double consciousness theme by inspiring pride in one’s racial heritage as
well as the determination to achieve full rights. It prefigures the militant
protest literature of both the Harlem Renaissance and the Negritude move-
ment decades later:
I am the smoke king,
I am black.
I am swinging in the sky,
I am ringing worlds on high;
I am the thought of the throbbing mills,
I am the soul of the Soul toils kills,
Up I’m curling from the sod,
I am whirling home to God.
I am the smoke king,
I am black.
...
I am the smoke king,
I am black.
I am darkening with song,
I am hearkening to wrong;
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 55


--- PAGE 77 ---
I will be black as blackness can,
The blacker the mantle the mightier the man.
50
“A Litany at Atlanta” was written in the aftermath of the bloody race
riot in Atlanta in 1906. Characteristically, Du Bois wrote a political essay
about the riot in the journal World Today, emphasizing that institutional
racism, political indifference, and police brutality had combined to create
white vigilante mobs that were terrorizing the African American commu-
nity.
51 But his call of anguish was expressed artistically in “Litany,” pub-
lished in The Independent:
O Silent God, Thou whose voice afar in mist and mystery hath
left our ears an-hungered in these fearful days—
Hear us, good Lord....
A city lay in travail, God our Lord, and from her loins sprang
twin Murder and Black Hate. Red was the midnight: clang,
crack, and cry of death and fury filled the air and trembled
underneath the stars where church spires pointed silently to
Thee. And all this was to sate the greed of greedy men who hide
behind the veil of vengeance.
Bend us Thine ear, O Lord! . . .
Sit no longer blind, Lord God, deaf to our prayer and dumb to our
dumb suffering.
Surely Thou, too, art not white, O Lord, a pale, bloodless, heartless
thing!
Ah, Christ of all the Pities!
52
VI
Du Bois’s centrality as a creative force in shaping the contours of African
American literature and culture can best be measured during the period of
the 1950s, under the political repression of McCarthyism and the Cold
War. Because of Du Bois’s political identification with socialism and the
international Left, his books were barred from libraries; he was denied the
right to speak in public venues; for seven years the American government
illegally blocked his right to travel outside the United States. One critic,
Lenneal Henderson, correctly characterized Du Bois as “the most discred-
ited and maligned black scholar of the twentieth century.” Yet during this
period of political persecution, black cultural workers continued to be
inspired by his example. Playwright Lorraine Hansberry studied with Du
Bois in the 1950s at New York’s Jefferson School; novelist Alice Childress
was described by historian Gerald Horne as being “under Du Bois’s spell”
as well. Du Bois inspired the Committee for the Negro in the Arts, whose
56 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 78 ---
members included artist/activist Paul Robeson, Hansberry, Childress,
singer Harry Belafonte, and actor Sidney Poitier. Many white artists shared
those opinions. Henry Miller described Du Bois as “one of the truly deep
influences of my life.” Novelist Truman Capote consulted Du Bois in 1959
when he attempted to gain access to the People’s Republic of China.
53
Such testimony indicates the profound influence of Du Bois among a
wide spectrum of artists, writers, and cultural critics. But he never man-
aged to translate his political and cultural accomplishments into a coher-
ent critical intellectual tradition that would be expressed in the literature
and essays of later generations of African Americans. There were several
reasons for this curious lacuna, this gap between the prolific writer and his
admirers. The first and surely the most vexing difficulty concerned Du
Bois’s double consciousness formulation, which occupied the center of his
intellectual constellation. Friends and foes alike tended to bifurcate his
intellectual and political legacy, focusing on various aspects of his writings
or public engagements without synthesizing the divergent elements of his
theory and practice.
Over all was a grand design, but it eluded them. Reform-minded politi-
cians dedicated to the abolition of racial segregation debated Du Bois’s
writings on public policy; historians wrestled with his Black Reconstruction
and other social science texts; sociologists focused on his social research on
the urban Negro population; artists read his poetry, novels, and other liter-
ary works. An essayist rather than a system-builder, Du Bois left literally
thousands of newspaper pieces, articles in academic journals, and occasion-
al essays covering politics, folk religion, music, cultural history, and soci-
ology. By not ever writing a central theoretical statement clearly articulat-
ing his worldview and its meaning, Du Bois left his disciples to interpret
the master in a variety of ways.
Temperamentally, Du Bois was not inclined to establish a coherent
school of cultural and political criticism. His political battles with black
American educator Booker T. Washington throughout the period 1903–
1915 and his subsequent ideological conflicts with Jamaican black nation-
alist leader Marcus Mosiah Garvey during the 1920s set the terms of
debate for much of African American social and political theory. But Du
Bois fought more frequently with his political friends than with his polit-
ical opponents. Inside the naacp, he took on virtually every other leader at
one time or another. In 1934, in a dispute over policy, he resigned from the
organization he had founded. Accepting a faculty position at Atlanta Uni-
versity, he accused that institution’s president, Rufus E. Clement, of con-
spiring against him. When Du Bois was retired involuntarily from the uni-
W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 57


--- PAGE 79 ---
versity in 1944, Clement characterized him as “uncooperative” and “antag-
onistic.”
54 Returning to the naacp as director of research, Du Bois was
summarily fired four years later when he openly opposed the decisions of
the association’s national secretary.
This combativeness was a problem, but his inability to explain his com-
plex ideas clearly, in a useful way, compounded it. “I was no natural leader
of men,” Du Bois once observed. “I could not slap people on the back and
make friends of strangers. I could not easily break down an inherited
reserve; or at all times curb a biting, critical tongue.”
55
Despite these and other personal contradictions, W. E. B. Du Bois ded-
icated himself for nearly a century to the struggle to end racial discrimina-
tion, the exploitation of nonwhite people across the globe, and other man-
ifestations of social and political oppression. His vision of the nature of this
conflict was at once cultural and political. As he explained in his conclu-
sion to Black Reconstruction : “This the American black man knows: His
fight here is a fight to the finish. Either he dies or wins ....H e  w i l l  enter
modern civilization here in America as a black man on terms of perfect and
unlimited equality with any white man, or he will enter not at all.... This
is the last great battle of the West.”
56
For both the artist and the scholar, the politician and the dreamer, the
cultural vision of W. E. B. Du Bois was an essential component of the pol-
itics of human equality.
58 | W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 80 ---
59
W. E. B. Du Bois—founder of the National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People and editor of its journal, Crisis, sociologist, civil
rights leader, and Father of Pan-Africanism—is seldom viewed as a Chris-
tian. His biographers note that he frequently attacked all Christian de-
nominations for their support of racial segregation. In published articles,
Du Bois described himself as an “agnostic” and questioned the “immortal-
ity” of man.
1 As a college student and in later life, he affirmed that “work,
systematic and tireless,” was his only true faith.2 In December 1940 he an-
nounced that he worshiped “Truth and Truth only....I  w i l l  face each sun-
rise with one prayer: There is no God but Love and Work is his Prophet.”3
At the end of his public career, Du Bois declared, “I believe in commu-
nism,” renouncing American “free enterprise [as] leading the world to dis-
aster,” and he died an exile in Ghana.
4
I
This image of Du Bois reveals only one aspect of his multifaceted charac-
ter, however. For he also wrote extensively, throughout his life, on the black
church. His earliest published essays focus on black religious life in his
hometown, Great Barrington, Massachusetts.
5 One of his latest articles,
written in 1962, was an introduction to a photographic study of storefront
churches in the ghetto of Buffalo, New York.
6 In the intervening years he
5
The Black Faith of
W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 81 ---
wrote several hundred articles on religion, the black church, and the social
and political function of religious institutions. Du Bois was simultaneous-
ly an agnostic and an Anglican, a staunch critic of religious dogma and a
passionate convert to the black version of Christianity. His belief in his
people was expressed in his own black faith for the world.
Du Bois’s religious sensibility was formed early in life. His grandfather,
Alexander Du Bois, was senior warden of the black Episcopal Parish of
St. Luke, founded by black residents of New Haven, Connecticut, in
1847.
7 His mother, Mary Burghardt, was deeply religious and frequently
but softly urged her high-spirited son to attend church services regularly
and “never to go into a liquor saloon or even near it.” Life in Great Bar-
rington during the Gilded Age was largely defined by the church and its
strict moral code. Du Bois and his mother attended two churches: a small
Negro Methodist Zion church, formed by a small colony of “‘contrabands,’
freed Negroes from the South,” and Great Barrington’s Congregational
church, which was patronized by the leading merchants, farmers, and
“professional men” of the community.
8 Even as a teenager, Du Bois no-
ticed the class divisions within his small community, as manifested in
the existence of various denominations. The local Catholic church “was
perched across the river beyond the mills, and thither the [Irish] girl ser-
vants trudged faithfully early mornings to mass. This and other traits of
the Irish became the basis of jokes and ridicule in town.” Colored people,
by contrast, despite their lower-class status, were cordially welcomed in
white middle-class congregations. The Episcopal church catered to “older
families and the more well-to-do,” and most of Du Bois’s extended fami-
ly in the region belonged to this congregation. In the northern section of
the town, near the mill, was an unpretentious “small white wooden
Methodist church,” attended by “the less well-known inhabitants” of
Great Barrington.
9
Du Bois graduated from high school in June 1884, and his mother died
several months later. His subsequent academic career would have been in
doubt had it not been for the timely intervention of three leading citizens:
the Reverend Mr. Scudder, pastor of the Congregational church; Edward
Van Lennep, superintendent of the Congregational church’s Sunday school
and principal of a local private school; and the Reverend C. C. Painter, a
retired Federal Indian Agent and former pastor of several Congregational
churches in Connecticut. The church in Great Barrington and Painter’s
churches agreed to donate one hundred dollars a year for Du Bois’s college
education. The black youth wished to attend Harvard, but Painter insisted
that “the reconstructed South . . . was the place for me to be educated.”
60 | The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 82 ---
Over the objections of “my family and colored friends,” Du Bois was sent
to Fisk University in Nashville in September 1885.
10
Painter’s decision to send Du Bois to the South fundamentally shaped
the young man’s life. Growing up in New England, Du Bois had known
little racial prejudice, and his contacts with other blacks had been few and
brief. In Nashville, a world of color was revealed, and the young Puritan
was sorely out of place at first. “I was thrilled to be for the first time among
so many people of my own color ....N e v e r  before had I seen young men
so self-assured and who gave themselves such airs, and colored men at that;
and above all for the first time I saw beautiful girls.” Years of sexual repres-
sion and conservative training put him at odds with his contemporaries,
who had “loose sexual morals.” Years later Du Bois admitted frankly, “I
actually did not know the physical difference between men and women. At
first my fellows jeered in disbelief and then became sorry and made many
offers to guide my abysmal ignorance. This built for me inexcusable and
startling temptations.”
11 Regarded as a “liar” or “freak” when he revealed
his virginity, he sought familiar refuge in the arms of the church. He duti-
fully attended church services, revivals, and morning prayers at the begin-
ning of each school day, in a desperate search for inner tranquillity. Writing
to Reverend Scudder in February 1886, the young college freshman ob-
served that he had “united with the Church and hope that the prayers of
my Sunday School may help guide me in the path of Christian duty.”
Du Bois faithfully continued to correspond with members of the Great
Barrington Sunday school class until at least 1892.
12
But in Nashville he encountered controversy in his faith from “funda-
mentalist” quarters. One of Du Bois’s classmates, “Pop” Miller, brought
him before the congregation and accused him of “a particularly heinous
form of sin”—public “dancing.” Du Bois protested in vain that he had
“never attended public dance halls” and had only engaged in the “innocent
pastime . . . at the homes of colored friends in the city.” Fisk University
teachers supported Miller, warning the young sinner “that my dancing
might well be quite innocent, but . . . my example might lead others astray.”
Du Bois deeply resented their intervention and much later concluded that
this little tempest “led to my eventual refusal to join a religious organiza-
tion.” But for the moment, he still “never questioned [his] religious up-
bringing. Its theory had presented no particular difficulties: God ruled the
world, Christ loved it, and men did right, or tried to; otherwise they were
rightly punished.”
13
Another aspect of the black social and religious experience became part
of Du Bois’s development in the summers of 1886 and 1887. In east Tennes-
The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 61


--- PAGE 83 ---
see, he obtained a minor position as a rural schoolteacher at twenty-eight
dollars per month. At last he encountered “the real seat of slavery ...I
touched intimately the lives of the commonest of mankind—people who
ranged from barefooted dwellers on dirt floors, with patched rags for clothes,
to rough hard-working farmers, with plain, clean plenty.” His schoolhouse
was nothing but a log hut with no door, “a massive rickety fireplace,” and lit-
tle furniture. “I was haunted by a New England vision of neat little desks and
chairs, but alas the reality was rough plank benches without backs, and at
times without legs,” Du Bois noted. “They had the one virtue of making
naps dangerous, possibly fatal, for the floor was not to be trusted.”
14
Among his class of nearly thirty youths, many older than himself, was
“a thin, homely girl of twenty,” Josie—later to be described as an unforget-
table figure in The Souls of Black Folk .
15 The heart of Southern black life
and labor was opened to Du Bois. Here he found warmth and unpreten-
tious friendship that he had not thought possible. Frequently after classes
were finished, he visited the families of his pupils: sitting on the porch eat-
ing fresh peaches with Josie and her talkative mother; visiting Doc Burke’s
farm, helping himself to fried chicken, wheat biscuits, string beans, and
plump berries. Here he also discovered the mystery of sex, sleeping with an
“unhappy wife who was my landlady.” Time for these folk seemingly stood
still. To be sure, life “was dull and humdrum,” Du Bois wrote in his Auto-
biography: “I have called my community a world, and so its isolation made
it. There was among us but a half-awakened common consciousness,
sprung from common joy and grief, at burial, birth or wedding; from a
common hardship in poverty, poor land and low wages; and, above all,
from the sight of the Veil that hung between us and Opportunity.”
16
But the essence of black life was to be found on Sunday mornings, as
the dawn broke above the rural countryside. In the center of the colored
district of Alexandria, Tennessee, were “the twin temples of the hamlet, the
Methodist and Hard-Shell Baptist churches.” In these unadorned wooden
halls, the black folk made “the weekly sacrifice with frenzied priest at the
altar of the ‘old-time religion.”’ It was here that the families of his students
sang in “soft melody and mighty cadences” the black spirituals of slavery.
At first Du Bois was baffled by this experience. “We in Berkshire . . . were
very quiet and subdued, and I know not what would have happened those
clear Sabbath mornings had someone punctuated the sermon with a
scream, or interrupted the long prayer with a loud Amen!” Sensitive about
his strict background, and yet alienated from the Congregational church in
Nashville, Du Bois was “determined to know something of the Negro in
the country districts.” Their deep expressions of spirituality were utterly
62 | The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 84 ---
new to him. As a budding scholar and, more important, as a black man, he
was determined to understand their religion and to integrate it into his
own embryonic worldview.
17
II
The basic anatomy of the black religious experience was expressed in three
factors: “the Preacher, the Music, and the Frenzy.” The black minister, Du
Bois later suggested, “is the most unique personality developed by the Ne-
gro on American soil.” The black minister emerged during slavery as a pow-
erful force in community life. “He early appeared on the plantation and
found his function as the healer of the sick, the interpreter of the Unknown,
the comforter of the sorrowing, the supernatural avenger of wrong, and the
one who rudely but picturesquely expressed the longing, disappointment,
and resentment of a stolen and oppressed people.” Thus the social dynam-
ics that produced white clergy and religious institutions differed radically
from the organic evolution of the black church and its preachers. The tran-
sition from traditional African social systems to the plantation South was
nothing less than “a terrific social revolution, and yet some traces were
retained of the former group life, and the chief remaining institution was
the Priest or Medicineman.” This charismatic representative of the nommo
or essence of his people, a synthesis of “bard, physician, judge, and priest,”
became within the American South “the Negro preacher.” During Recon-
struction and after, other basic characteristics were added to his social pro-
file: he was at once “a leader, a politician, an orator, a ‘boss,’ an intriguer, an
idealist.... The combination of a certain adroitness with deep-seated ear-
nestness, of tact with consummate ability, gave him his preeminence,” Du
Bois noted, “and helps him maintain it.”
18
The music of black faith “is that plaintive rhythmic melody,” Du Bois
wrote in The Souls of Black Folk, “which, despite caricature and defilement,
still remains the most original and beautiful expression of human life and
longing yet born on American soil.” Even when he was a small boy, Du
Bois reflected, “these songs . . . stirred me strangely. They came out of the
South unknown to me, one by one, and yet at once I knew them as of me
and mine.” The spirituals and the “Sorrow Songs” revealed the anguish and
hope of a people in bondage, a mass of illiterate slaves whose spiritual striv-
ings brought together an aspiration of secular emancipation and religious
freedom. In such songs, “the slave spoke to the world” in an Aesopian lan-
guage, partially “veiled and half articulate.” “Steal away to Jesus” could
mean different things to the masters and the slaves. There was the “cradle-
song of death which all men know—‘Swing low, sweet chariot”’; “songs of
The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 63


--- PAGE 85 ---
the fugitive like that which opens ‘The Wings of Atlanta”’; and songs that
revealed the full glory of the end of life’s oppression—“‘My Lord, what a
mourning! when the stars begin to fall.”’ In the Carolina swamplands, the
slaves sang:
Michael, haul the boat ashore,
Then you’ll hear the horn they blow,
Then you’ll hear the trumpet sound,
Trumpet sound the world around,
Trumpet sound for rich and poor,
Trumpet sound the Jubilee,
Trumpet sound for you and me.
The spirituals were simultaneously sorrowful and yet filled with hope, or as
Du Bois expressed it, “a faith in the ultimate justice of things. The minor
cadences of despair change often to triumph and calm confidence.” In the
face of oppression, the music provides a “faith in life”; it offers “sometimes
assurance of boundless justice in some fair world beyond.” The transition
to Jim Crow and lynching was the secular political reality that created the
living aesthetic space for such songs to continue to capture “the tragic soul-
life” of black people. They express the hope “that sometime, somewhere,
men will judge men by their souls and not by their skins.”
19
The “Frenzy or ‘Shouting,’ when the Spirit of the Lord passed by, and,
seizing the devotee, made him mad with supernatural joy, was the last
essential of Negro religion,” Du Bois wrote, adding for emphasis, “and the
one more devoutly believed in than all the rest.” The shout was at once a
purgation of the believers’ anxieties, fears, and doubts created under slav-
ery and segregation; it was a catharsis, the expression of transcendence, a
cry of faith and hope, a physical and collective explosion that was neces-
sary for a people trapped in the permanent vise of social anxiety and frus-
tration. “It varied in expression from the silent rapt countenance or low
murmur and moan to the mad abandon of physical fervor—the stamping,
shrieking and laughing, the vision and trance.” The common rapture was
expressed by man but was not of man: the frenzy, for the black Christian,
was the “visible manifestation of God.” Blacks believed that, without this
catharsis, “there could be no true communion with the Invisible.”
20
III
The soul-searching experiences in the Tennessee countryside placed Du
Bois increasingly at odds with established Christian theology, and with
himself. When assigned a text on Christian logic at Fisk, he commented
64 | The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 86 ---
that it now “affronted my logic. It was to my mind, then and since, a cheap
piece of special pleading.” University president Erastus Cravath secured a
scholarship for Du Bois’s postgraduate work at Hartford Theological Sem-
inary. But Du Bois could not accept it. “I believed too little in Christian
dogma to become a minister. I was not without faith: I never stole mater-
ial or spiritual things; I not only never lied, but blurted out my conception
of truth on the most untoward occasions; I drank no alcohol and knew
nothing of women, physically or psychically, to the incredulous amusement
of my more experienced fellows.”
21
Du Bois chose Harvard University instead. His graduate training there,
under the direction of philosophers William James and George Santayana,
pushed the black scholar far from “the sterilities of scholastic philosophy to
realistic pragmatism.”
22 While he was in Boston, however, he pursued his
relationship with the black church. On Thanksgiving night, 1891, Du Bois
organized and participated in Aristophanes’ play The Birds at the black
community’s Charles Street Church. Nevertheless, he expressed blunt crit-
icisms of the black church in an 1891 paper prepared for the National Co-
lored League of Boston: “A religion that won’t stand the application of rea-
son and common sense is not fit for an intelligent dog.” But his hostility
toward the white Christian church was far more profound. In his diary,
Du Bois attacked the Anglo-Saxon’s “high Episcopal Nicene creed” as a
rationale for white supremacy. Musing on the biblical image of “Ethiopia
[stretching] forth her hands to God,” the young Harvard man fumed, “The
spectacle [of ] the venerable colored dame in this rather unbalanced position
in regard to the Anglo-Saxon god has become somewhat nauseating to the
average young Negro of today.” For the white West, with the possible excep-
tion of the “self-forgetful Quakers,” God was dead, Du Bois decided.
23
If racial oppression and segregation had compromised and destroyed
the reality of God among most American whites, Du Bois thought, then
he would refuse to participate in the charade. In his first teaching post, at
Wilberforce University, a small black Methodist institution, he “wandered
casually” into a local black prayer gathering. “Suddenly and without warn-
ing, a student leader of the meeting announced that ‘Professor Du Bois will
lead us in prayer.’ I simply answered, ‘No, he won’t,’ and as a result nearly
lost my new job.” An outraged president forced Du Bois before the school’s
governing board of bishops, and “it took a great deal of explaining” to con-
vince its members “why a professor in Wilberforce should not be able at all
times and sundry to address God in extemporaneous prayer. I was saved
only by the fact that my coming to Wilberforce had been widely advertised
and I was willing to do endless work.”
24
The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 65


--- PAGE 87 ---
He quickly acquired a reputation as a troublemaker, cynic, and “agnos-
tic” by refusing “to attend the annual ‘revivals’ of religion which interrupt-
ed school work every year at Christmas time.” In May 1896 he threatened
the college treasurer in order to receive back payment for his salary.
25 Such
irreverent behavior did not go unnoticed beyond Wilberforce. After a fif-
teen-month stint at the University of Pennsylvania, where he compiled the
first major sociological survey of African American urban life, The Phila-
delphia Negro, Du Bois applied for a position at Atlanta University. The
college’s president, Horace Bumstead, was by nature and political training
a cautious man. Several trustees and prominent friends of Atlanta Univer-
sity expressed “objections and misgivings” to him when learning of Du
Bois’s possible appointment. Bumstead later wrote that “Atlanta University
has always had a pronounced religious, though undenominational life” and
that its teachers were expected “to help to maintain it.” But on that point,
such assurances “were not very easy to get” from Du Bois. When asked of
his religious affiliation, Bumstead wrote, Du Bois curtly replied, “‘None to
speak of.’ But though reluctant to speak of his religion or to say what he
would do at Atlanta,” and despite grave “objections and misgivings,” he
was permitted to join the faculty.
26
Yet Du Bois’s spiritual commitment to his people, which deepened and
enlarged his analytic critique of the total society, could not be expressed as
a complete rejection of black Christianity. Repeatedly his sociological re-
search focused on the centrality of religion within black life, not only in
The Philadelphia Negro but also in his 1897 study of black life in Farmville,
Virginia, completed for the U.S. Department of Labor, and in his 1898
study of Atlanta, Georgia.
27 The black “First Baptist” church in Farmville
is described by Du Bois in intimate detail as “a roomy brick edifice seating
five hundred or more persons, tastefully finished in Georgia pine, with a
carpet, a small organ, and stained-glass windows”:
Underneath is a large assembly room with benches. This building is
the central club-house of a community of a thousand or more
Negroes. Various organizations meet here,— the church proper, the
Sunday-school, two or three insurance societies, women’s societies,
secret societies, and mass meetings of various kinds. Entertainment,
suppers, and lectures are held beside the five or six regular weekly reli-
gious services. Considerable sums of money are collected and expend-
ed here, employment is found for the idle, strangers are introduced,
news is disseminated and charity distributed. At the same time this
social, intellectual, and economic centre is a religious centre of great
power. Depravity, Sin, Redemption, Heaven, Hell, and Damnation
66 | The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 88 ---
are preached with much fervor, and revivals take place every year after
the crops are laid by; and few indeed of the community have the
hardihood to withstand conversion. Back of this more formal religion,
the Church often stands as a real conserver of morals, a strengthener
of family life, and the final authority on what is Good and Right.
28
Du Bois the agnostic confronted the vibrant reality of black spiritual and
social life and could not stand apart from it. As a Pan-Africanist and as a
sociologist he came to political terms with the black church in these words:
“The Negro church of to-day is the social centre of Negro life in the United
States, and the most characteristic expression of African character.”
29 The
uneven and contradictory synthesis of his religious doubts and faith was
expressed, at last, in his famous theory of “double consciousness.” If the
Negro was at once “an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two
unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body,”
30 then the soul
of Du Bois would be expressed for the white world in agnosticism or, at
best, only in the most critical and formal guise. The soul of Du Bois con-
fronting the black world had no choice but to embrace black Christianity.
IV
As a mature scholar and leader of the naacp, Du Bois maintained his
contradictory position on religion. Before the white world, he made few
concessions. Reverting to the denomination of his paternal grandfather, he
was nominally an Episcopalian for a time.
31 But inside the color line, he
gave poetic expression to his love of God in his “Credo,” first printed in
October 1904:
I believe in God, who made of one blood all nations that on earth do
dwell. I believe that all men, black and brown and white, are broth-
ers . . . knowing that men may be brothers in Christ, even though
they be not brothers-in-law....I  believe in the Devil and his angels,
who wantonly work to narrow the opportunity of struggling human
beings especially if they be black; who spit in the faces of the fallen,
strike them that cannot strike again, believe the worst and work to
prove it, hating the image which their Maker stamped on a brother’s
soul. I believe in the Prince of Peace. I believe that War is Murder....
Finally, I believe in Patience—patience with the weakness of the Weak
and the strength of the Strong, the prejudice of the Ignorant and the
ignorance of the Blind; patience with the tardy triumph of Joy and the
mad chastening of Sorrow;— patience with God!
32
If the Christian ideal retained its meaning, the Christian church as a
whole had not. White Christianity, “together with the wisest and richest of
The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 67


--- PAGE 89 ---
the people in the United States, defended [slavery] for 250 years,” he de-
clared in 1927.
33 Now white Christians supported the institutional racism,
lynchings, and political disfranchisement of blacks. Regretfully, “I have lit-
tle faith that Christianity can settle the race problem, but I have abiding
faith in men.”
34 In a biting editorial, “The Negro and the Church,” pub-
lished in the naacp journal Crisis in October 1913, Du Bois denounced
Christian “hypocrisy” and charged that the church ruthlessly denied “pow-
er” to blacks. “The Negro problem is the test of the church.”
35
A brief review of Du Bois’s published writings indicates that the
church filled him with revulsion at the same time that it commanded his
curious attention to its activities and internal debates, especially as they
affected the African American. In private correspondence with the Rev-
erend Samuel H. Bishop, general agent of the American Church Institute
for Negroes, and in a published essay in June 1907, Du Bois criticized the
Episcopal church for its “hypocrisy.” Despite his nominal membership, “I
have no particular affection for the Church,” he informed Bishop. “I think
its record on the Negro problem has been shameful ....S o  far as the
Negro problem is concerned the southern branch of the Church is a moral
dead weight and the northern branch of the Church never has had the
moral courage to stand against it.” The Episcopalian leadership was woe-
fully “behind other churches in recognizing human manhood and Chris-
tian equality.”
36
In August 1920, in Crisis, he heartily congratulated the Methodist Epis-
copal church for elevating two black men, Robert E. Jones and Matthew W.
Clair, to the posts of bishop after “a fight of 25 years,” adding, “There are
still white Christians in Zion.”
37 But when the same Northern Methodists
attempted to merge with the Southern Methodists, breaking off relations
with the all-black African Methodist Episcopal ( ame) church, the Crisis
editor was filled with scorn. Unity among white Methodists was taking
place at the sacrifice of racial equality, he declared. Somewhat sarcastically,
he inquired if Northern white Methodists still had “the present address of
Jesus of Nazareth.”
38
Du Bois plotted the erratic racial progress of the Baptist World Alliance
and praised the organization for holding an interracial convention in segre-
gated Atlanta in 1939.
39 His disputes with the Catholic church symbolize
his strained relations with other churches. In 1924, the Knights of
Columbus published his book The Gift of Black Folk ; Du Bois praised
“Catholic priests and sisters teaching the colored South . . . for their
unselfish work”; he “admired much” of the church’s “mighty history.” But in
March 1925, in his private correspondence with Joseph B. Glenn, Du Bois
68 | The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 90 ---
charged that “the Catholic Church in America stands for color separation
and discrimination to a degree equaled by no other church in America, and
that is saying a very great deal.” In hundreds of years, it had “ordained less
than a half dozen black Catholic priests either because they have sent us
poor teachers or because American Catholics do not want to work beside
black priests and sisters or because they think Negroes have neither brains
nor morals.” Catholic parochial schools rarely accepted black applicants,
and “the Catholic University in Washington invites them elsewhere.” In
short, the “‘nigger’ haters clothed in its Episcopal robes” were promoting
racism every degree as vicious as “the Ku Klux Klan.”
40 The Catholic and
Protestant churches failed generally on the race issue, Du Bois perceived,
because they had forgotten the living meaning of the teachings of “Jesus,
the Jew.” The ordeal of the Christ who perished for all humanity was ob-
scured by the coarse blinders of “race hatred.”
41
The black American church, in contrast, served a fundamentally differ-
ent function: it was the organizational and spiritual center of black life and
as such touched every minute aspect of the segregated community’s en-
deavors. It was a race-conscious organization—it could hardly have been
otherwise during the Jim Crow era—yet its strength served to preserve and
to defend the basic humanity of African American people, and its true
vision of itself was one without color or class barriers. Even as a senior at
Fisk University, Du Bois recognized that being a Christian meant that “we
should not forget the practical side” of Christianity—that is, good works
that uplifted the most oppressed groups of society.
42
A decade later, speaking before a Fisk University graduate audience, he
merged the ideals of black faith with the political struggle to transform the
material conditions of African Americans. “The German works for Ger-
many, the Englishman serves England, and it is the duty of the Negro to
serve his blood and lineage, and so working, each for each, and all for each,
we realize the goal of each for all.” As the collective expression of all blacks,
the church and its clergy were crucial in this process of self-achievement.
African American ministers must and “will transform the mysticism of
Negro religion into the righteousness of Christianity.” Only by “cher-
ish[ing] unwavering faith in the blood of your fathers” could this spiritual-
ly moved mass of black humanity achieve political freedom.
43
In late 1900 Du Bois contributed to the Boston publication New World
a brief essay, “The Religion of the Negro,” which expanded upon these
themes. “The Negro church antedates the Negro home,” he noted, a his-
torical fact that created “the expression of the inner ethical life of a people
in a sense seldom true elsewhere.” The church is a haven in a heartless
The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 69


--- PAGE 91 ---
world, as blacks search for meaning in a segregated and politically oppres-
sive society. “Conscious of his impotence, and pessimistic,” the Negro
“often becomes bitter and vindictive; and his religion, instead of a worship,
is a complaint and a curse, a wail rather than a hope, a sneer rather than a
faith.” At these moments, “one type of Negro stands almost ready to curse
God and die.” Yet he finds salvation within the Veil, and a spiritual deliv-
erance from earthly suffering. Silently as ever broods “the deep religious
feeling of the real Negro heart, the stirring, unguided might of powerful
human souls who have lost the guiding star of the past and seek in the
great night a new religious ideal. Some day the Awakening will come,” Du
Bois predicted, “when the pent-up vigor of ten million souls shall sweep
irresistibly toward the Goal, out of the Valley of the Shadow of Death . . .
[toward] Liberty, Justice, and Right.”
44
Du Bois’s faith in the historic goal of black religion did not exempt spe-
cific denominations from his criticism. The black church found “greatness”
only as it linked the spiritual striving of the masses with a social commit-
ment to challenge Jim Crow laws, political disfranchisement, and all forms
of bigotry and economic deprivation.
45 In his edited volume The Negro
Church, published in 1903 as part of the Atlanta University series, and in
subsequent periodical articles, Du Bois carefully scrutinized the progress of
the black church.
46 He reminded the black clergy who were more conserv-
ative that black religion demanded uncompromising political protest, in the
antebellum tradition of slave preacher and rebel Nat Turner. Occasionally in
Crisis he commended the work of young black ministers who had come
“forward to preserve and rescue the good that is in the Negro Church.”
47
In his organizational work Du Bois cooperated with many black min-
isters who shared his politically liberal views. In the Niagara Movement,
formed by Du Bois and radical journalist William Monroe Trotter in 1905
to oppose the accommodationist program of Booker T. Washington, black
religious leaders were especially prominent: Reverdy C. Ransom of Boston,
J. Milton Waldron of Jacksonville (and later of Washington, D.C.), Bryon
Gunner of Newport, George Freeman Bragg of Baltimore, and Sutton E.
Griggs of Nashville. The vast majority of black clergy “enunciated a grad-
ualist philosophy of self-help, racial solidarity, and economic progress,”
thus clearly aligning themselves with Washington’s “Tuskegee Machine.”
Gradually, though, many Northern-based bishops and black religious lead-
ers began to reflect Du Bois’s militant political beliefs. Waldron had been
a supporter of the Tuskegee philosophy while located in Jacksonville; after
relocating to Washington, he rapidly fell into the Du Bois faction and
became local president of the naacp.
48
70 | The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 92 ---
One of Du Bois’s closest associates was Alexander Walters, a bishop of
the African Methodist Episcopal Zion church and presiding chairman of the
first Pan-African Conference, held in London in 1900, at which Du Bois
served as secretary. Bishop Walters, a founder of the militant National Negro
American Political League in June 1908 and the nation’s leading black
Democrat, frequently advised Du Bois—and sometimes with disastrous
consequences.
49 Du Bois was particularly harsh with the ame church. In
January 1929 he criticized it for failing to provide sufficient financial support
for South African missionary work led by his former Wilberforce student
Charlotte Manye.
50 Repeatedly he denounced the many “fakers” and
“frauds” among the ame church’s leadership.51
What was the cultural purpose of the black church beyond its necessary
engagement in political life on behalf of African Americans? Du Bois con-
stantly returned to the central themes provided by his experience in east-
ern Tennessee and, later, his sociological research conducted in Philadel-
phia, Farmville, and Atlanta. The church was the cradle for the African
American gift of song, that rare element of Negro culture that had to be
constantly nourished. In 1903, Du Bois published a short Bibliography of
Negro Folk Songs to encourage scholarly research into African American
popular and spiritual music.
52 He praised the musical “labors” of John
Wesley Work and his wife, Alice Work, music professors at Fisk Univer-
sity, who had “resurrect[ed]” and made “eternal the Negro spiritual.” In
Crisis he applauded black musical directors in both the churches and the
segregated public schools for instructing a new generation of black pupils
in the spirituals.
This did not mean that Du Bois did not appreciate other, more popu-
lar forms of black music. He noted with grudging approval the develop-
ment of “ragtime” melodies and in an early issue of Crisis congratulated
popular black composer J. Rosamond Johnson for the creation of “a new
and distinct school of Negro music.”
53 In 1925, at the height of the Har-
lem Renaissance, Du Bois penned a brief essay, “The Black Man Brings
His Gifts,” which praised the work of William Christopher Handy, the
“father of the blues.”
54 But his polished New England upbringing seldom
failed to assert itself: Du Bois always held a special affection for those
among his race who mastered European classical music.
55 He was a friend
of the great black concert tenor Roland Hayes and frequently attended his
performances.
56 In March 1918 he was the first to bring to national atten-
tion a new and gifted “baritone soloist,” a nineteen-year-old student at
Rutgers University named Paul Robeson.
57
The songs of black religious praise were the basis for the Negro’s spe-
The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 71


--- PAGE 93 ---
cial ability in all music. In response to one New York Timescritic who urged
blacks to croon only “old-time” plantation melodies, Du Bois tartly de-
clared, “It is to be trusted that our leaders in music, holding on to the beau-
tiful heritage of the past, will not on that account, either be coerced or
frightened from taking all music for their province and showing the world
how to sing.”
58
V
The greatest gift of black faith, however, went to the heart of the Christian
tradition: its radical reinterpretation of Christ as a historical and spiritual
figure for early twentieth-century American society. As a sociologist, Du
Bois condemned not merely the profit motive of monopoly capital and its
exploitation of labor but also found its espousal of Christian rhetoric
empty of social content. In December 1913, for example, his Crisis edito-
rial again blasted the racism of the Episcopal church, declaring that any
acceptance of bigotry is an abrogation of the teaching of the Son of God.
“The church of John Pierpont Morgan [is] not the church of Jesus Christ,”
he concluded. For the special Christmas issue of Crisis in December 1925,
Jesus returns to earth and is immediately disillusioned with the gross spec-
tacle of wealth and public avarice that is held in his name. Defiantly he
speaks from the heights of the Woolworth Building in Manhattan to con-
demn the modern mob—“and the people were dumbfounded.” In Dark-
water: Voices from Within the Veil, Jesus returns to earth in Waco, Texas, and
teaches white racists to “love” oppressed blacks. When an escaped black
convict is unjustly burned alive, a voice comes to him “out of the winds of
the night, saying: ‘This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise!”’
59
During the Great Depression, Du Bois suggested that Christmas
should be abolished, since “Jesus Christ is not usually invited to his birth-
day celebration.” The living legacy of Christ, Du Bois suggested, could be
realized only in a rededication to his historic example as a spiritual rebel
against the established dogma and prejudice of the social order. In Decem-
ber 1909 Du Bois declared that white abolitionist John Brown was a nine-
teenth-century martyr in the true tradition of Jesus Christ. Christ was
undoubtedly “the greatest of religious rebels,” he wrote in 1928.
60
Later in his political life, as Du Bois moved closer to Marxism-
Leninism, he viewed Christ in a more radical context. In February 1948 he
suggested that opponents of South African apartheid were truly Christians
in the great tradition of Christ himself. The revolutionary heroes in the
emancipation of the world’s colored and exploited masses were Mohandas
K. Gandhi, V. I. Lenin, and Jesus: their principles could promote an inter-
72 | The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 94 ---
national “fight for freedom” and economic justice. The political purposes of
the black church merged with the figure of Jesus to create a secular “free-
dom fighter” in the battle to uproot racism and capitalism. In the conscious-
ness of the oppressed, in “the Second Coming” Jesus would be born black.
61
Du Bois was ideologically consistent in politics. As his literary executor
Herbert Aptheker writes, “All his life Du Bois was a radical prophet. He
tore at the Veil; at the same time, he had a particular perspective from which
he saw this country and world, past, present, and future.”
62 Before the ster-
ile walls of segregation, he denounced intolerance; and in the Jim Crowed
houses of prayer, he defied hypocrisy. Yet his “paradoxical behavior” in reli-
gion is no paradox at all.
63 Du Bois saw himself as a legitimate child of the
Renaissance and Western culture, but the “Veil” of race permitted him to
question the ethical directions of the hegemonic social order. For him, the
stoic figure of Saint Francis of Assisi could be transformed into a radical
who sought “to satisfy the world’s great wants.”
64
White Christianity had failed only because it did not comprehend its
inherently radical commitment to serve humanity. Black Christianity, in
contrast, had fulfilled that mission for African Americans and served as
an example for the larger world. Thus Du Bois the “prophet,” or “reli-
gious radical,” could find peace within this faith. His God was the God
of black liberation.
The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 73


--- PAGE 95 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 96 ---
75
William Edward Burghardt Du Bois is generally accorded by black
scholars and political leaders alike the title “Father of Pan-Africanism.”
Trinidadian historian and Marxist activist C. L. R. James writes that “more
than any other citizen of Western civilization (or of Africa itself ) [Du Bois]
struggled over many years and succeeded in making the world aware that
Africa and Africans had to be freed from the thralldom which Western civ-
ilization had imposed on them.” Du Bois was “from start to finish ...t h e
moving spirit and active organizer” of five Pan-African congresses.
1 Kwame
Nkrumah, leader of the Gold Coast independence movement in the late
1940s and 1950s and subsequently prime minister of Ghana, referred to
Du Bois as a “treasured part of Africa’s history” and recounted his unique
contributions to the evolution of Pan-Africanism in several works.
2
I
Even social scientists who are openly hostile to Du Bois recognize, in a dis-
torted manner, the rich Pan-Africanist legacy of the black scholar. Harold
R. Isaacs criticized Du Bois as never having been “a successful leader or
organizer or even a popular public figure.” His Pan-Africanism was simply
a type of “romantic racism” that “got nowhere.” Nevertheless, Isaacs ack-
nowledged grudgingly that modern black leaders recognize Du Bois as the
6
The Pan-Africanism of
W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 97 ---
“Father of Pan-Africanism” and that his militant words on Africa now
“ring in the air all around us.”
3
In his biography of Du Bois, Francis S. Broderick declared that none of
his subject’s books “except The Philadelphia Negro is first-class.” Du Bois’s
voluminous studies on African culture, history, and politics, which include
The Negro and The World and Africa , “all possess some information, but
nothing which indicates the mind or hand of an original scholar.” The
Pan-African congresses of the 1920s, Broderick adds, accomplished, if
anything, less than the failed Niagara Movement of 1905–1909. Yet even
Broderick, blinded by racism, must stand in awe of Du Bois’s prophecy of
African and Asian nationalism, which swept the Third World in the 1950s
and afterward. “After the Asian-African conference at Bandung in 1955,”
Broderick admits, “who had the last laugh, Du Bois or his critics? Du Bois
was a generation ahead of his time. The leaders of at least two [African
nations] have publicly made explicit acknowledgment of their debt to Du
Bois’s inspiration.”
4
This essay is not a comprehensive analysis of Du Bois’s Pan-Africanism
but rather an examination of his role in the evolution of the Pan-Africanist
political movement from 1900 to 1945. Special emphasis is given to the
relationship between Du Bois’s sponsorship and the development of polit-
ical programs at the Pan-African congresses during these years and to his
overall political life and activities within the United States.
Perhaps the clearest point of departure in the study of Du Bois’s Pan-
Africanist thought is provided by his literary executor, Marxist historian
Herbert Aptheker. In a 1968 essay, Aptheker suggests two basic factors that
oriented Du Bois’s intellectual endeavors. Aptheker rejects the nearly uni-
versal thesis that Du Bois’s central conception of black liberation varied
from decade to decade. Indeed, his philosophical orientation or method of
analysis reveals a startling consistency. “Du Bois’s extraordinary career man-
ifests a remarkable continuity,” Aptheker states. First, “all his life Du Bois
was a radical democrat; this was true even with his ‘Talented Tenth’ concept
which held that mass advance depended upon leadership and service from
a trained minority.” Certainly the black scholar’s “political affiliations or
affinities varied as times changed, as programs altered.” At various histori-
cal moments Du Bois was a reformed Republican, a Democrat, a Socialist,
a Communist, and a supporter of the Progressive Party of Henry Wallace.
“These were, however, political choices and not defining marks of philo-
sophical approaches.” At the root of his politics was a commitment to a
democracy defined by the realization of racial equality and social justice for
all social groups and classes within the society. Second, as Aptheker notes:
76 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 98 ---
[Du Bois’s] penetrating observation, first offered in 1900 and twice
repeated in a significant article published the next year—“The problem
of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line”—was funda-
mental to his vision of the unity of all African people (to grow, as Du
Bois advanced in years, to the idea that this itself was preliminary, to the
unity of all the darker peoples of the earth and that was part of the
process of the worldwide unification of all who labor) and was, indeed,
first enunciated as the Call of the original Pan-African Conference.
This insight forms the inspiration for and thesis of his The Negro (Lon-
don: Home Library, 1915),Black Folk, Then and Now(New York: Holt,
1939), Color and Democracy: Colonies and Peace (New York: Harcourt,
Brace, 1945), [and] The World and Africa(New York: Viking, 1947).
5
Throughout his adult life, Du Bois never identified racism as a purely
American phenomenon. He understood that a resolution of the color line
could occur only within the international political context and that racism
was tied directly to economic exploitation and domination by the white
West of peoples of color all across the globe. Pan-Africanism, then, was
merely the concrete political expression of Du Bois’s intellectual commit-
ment to eradicate racism, colonialism, and all structures of exploitation.
II
What shaped Du Bois’s evolving philosophy of Pan-Africanism? In Dusk
of Dawn, he repeats Countee Cullen’s memorable lines:
What is Africa to me:
Copper sun or scarlet sea,
Jungle star or jungle track
Strong bronzed men, or regal black
Women from whose loins I sprang
When the birds of Eden sang?
One three centuries removed
From the scenes his fathers loved,
Spicy grove, cinnamon tree,
What is Africa to me?
6
“What is Africa to me?” Du Bois pondered. “Neither my father nor my
father’s father ever saw Africa or knew its meaning or cared much for it.
My mother’s folk were closer and yet their direct connection, in culture and
race, became tenuous; still, my tie to Africa is strong.”
7 As a child, Du Bois
heard an African melody that his great-grandmother Violet Du Bois had
brought from the continent, which over generations had become a “tradi-
tion in his family.”
8 There were no books on Africa in Great Barrington’s
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 77


--- PAGE 99 ---
modest library. Yet even as a child he had become annoyed with the crude
racial stereotypes depicted in his classroom textbooks. In his 1959 inter-
view with Isaacs, Du Bois reflected that he encountered pictures of the
races of man in his earliest texts, “a white man, a Chinese mandarin, and a
savage Negro. That was what the class got, and it made me especially sen-
sitive. I did not recognize those pictures in the book as being my people.”
9
It was his undergraduate experience at Fisk University that first awak-
ened Du Bois’s lifelong identification with African culture. Fisk had the
beginnings of an African museum, and young Will examined the small
selection of African carvings and artifacts with fascination. Continuing his
undergraduate studies at Harvard University, he encountered the pseudo-
science of racial dogma, presented as if it were a consequence of the new
theory of evolution. No courses on African, Chinese, or Indian history
were offered at Harvard. Returning from a period of study at the Univer-
sity of Berlin, Du Bois applied to the doctoral program in social science at
Harvard in the spring of 1980. His topic was “the social and economic rise
of the Negro people.”
10
For two years, Du Bois was preoccupied with thousands of hours of re-
search in the Congressional Record, colonial and state documents, and sec-
ondary literature pertaining to the African slave trade. Simultaneously, he
participated in the larger cultural and social life of Boston’s black commu-
nity, taking part in church plays and drafting a comprehensive program to
improve and expand local black libraries, lectures, literary societies, and
Chauatauqua circles.
11 The final product of his labor was his thesis, The
Suppression of the African Slave-Trade to the United States of America, 1638–
1870, which in 1896 became the initial volume of the Harvard Historical
Studies series. The importance of this pioneering study, published during
a period of rising racial violence, political disfranchisement, and historio-
graphical revision of the role of the Negro in American democracy, cannot
be overemphasized. It provided the first serious examination of the impact
of the Haitian revolution upon the domestic slave political economy. “The
Final Crisis,” the chapter on the South’s frenzied political attempts to re-
scind the 1808 ban on the transatlantic slave trade, was not equaled in his-
torical research for decades.
12
The white academic establishment offered grudging praise: one review
in the American Historical Review applauded the work as a “valuable review
of an important subject” but added that Du Bois occasionally used phrases
that “characterize the advocate rather than the historian.”
13 For Du Bois, of
course, that was the entire point: scholarship served to advance racial inter-
ests. Any antiracist research that emphasized the humanity of African peo-
78 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 100 ---
ple and denounced the profit motive of white slaveholders contributed to
the immediate struggle of destroying the color line and expanding democ-
racy to include the Negro.
As Du Bois pursued an academic career, teaching briefly at Wilberforce
University and the University of Pennsylvania before settling at Atlanta
University from 1897 to 1910 as a professor of economics and history, other
black intellectuals became more preoccupied with the cultural and political
image of Africa. One of the most ambitious and visionary of the new gen-
eration was a young Trinidadian lawyer, Henry Sylvester Williams. Born in
1869, Williams traveled to the United States in 1891 and two years later
went to Canada to attend law school. In 1896 Williams moved to London,
and within a year he had organized the Pan-African Association. Gradually,
he established the basis for a political formation that would embrace blacks
in the West Indies, the United States, and Africa. Its unambiguous goals
were “to secure to Africans throughout the world true civil and political
rights” and “to ameliorate the conditions of our brothers on the continent
of Africa, America and other parts of the world.”
14 In this effort, assistance
was provided by a curious benefactor, the conservative African American
educator, Booker T. Washington. In one of history’s little ironies, Wash-
ington in 1899 promoted the projected Pan-African Conference as a “most
effective and far-reaching” activity during a London visit. The president of
Tuskegee Institute “beg[ged] and advise[d] as many of our people as can
possibly do so” to take an active role in Williams’s conference.
15
Du Bois and approximately thirty other West Indian and African
American intellectuals attended the Pan-African Association’s confer-
ence in July 1900. The meeting attracted minor attention in the press,
and the delegates were welcomed by the Lord Bishop of London. Queen
Victoria even forwarded a note through her minister Joseph Chamber-
lain, promising not to “overlook the interests of the natives.” The confer-
ence drafted “An Address to the Nations of the World,” which urged the
democratic treatment of black people in majority white nations and the
ultimate emancipation of Africa itself. Du Bois penned the most memo-
rable statement of the assembly: “The problem of the Twentieth Century
is the problem of the color line.” The net results of this gathering, in the
short run, were unfortunately minimal. In his The World and Africa , pub-
lished much later, Du Bois noted that “this meeting had no deep roots in
Africa itself, and the movement and the idea died for a generation.”
16
Williams soon returned to the Caribbean to establish branches of his
Pan-African Association. While visiting Jamaica in March 1901, he won
the support of radical journalist Joseph Robert Love.
17 But failing to
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 79


--- PAGE 101 ---
build a viable organization, Williams returned to Trinidad in 1908 and
died there in 1911.
The failure of this early attempt to forge an international forum for Pan-
African opinion did not diminish Du Bois’s interest in Africa. Throughout
the first two decades of the twentieth century, he was one of the few Amer-
ican scholars who encouraged others to take an active interest in the cultu-
ral, economic, and political history of African people. In 1903 he wrote a re-
view of Joseph A. Tillinghast’s The Negro in Africa and Americathat appeared
in Political Science Quarterly. The review is noteworthy in that Du Bois em-
phasized the centrality of African culture in the evolution of black American
life and history.
18 Several years later, writing for The Nation, Du Bois re-
viewed seven books on African history, including the notable work of E. D.
Morel, The Black Man’s Burden. Du Bois argued here that the recent history
of Africa was essentially that of European exploitation, characterized most
clearly by the atrocities committed by King Leopold of Belgium in the Con-
go Free State.
19
As editor of Crisis, the journal of the newly founded naacp,f r o m
1910 until his resignation in 1934, Du Bois constantly provided his read-
ers with information on Africa and peoples of African descent outside the
United States. From 1903 through 1919, Du Bois’s journalistic writings
on Africa fall into three distinct categories. First, he tried to popularize
the idea of a Pan-Africanist perspective, the then utopian notion that the
political demand of “Africa for the Africans” inevitably would become
a necessity.
20
Second, he attempted to distinguish his version of Pan-Africanism
from the nineteenth-century African emigrationist views of black entre-
preneur Paul Cuffe and ame bishop Henry M. Turner. As Harold R. Isaacs
correctly notes, Du Bois never “chose the ultimate option of urging anger
nor in his deepest despair was he driven to the notion that there was an
answer for Negroes in recrossing the ocean to resettle it . . . the homeland
of their ancestors. Du Bois had the imagination and intelligence to see,
long before anyone else, that the meaningful slogan for beleaguered Amer-
ican Negroes as far as Africa was concerned was not “Back to Africa” but
“Africa for the Africans.”
21
In February 1914, and again in January 1916, Du Bois’s editorials in
Crisis attacked various plans by blacks to organize back-to-Africa efforts.
Criticizing the emigrationist movement led by Chief Alfred Sam, Du Bois
urged blacks not to become involved in speculative schemes destined for
failure. To Oklahoma supporters of Chief Sam, Du Bois declared that
there was no need to travel across the Atlantic to combat racism: “Fight out
80 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 102 ---
the battle in Oklahoma.” He cautioned that there was “no steamship in
New York building for the African trade and owned by Negroes.”
22
Finally, Du Bois attempted to advance a general thesis linking the con-
tinued political and economic exploitation of Africa with the expansion of
European imperialism and war. He consistently used Crisis to denounce
both British and German colonial policies in Africa.
23 More significant, he
drafted an important essay in 1915, “The African Roots of the War,” which
in some respects paralleled the argument that V. I. Lenin made in his 1916
thesis, Imperialism. Both argued that the scramble to control raw materi-
als, labor, and territories in Africa and Asia was the root cause of the world
war. Du Bois also predicted that the conflict would bring forward new
nationalist leaders in India, China, and Africa and that black Americans
would play a more central role in the “awakening” of Africa after the con-
flict in Europe ended.
24
During World War I, Du Bois recognized that there was an opportu-
nity to revive his Pan-African program in a more concrete form. In 1917
he advocated the creation of “a new African state formed from German
possessions and from the Belgian Congo; the following year, he wanted to
include, if possible, Uganda, French Equatorial Africa, Angola, and Mo-
zambique.” As the conflict concluded, Du Bois received the naacp’s en-
dorsement for the program of semiautonomous governance for Africans
living in former German colonies and for the acceleration of educational,
social, and economic development on the continent generally.
25 Writing to
President Woodrow Wilson on November 27, 1918, Du Bois proposed
that the American government support his plans. J. P . Tumulty, the presi-
dent’s secretary, shared the memo with Wilson but replied that it would be
impossible for him to meet with Du Bois.
26
With the naacp’s approval, Du Bois immediately prepared to travel to
Europe, hoping both to investigate “the treatment of Negro soldiers” and to
represent the interests of “the Negroes of the world . . . before the [Ver-
sailles] Peace Congress.”
27 Securing passage abroad was a problem. Du Bois
learned, however, that Wilson was sending Tuskegee Institute president
Robert Russa Moton to France. Du Bois noted that Moton’s duty was to
speak to the returning Negro soldiers, pacify them, and forestall any attempt
at agitation or open expression of resentment upon their return to the
United States. As Du Bois remarked much later, “Under those circum-
stances, my request also to go could hardly be denied.”
28
Even before he arrived in Paris, Du Bois wrote back to the United
States explaining his purposes to both white and black followers. He reit-
erated that his proposal for a new Pan-African congress was not a call for
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 81


--- PAGE 103 ---
racial separatism. African emigration for the masses of American blacks
was “absurd.” However, Du Bois emphasized, “the African movement
means to us what the Zionist movement must mean to the Jews, the cen-
tralization of race effort and the recognition of a racial fount.”
29 Visiting
members of the Peace Congress, Du Bois lobbied for his ambitious pro-
gram without success. Colonel House, Wilson’s chief aide, listened pa-
tiently to Du Bois but did not promise anything. Leaving nothing to
chance, on January 1, 1919, Major F. P . Schoonmaker of the U.S. Army
Ninety-second Division ordered intelligence officers to monitor “all of
[Du Bois’s] moves and actions while at station of any unit.”
30
Secretly watched by his own government, Du Bois spent six fruitless
weeks in and around Paris, frustrated by his inability to obtain even French
permission to schedule his Pan-Africanist congress. The Chicago Tribune
correspondent, observing Du Bois’s plight, cabled home: “[Du Bois’s]
memorandum to President Wilson . . . is quite Utopian, and has less than
a Chinaman’s chance of getting anywhere in the Peace Conference, but it
is nevertheless interesting. As self-determination is one of the words to
conjure with in Paris nowadays, the Negro leaders are seeking to have it
applied, if possible, in a measure to their race in Africa.”
31
As Du Bois later wrote, “My plan to have Africa in some way voice its
complaints to the world [was] . . . without political backing and indeed
without widespread backing of any kind. Had it not been for one circum-
stance, it would have utterly failed; and that circumstance was that black
Africa had the right to send from Senegal a member to the French Parlia-
ment.”
32 This deputy, Blaise Diagne, was “the most influential colonial poli-
tician in France at the time,” according to Pan-Africanist scholar George
Padmore, and “a close friend” of the prime minister, Georges Clemenceau.
33
Diagne had been born in Gorée, Senegal, in 1872. Despite his origins in
poverty, he rose through education to acquire a position as French colonial
customs officer. In 1909 he confirmed his status within local white society
by his marriage to a Frenchwoman. Five years later, over the strenuous op-
position of both the colored metis and local white entrepreneurs, the black
man won election to the Parisian Chamber of Deputies.
Despite his radical rhetoric, Diagne was always “a Frenchman before
being a Pan-African, and insisted upon praising French colonial rule, while
attacking the other European powers’ operations in Africa.”
34 When the
French faced “military disaster” in early 1911, Clemenceau named Diagne
commissaire-général for French West Africa and charged him “with the re-
sponsibility of recruiting African troops for the Western front to help stem
the German offensive.” Within twelve months, under Diagne’s direction,
82 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 104 ---
680,000 soldiers and 238,000 laborers from French West Africa were in
France.
35 Clemenceau was “overjoyed” and offered Diagne the French Le-
gion of Honor. Diagne modestly refused, pleading that “he had only done
his duty and that was reward enough.” Many African militants, suffering
under the brutal heel of French imperialism, denounced Diagne as “a trai-
tor for having brought the Africans to fight for France” and termed him “a
tool of the rich white colonial interests.”
36
When Du Bois approached Diagne for help in scheduling the Pan-
Africanist session, however, he quickly consented. Clemenceau could easily
have ignored the unknown African American petitioner. But when Diagne
personally requested the French government to allow the congress to meet,
the prime minister replied, “Don’t advertise it, but go ahead.”
37 Arrange-
ments were made to reserve suites at the Grand Hotel in Paris. Madame
Calman-Levy, the widow of an influential French publisher, “became en-
thusiastic over the idea of [Du Bois’s] congress and brought together in her
salon groups of interested persons” from the French and Belgian govern-
ments.
38 Frantically, American officials objected to the Pan-African con-
gress; one state department official told the press that “no such conference
would be held” and that should the session take place, “no passports would
be issued for American delegates desiring to attend the meeting.”
39
Despite belated American opposition, fifty-seven delegates from fif-
teen countries met on February 19, 1919, for the first Pan-African con-
gress. Among them were twenty-one West Indians, sixteen delegates from
the United States, and twelve from nine different African nations. The
New York Evening Globe reported on February 22, 1919:
[The Pan-African congress is] the first assembly of its kind in history,
and has for its object the drafting of an appeal to the Peace Conference
to give the Negro race of Africa a chance to develop unhindered by
other races. Seated at long green tables in the council room today, were
Negroes in the trim uniform of American Army officers, other Amer-
ican colored men in frock coats or business suits, polished French Ne-
groes who hold public office, Senegalese who sit in the French Cham-
ber of Deputies.
40
From the beginning of the assembly, Diagne, who was chosen as the
president of the congress, and Du Bois, its secretary, were at odds. Diagne’s
chief concern was that French territorial interests in Africa should be pre-
served and expanded; the anticolonial polemics of Pan-Africanism should
be levied against all other Europeans, but not the French.
41 Du Bois wrote
the principal report of the congress, which requested that the European
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 83


--- PAGE 105 ---
and American powers turn over the former German colonies of Kamerun,
Tanganyika, and Southwest Africa [Namibia] to an “international organi-
zation.” The Allies were asked to “establish a code of law for the interna-
tional protection of the natives of Africa, similar to the proposed inter-
national code of labor.”
Nowhere in the congress’s demands were Europeans asked to grant Af-
ricans the right to complete self-determination. Rather, the congress, speak-
ing for “the Negroes of the world,” resolved that “hereafter the natives of
Africa and the peoples of African descent” should be governed according to
more humane and democratic rules. Land and other natural resources
“should be held in trust for the natives” while they acquired the means to
“effective ownership of as much land as they can profitably develop.” Cap-
ital should be “regulated as to prevent the exploitation of the natives and the
exhaustion of the natural wealth of the country.” All forms of “slavery and
corporal punishment” must be abolished, the resolutions urged. The right
of every black “child to learn to read and write his own language” and have
access to “higher technical and cultural training” must be guaranteed. In
terms of political rights, all Africans should “participate in the government
as fast as their development permits.” Educated blacks must be given the
“higher offices of State,” culminating in the future of an “Africa ruled by
consent of the Africans.”
42
At best, the resolutions had only a minor impact upon the deliberations
of the Versailles Peace Congress. Despite the relative moderation of these
demands, for European leaders “the very idea of Pan-Africanism was so
strange that it seemed unreal and yet at the same time perhaps potentially
dangerous.”
43
III
Optimistic, Du Bois returned to the United States, “from where he hoped
to build a real organization capable of stimulating the national aspirations
of the natives of Africa, and of securing wider support for the activities of
the Congress.”
44 Over the next two years, Du Bois attempted to raise finan-
cial and political support for the Pan-Africanist movement. Throughout the
rest of 1919, he and the naacp were preoccupied with combating the fierce
upsurgence of postwar racist violence. But after “corresponding with Ne-
groes in all parts of Africa and in other parts of the world,” he scheduled a
second congress, to be held in London, Brussels, and Paris from August 28
to September 6, 1921.
45 One hundred thirteen delegates attended the ses-
sions, seven from the Caribbean, thirty-five blacks from America, forty-one
from Africa, and the remainder from Europe.
84 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 106 ---
The London meetings were held in Central Hall, facing Westminster
Abbey, on August 28 and 29. Leading members of the British Labour Par-
ty and Fabian socialists initiated a discussion on “the relation of white and
colored labor.” The London session unanimously adopted a statement that
criticized Belgium’s colonial rule in the Congo and provoked “bitter oppo-
sition in Brussels” among government leaders. Once in Belgium, Diagne
attempted “to substitute an innocuous statement concerning [the] good-
will” of both the Belgian and the French colonialists, and in his capacity as
chair, he declared the resolution “adopted” despite “a clear majority in op-
position.” The last sessions, in the Palais Mondial, located in Paris’s Cin-
quantenaire Park, reversed Diagne’s maneuver by upholding the basic Lon-
don session drafts. The final document read in part:
To the World: The absolute equality of races, physical, political and
social, is the founding stone of world and human advancements. No
one denies great differences of gift, capacity, and attainment among
individuals of all races, but the voice of Science, Religion, and practi-
cal Politics is one in denying the God-appointed existence of super-
races, or of races naturally and inevitably and eternally inferior....T h e
habit of democracy must be made to encircle the earth....L o c a l  self-
government with a minimum of help and oversight can be established
tomorrow in Asia, in Africa, America, and the Isles of the sea. . . . The
Negro race, through their thinking intelligentsia, demand:
1. The recognition of civilized men as civilized, despite their race
and color.
2. Local self-government for backward groups, deliberately rising as
experience and knowledge grow to complete self-government ...
3. Education in self-knowledge, in scientific truth, and in indus-
trial technique, undivorced from the art of beauty.
4. Freedom in their own religion and social customs and with the
right to be different and nonconformist.
5. Cooperation with the rest of the world in government, indus-
try, and art on the bases of Justice, Freedom and Peace.
6. The return to Negroes of their land and its natural fruits, and
defense against the unrestrained greed of invested capital.
7. The establishment under the League of Nations of an interna-
tional institution for the study of African problems.
8. The establishment of an international section of the Labor
Bureau of the League of Nations, charged with the protection
of native labor.
46
A small delegation of conference participants, led by Dantes Belle-
garde, Haiti’s ambassador to France and representative to the League of
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 85


--- PAGE 107 ---
Nations, traveled to the Geneva headquarters of the League of Nations
and presented the congress’s petition. The League’s Mandates Commis-
sion studied the congress’s proposals and soon published them with favor-
able commentary:
Consciously or subconsciously there is in the world today a wide-
spread and growing feeling that it is permissible to treat civilized men
as uncivilized if they are colored and more especially of Negro de-
scent. ...[ W e ]  urge that the League of Nations take a firm stand on
the absolute equality of races and that it form an International Insti-
tute for the study of the Negro problem, and for the evolution and
protection of the Negro race.
47
The success of the second Pan-African congress in attracting a level of
international support also generated, for the first time, the criticism of the
European press. British Africanist Sir Harry Johnston chided the Pan-
Africanist intellectuals, noting curtly that American “colored people  . . .
know so little about real Africa.” The British humor magazine Punch paro-
died the “Pan-African Manifesto.”
48
More seriously,Neptune, a major Brussels newspaper, levied the accusa-
tion that the Pan-Africanist congress was “an agency of Moscow and the
cause of native unrest in the Congo.” It asserted that the congress’s leaders
had “received remuneration” from the Bolsheviks and predicted darkly that
Pan-Africanist propaganda would “some day [cause] grave difficulties in
the Negro village of Kinshasa.”
49
Other European leaders and colonial officials confused Du Bois’s Pan-
Africanist movement with the alarming growth of the militant black
nationalist organization, the Universal Negro Improvement Association
(unia), led by the charismatic Jamaican Marcus Mosiah Garvey. Du Bois
later complained, “News of [Garvey’s] astonishing plans reached Europe
and the various colonial offices, even before my much more modest pro-
posals. Often the Pan-African congress was confounded with the Garvey
movement with consequent suspicion and attack.”
50 Even as the 1919 Pan-
African congress was meeting in Paris, the unia newspaper Negro World
was banned by the acting governor in British Honduras [Belize] and by the
Trinidadian governor “on grounds that it [was] seditious.” In May 1919 the
British Guianan government seized and destroyed Negro World; on August
6, 1919, the acting governor of Jamaica ordered postal agents to seize
copies of the newspaper; on August 19, “legislation to ban the Negro World
in the Windward islands [was] advocated by the governor, G. B. Haddon-
Smith.”
51 Thus, from Du Bois’s perspective, any perceived connection with
86 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 108 ---
the threat of Garvey’s militant black nationalism compromised his Pan-
African objectives.
On the other side of the color line, Garvey and his followers denounced
the Pan-Africanism of Du Bois as early as 1918. Always the polemicist,
Garvey himself was not above distorting the facts to suit his immediate po-
litical objectives. Speaking before the Baltimore unia branch on December
18, 1918, for example, Garvey stated erroneously that Du Bois and Moton
were sent jointly “to France to prevent Negroes from getting the fruits of
their sacrifices on the battlefields.” Negroes should enjoy democracy, Garvey
declared, but whites had “sent for men like Du Bois and Moton to prevent
us from getting it.”
52 In retrospect, the famous Du Bois–Garvey debate that
characterized so much of the politics of the black world during the 1920s
began in the circumstances surrounding the first Pan-African congress.
On November 10 and 11, 1918, the unia proposed a series of “Peace
Aims” to the Allies. Learning of the pending Versailles Peace Conference,
the unia appointed three members to go to Paris. Only one, a nineteen-
year-old Haitian named Eliézer Cadet, was able to secure a passport for
the trip.
53 In Cadet’s possession were two addresses, to the “People of
England and France,” respectively, urging them to grant “fair play and jus-
tice on the continents of Africa, America and on the West Indies.” Euro-
peans were asked to “help us to abolish the lynching institutions and burn-
ing at the stake of men, women, and children of our race in the United
States of America, to abolish industrial serfdom, robbery, and exploitation
in the West Indies and the new slavery and outrages inflicted on our race
in Africa.”
54
Unfortunately, Cadet did not arrive in Paris until March 1, several days
after the Pan-African congress had ended, and he did not deliver the
unia’s documents to Clemenceau’s offices until March 9. His failure to
attract the attention of the French authorities or the press was attributed
to the intervention of “adversaries.” Garvey incorrectly assumed that Du
Bois was somehow responsible for Cadet’s problems. At a mass assembly
of three thousand unia supporters, which included A. Philip Randolph
and socialist editor Chandler Owen, Garvey declared that the naacp
leader had placed “obstacles in the way of the elected representative effi-
ciently discharging his already difficult duties on behalf of the Negro race.”
A resolution that “denounced the reactionary leader, W. E. B. Du Bois, and
upheld Eliézer Cadet” passed unanimously “with acclamation.”
55 On April
5, 1919, Negro World repeated the charges that the U.S. government had
asked “Dr. Du Bois to go to France” and that he had sabotaged the unia’s
initiatives. To say that Garvey deliberately libeled Du Bois would be too
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 87


--- PAGE 109 ---
generous, for the unia leader cynically distorted the facts: “Cadet present-
ed these [ unia] aims to the French people and to the Peace Conference,
[but] Du Bois . . . who was never elected by anyone except by the capital-
ist class . . . has come out to attack [our aims] in the French papers.” 56
Other black American activists repeated Garvey’s charges. Chandler
Owen asserted that only “good niggers” like Du Bois could get passports
to attend the Pan-African congress. Only “men who positively would not
discuss lynching, peonage, disfranchisement and discrimination” were
allowed to go to Paris.
57 Du Bois at first ignored the slanders, but as he
prepared for the second Pan-African congress he responded to Garvey’s
attacks. Throughout his visit to France, he “never saw or heard of [Cadet],
never denied his nor anyone’s statements of the wretched American con-
ditions, did everything possible to arouse rather than quiet the French
press, and would have been delighted to welcome and cooperate with any
colored fellow-worker.” The entire affair had convinced Du Bois that
Garvey had “very serious defects of temperament and training: he is dic-
tatorial, domineering, inordinately vain, and very suspicious.”
58
This minor conflict shortly grew into an ideological war, as the two
men identified by Pan-Africanist George Padmore as “the two outstand-
ing Negro leaders in the Western hemisphere” debated their respective
Pan-African programs.
59 A full critique of the Du Bois–Garvey debate
transcends the scope of this discussion, but, as Padmore notes, “Where Du
Bois differed from Garvey was in his conception of the Pan-African move-
ment as an aid to the promotion of national self-determination among
Africans under African leadership, for the benefit of Africans themselves.
Garvey, on the other hand, looked upon Africa as a place for colonizing
Western Negroes under his personal domination.”
60
More generous is the assessment of Garvey scholar Theodore G. Vin-
cent, who viewed the most important contrast between Du Bois and Gar-
vey as their radically different social positions. The “famous feud pitted an
introspective scholar” against a “gregarious, virtually self-educated, mass
leader. As a social analyst, Du Bois made critical evaluations of all leading
blacks; most could accept it in good spirit; Garvey could not.”
61 Historian
John Henrik Clarke, surveying the debate, notes that Du Bois often ad-
dressed advice to Marcus Garvey “as if . . . [he] were a misguided child, and
Garvey spoke of Du Bois as if he were a fraud, and a traitor to his people.
At a critical period, this kind of conduct was a negation of the cause that
had been the life work of both men.”
62
The 1921 Pan-African congress was in many respects the high point of
the Pan-African movement in the 1920s. An international secretariat es-
88 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 110 ---
tablished in Paris to facilitate correspondence soon closed for lack of
funds. Diagne postponed the scheduled 1923 congress, and “finally with-
out proper notice or preparation” the sessions were held in London and
Lisbon.
63 British author H. G. Wells and socialist Harold Laski attended
the London sessions; Labour Party leader Ramsay MacDonald wrote to
the congress affirming his support. The Lisbon sessions were more pro-
ductive, with delegates from eleven nations in attendance. Two former
colonial administrators of Portugal “Promised to use their influence in get-
ting their Government to abolish conscript labor and other such overdue
reforms in the African colonies.” In their manifesto, the delegates repeat-
ed their demands of two years before, concluding, “In fine, we ask in all
the world, that black folk be treated as men. We can see no other road to
peace and progress.”
64
Nkrumah would later write that the 1923 congress “lacked funds and
membership was limited. The delegates were idealists rather than men of
action. However, a certain amount of publicity was achieved, and Africans
and men of African descent for the first time gained valuable experience in
working together.”
65 After the congress, Du Bois visited Africa for the first
time, seeing four African islands and five countries. In Liberia, he repre-
sented the U.S. government at the inaugural of President C. D. B. King.
66
In the mid-1920s, Du Bois recognized that “the Pan-African idea was
still American rather than African, but it was growing, and it expressed a
real demand for examination of the African situation and a plan of treat-
ment from the native African point of view.” His plans for a fourth con-
ference, which was to be held in “Jamaica, Haiti, Cuba, and the French
islands” in 1925 failed to materialize. Efforts to charter a ship to carry par-
ticipants across the region were unsuccessful, and one French firm de-
manded “the prohibitive price of fifty thousand dollars” to transport the
black delegates.
67
One year later, Addie W. Hunton, a naacp field organizer and leader
of a black women’s association, the Circle of Peace and Foreign Relations,
largely initiated the plans for another Pan-African congress, which was
held in New York City in August 1927.
68 The sessions attracted five thou-
sand people, far more than the number of participants at all previous con-
gresses combined. There were 208 paid delegates from twenty-two states
and the District of Columbia. Others came from India, China, Egypt, Li-
beria, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, the Gold Coast, and other nations. Despite
the presence of Chief Amoah III of the Gold Coast, Du Bois was disap-
pointed with the small number of African delegates. Nevertheless, largely
because of the spirited presence of African American women leaders, the
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 89


--- PAGE 111 ---
congress was productive. As Padmore wrote, “While these Negro women
had no intention of voluntarily going back to Africa, they, like so many of
their menfolk, took a lively interest in the land of their ancestors.”
69 The
delegates emphasized “six points” in their resolutions:
Negroes everywhere need:
1. A voice in their own government.
2. Native rights to the land and its natural resources.
3. Modern education for all children.
4. The development of Africa for the Africans and not merely for
the profit of Europeans.
5. The reorganization of commerce and industry so as to make the
main object of capital and labor the welfare of the many rather
than the enriching of the few.
6. The treatment of civilized men as civilized despite difference of
birth, race or color.
70
The delegates also ratified resolutions that widened the scope of Pan-
Africanism. The Soviet Union was applauded “for its liberal attitude toward
the colored races and for the help which it has extended to them from time
to time.” Echoing Marx’s famous observation in Capital, the congress told
the white working class “to realize that no program of labor uplift can be
successfully carried through in Europe and America so long as colored labor
is exploited and enslaved and deprived of all political power.”
71
The Great Depression and the rise of fascism contributed decisively to
the temporary collapse of Pan-Africanism. In 1929 Du Bois attempted to
hold a fifth Pan-African congress in Tunisia. “Elaborate preparations were
begun,” he noted in The World and Africa. “It looked as though at last the
movement was going to be geographically in Africa. But two insuperable
difficulties intervened: first, the French government very politely, but firmly,
informed us that the Congress could take place at Marseilles or any French
city, but not in Africa; and second, there came the Great Depression.”
72
Six weeks after the stock market crash of October 1929, Du Bois ad-
mitted to his Crisis readers that “the importance of these [Pan-African]
meetings is not yet realized by educated and thinking Negroes” in the
United States. He attributed much of the problem to “the unfortunate
words and career of Marcus Garvey,” who had dampened the interest of
many African Americans in African issues. “Nevertheless, the idea of the
Pan-African Congress is sound, and in less than a hundred years, it is
going to be realized.”
73
Most of the leadership of the naacp had never been interested in Du
Bois’s Pan-Africanist vision, and with the cancellation of plans for the
90 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 112 ---
1929 congress at Tunis, the organization silently retreated from involve-
ment in African affairs. Du Bois’s departure from the editorial and politi-
cal leadership of the naacp in the summer of 1934 and the elevation of
staunch integrationist and anti-Communist Walter White to the post of
naacp secretary ended a distinct phase of Pan-Africanist history.
IV
The focus of the Pan-Africanist movement returned to London during the
1930s, largely because of the dynamic personality of George Padmore, the
nephew of Henry Sylvester Williams.
74 Born Malcolm Nurse, the young
Trinidadian came to the United States in 1924 to pursue a career in law. He
joined the Communist Party in 1927 and helped to direct the party’s Har-
lem newspaper for a time. Padmore advanced quickly: by the early 1930s he
had become “the foremost black figure in the Communist International —
the Comintern — culminating in his receiving appointment as a colonel in
the Red Army.” Padmore traveled across colonial Africa, recruiting African
militants to revolutionary Marxism, and later “as head of the African Bu-
reau of the Comintern in Germany, he organized an International Confer-
ence of black workers in Hamburg.”
75
But in 1934 Padmore abruptly severed his association with the Com-
munists. In his judgment, the Communists had been incorrect to condemn
Garvey’s unia and Du Bois’s Pan-African congresses “as manifestations of
petit bourgeois nationalism, to be fought and destroyed before Commu-
nism could ever hope to make inroads in Africa or win the allegiance of the
Negro masses in America to the cause of the ‘Proletarian Revolution. ’...
The attitude of most white Communists toward Negro organizations has
been one of contempt. If they cannot control them, they seek their destruc-
tion by infiltration.”
76
Relocated in London during the Depression, Padmore established an
informal headquarters at his home for African and West Indian students and
activists. A young Kenyan studying anthropology, Jomo Kenyatta, was a vis-
itor and close disciple. Two other associates consulted frequently with Pad-
more: C. L. R. James and Paul Robeson. Born in Trinidad in 1901, James
was the leading black Trotskyist in Europe and, within Padmore’s circle of
associates, the most articulate theoretician of Pan-Africanism. Writing in the
tradition of Du Bois, he produced during these years several classic texts:The
Case for West Indian Self-Government (1933), The Black Jacobins: Toussaint
L’Ouverture and the Haitian Revolution(1938), and A History of Negro Revolt
(1937).
77 Robeson, the great black Shakespearean actor and vocalist, was
profoundly interested in African culture and politics. The African American
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 91


--- PAGE 113 ---
artist appeared in the title role of Toussaint L’Ouverture, a 1936 play written
and staged by James. These men represented a new generation of black
scholarship and political action, which would create the nucleus of the Pan-
Africanist upsurge after World War II.
With the Italian invasion of Ethiopia, this new leadership helped to
create the International African Friends of Abyssinia (iafa). Their imme-
diate goal was “to arouse the sympathy and support of the British public
for the victims of Fascist aggression and to assist by all means in their
power in the maintenance of the territorial integrity and political indepen-
dence of Abyssinia.”
78 Participants in the iafa included Amy Ashwood
Garvey, the first wife of the leader of the unia, who served as honorary
treasurer; T. Albert Marryshaw of Grenada; Gold Coast leader J. B. Dan-
quah; Mohammed Said of Somaliland; Jomo Kenyatta, the organization’s
honorary secretary; and James, who was iafa chairman. Several years later,
the International African Service Bureau was founded at the initiation of
T. R. Makonnen. Padmore chaired the bureau, writing much of the corres-
pondence in his kitchen. James edited the bureau’s International African
Opinion; Kenyatta served as assistant secretary, and Makonnen, the trea-
surer, successfully raised funds for the group’s activities. Robeson and Max
Yergan, a black ymca secretary who had worked in South Africa, initiated
plans during a 1939 London meeting to establish the Council on African
Affairs in the United States. Based in New York City, the new organiza-
tion attracted the energies of Alphaeus Hunton, a Howard University pro-
fessor of literature. Robeson, Yergan, and Hunton started a regular month-
ly meeting, devoted to developments in the continent. The council invited
African intellectuals and political leaders to speak at public forums.
79
Despite these hopeful signs, few others besides this circle of intellectu-
als and radicals perceived the Pan-Africanist cause as anything but a vi-
sionary and quiet abstract discourse. Though Du Bois had returned to
Atlanta University in 1934, he was still optimistic about the possibility of
reviving the Pan-African congress movement. In a June 1940 newspaper
column in the Amsterdam News, he suggested holding a “Fifth Pan-African
Congress” in Haiti in 1942. In the wake of A. Philip Randolph’s March on
Washington Movement of 1941, the two leaders suggested the preparation
of a “Congress of Black People” to coincide with the end of World War
II.
80 In his personal correspondence, Du Bois admitted in February 1941
that Pan-Africanism “is only an idea on paper and in the memory of a con-
siderable number of former [Congress] participants in America, the West
Indies and Africa.” But he also predicted, “If the world ever settles down
to peace again, there will be another meeting of the Congress.”
81 In 1944
92 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 114 ---
Du Bois discussed the idea of developing “an African Freedom Charter
and the scheduling of another Pan-African Congress with Amy Jacques
Garvey, the recent widow of the unia leader, Robeson, Yergan, and Harold
Moody, chairman of the London Missionary Society.”
82
In the summer of 1944 Du Bois returned to the naacp as director of
special research. One of his immediate objectives was to “revive the Pan-
African movement and give general attention to the foreign aspects of the
race problem.”
83 The actual planning of the October 1945 Pan-African
congress was, however, accomplished by Padmore and a young, idealistic
Gold Coast student, Francis (later Kwame) Nkrumah. James had traveled
during the war to North America, first conducting a series of discussions
with exiled Marxist Leon Trotsky in Coyoacan, Mexico, then organizing
dissident black and white rural workers.
84 In 1943, quite by accident, James
met the young African, who was attending Lincoln University. From 1943
to early 1945 Nkrumah “would come up to New York to spend a day or
two” with James and his associates. James comments: “Even in those years,
Nkrumah was noted for his acute intelligence, his intellectual energy, the
elegance of his person, the charm of his manners, and his ability to estab-
lish easy relations with any company in which he found himself.” When
Nkrumah left for England to study law, James scribbled a note of intro-
duction to Padmore. Within weeks, Nkrumah joined Kenyatta as a regular
“student” in the Padmore household.
85
Padmore’s opportunity to revive the Pan-African congress concept
came with the February 1945 establishment in London of the World
Federation of Trade Unions, which brought dozens of “representatives of
black labour from Nigeria, Gold Coast, Sierra Leone, Gambia, Jamaica,
Trinidad, Barbados, British Guiana, and other colonial lands.” A second
World Federation of Trade Unions meeting had been scheduled in Paris
from September 25 to October 9, 1945. Padmore successfully persuaded
these black trade unionists and other political leaders to come to Man-
chester following the Paris meeting. In March 1945 a “provisional pro-
gramme and agenda” were set and a working committee formed, which
included Padmore and Nkrumah as “joint political secretaries,” South Af-
rican writer Peter Abrahams as “publicity secretary,” Kenyatta as “assistant
secretary,” Peter Milliard of British Guiana as chairman, and Makonnen
working once more as treasurer.
86
In the United States, Du Bois had established correspondence with J. B.
Danquah, who was then the general secretary of the Gold Coast Youth
Conference, and with Jamaican attorney Norman W. Manley, who would
later serve as his country’s prime minister.
87 It is clear that Padmore had is-
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 93


--- PAGE 115 ---
sued the call for a Pan-African congress without Du Bois’s knowledge. On
March 22, 1945, he wrote to Padmore insisting that the meeting “ought to
be held in Africa” and that the “meeting should not be set for a definite date
as yet,” since the war had not ended.
88 Within several weeks, however, Du
Bois wrote to Padmore that he was “in complete sympathy” with his plans
and that he had “changed my mind as to the time of the Congress as well.”
During the next six months the two men worked closely in coordinating
the congress.
89
The Manchester Pan-African congress attracted the political and intel-
lectual vanguard of the black world. Participants came from across the Af-
rican Diaspora and Africa: Wallace Johnson, secretary of the Sierra Leone
Youth League; Magnus Williams, of the National Council of Nigeria and
the Cameroons: Raphael Armattos, of Togoland; J. S. Annan, secretary of
the Gold Coast Railway Civil Servants’ and Technical Workers’ Union; G.
Ashie Nikoi, a leader of the Gold Coast Farmers; Marko Hlubi, Zulu rep-
resentative of the African National Congress; Jamaica’s Norman Manley
and Alma LaBardie, of the Jamaica Women’s Movement; P . M. Harper, of
the British Guiana Trade Union Congress; E. de Lisle Yearwood, of the
Barbados Labour Party; and Claude Lushington and John Rojas, of the
West Indian Nationalist Party. Certain individuals stood out at the con-
gress. Kenyatta was the leading spokesperson for East African affairs. And
Nkrumah, heretofore unknown, quickly emerged as a dominant personal-
ity among the West African delegates. Padmore and Milliard were the es-
sential organizers of the forums. Amy Jacques Garvey received the warm
applause of all participants. Yet the guiding spirit of the congress, all rec-
ognized, was Du Bois. As Padmore wrote:
These discussions were conducted under the direction of Dr. Du Bois,
who at the age of seventy-three, had flown across the Atlantic from
New York to preside over the coming of age of his political child. This
“Grand Old Man,” politically ahead of many much younger in years,
was given an enthusiastic welcome by the delegates. For he had done
more than any other to inspire and influence by his writings and polit-
ical philosophy all the young men who had foregathered from far dis-
tant corners of the earth. Even among the older delegations, there
were many who were meeting the “Father of Pan-Africanism” in the
flesh for the first time. Dr. Du Bois was by no means a silent specta-
tor at the Fifth Pan-African Congress. He entered into all the discus-
sions and brought to the deliberations a freshness of outlook that
greatly influenced the final decisions; the implementation of which
are already shaping the future of the African continent.
90
94 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 116 ---
The fifth Pan-African congress differed from the earlier sessions in sev-
eral important respects. Most of the Manchester participants were elected
leaders of various mass-constituency organizations or had direct contacts
with nascent independence movements. Thus their programs had an im-
mediacy and a comprehensive character that drew strength from actual
workers’ struggles. Most of the two hundred delegates and observers were
proposing “a mass movement intimately identified with the underprivi-
leged sections of the colored colonial populations.”
91
The sessions on West Africa focused on the immediate tasks of the in-
dependence movements in that region, especially in Nigeria and the Gold
Coast. Resolutions in this area included demands for the creation of “inde-
pendent trade unions and cooperative movements without official inter-
ference.” British rule was denounced for tolerating “mass illiteracy, ill-
health, malnutrition, prostitution, and many other social evils,” and orga-
nized Christianity was described as a tool that facilitated “the political and
economic exploitation of the West African peoples by alien powers.” Sig-
nificantly, delegates also criticized “the artificial divisions and territorial
boundaries created by the imperialist powers,” which were viewed as “de-
liberate steps to obstruct the political unity of the West African peoples.”
Congress participants were already proposing the cardinal principle of
what would afterward be referred to as Nkrumahism: that only by the po-
litical and economic unity of all Africa could the legacy of European colo-
nial rule be uprooted.
The delegates believe in peace. How could it be otherwise, when for
centuries the African peoples have been the victims of violence and
slavery? . . . We are determined to be free. We want education. We
want the right to earn a decent living; the right to express our thoughts
and emotions, to adopt and create forms of beauty. We demand for
Black Africa autonomy and independence, so far and not further than
it is possible in this One World for groups and peoples to rule them-
selves subject to inevitable world unity and federation ....W e  con-
demn the monopoly of capital and rule of private wealth and industry
for private profit alone. We welcome economic democracy as the only
real democracy.
92
The aftermath of the Manchester congress is, of course, well known.
Nkrumah formed the West African National Secretariat to implement the
congress’s resolutions. Returning to the Gold Coast in 1947, he built the
powerful Convention People’s Party, and under his leadership the indepen-
dent nation of Ghana was born in 1957. Kenyatta became the leader of
Kenya’s independence movement and emerged as that nation’s president.
The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 95


--- PAGE 117 ---
Du Bois’s subsequent intellectual activities on African affairs continued to
increase. His two major books after the war focused specifically on the press-
ing necessity of African liberation. After his dismissal from the naacp in
1948, he became vice chairman of the Council on African Affairs. From
March 1947 through February 1948, Du Bois wrote a total of fifty-three es-
says on African politics, economic development, and history for the Harlem
weekly People’s Voice, owned by Congressman Adam Clayton Powell.
Du Bois’s voluminous early works on Africa and race relations became
more widely distributed across the Caribbean and Africa during the 1950s,
as another new generation of black activists and intellectuals looked for
proper theoretical grounding for their national liberation struggles. They
recognized, in Padmore’s words, that Du Bois “was the first American
Negro leader to realize the significance of the colonial liberation move-
ments as part of the struggle of the darker races of Asia and Africa and the
importance of fostering closer cooperation between native-born Americans
and peoples of African descent in the Western Hemisphere.
93 For Du Bois
himself, the pursuit of the Pan-Africanist ideal was directly linked with his
vision of radical democracy, or per haps more accurately, multicultural
democracy. Africa and peoples of the African Diaspora could not be truly
free so long as democracy existed only for the few:
The iron curtain was not invented by Russia; it hung between Europe
and Africa half a thousand years. When the producer is so separated
from the consumer in time and space that a mutual knowledge and
understanding is impossible, then to regard the industrial process as
“individual enterprise” or the result as “private enterprise” is stupid. It is
a social process, and if not socially controlled sinks to anarchy with
every possible crime of irresponsible greed. Such was the African slave
trade, and such is the capitalist system it brought to full flower. Men
made cotton cloth and sold sugar; but between the two they stole,
killed, and raped human beings. . . . If a world of ultimate democracy,
reaching across the color line and abolishing race discrimination, can
only be accomplished by the method laid down by Karl Marx, then that
method deserves to be triumphant no matter what we think or do.
94
96 | The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 118 ---
97
Many studies have examined the evolution of African politics or the theo-
retical contributions of individuals who have played significant roles in the
patterns of social protest within Africa, but the attempt to chart the actu-
al social development among black intellectuals generated within the Afri-
can Diaspora has barely begun. We know a good deal about individual
leaders, such as Kwame Nkrumah, Julius Nyerere, and Leopold Senghor,
but relatively little—in theoretical terms—about their development as po-
litical intellectuals against the background of antiracist and anticolonial
struggles in sub-Saharan Africa, the Caribbean, and black America. What
was the life of the political mind of the African Diaspora in the late nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries?
I have begun a research project that aims toward a comprehensive his-
torical and theoretical critique of the contours, commonalities, and diver-
gences of African, Caribbean, and African American political and social
protest thought. This essay presents a set of conceptual questions that serve
as a theoretical framework for that project.
I
The first question is, “What are political intellectuals and what is their func-
tion within society?” The most detailed and comprehensive answer is found
in the work of the Italian Marxist intellectual Antonio Gramsci. In his sem-
inal study The Prison Notebooks , Gramsci suggested that all intellectuals,
7
Political Intellectuals in
the African Diaspora


--- PAGE 119 ---
whether or not they are personally involved in political organizations and
activities, perform a political function. They provide an academic rationale
for the dominant set of ideological, cultural, and social relations that exist
within the social formation. They explain, justify, and legitimate the intel-
lectual status quo. They constitute the ideological glue that binds together
the force that Gramsci termed “hegemony.” Each social class, Gramsci
observed in The Prison Notebooks, “creates together with itself, organically,
one or more strata of intellectuals which give it homogeneity and an aware-
ness of its own function not only in economic but also in the social and
political fields.”
1
Within a society based on capitalist economic patterns of ownership and
production, traditional intellectuals—writers, theologians, philosophers,
social critics, novelists, artists, and so forth—are directly involved in the
production and reproduction of ideological forms that reinforce domination
by the classes that control political and economic power. Part of their re-
sponsibility is to socialize successive generations to accept the dominant
ideology and power relations with the existing social order. Consequently,
intellectuals in this context are less concerned with the transmission of
knowledge that accurately relates to the material and social conditions of
their students and readers than with the promulgation of perspectives that
reaffirm the established order. Education in this context becomes a method
of obscuring rather than illuminating social reality. Intellectuals also serve
to explain social, political, cultural, and even scientific phenomena in a way
that reinforces the power arrangements within the political economy and
social structure, thus permitting the process of accumulation within the
capitalist economy.
Gramsci emphasized that “traditional intellectuals” may not perceive
themselves as ideological appendages to the development of capitalism. In-
deed, traditional intellectuals view themselves as existing above social class-
es, independent of partisanship and class affiliation. They do retain a certain
autonomy, or as Gramsci noted, “The relationship between the intellectuals
and the world of production is not as direct as it is with the fundamental
social groups but is, in varying degrees, ‘mediated’ by the whole fabric of soci-
ety and by the complex of superstructures, of which the intellectuals are, pre-
cisely, the ‘functionaries.”’
2
Social change within a society dominated by capital occurs fundamen-
tally through social-class conflicts or through protests by dominated groups
or constituencies—racial, ethnic, or national minorities—against real griev-
ances generated by the political and economic order. Oppressed social class-
es or racial groups may try to win liberal or sympathetic intellectuals of the
98 | Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora


--- PAGE 120 ---
ruling class over to their political perspective, in an attempt to challenge
existing beliefs. Certainly this has occurred many times during the history
of social protest, throughout the African Diaspora: the development of
white abolitionism in the United Kingdom and the United States in the
early nineteenth century, for example; or, in the twentieth century, white
anticolonialist and antiimperialist agitation against the crimes of Europe
in Africa.
But Gramsci suggested that such a dynamic is not enough to transform
the dominant hegemony, or “common sense,” ideologically reproduced by
the vast majority of the society’s traditional intellectuals. “One of the most
important characteristics of any group that is developing towards domi-
nance is the struggle to assimilate and to conquer ‘ideologically’ the tradi-
tional intellectuals,” Gramsci noted, “but this assimilation and conquest is
made quicker and more efficacious the more the group in question suc-
ceeds in simultaneously elaborating its own organic intellectuals.”
3
In contrast, organic intellectuals emerge from the most oppressed and
exploited social classes and groups within society. They generally articulate
the consciousness of their classes in politics, in social relations, and within
the economy. Because their connections with the elites who control the
economy or dominate governmental institutions are tenuous or even nonex-
istent, their objective class position is implicitly or explicitly in direct con-
flict with the dominant powers. Gramsci believed that in every successful
social revolution, oppressed classes generate their own organic intellectuals,
who assume a pivotal ideological role in the process of social change.
Organic intellectuals can reveal gross contradictions within the political
process, illustrating the distance between those who govern and those who
are governed; they may express the deep grievances percolating up from the
masses below regarding educational, social, cultural, economic, or political
rights; they may promote a counterhegemonic perspective with civil society
that establishes a culture of resistance, glorifying beliefs, rituals, or symbols
of struggle against the dominant social classes and political elites; and they
may assist in the advancement of educational and cultural awareness at a
mass participatory level, through public school intervention, literacy cam-
paigns, and so forth. Organic intellectuals do not attempt merely to inter-
pret the world in various ways; their object is to change it.
For several fundamental reasons, organic intellectuals who emerge from
social movements seldom have the influence or authority within society to
implement their social theories and political perspectives. On a technical
level, they lack the institutional resources and standard academic support
to engage in long-term research or intellectual investigation. They may be
Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora | 99


--- PAGE 121 ---
explicitly excluded from the academy solely on the grounds of race, as in
the famous case of W. E. B. Du Bois, who earned a doctorate in history at
Harvard University and established a brilliant publication record but was
unable, for sixty years, to obtain a tenure-track position at any white Amer-
ican university. They may possess a wealth of critical information about
some aspect of their oppressed social group’s history or political develop-
ment but lack the traditional academic credentials of mainstream intellec-
tuals. During the period 1919–1939 in black America, for example, some
of the most talented and well-read intellectuals included Hubert H.
Harrison, the socialist and black nationalist writer; popular historian J. A.
Rogers; and militant journalist John Edward Bruce, who founded the Ne-
gro Society for Historical Research in 1911. But with the partial exception
of Harrison, who held a nontenured position as a “special lecturer” in con-
temporary civilization at New York University, neither these intellectuals
nor their writings were welcome at white colleges and universities.
4
Organic intellectuals have theoretical perspectives and ideas not gener-
ally replicated in the normal discourse or inquiry of traditional intellectu-
als within the university and professional organizations. Consequently, any
innovations or discoveries that they achieve are usually dismissed without
serious examination or analysis by the mainstream. It is not that their work
is explicitly rejected; rather, it is simply ignored.
One need not develop a rigorous critique of a theoretical statement if the
work is neither widely read nor distributed by traditional scholars. Organic
intellectuals suffer from a periodic sense of isolation and even social alien-
ation from their base constituency, class, or national group. Developing a
sense of history and critical intellectual tradition within the organic or
insurgent milieu is always extremely difficult. The absence of mentors who
can provide the socialization as well as the external contacts so crucial for
professional and intellectual advancement contributes to the sense of isola-
tion. Moreover, organic intellectuals must frequently pay a public price for
their academic heresies. In most countries in the African Diaspora dom-
inated by European colonialism or racial segregation (as in the American
South), the price has been imprisonment, political harassment, arrest, cen-
sorship, house arrest, unemployment, poverty, and sometimes death.
Political censorship and isolation create yet another problem. Isolation
can distort or deform the research or scientific interpretation of organic
scholars, because they are denied the most recent data on investigative
methods or resources. Their physical isolation from the academy can limit
the scope of their work. Finally, the political ideas of organic intellectuals
frequently take on the characteristics or orientation of the oppressed social
100 | Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora


--- PAGE 122 ---
classes in which they live in close proximity. The language and style of
organic intellectual discourse are often designed for a mass audience rather
than an effete coterie of abstract scholars. Organic intellectuals are engaged
in problem solving, not in detached academic inquiry. The demands of the
broader social movement that consume their energies and passion largely
dictate the theoretical question posed in their work.
An additional set of political and social limitations has plagued organic
intellectuals within the black world. During the first half of the twentieth
century, serious academic work dealing with people of African descent
dwelt in an extremely repressive environment. In Africa, the political and
social structures of European colonialism controlled society from above. In
the American South, the white establishment dismantled the last vestiges
of democratic government in the 1890s and imposed a rigid regime of ra-
cial segregation in public accommodations, transportation, and the job mar-
ket—a regime reinforced by the lynching of at least one hundred black men
and women a year.
These two repressive forms of society were comparable in many re-
spects. Both colonialism and Jim Crow severely restricted individual and
group civil liberties, often outlawing freedom of the press and freedom of
assembly for nonwhites. The political apparatus did not permit blacks to
participate directly in elections; in the South, blacks who had won the elec-
toral franchise immediately after the end of slavery were now forcibly re-
moved from overseers’ rolls. Organized political groups advocating racial
reform or the termination of institutional or vigilante violence against non-
whites encountered severe repression. The state frequently prohibited their
work and imprisoned their leaders. The legal apparatus of the racist state
dispensed a crude yet effective form of civil order, which regulated the pub-
lic behavior of blacks and protected the security of whites’ private proper-
ty and power within majority black areas. The social and cultural institu-
tions, especially the schools, reinforced—by design—a negative, subordi-
nate self-image among nonwhite children. The curriculum advanced val-
ues that justified the hegemony of the white man as an absolute political
and cultural necessity. Negro inferiority and white supremacy were postu-
lates as widely accepted in the academy as Newton’s laws of gravity and
motion. Science, art, and culture translated the dynamics of lynching and
disfranchisement into the discourse of detached scholarship.
II
Within this political environment, successive generations of black political
intellectuals became preoccupied with several central questions—questions
Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora | 101


--- PAGE 123 ---
that transcend geography and the peculiarities of local culture, political
institutions, and social structure.
What is racism? How did racial prejudice and discrimination evolve as
a central ideological feature of western civilization’s encounter with the Af-
rican world? What is the relationship between institutional racism and the
structures of colonialism in the Caribbean and Africa, or the apparatus of
Jim Crow in the United States? Is it possible to dismantle the structures of
political and economic domination without simultaneously challenging the
legitimacy of racist ideology and cultural relations? Black organic intellec-
tuals also questioned the historical and theoretical relationship between
racial prejudice and democracy, particularly as it applied to the status of mi-
nority populations. Is democracy so grounded in narrow cultural assump-
tions about the process of decision making within pluralistic societies that
its applicability or relevance to the African Diaspora is very limited?
More generally, black intellectuals questioned the relationship between
institutional racism and other forms of social and political domination:
rooted in social class, nationality, religious intolerance, ethnocentrism. Is it
a realistic or realizable political project to take as one’s goal a society that
is not only antiracist but actually committed to human equality? Can
humanity transcend the contradictions of its own history and create a more
humane political economy and cultural environment? These questions, and
others, have preoccupied the research and critical writings of black organ-
ic intellectuals for a century and more.
In pursuing the answers to these questions, organic intellectuals of the
African Diaspora established several common responses to the existence of
white colonial or capitalist domination. Black intellectuals repeatedly as-
serted the cultural unity and aesthetic identity of all people of African des-
cent. This response was undoubtedly in part an attempt to counter the im-
pact of the ideology of white supremacy, to project the accomplishments and
richness of the cultural heritage of African people in a variety of political and
social environments. But another essential element was the concept that
common cultural threads bound the people of the Diaspora together and
that the art, music, literature, and theater of black people expressed these
connections. The integrity of this cultural tradition provided some of the
ideological ammunition for a critique of European and American cultural
hegemony. In short, the artistic and cultural expressions of African people
not only established our claim to the rights of humanity but were also an
essential aspect of our political assault against the structures of domination.
During the 1920s in black America, for example, the central cultural
and artistic movement was the Harlem Renaissance, a phenomenon that—
102 | Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora


--- PAGE 124 ---
when it comes to connections between African Americans and both the
image and reality of Africa—can only be described as “contradictory.” A
goodly number of black artists, particularly those who found white patron-
age, sought to validate the universality of their work by “transcending”
their racial identity. Others insisted that African American art should have
little to do with political agitation on the issue of racism.
But those organic intellectuals who identified closely, both personally
and politically, with the black masses approached the issue of black art and
liberation very differently. William H. Ferris, a former member of W. E.
B. Du Bois’s Niagara Movement and literary editor during the early 1920s
of Marcus Garvey’s Negro World newspaper, argued against the “false con-
ception of art” that should “appeal exclusively . . . to the bourgeoisie.”
Largely due to “social pressure,” Ferris observed, too many black artists “are
forced to produce works that bring out ‘the higher aspiration of the Negro,’
works that with a brutally sterile puritanism steer clear of the beauty and
simplicity of true art.”
5
Some of the most productive and influential black writers of the peri-
od agreed with Ferris. Claude McKay’s famous poem “If We Must Die”
captured the necessity for African Americans to organize against racist
violence. Black art had to advance the ideological and political interests of
the masses. As McKay insisted in his 1923 book The Negroes in America ,
prepared for the Communist International: “The only literature which
merits any attention is that which has the character of national propagan-
da. Almost any Negro writer, however much he might appear to be mind-
ing his own business, is really drawn into active work in the area of propa-
ganda.”
6 Similarly, Langston Hughes’s “The Negro Artist and the Racial
Mountain” emphasized the necessity for African American writers to
deepen their political and “spiritual” identification with the black masses.
Hughes’s “mountain,” which stood “in the way of any true Negro art in
America,” was the tendency “within the race toward whiteness, the desire
to pour racial individuality into the mold of American standardization, and
to be as little Negro and as much American as possible.”
7
The major black nationalist mass movement of the era, the Universal
Negro Improvement Association, was in many respects a Pan-African cul-
tural and artistic movement, developing and attracting writers and artists
who were committed to black liberation. “We must encourage our own
black authors who have character,” Garvey himself wrote in 1928, “who are
loyal to their race, who feel proud to be black, and in every way let them
feel that we appreciate their efforts to advance our race.”
8
Literary clubs and theatrical companies were established at unia branch-
Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora | 103


--- PAGE 125 ---
es across the African Diaspora. Chapters held concerts featuring local black
artists; they scheduled plays, debating contests, poetry readings, and other
cultural events. In 1921, the Negro World Christmas literary contest offered
thirty-six cash prizes to participants. It was not unusual for poets and writ-
ers to join the unia and to be elevated to political leadership roles. Poet J. R.
Ralph Casimir, for example, was the leader of the unia branch in Dominica
and contributed dozens of Pan-Africanist–oriented poems to the Negro
World under the name Civis Africanus. After Garvey’s publication was offi-
cially banned in West Africa, Casimir forwarded copies to J. E. Casely Hay-
ford, editor of the Gold Coast Leader. Charles H. D. Este, a major figure of
the unia’s Montreal branch, achieved prominence as a frequent contributor
of poetry on black nationalist themes to Negro World. The publication at-
tracted the literary contributions of a variety of black writers and political
activists alike. Albert Marryshaw, the political reform leader of Grenada and
early advocate of West Indian federation during the 1920s, published poet-
ry in Negro World. Gold Coast attorney and African nationalist Kobina Sikyi
contributed the political poem “The Sojourner” in 1922, calling upon
Africans to reclaim their cultural heritage:
Awake thee from thy slumber
And quickly disencumber
Thy manhood of the fetters
That make thine equals betters.
9
Another common response to white colonial and capitalist domination
within the African Diaspora was the general belief, expressed by many
black intellectuals as early as the mid-nineteenth century, that the ultimate
liberation of African people in any single country was directly connected
to the condition of black people in other countries. Part of this analysis
derived from the realities of European colonialism; Britain manifested its
domination throughout the nonwhite world between 1890 and 1940, from
the Caribbean to sub-Saharan Africa, to the Indian subcontinent, to the
Middle East. The shape of colonial regimes might differ in form but not
in essence. All were structures designed to facilitate economic exploitation
and political domination; all involved some form of cultural imperialism,
whether modeled after the French assimilationist pattern or the rigidly
segregated institutions characteristic of the British and Americans.
The political protests of one community of black people in one corner
of the Diaspora might provide critical insights into the appropriate strate-
gies or tactics of resistance in another geographical region. As a practical
matter, organic intellectuals understood the need to learn about other black
104 | Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora


--- PAGE 126 ---
resistance movements, to avoid the mistakes or errors of those groups in
organizing against colonial domination, and to maintain regular lines of
communication with other formations engaged in similar protest activities.
Implicitly, this pragmatic desire to cultivate political connections presumed
a Pan-African problematic, a theoretical perspective linking local, region-
al, and international struggles. They also understood the need for solidar-
ity movements to provide political and moral support for black communi-
ties or nations that were under military attack or were experiencing severe
racial and political oppression.
III
The first organic intellectual to achieve a profoundly influential critique of
colonialism and European racism and to articulate a truly Pan-African po-
litical model for agitation was Edward Wilmot Blyden. Intellectuals with-
in the African Diaspora born in the late nineteenth century and coming to
political maturity immediately after World War I were heavily influenced
by his massive academic and polemical achievement. In a series of essays
appearing in African Repository from 1860 to 1890, Blyden had provided
an articulate rejection of the ideology of European supremacy and racism.
His 1888 seminal work, Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race , projected
pride in Africa’s cultural heritage.
Perhaps even more influential was Blyden’s personal model of academic
excellence and political engagement on behalf of African people. A native of
St. Thomas, Blyden had become a professor of Greek and Latin at Liberia
College in Monrovia in 1861 and was named to the presidency two decades
later. At different times in his career he was secretary of state, minister of the
interior, ambassador to London and Paris, and commissioner to the descen-
dants of Africa in the United States and the West Indies. Blyden’s entire
approach to his political and intellectual understanding of race was based on
a Pan-African model, a theoretical approach transcending the distortions of
local ethnic parochialism.
During the period 1919 to 1939, the most prominent examples of Pan-
Africanist political organization initiated by the black intelligentsia were
Du Bois’s Pan-African congresses. But many other organizational efforts
also promoted the vision of Blyden. In 1925 African students living in the
United Kingdom founded the West African Students’ Union. Among the
key organizers were J. B. Danquah, later the leader of the United Gold
Coast Convention; H. J. Lightfoot-Boston, later the governor-general of
Sierra Leone; and J. W. de Graft Johnson of the Gold Coast. Actually,wasu
was neither composed totally of students nor limited to West African mem-
Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora | 105


--- PAGE 127 ---
bership; its constitution permitted anyone of African descent to participate.
Its original goals included the promotion of nationalist and Pan-African
pride and consciousness; the cultivation of leadership abilities among its
members; service “as a Bureau of Information on African history, customs
and institutions”; and “act[ing] as a center for Research on all subjects ap-
pertaining to Africa and its development.”
By early 1926 wasu had established its own publication, Wasu. The
quarterly magazine was distributed to black communities throughout Af-
rica, Europe, the United Kingdom, and the United States. It developed
branches in Accra, Freetown, Kano, and other West African cities. Its offi-
cial patrons included Casely Hayford and, in the 1930s, African American
artist and activist Paul Robeson. Upon Garvey’s arrival in England in 1928
immediately following his expulsion from the United States, wasu began
to work closely with Garveyites and for a time placed its headquarters in
lodgings owned by supporters. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, addi-
tional branches of wasu were established in Lagos, Port Harcourt Jos,
Cape Coast, Sekondi, and other cities.
10
During the Depression, other Pan-African formations developed. In
December 1931 the League of Africans was organized in London, with the
purpose of promoting “mutual understanding” and “sincere, friendly Egyp-
tians and other Native races of North Africa.” Among the initial officers
were Jomo Kenyatta, general secretary, and A. J. Koi, of the Gold Coast,
who would serve a quarter century later in Kwame Nkrumah’s cabinet. The
League of Africans appears to have disintegrated within two years.
More successful was the League of Colored Peoples, established by
Harold A. Moody, a Jamaican medical doctor and civic leader of London’s
black community. Moody sought to unify Caribbean and African students
living and working in the United Kingdom behind a moderate reformist
program. The objectives of the league included the improvement of race
relations in England, the promotion of cooperative relations between “orga-
nizations sympathetic to Colored Peoples” and “to interest members in the
Welfare of Colored Peoples in all parts of the World.” Whites were allowed
to speak at the league’s meetings and conferences, but they were barred from
the executive committee. Moody’s rigid commitment to Christianity and his
bias against Marxism alienated some African and West Indian students. In
1932 George Padmore’s Negro Worker magazine carried an appeal to non-
white students to “break with the sycophantic leadership of Dr. Harold
Moody, a typical ‘Uncle Tom.”’ But Moody’s efforts helped sustain interest
and political engagement in a Pan-Africanism that included both the Carib-
bean and black America.
11
106 | Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora


--- PAGE 128 ---
African students in Paris at the same time were developing similar
organizations. Touvalou Houenou, of Dahomey, initiated the Ligue uni-
verselle, calling for African and Caribbean political self-determination and
emphasizing the cultural and political unity of all African people. Attacked
as subversive by Blaise Diagne, the Ligue disintegrated within a few years.
More successful was the Ligue de la defense de la race Negro, established
by Tiemoho Kouyate. This second formation existed for about a decade
before it was suppressed by government authorities.
But perhaps the most important single Pan-Africanist organization
during this period was the International African Friends of Abyssinia, es-
tablished in August 1935, two months before Italy’s brutal invasion of
Ethiopia. Its officers and international committee members truly repre-
sented a Pan-African united front. The chair was Trinidadian Trotskyist C.
L. R. James, who was in the process of writing The Black Jacobins; the sec-
ond vice president was Grenadian Albert Marryshaw; Jomo Kenyatta was
honorary secretary; Amy Ashwood Garvey, the first wife of the black na-
tionalist leader and a prominent Pan-Africanist; and committee member J.
B. Danquah. Although he did not participate in its founding, former
Communist International leader George Padmore quickly emerged as the
principal leader and organizer of the group. This formation lasted only a
year, but it became the nucleus for the International African Service Bu-
reau, led by Padmore, Kenyatta, and James, which would become the infor-
mal general secretariat for Pan-Africanist agitation and the promotion of
independence movements for both the Caribbean and Africa after World
War II.
Political intellectuals as a social group have been central to the process
of political, cultural, and social change within the African Diaspora. Fur-
ther research should reveal even more extensive connections among black
nationalist, labor, socialist, and electoral political organizations and their
programs, tactics, and strategies for empowerment. It is here, among these
organizational and political connections, that we may discern certain pat-
terns that explain the emergence of organic intellectuals and their general
strategies toward social transformation.
Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora | 107


--- PAGE 129 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 130 ---
PART THREE
The Politics of Peace and
Urban Empowerment


--- PAGE 131 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 132 ---
111
I
In the early 1980s millions of Americans became part of a modern world
peace movement. On June 12, 1982, more than one million of them
demonstrated in New York in favor of a bilateral freeze of nuclear weapons
production by the United States and the Soviet Union. In November 1982
about eleven million Americans voted to endorse the “freeze.” In more
than fifty cities, a “Jobs with Peace” referendum passed, calling upon Con-
gress to provide more funds for human needs and vocational programs.
Many American businessmen noted with some alarm that expenditures for
both conventional and nuclear weapons had produced massive federal
deficits that might reach $300 billion per year by 1986. Others argued that
an immediate freeze on the production, testing, and deployment of nuclear
weapons, missiles, and bombers would save $6 billion in 1983 dollars, and
perhaps $200 billion over a ten-year period. Opposing the popular move-
8
Peace and Black Liberation:
The Contributions of W. E. B. Du Bois
War? Not so, not war:
Dominion, Lord, and over black, not white
Black, brown and fawn,
And not Thy chosen brood, O God,
We murdered.
To build Thy kingdom,
To drape our wives and little ones,
And set their souls a’glitter—
For this we killed these lesser breeds
And civilized their dead,
Raping red rubber, diamonds, cocoa, gold.
For this, too, once, and in Thy name
I lynched a Nigger.
—W. E B. Du Bois, “A Christmas Poem,” December 1914


--- PAGE 133 ---
ment for peace and nuclear weapons reductions were the conservative poli-
cies of the Reagan administration—intervention in Central America, con-
frontation with the Soviet Union, and, pending before Congress, an un-
precedented request for an appropriation of $1.5 trillion for the military.
For much of the world, the direction of American military and foreign pol-
icy in the 1980s seemed to foreshadow the very real possibility of a third
world war.
1
The strength of this modern peace movement and the broad-based
popularity of a nuclear freeze tend to obscure a number of historical is-
sues of special relevance to black Americans and other national minori-
ties. The legacy of the Cold War and McCarthyism has contributed to a
kind of “historical amnesia” for many white Americans. Few political
commentators in the national media note that many of the public policy
concerns raised today about nuclear ar ms proliferation echo the slogans
and campaigns of millions of other Americans of a generation ago. More
than one million voters supported the Progressive Party presidential cam-
paign of Henry Wallace in 1948, and millions of others voted for the
Democratic Party incumbent, Harry S. Truman, in the vague hope that
he would implement a few of the demands for peaceful coexistence and
disarmament raised by the Progressives. Moreover, many contemporary
white peace activists fear any relationship between their specific activities
and/or disarmament proposals with the broader socioeconomic concerns
that attract the immediate interest of working-class and nonwhite peo-
ple—full employment, decent housing, better schools, welfare, adequate
medical care.
Indeed, after I delivered a speech on the necessity of linking the issues
of racism, imperialism, and reductions in both nuclear and conventional
weapons, one white middle-class woman, a supporter of the freeze cam-
paign, privately rebuked me. “Blacks and Latinos aren’t interested in peace,
or at least they haven’t been in the past,” she said in a matter-of-fact man-
ner. “It could be that the prospect of a nuclear war is so terrifying that most
blacks just aren’t able to worry about it.” I was willing, for the moment, to
ignore her ethnocentrism. What genuinely perturbed me was this woman’s
simplistic belief that America’s defense policies were completely unrelated
to racism or colonialism. Somehow, the idea that one could promote the
freeze campaign without speaking to the material conditions of poverty,
discrimination, and hunger was, from my vantage point, morally wrong
and politically inept.
It seems apparent, in the light of history, that no significant reform
movement can succeed in this nation without the participation and the de-
112 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 134 ---
cisive leadership of peoples of color, as well as of the working class. This is
not simply a question of “race relations,” wherein certain numbers of iden-
tifiable black, Asian American, and Latino leaders are politely invited to sit
on a dais and offer a few words of support. Nor is it the hasty incorporation
of the pressing economic, political, and social agendas of the black and
brown working classes into the agendas of groups working for disarmament
and arms reduction. It is rather the relearning of American social history,
from the bottom up, reconstructing the key components of a practical
American program for social transformation. At minimum, this involves an
intimate awareness of the dialectical unity between wars for national liber-
ation and the necessity for world peace; the need to destroy racial barriers
and the necessity that African people and their New World descendants
unite; the occasional use of violence to halt the violence imposed by capi-
talism within people’s daily lives.
Many white peace advocates are completely ignorant of the contribu-
tions that blacks have made to white movements. For decades, some of
the most articulate people speaking for peace have been African Ameri-
cans. Melvin B. Tolson’s “A Legend of Versailles” provides a poet’s insight
into the seeds planted at the 1919 peace conference from which Hitler
and war grew.
2
Langston Hughes’s “Peace” says more in eight lines than a series of
treatises could ever relate:
We passed their graves:
The dead men there,
Winners or losers,
Did not care.
In the dark
They could not see
Who had gained
The victory.
3
The most charismatic and noted proponent of peace in U.S. history was
the gentle giant Paul Robeson. A true Renaissance man, Robeson made his
mark in athletics and law, in music and drama, in human rights and in the
cause of African liberation. At the height of the Cold War, Robeson did
not repudiate his political commitment to the peace movement, and to the
cause of human emancipation. As Andrew Young has noted, Robeson
“loved justice, freedom, compassion” and “hated injustice, oppression, [and]
tyranny. To the young of my generation and to those who have followed
after, he was a giant among men.”
4
Peace and Black Liberation | 113


--- PAGE 135 ---
Yet as monumental as Robeson was as a symbol of peace and freedom,
he was not primarily a social theorist. Robeson’s actions in the face of
McCarthyite persecution are an indelible part of the progressive history of
the period, but he did not attempt to develop a specific method of social
criticism that would establish the linkages among peace, the struggle
against racism, and the cause of socialism.
The one American who devoted more than half a century to the prin-
ciple of peace—and to many other struggles besides—was yet another
black man, W. E. B. Du Bois. In his many works on a wide range of issues,
we can find the theoretical basis for a more advanced peace movement for
our own time. This discussion is not a comprehensive critique of Du Bois’s
writings on peace and black liberation—notably Color and Democracy: Col-
onies and Peace (1945) and In Battle for Peace (1952). Rather, my aim here
is to present the thematic content of Du Bois’s essays and, most important,
his evolving method of historical materialism in developing a critique link-
ing racism, war, and peace.
5
II
Du Bois always presents special difficulties for the historian because of the
wide variety of his research and political interests over seventy-five years as
cofounder of the naacp (1909), organizer of five Pan-African congresses,
author of classic texts in black sociology and history—most prominently
The Souls of Black Folk (1903) and Black Reconstruction in America (1935),
editor of the naacp journal Crisis (1910–1934), and director of special re-
search for the naacp (1944–1948). Du Bois is generally viewed through
the prism of black history in three specific frames of reference: his conflict
with conservative black educator Booker T. Washington; his debates with
Jamaican black nationalist Marcus Garvey; and his role as a leader of the
naacp, up to his resignation in 1934. For many white liberal historians, the
story of Du Bois’s public life ends here, almost three decades before his
death. What is especially striking is the failure of virtually every histori-
an—with the outstanding exception of Herbert Aptheker—to analyze one
of the principal themes of his entire life’s work: Du Bois’s theoretical and
programmatic understanding of peace.
A single-minded vision of a world without war is everywhere in Du
Bois’s speeches, articles, and books over the years. As early as 1904, he
declared:
I believe in the Prince of Peace. I believe that War is Murder. I believe
that armies and navies are at bottom the tinsel and braggadocio of
oppression and wrong, and I believe that the wicked conquest of
114 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 136 ---
weaker and darker nations by nations whiter and stronger but fore-
shadows the death of that strength.
6
Throughout a long and controversial career as a leader of the black free-
dom movement, Du Bois never wavered from this commitment to peace. He
recommended books on pacifism to readers of his journal Horizon in 1907.
7
After World War I, Du Bois used the pages of a black children’s monthly,
the Brownies’ Book, to reinforce antiwar sentiments among youth. In one
Brownies’ Book column, he argued that the U.S. government should be pro-
hibited from participating in any foreign conflicts unless a majority of voters
passed a national referendum.
8 Ten years later, speaking at a “peace mass
meeting” sponsored by World Tomorrow magazine in New York City, Du
Bois declared that America’s impulse toward war was driven by the demand
“for cheap labor and materials.”
9 In March 1949 he gave a major address
titled “Peace, Freedom’s Road for Oppressed Peoples” before the Cultural
and Scientific Conference for World Peace at Madison Square Garden.
10 In
the May 1955 issue of New World Review, he made his assessment of the
strengths and weaknesses of the postwar peace movement and his reasons for
reaffirming his long-held faith in reason and right over human conflict.
11
Du Bois continued to advocate world peace, along with his other prin-
ciples of civil rights for black Americans and Third World liberation. But
his understanding of peace, unlike that of most white Americans, was a
detailed, dialectical, and dynamic concept, rooted in the material conditions
of humanity and based upon an absolute commitment to social justice.
Du Bois’s first and most essential contribution to a black liberation/
peace analysis was his correlation between war and white capitalist hege-
mony. In “The African Roots of the War,” published in the May 1915 issue
of Atlantic Monthly, he argued that the European conflict was based upon
imperialist competition for overseas territories in Africa and Asia. At the
root of the war, he insisted, were white racism and the demand to accumu-
late capital at the expense of darker humanity.
12 That same month in Crisis
he also attacked the vicious racism found within all-white peace organiza-
tions in both Europe and the United States. He wrote that any peace group
that did not simultaneously oppose colonialism, capitalist exploitation of
peoples of color, and racism would be fundamentally compromised.
13
And, though Du Bois was not aware of it, yet another socialist was mak-
ing some of these same points, in a very different political context: V. I.
Lenin. Influenced by the 1902 study of British writer J. A. Hobson, and per-
haps more decisively by his brilliant pupil N. I. Bukharin, Lenin shared Du
Bois’s conviction that “these imperialist countries form alliances against one
Peace and Black Liberation | 115


--- PAGE 137 ---
another in order to protect or enlarge their possessions, their interests and
their spheres of influence” across Asia and other continents. In 1916 Lenin
noted that there was an “inseverable bond” between colonial exploitation in
Africa and Asia, “between imperialism and the trusts, and, therefore between
imperialism and the foundations of capitalism.”
14
Thus, despite his political distance from revolutionary Marxism, Du Bois
developed a quasi-Leninist outlook on the relationship between interna-
tional war, racism, and world capitalism decades before he actually joined the
Communist Party. This radical perspective is sharply revealed in his subse-
quent writings as well. In a brief note published in the October 1923 issue
of Crisis, the editor noted that the basis for world war was capitalist expan-
sion and a deep-seated hatred of colored people. War produces profits for
corporations; colonial expansion “to ‘develop’ the tropics” creates interna-
tional turmoil; “it pays to kill ‘niggers.”’
15 In January 1947 Du Bois was invit-
ed to speak at the sixth annual dinner of the Nobel Anniversary Committee
and was asked to make a comment on the prospects for peace. His sharp
reply was, “The emancipation of the black masses of the world is one guar-
antee of a firm foundation for world peace.” In short, peace demanded the
destruction of racism.
16
For Du Bois, peace was not the absence of conflict but the realization of
social justice and human equality, which would make war unnecessary. In the
March 1926 issue of Crisis, he suggested three steps toward the realization
of world peace—a universal agreement to “outlaw war,” a collective means to
monitor disagreements between nations and impose arbitration, and, finally,
complete disarmament. Even with such agreements in place, wars would still
continue unless institutional racism, capitalist imperialism, and the colonial
regimes of England, France, Belgium, and other nations were overthrown,
because these factors were “basic sources of war.” To win a lasting peace,
equality for all societies had to be established as a clear goal.
17
Du Bois’s rejection of “absolute pacifism” in the struggle for peace pro-
voked dissension by liberals of all races and cultures. In 1936 an Indian in-
tellectual, N. S. Subba Rao, criticized his views. Du Bois countered that
Rao’s pacifism promoted “acquiescence” and “subordination” to British au-
thority among the Indian masses. Genuine peace could not come to the sub-
continent until the Indian people rose up to overturn the ruling British elite.
Achieving worldwide peace would require a united front of the globe’s col-
ored people, not with the goal of oppressing whites but with one of liqui-
dating all forms of political tyranny.
18 Du Bois believed in the principle of
peace in regard to human relations but not to the point at which fascism and
racism would be unchecked and unresisted. Immediately after Pearl Harbor,
116 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 138 ---
he urged blacks to “close ranks” and do battle for the democratic rights “of
people of all colors.” In May 1942 he declared that if World War II was
being waged for human emancipation, “my gun is on my shoulder.”
19
For many critics, therefore, Du Bois was not a pacifist at all, and his se-
lective advocacy of war seemed to contradict his many assertions praising
peace. But to himself and, more important, in the light of the material
interests of his people, Du Bois’s position made complete sense. Poland
“had to resist Hitler,” he argued in March 1947, just as the brilliant former
slave Toussaint L’Ouverture was correct in leading his people to revolt
against their French slavemasters in Saint Domingue.
20 When Martin
Luther King Jr. used nonviolent direct action to defeat segregation on mu-
nicipal buses in Montgomery, Alabama, Du Bois cheered—but gently crit-
icized the young black minister’s “absolute pacifism” and his failure to
relate blacks’ real class and political interests within a pacifist framework.
21
The dialectical unity between his advocacy of “peace” and the necessity
for certain “types” of warfare is illustrated by Du Bois’s many writings on
Africa. First, he consistently criticized American pacifists for turning a blind
eye to the European partition of Africa and to the relationship between colo-
nialism and war.
22 In the July 1943 issue of Foreign Affairs, he pointed out
again, as he had done during World War I, that the European nations fight-
ing Germany maintained their exploitive policies within their own African
colonies. To guarantee peace after this conflict, the entire process of under-
development had to be halted. Africans should possess their own “land and
resources,” and the governments of these nations should “reflect” the desires
of the black masses.
23 In his Atlanta University journal Phylon, Du Bois at-
tacked the Roosevelt administration’s policies on Africa and singled out an
administrator of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, Henry Villard—the
grandson of abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison—for sharp criticism.
24 In
a controversial essay for the New Leader, Du Bois argued that African and
Asian colonialism had been decisive factors in creating both world wars and
declared that European imperialism would inevitably encourage more war in
the future. His analysis was so uncompromising that one staff writer on the
Communist Party’s paper, the Daily Worker, condemned his remarks as
“ultra-leftist,”
25
Throughout the remainder of his life, Du Bois insisted that “until the
question of colonialism” and the European capitalists’ “rape of Africa” were
ended, “there can be no peace in the world.”
26 It is also clear that his ideas
on the need for world peace to facilitate the drive toward African self-
determination found a receptive audience among militant African leaders.
The young Kwame Nkrumah, for example, who in 1946 was serving as
Peace and Black Liberation | 117


--- PAGE 139 ---
secretary-general of the West African National Secretariat in London,
praised Du Bois for his role in putting before the United Nations a peti-
tion representing the demands of “African organizations and the descen-
dants of Africans in America.” Nkrumah informed Du Bois that his group
“fully supported” the idea of relating “the important question of the treat-
ment of Africans and people of African descent, racial discrimination and
colonial matters generally” to the quest to achieve “world peace.”
27
III
Despite his many earlier writings on the subject, Du Bois’s international
prominence as an advocate for peace did not really gain recognition until
the end of World War II. In June 1945 he attended the founding confer-
ence of the United Nations, held in San Francisco. Serving as a consultant
representing the naacp, he perceived for the first time a growing rift be-
tween the world’s oppressed peoples and the United States, which was
now the “major colonial power.” He wrote in the Chicago Defender, “I seem
to see outlined a third World War based on the suppression of Asia and
the strangling of Russia. Perhaps I am wrong. God Knows I hope I am.”
28
His active participation in the Pan-African congress of 1945, his growing
political militancy, his advocacy of peace with the Soviet Union, and his
support for the 1948 presidential campaign of Henry Wallace, all contrib-
uted to his dismissal, in September 1948, as the naacp’s director of spe-
cial research.
After this second departure from the naacp, Paul Robeson asked Du
Bois to become vice chairman of the Council on African Affairs, without a
salary but with secretarial assistance and an office.
29 “I accepted for two rea-
sons,” Du Bois writes in his Autobiography. “First, because of my belief in
the work which the Council should do for Africa; and secondly, because of
my belief that no man or organization should be denied the right to a career
because of political or religious beliefs.”
30 Simultaneously, he became vigor-
ously involved in public efforts to halt the mounting Cold War with the
Soviet Union. In concert with other leading intellectuals—Thomas Mann,
Lillian Hellman, Linus Pauling, Albert Einstein—Du Bois used his pen
and his voice to protest the drive toward another war. At the Cultural and
Scientific Conference for World Peace, held in March 1949 in New York
City, he declared:
We know and the saner nations know that we are not traitors or con-
spirators; and far from plotting force and violence it is precisely force
and violence that we bitterly oppose. This conference was not called
to defend communism nor socialism nor the American way of life! It
118 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 140 ---
was called to promote peace! It was called to say and say again that no
matter how right or wrong differing systems of beliefs in religion,
industry, or government may be, war is not the method by which their
differences can successfully be settled for the good of mankind.
31
At the urging of O. John Rogge, a former special assistant to the U.S.
attorney general, Du Bois agreed to attend a conference for world peace in
Paris in April 1950 and later spoke at an “all-Soviet peace conference” held
in Moscow that August. He addressed more than a thousand delegates,
and his speech represented, in retrospect, one of the most cogent overviews
relating the questions of racism, class exploitation, and peace ever delivered
by any American. Du Bois first observed, “I represent millions of citizens
of the United States who are just as opposed to war as you are. But it is not
easy for American citizens either to know the truth about the world or to
express it.” In the United States, the opposition to peace had strong his-
torical foundations, which he described in detail—a legacy of slavery, the
exploitation of white and black labor, and the massive concentration of
wealth in the hands of a few individuals:
The power of private corporate wealth in the United States has throt-
tled democracy and this was made possible by the color caste which
followed Reconstruction after the Civil War. When the Negro was
disfranchised in the South, the white South was and is owned increas-
ingly by the industrial North. Thus, caste, which deprived the mass of
Negroes of political and civil rights and compelled them to accept the
lowest wage, lay underneath the vast industrial profit of the years 1890
to 1900, when the greatest combinations of capital took place. The
fight of Negroes for democracy in these years was the main movement
of the kind in the United States. They began to gain the sympathy
and cooperation of those liberal whites who succeeded the Abolition-
ists and who now realized that physical emancipation of a working
class must be followed by political and economic emancipation or
means nothing.... Democracy has no part in industry, save through
the violence or threatened violence of the strike. No great American
industry admits that it could or should be controlled by those who do
its work. But unless democratic methods enter industry, democracy
fails to function in other parts of life. . . . Organized wealth owns the
press and chief news gathering organs and is exercising increased con-
trol over the schools and making public discussion and even free
thinking difficult and often impossible.
32
For these historical reasons, the United States was committed to a for-
eign policy of confrontation with the Soviets and colonial exploitation of
Peace and Black Liberation | 119


--- PAGE 141 ---
the nonwhite world. Du Bois admitted that many Americans had “suc-
cumbed” to the “almost hysterical propaganda that the freedoms which
they have are being threatened and that a third world war is the only rem-
edy.” But millions of others who opposed racism and economic injustice
would join him in the battle for peace.
In the spring of 1950 about three dozen Americans met at Rogge’s home
in New York City to form the nucleus of what became the Peace Infor-
mation Center. Du Bois joined the group and was quickly identified as its
primary leader in the press. At the urging of the Peace Information Center,
2.5 million Americans signed the “Stockholm Appeal,” a document calling
for the abolition of atomic weapons. On July 12, 1950, Secretary of State
Dean Acheson denounced the center, warning Americans that “the so-called
‘world peace appeal’ or ‘Stockholm resolution”’ was simply “a propaganda
trick in the spurious ‘peace offensive’ of the Soviet Union.” Du Bois’s re-
sponse was immediate and uncompromising:
The main burden of your opposition to this Appeal and to our efforts
lies in the charge that we are part of a “spurious peace offensive” of the
Soviet Union. Is it our strategy that when the Soviet Union asks for
peace, we insist on war? Must any proposals for averting atomic cata-
strophe be sanctioned by the Soviet Union? . . . We have got to live in
the world with Russia and China. If we worked together with the
Soviet Union against the menace of Hitler, can we not work with
them again at a time when only faith can save us from utter atomic
disaster? Certainly hundreds of millions of colonial peoples in Asia,
Africa, Latin America and elsewhere, conscious of our support of
Chiang Kai-shek, Bao Dai and the colonial system, and mindful of
the oppressive discrimination against the Negro people in the United
States, would feel that our intentions also must be accepted on faith.
Today in this country it is becoming standard reaction to call anything
“communist” and therefore subversive and unpatriotic ....W e  f e e l
strongly that this tactic has already gone too far; that it is not suffi-
cient today to trace a proposal to a communist source in order to dis-
miss it with contempt.
33
Du Bois’s public response to President Truman’s secretary of state, and
the concurrent wave of domestic terrorism and McCarthyite politics that
Lillian Hellman named “Scoundrel Time,” set into motion a series of
events culminating in the “political assassination” of Du Bois. In August
1950, as the work of the Peace Information Center continued, Du Bois
agreed to run for the U.S. Senate in New York as a candidate of the leftist
American Labor Party. He later admitted that he went into the campaign
120 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 142 ---
“knowing from the first that I did not have a ghost of a chance for elec-
tion, and that my efforts would bring me ridicule at best and jail at worst.”
But the electoral effort allowed him “to speak for peace which could be
voiced in no other way.”
34 Giving ten major speeches across the state and
seven radio broadcasts, Du Bois did not expect to receive 10,000 votes. To
his amazement, he received 224,599—about 4 percent statewide, and 12.6
percent of Harlem’s votes.
35
Only one month after Acheson’s attack on the Peace Information Cen-
ter, the Department of Justice declared that the center was “acting as an
agent of a foreign principal without having filed its registration statement”
as required by the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938. Du Bois pro-
tested directly to Attorney General J. Howard McGrath that the center
was not a “publicity agent” for a “foreign principal,” and that the Justice
Department’s “arbitrary and capricious refusal to confer with me compels
me to infer that either the Department is unaware of the import of the sta-
tute which it seeks to enforce, or that it is unwise enough to deal cavalier-
ly with the rights of American citizens.”
36
The Peace Information Center was disbanded in October 1950. On
February 9, 1951, however, Du Bois and others formerly associated with
the center were indicted as unregistered foreign agents. The American
press convicted Du Bois even before he had been arraigned, much less
tried. On February 11 an editorial in the New York Herald Tribune de-
clared, “The Du Bois outfit was set up to promote a tricky appeal of Soviet
origin, poisonous in its surface innocence, which made it appear that a sig-
nature against the use of atomic weapons would forthwith insure world
peace.” The newspaper continued, “It was, in short, an attempt to disarm
America and yet ignore every form of Communist aggression.”
37 The trial
date was set for April 2, 1951, but was postponed several times. Finally, on
November 8, 1951, the trial began in Washington, D.C.; ironically, Rogge
was the chief government witness against Du Bois. Virtually everyone who
“had attended any meetings” of the center “was visited by FBI agents, often
two or three times, and many of them subpoenaed. So little was discovered,
however, that at the last moment most of these witnesses were never sum-
moned.”
38 The prosecution failed to present any incriminating evidence,
and a directed verdict of acquittal was given on November 20.
Du Bois was free, but his career and political credibility were virtually
ruined. naacp leader Walter White seized the opportunity to bury his long-
time rival. A staunch anticommunist, White told associates that the Justice
Department had “definite evidence” of Du Bois’s guilt, and the New York
office of the naacp took no action to defend their own founder and intel-
Peace and Black Liberation | 121


--- PAGE 143 ---
lectual mentor.39 Most black American leaders in the churches, colleges, and
business community were silent; in a few rare cases, one or another joined in
the jackals’ chorus.
But across the world, the arrest and trial of Du Bois became a major
political issue. For George Padmore and other nationalist leaders, the trial
was an effort to halt Du Bois’s “heroic fight for peace. We consider this at-
tempt to blackmail you into silence an outrage against the fundamental
principles of democracy and an insult to Africans and people of African
descent throughout the world.” Padmore praised Du Bois as “the finest
representative of our people’s hopes, dreams and aspirations. You have done
more than any other man during the first half of the twentieth century to
blaze the way and chart the course for Negro rights in America and Afri-
can and Colonial freedom.”
40 Frederic Joliot-Curie, France’s high com-
missioner for atomic energy and president of the World Peace Council,
praised Du Bois’s “perseverance and courage in the struggle for a just
cause.”
41 The International Union of Students, an organization numbering
five million youths in seventy-one nations, declared that Du Bois’s “work
for peace is in the best traditions of the American people. Prosecution is an
attack upon peace supporters, upon Negro people and upon [the] right of
professors and students to act for peace.”
42 An International Defense Com-
mittee was created, composed of representatives from Brazil, Switzerland,
Italy, Belgium, Romania, the Netherlands, France, and other nations.
Even within the United States, many courageous voices rallied to Du
Bois’s defense. The senior bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal
Church, Reverdy C. Ransom, denounced the indictment as a “strike
against the intelligentsia of Negro Americans and the millions who trust
and follow their leadership.” A conviction would be “the most powerful
blow against Negro Freedom and Equality that has happened since Ab-
raham Lincoln issued his proclamation emancipating the slaves. We are
not turning back a single inch.”
43 Albert Einstein contacted Du Bois ask-
ing to do whatever possible to help his case. And a prominent black judge,
Hubert T. Delany, who was subpoenaed to testify in the trial, informed
Du Bois that while he was not called, “I would have considered it an
honor to have given testimony to [your] excellent reputation. ...I  k n o w
of no single individual in this country who has fought longer, harder, more
consistently and more militantly for the rights of Negroes than you.”
44
For the rest of his life, however, Du Bois would be treated as a convict-
ed felon in his native land. Black newspapers that had proudly carried his
columns and occasional essays for decades now refused even to mention his
name. FBI and local police agents quizzed residents in Du Bois’s Brooklyn
122 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 144 ---
neighborhood about his visitors and habits. Large commercial publishers
who once competed for his manuscripts now rejected his works out of hand.
“From being a person whom every Negro in the nation knew by name at
least and hastened always to entertain or praise, churches and Negroes’ con-
ferences refused to mention my past or present existence,” Du Bois notes in
his Autobiography. “The central office of the naacp refused to let local
branches invite me or sponsor any lectures. I was refused the right to speak
on the University of California campus, because of naacp protest.”
45
On February 12, 1952, Du Bois was informed by the State Department
that he would not be permitted a passport, because “your proposed travel
would be contrary to the best interests of the United States.”
46 Until 1958,
when the Supreme Court overruled the State Department’s actions, he was
strictly confined to the United States. In May 1952 Du Bois and his sec-
ond wife, Shirley Graham Du Bois, were even refused entry into Canada,
despite the fact that no passport was necessary to visit that country. Now a
political pariah, even to many of his own people, Du Bois had private mo-
ments of doubt and despair. “The white world which had never liked me
but was forced in the past to respect me, now ignored me or deliberately
distorted my work,” he noted. “It was a bitter experience and I bowed be-
fore the storm. But I did not break.”
47
Nearly ninety years of age, Du Bois fearlessly continued the battle for
peace and racial justice as before. In journals at home and abroad, he con-
tinued to criticize the foreign policy of the Truman and Eisenhower ad-
ministrations. In a Monthly Review essay, he observed that the crisis of
world capitalism would bring about a united front of colored people across
the globe into a program for socialism.
48 In a speech in Los Angeles on
June 3, 1954, he argued that Vice President Richard M. Nixon was trying
to send U.S. “troops into Indo-China.” The threat to world peace largely
“lies in the continued insistence” of the United States “that the existence
of Socialist and Communist states are in themselves reasons for fear of ag-
gression.”
49 In Jewish Life, he cautioned readers that America was attempt-
ing to manipulate war with Communist China over the Formosa issue. 50
By 1956, if not well before, Du Bois had concluded that the gains achieved
by the Bolshevik Revolution outweighed its flaws, and more specifically,
that the Soviet state’s continued existence had a progressive and positive
role in the collapse of European colonial regimes and in the struggle
against white supremacy.
51
Perhaps most decisively, Du Bois continued to have a significant im-
pact upon developments in the African Diaspora, and in his writings he
repeatedly linked the question of world peace with the politics of African
Peace and Black Liberation | 123


--- PAGE 145 ---
liberation. He advised Padmore and Nkrumah to be wary of British and
American corporate investment in the period of postindependence. In
1957, he assisted Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett, publisher of the Sun-Reporter
newspaper in San Francisco, in establishing a medical team for service in
West Africa. To a West Indian correspondent, he urged the creation of a
West Indian Federation. Clearly and in detail, he provided an analysis that
placed black liberation and self-determination within a geopolitical frame-
work of detente between the ussr and the United States. Peace, in short,
was vital to the winning of black freedom.
52
IV
Du Bois’s final years were spent largely outside the United States. First, in
1958–1959, he went on a world tour that included the Soviet Union and
China. Then he left the United States on October 5, 1961, for Nkrumah’s
Ghana, where he died at the age of ninety-five on August 27, 1963. Du
Bois’s departure was prompted in part by the U.S. Supreme Court’s deci-
sion to uphold the infamous “McCarran Act,” which again jeopardized his
right to a passport. On October 1, 1961, he applied for admission to the
Communist Party of the United States. Characteristically, in a letter to
General Secretary Gus Hall, Du Bois wrote, “I have been long and slow in
coming to this conclusion, but at last my mind is settled.”
53
His decision to join the Communist Party and, even earlier, his work
for peace brought ridicule from historians and other academic detractors.
In 1959 historian Francis Broderick wrote:
No single work [of Du Bois] except The Philadelphia Negro , is first-
class. Black Reconstruction will be remembered, but more because of its
eccentric racist-Marxist interpretations than because of its assemblage
of new material. . . . It seems unlikely that Du Bois will be remem-
bered as a literary artist. . . . If there was a sharp break in Du Bois’s
ideas, it came not in 1934, when he separated from the naacp, but in
1952, when he abandoned the struggle for Negro rights to concen-
trate on world movements for peace and socialism.
54
The intellectual dishonesty and racism within these lines are evident.
To this day, Du Bois suffers from a host of detractors and “defenders,” both
those who vigorously dissent from certain aspects of his later life and work
and those who applaud only his earlier contributions. But the full measure
of the man is to be found not merely in his voluminous and formidable
academic studies, nor in his work for the naacp, and not even in his cen-
124 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 146 ---
tral role as the Father of Pan-Africanism. It is found in his dialectical
method of analysis, his constant care for the fine details and practical expe-
rience of human societies and cultures, and their relationship to the broad-
er processes of economic and material life.
His method of research, which carefully linked the integral themes of
peace, African liberation, and socialism, had its impact upon scores of
social theorists and political leaders who came later. One example is pro-
vided by Martin Luther King Jr. Six weeks before his assassination, King
spoke at a Carnegie Hall tribute on the centennial of the birth of Du Bois.
Like Du Bois, King had now taken a public stand against another Demo-
cratic administration, in opposition to U.S.-provoked foreign wars. Du
Bois “defied” his powerful opponents, King declared, “and though they
heaped venom and scorn upon him, his powerful voice was never still.”
King did not skirt Du Bois’s long-standing identification with Marxism.
“So many would like to ignore the fact that Du Bois was a Communist in
his last years.” In a deliberate reference to Vietnam, King said, “Our irra-
tional, obsessive anti-Communism has led us into too many quagmires.”
55
King’s principled commitment to nonviolent direct action did not dictate
that he remain silent on national liberation struggles abroad or on the
necessity for economic justice at home.
Most of the people of color across the world, consciously or not, define
“peace” in Du Boisian terms—the absence of imperialist aggression, the
achievement of national self-determination, the end of apartheid and racial
segregation, the realization of what is needed for a decent and humane ma-
terial and social life for themselves and for their children. Throughout his
entire career as a public figure, W. E. B. Du Bois spoke eloquently for these
social goals. If, after the end of World War II, he emphasized with greater
sharpness the necessity for world peace, it was no sudden departure from
his fundamental principles or method of analysis.
The change occurred within American society itself, and within the
direction of the government and corporations of the United States, toward
a clear and very real prospect of war. Such a war would have obliterated the
prospects of African liberation, for a decent life for American working
people, black and white, and for the realization of a socialist future for hu-
manity. This new reality motivated Du Bois to dedicate his life to what he
termed the “battle for peace.” In the end, his legacy can—and will—moti-
vate others to end war and racism in our time. It can succeed, however, only
if white American peace activists finally come to terms with their own
unconscious or explicit racism, if they understand in theory and in fact the
Peace and Black Liberation | 125


--- PAGE 147 ---
direct relationship of U.S. aggression in Central America, Africa, and Asia
to the larger process of exploitation that spawns racism and human suffer-
ing. The specter of nuclear madness, for Du Bois’s time and for our own,
will not be lifted unless the battle for peace is directly joined to the strug-
gle for economic justice, national liberation, and racial equality. Without
real justice, there can be no peace.
126 | Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 148 ---
127
In 1983 Chicago elected its first black mayor, Congressman Harold
Washington, in a political contest highly charged with racism and social-
class conflict. Breaking out of a two-generations-long pattern of electoral
apathy and political repression, nearly three-fourths of all black voters
turned out on April 12 of that year to give Washington more than 514,000
votes. The black Democrat combined that total with votes from other key
constituencies—79 percent of the Puerto Rican vote, 68 percent of the
Mexican American vote, and 38 percent of the Jewish vote—to defeat
Bernard Epton, his previously obscure Republican opponent.
1 During the
next four years Washington tried to reform the city’s byzantine govern-
ment while addressing the basic grievances and problems of blacks and
other constituents in the areas of housing, health care, employment, police
brutality, and social services.
The central political dilemma confronting Washington was the need to
create a broad-based, progressive, radical-reformist, multiethnic, multiclass
coalition that would, in theory, embrace African Americans, Hispanics,
Asian Americans, low-income working people, and the unemployed. Evi-
dence provided by the mayoral campaign of 1987, when Mayor Washington
sought and won reelection, suggests that the difficulties inherent in such a
strategy—a “Rainbow Coalition”—may be underestimated by its propo-
nents. Moreover, the coalition’s more progressive elements failed to develop
independent structures outside of government to influence the mayor’s
9
Harold Washington’s Chicago:
Race, Class Conflict, and Political Change


--- PAGE 149 ---
agenda, and that failure directly contributed to the difficulty of consolidat-
ing a Rainbow Coalition in Chicago.
I
Washington’s inability to dominate the city council for the first three years
of his tenure undermined his efforts to transform Chicago’s political sys-
tem. The boss of the Cook County Democratic Party machine, Alderman
E. R. “Fast Eddie” Vrdolyak, deprived the mayor of any real authority by
controlling twenty-nine of the fifty aldermen. Vrdolyak’s majority bloc
changed the city council’s rules to require a two-thirds vote to take bills
away from committees that refused to act on them. “Regular” Democrats
dominated by the machine held the powerful committee chairmanships,
and independents aligned with Washington held nothing. Normal gov-
ernmental processes were totally disrupted by these “council wars.”
Superficially, the conflicts between the Vrdolyak and Washington blocs
seemed to be motivated solely by race. During the 1983 Democratic may-
oral primary, Vrdolyak had mobilized white supporters by resorting to crude
race-baiting: “It’s a racial thing. Don’t kid yourself ....W e ’ r e  fighting to
keep the city the way it is.”
2 The fundamental factors motivating these po-
litical skirmishes, however, were patronage and power, not race. Vrdolyak
and his allies were “concerned about loss of power and patronage and op-
portunities,” observed Edwin C. Berry, former director of the Chicago Ur-
ban League. “If Harold Washington were as white as the driven snow and
he took away those privileges, they would be equally against him.”
3
Despite the disruption caused by the council wars, Washington’s ad-
ministration successfully addressed many social problems. In the area of
public housing, the city built 9,596 new residential units in 1983–1985.
Washington’s housing staff was reduced by one-fourth, but it was able to
rehabilitate more than twice the number of homes restored under the pre-
vious administration. The Housing Department gave emergency grants to
nonprofit groups to save low-income hotels and apartment buildings. The
administration also cooperated with housing experts to initiate the Chi-
cago Equity Fund and the Chicago Housing Partnership, which provided
funds to nonprofit organizations renovating low-income houses.
In the field of health care, the record was mixed. Under Washington, the
city’s infant mortality rate dropped from 18.6 per thousand live births to
16.4, but this rate was still 55 percent higher than the national average. And
in several black communities in Chicago, the infant mortality rate remained
much higher—between 24 and 30 deaths per thousand live births. Inflation
had severely shrunk the Health Department’s budget, and the number of
128 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 150 ---
staff and professional workers was cut from 2,234 to 1,962. But this fiscal-
ly strapped department continued to manage six large health care centers
and numerous small clinics and to serve as “the basic health care provider
for 230,000 Chicagoans a year.”
4 Despite their financial difficulties, these
public agencies and others continued to improve methods of service.
With some difficulty, the new administration attempted to revise the
city’s budgetary priorities. Its task was complicated by reductions in the
amount of community development funds granted to the city by the fed-
eral government, which declined from $140 million in 1983 to $85 million
in 1985. But Washington believed that most Chicagoans would support
additional user fees and taxes if the budgetary process was honest and if
financial alternatives were clearly outlined.
By late 1983 Washington had begun a process of collective bargaining
with all employees, introducing “new cost controls, efficient management,
and personnel cuts” in city departments swollen by patronage. Approxi-
mately $13.5 million of the remaining federal community development
funds was “shifted from administrative salaries and into a variety of neigh-
borhood and service improvements.”
5 Washington also initiated a series of
tax hikes amounting to $312 million over a three-year period. Conse-
quently, the mayor was able to reduce the city’s long-term debt by $27.5
million. But the city council blocked many efforts to locate additional
sources of revenue. Proposals to tax health clubs and boat moorings were
tabled by the council’s finance committee, and a plan for a $79 million
commercial lease tax on corporations was halted in court.
Washington faced two major difficulties in addressing the city’s econom-
ic problems. First, his prime constituency suffered disproportionately from
employment discrimination and high rates of joblessness, and it expected the
administration to act in a “social-democratic” manner by creating jobs. His-
panic and black entrepreneurs who had endorsed Washington urged the ad-
ministration to expand “minority business enterprise” and affirmative-action
plans. Sensitive to these demands, Washington signed an executive order in
April 1985 setting aside at least 30 percent of city contracts for minority-
owned and women-owned firms.
6 The next year, the city’s Department of
Economic Development issued a report advocating expanded business
growth in the Hispanic community. All city departments were urged to set
specific targets for purchases from Latino-owned companies, and $280,000
was set aside to fund ten Hispanic business organizations.
7
Washington’s 1983 appointment of Robert Mier as commissioner of
economic development was also a partial signal in favor of a moderately
left economic strategy. Mier advocated public support for cooperative and
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 129


--- PAGE 151 ---
worker-owned enterprises, as well as financing for joint ventures with large
corporations. Throughout his first term, Washington repeatedly insisted
that his long-term goal was “full employment” and a “booming general
economy.” But this social-democratic desire was tempered by the political
constraints of his own office, and the mayor cautiously cooled the eco-
nomic expectations of his own supporters: “Fiscal prudence in municipal
government leads to a better economic climate for business ....T h e
employer of last resort must be the Federal Government, if government
at all.”
8
Washington’s second difficulty in addressing Chicago’s economic prob-
lems was the cold disdain with which he was regarded by corporate lead-
ers. It had begun with his mobilization in 1982 for the 1983 mayoral race
and never really abated, despite repeated overtures by his administration.
Business leaders originally perceived Mier as “too pro-neighborhood and
left-wing,” and they “particularly disliked Mier’s and Washington’s ideas
that economic development must not be left in the hands of business exec-
utives with little accountability to the mayor’s office and that economic
development and manpower training should be closely linked.”
9 By the
middle of Washington’s first term, corporate “paranoia” toward the admin-
istration persisted. Business leaders recognized that the struggle between
Washington and Vrdolyak’s majority bloc in the city council was about
“power, not race,” in the words of one corporate attorney. “But by that stan-
dard, they don’t see [Washington] winning....T h e y  want to see him mak-
ing compromises with his opponents.” Large developers complained that
conducting business with new city officials was “slower” than before, but
they admitted that procedures were also “fairer and more professional.”
10
By August 1986 the Department of Economic Development had cre-
ated approximately sixteen thousand new jobs through ninety different
types of loans and financial-assistance packages to aid businesses. Wash-
ington initiated the general obligation bond, designed to fund capital im-
provements in the city’s infrastructure and in neighborhoods. Overall em-
ployment citywide under Washington increased by 2.2 percent in 1983–
1984, including a 5.1 percent increase in jobs on the South Side.
11 Most
bankers and corporate executives, however, remained pessimistic about the
city’s economic climate under a black mayor.
It was not until early 1986 that the administration won a decisive victo-
ry against Vrdolyak’s bloc, after a federal court ordered special elections in
seven gerrymandered wards. On March 18, 1986, candidates aligned with
the machine won three seats, Washington supporters gained two, and runoff
elections were scheduled for two races in which no candidate had won a clear
130 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 152 ---
majority. The races in these two wards would largely prefigure the 1987 may-
oral election, and both sides mobilized their forces. The Democratic
machine basically conceded its hold on the Fifteenth Ward, which was 75
percent black. With active campaign support from Washington and the
Reverend Jesse Jackson, Marlene Carter, a progressive neighborhood activist
and clerical worker, trounced her machine-backed black opponent by a two-
to-one margin. But the aldermanic contest in the Hispanic Twenty-sixth
Ward was perceived as highly marginal by both factions. Hispanic incum-
bent Manuel Torres had voted faithfully behind the Vrdolyak faction in the
city council, and he was the recipient of ample financial and political support
from former mayor Jane Byrne, state’s attorney Richard M. Daley, and other
white Democrats. Challenger Luis V. Gutierrez, an advocate of Puerto Ri-
can independence, was viciously smeared as a communist, a supporter of ter-
rorists, and even an atheist—despite his prominent membership in the
United Church of Christ and his campaign slogan, “Church, Family, Com-
munity.” Gutierrez’s superior grassroots organizing effort, which helped to
increase voter turnout from 47 percent in the March 1986 election to 62 per-
cent six weeks later, defeated Torres and the machine.
The victories of Gutierrez and Carter ended the Democratic machine’s
council mandate of twenty-nine to twenty-one and created a balance of
twenty-five aldermen on each side—which permitted the mayor to cast
tie-breaking votes and thus control the city government. Several white and
Hispanic aldermen who had previously supported Vrdolyak immediately
announced their “independence” and cast votes with the mayor on several
occasions. Washington was finally able to win approval of major proposals
and to place his nominees on various boards, some of whose appointments
had been stalled by the council’s majority since late 1983.
12
On September 24, 1986, the “reformed” city council narrowly passed
the mayor’s budget, which included an $80 million property tax increase.
Machine leader Edward Burke was removed as chairman of the council’s
finance committee and replaced by Washington lieutenant Timothy Evans.
Democratic Party committee member Edmund Kelly was replaced as su-
perintendent of Chicago’s Park District by independent black leader Jesse
Madison.
13
II
Increasingly, the Regular Democrats found themselves on the defensive.
Their only solution was the removal of Washington from office. To accom-
plish this, they had to re-create the chaotic conditions of the general election
of April 1983, when a little-known Republican challenger had nearly upset
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 131


--- PAGE 153 ---
Washington in a racially charged political environment. The white
Democrats also recognized that they had to avoid at all costs an election that
pitted Washington against two or more well-known white candidates. What
was required, in short, was a “white united front”—or in Vrdolyak’s words,
“anyone but Harold.” Setting the theme for the machine was powerful U.S.
Congressman Dan Rostenkowski: “I’d love to see a united front.”
14
The initial strategy to guarantee a two-way mayoral race was advanced
by the supporters of state’s attorney Richard M. Daley, son of Chicago’s
former political boss and an unsuccessful candidate for mayor in 1983.
Daley proposed to replace the traditional two-party primary system with a
nonpartisan election. The two candidates receiving the highest number of
votes would subsequently face each other in a runoff if neither had received
at least 50 percent of the vote. Daley explained his proposal as an attempt
to promote racial harmony within the electoral process: “The current sys-
tem encourages the politics of factions which have no incentive to reach
beyond themselves to the entire Chicago community. It encourages an atti-
tude of ‘us against them.’”
15 Black leaders immediately denounced the
proposed referendum on the issue as a transparently racist maneuver.
Sixty volunteers from the Chicago Urban League, the naacp, and other
civic associations found thousands of irregularities in the petitions for the
referendum. Many signatures were forgeries or were those of nonresidents;
about five thousand signatures were actually photocopies from other names
on the petition sheets. Although the city’s Board of Elections initially
approved the referendum, circuit court judge Joseph Schneider blocked it
from the February 24, 1987, ballot. In early November 1986, the Illinois
Supreme Court ruled that Daley’s referendum was “too ambiguous” to be
“constitutionally valid.”
16
The next machine scenario was to pressure white prospective candidates
to fall behind a single challenger against Washington in either the Demo-
cratic primary or the general election. The chief difficulty here was that the
personal and political ambitions of the individual white candidates tran-
scended party loyalties and racial solidarity. The Republicans had opposed
the nonpartisan scheme because it would have voided any practical oppor-
tunity to elect a Republican mayor. Several candidates soon volunteered for
the gop mayoral primary, including Northwestern University professor
Donald Haider, who had been a Democratic aide to Mayor Byrne; Chicago
police officer Chester Hornowski; and local entertainer Ray Wardingley,
professionally known as Spanky the Clown. All were “political unknowns,”
but any of them might siphon off several thousand votes from a major white
independent challenger in the general election, thus throwing the race to
132 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 154 ---
Washington.17 For this reason, such prominent Illinois Republicans as for-
mer governor Richard Ogilvie and former U.S. attorney Dan K. Webb
declined to run.
Jane Byrne complicated matters in July 1985 by announcing her candi-
dacy for mayor in the Democratic primary. She gradually won the endorse-
ments of several influential machine leaders, including Alderman Roman
Pucinski and former Park District head Edmund Kelly, and collected a
campaign treasury exceeding one million dollars. But Byrne had too many
liabilities as a potential “white united front candidate.” Throughout 1986
Byrne consistently scored from six to sixteen points behind Washington in
public opinion polls. The former mayor’s highly controversial record in
office had created the widespread perception that she could never be re-
elected.
18 The Daley wing of the Regular Democrats, based on Chicago’s
Southwest Side, decided to support Cook County assessor Thomas C.
Hynes, though he was little known to most Chicago voters. Hynes’s chief
asset was the political support of Daley and U.S. representatives Dan
Rostenkowski and William Lipinski. He filed to enter the Democratic pri-
mary but simultaneously prepared to run on a third-party ticket in the gen-
eral election.
19
These intricate machinations failed to take into account the ambitions
of Vrdolyak, Washington’s most prominent white critic. The machine
boss’s controversial image as a vulgar racist demagogue was not popular
with a majority of Chicago’s electorate, whether white, Hispanic, or black.
White voters polled in late 1986 gave the Democratic Party leader a 53
percent “unfavorable” rating and a “favorable” rating of 37 percent, while
blacks gave him an unfavorable score of 82 percent. In a hypothetical head-
to-head race against Washington, polls indicated that the mayor would
win, 62 percent to 29 percent. Many white leaders immediately dismissed
Vrdolyak’s candidacy as “political suicide” or, at best, a duplicitous effort to
“lure the Mayor into the Democratic primary” against himself and Byrne
and then drop out, leaving Washington and Byrne in a two-way race.
20
This critique underestimated Vrdolyak’s subterranean talents and as-
sets. In mid-1986, he had established his own political action committee,
Save Chicago, and opened six political offices in all-white neighbor-
hoods. Vrdolyak led the city council fight against Washington’s property
tax hike, and the millionaire lawyer rhetorically cast himself as an “anti-
establishment populist.”
21 Moreover, Vrdolyak had served on the city
council since 1971, and over the years he had acquired detailed, damag-
ing information on his friends and opponents, which he used astutely at
critical junctures. Newly elected alderman Luis Gutierrez described
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 133


--- PAGE 155 ---
Vrdolyak’s normal blackmail-type pressure on Washington’s city council
supporters:
There [are] only about six or seven of us of the twenty-five [pro-
Washington aldermen] that say anything. You could say there’s only
six or seven that have big mouths and want to talk all the time. But I
figured it out—there’s only six or seven of us that Eddie Vrdolyak
doesn’t have anything on, that Eddie Vrdolyak hasn’t done a favor for,
that Eddie Vrdolyak hasn’t taken care of some problem, that Eddie
Vrdolyak doesn’t have some dirt on. So when you want to get up and
take Eddie on, you got to be clean.
22
Vrdolyak intuitively sensed that racism had to be a central component
of any successful strategy to defeat Washington. Large numbers of white
voters would not turn out on election day unless they were motivated by
hatred and fear. Vrdolyak’s means were vulgar—one leading member of his
city council bloc “always referred to the mayor as ‘that f--king nigger.”’
Vrdolyak himself told white community groups that “Washington wanted
to drive whites out of the city and ‘blacken’ it.”
23
The racist polemics of the Vrdolyak bloc created a social environment
in which vigilante violence against people of color could occur unchecked.
In the March 1986 special ward elections, members of the Ku Klux Klan
openly campaigned for at least one Regular Democratic candidate. On
June 28, 1986, the Klan held a “White Pride Rally” at Marquette Park that
initially attracted between three hundred and five hundred white residents.
When a small interracial group tried to rally against the Klan’s demonstra-
tion, several hundred local whites physically attacked them. Throughout
the summer of 1986 other similar incidents occurred. In Dolton, Illinois, a
white mob verbally assaulted and stoned a black marching corps during a
Fourth of July parade; in the white suburb of Lynwood, a black family
found racist graffiti defacing their home; and at least one local black home
was firebombed.
24 These random acts of terror were not planned, commit-
ted, or openly endorsed by Vrdolyak and his Democratic machine sup-
porters, but they served that group’s general political objectives. The most
effective way to coordinate an anti-Washington organization and agenda
among white working people was the manipulation of racism.
Washington’s troubles were compounded by the disarray in his own elec-
toral coalition. His seizure of control within the city council was a mixed
blessing in that it created the dangerous perception that the incumbent
would easily be reelected. It also fueled unrealistic patronage demands by va-
rious ethnic and political constituencies within his own bloc, who were im-
134 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 156 ---
patient with the pace of reform. To address the former, a voter registration
drive was launched in August 1986 to sign up most of the 177,000 voters
who had been purged from electoral rolls since the previous election. Partly
because of political apathy, only 60,000 people were registered in about six
weeks, but they lived mostly in black and Latino neighborhoods.
Contributing to the problem for progressives were the discriminatory
policies of the Chicago Board of Elections, which regularly deprived
thousands of poor and minority voters of their voting rights. The Chi-
cago Coalition for Voter Registration estimated that “20 percent of vot-
ers termed ineligible by election judges ar e illegally disfranchised.”
25 The
difficulties in registering low-income voters meant that the size of Wash-
ington’s core constituency would be considerably smaller than it had been
in 1983.
Washington also had to decide whether to contest the mayoral election
as a Democrat—within the Democratic Party primary, in other words—or
as an independent in the general election. Numerous factors pointed
toward an independent campaign. Washington had broken with the Regu-
lar Democratic organization in 1977, during his unsuccessful mayoral race
against Michael Bilandic. As an Illinois state senator, he had helped to
block Hynes’s election as Senate president for five weeks; he had also spon-
sored a bill to permit Chicago voters to recall Mayor Byrne. In 1977
Washington had told a group of black journalists: “I’m going to do that
which maybe I should have done ten or twelve years ago. I’m going to stay
outside that damned Democratic Party and give it hell.”
26
Throughout his first term, close advisers reiterated that the mayor had
no ideological or partisan commitment to the Democratic Party’s national
leadership. In the spring of 1984 more than a hundred community activists
and leftists, including Robert Starks, Luis Gutierrez, and Marlene Carter,
formed the Cook County Coalition for New Politics. Although the coali-
tion was short-lived, it advanced the notion of a progressive, multiracial
third party within the city. In Gutierrez’s district, 250 voters had joined his
Westtown Twenty-sixth Ward Independent Political Organization by
1986. His prime supporters, like most Chicago-area progressives, “could
give a damn about the Democratic Party,” Gutierrez insisted. “They’re
ready to work on whatever it is that moves socioeconomic justice ahead.”
27
Moreover, the Democratic Party’s national leaders refused to condemn
public efforts by Washington’s opponents to splinter the local party on nar-
row racial lines. “We keep the [Democratic] party in power,” reflected
Washington deputy campaign manager Jacky Grimshaw, “and the party
allows racists like Vrdolyak to remain in power.”
28
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 135


--- PAGE 157 ---
The question of a third-party mayoral candidacy was not merely tacti-
cal but fundamental to the entire scope of black and progressive politics for
the post-Reagan era. Richard Saks, a leader of Common Ground Network,
a Chicago-based community group, astutely outlined the issues in 1986:
[There are] two parties, and they both call themselves Democratic.
One is the Vrdolyakers, who base themselves on a straight-up racial
appeal; and the second is the Mayor’s coalition, which includes virtu-
ally the entire black community, a majority of the Latino community,
and a section of poor whites and progressive-minded whites ....
[Either] one or the other is going to be forced out of the Democratic
party. Either the Vrdolyakers will sell themselves to the Republican
party officially; or the Washington forces will be forced to form some
type of third party.
29
The local outcome would have a profound impact on national politics,
because Washington’s defeat might prompt the conservative wing of the
Democratic Party to accelerate its offensive against “special interests” such
as national minorities, feminists, organized labor, and the peace movement.
After some hesitation, Washington finally decided to run in the Demo-
cratic primary, even if Byrne challenged him as the sole white opponent.
One factor was the need to support progressive Democratic allies running
in aldermanic races. Another was the finding of opinion polls indicating
that he would lose some electoral support if he ran as an independent.
There was also the public perception of weakness, which might be fostered
if the incumbent mayor abandoned his own party’s line to his opponents.
30
III
The racial, ethnic, political, and social-class elements supporting Washing-
ton’s candidacy in 1983 had been highly divergent, and the mayor’s chief
challenge now was to create viable linkages among them. Each constitu-
ency seemed to view the administration’s reform agenda narrowly, through
the prism of its own specific interests.
One representative example is provided by the black-Latino controver-
sy over the city clerk’s race. Blac k attorney William Walls announced his
candidacy for the post, and support for him began to coalesce among
Washington allies. A citywide coalition of Latino leaders, however, decid-
ed to field its own candidate for the post—Gloria Chevere, the deputy
commissioner for planning and former director of the city’s largest Puerto
Rican credit union. Washington, Jesse Jackson, and other black leaders en-
dorsed Chevere, and Walls was pressured to leave the race. Black colum-
136 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 158 ---
nist Vernon Jarrett charged that Walls had become an “unwitting ally of
Jane Byrne,” because his campaign would only assist incumbent Walter
Kozubowski, a Regular Democrat. But many black nationalists and sever-
al black politicians saw Washington’s support for Chevere as a betrayal of
blacks’ interests. Chicago Metro News editor Nathaniel Clay deplored the
mayor’s endorsement of Chevere as an act of “political expediency.” If
Hispanics were seriously committed to a coalition, Clay insisted, they
should have “deferred to Walls....T h e y  didn’t do this because their real
goal is to maximize Hispanic political clout . . . this can only be done at the
expense of blacks; coalition politics in this instance is simply a convenient
cloak for ethnic ambitions.”
31
The Chevere-Walls conflict highlighted the underlying divisions and
conflicts that have long characterized relations between African Americans
and Latinos. For decades, black and brown reformers and progressives have
advocated a political alliance, based on common experiences of discrimina-
tion, economic exploitation, and political domination. Yet American social
history provides few models of “natural alliances” being formed among op-
pressed sectors of society via joint recognition of suffering and common
self-interest.
Sociologically, Chicago’s Latino population, unlike black America, is
neither a racially oppressed group nor a social group defined by a unified
historical, political, and cultural background. The first substantial number of
Spanish-speaking immigrants to the city were Mexican laborers who found
work in local steel mills and railroad yards shortly after World War I. The
initial influx of Puerto Ricans occurred two decades later. The local popula-
tions of both national minorities expanded dramatically only during the past
quarter century. In 1960 Chicago’s Puerto Rican population numbered only
32,371. Ten years later, Cook County’s Latin America–born population had
grown to 81,811, and 47,397 of these were Mexicans. By 1980 the Census
Bureau reported 499,322 Hispanics in Cook County; included among this
growing population were 310,428 Mexicans (about 62 percent of all His-
panics); 116,597 Puerto Ricans (23 percent); 15,961 Cubans (3 percent);
and 56,336 Spanish-speaking residents from Central and South America
and the Caribbean.
There are significant socioeconomic and racial distinctions within this
community. Puerto Ricans are nearly two times more likely than Mexicans
to live below the poverty level (31.6 percent versus 17.5 percent in 1980).
Cubans have a significantly higher median income than other Hispanics (in
1980, for example, $20,168 versus $11,959 for Puerto Ricans and $16,566
for Mexican Americans). Nearly 40 percent of all Puerto Ricans have an
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 137


--- PAGE 159 ---
eighth-grade education or less, and two-thirds have not finished high
school, statistics well below those for other Hispanics, blacks, and whites.
Most Cubans and many Mexicans have been culturally and socially assim-
ilated by the local white mainstream, while Puerto Ricans and perhaps a
majority of Chicanos share with blacks a profound alienation from prevail-
ing sociopolitical conditions.
32
Both black and Hispanic communities harbor other barriers to the joint
development of a progressive political bloc. Before 1980, only one Latino
had been elected to public office in Chicago. Hispanic churches were sel-
dom involved in electoral political activities or radical social welfare work
until Washington’s first mayoral race. With relatively low voter-turnout
rates, and under the omnipresent influence of the Democratic Party’s ma-
chine, Latino neighborhoods frequently produced politicians aligned be-
hind Vrdolyak, such as state representative Joseph Verrios and Thirty-first
Ward alderman Miguel Santiago, both from Puerto Rican constituencies.
Washington appointed three Puerto Ricans to high-level positions after
his election in April 1983: Miguel del Valle, chairperson of the Mayor’s
Advisory Commission on Latino Affairs ( macla); Benjamin Reyes, a
mayoral assistant; and Maria Cerda, director of the Department of Em-
ployment and Training.
But moderate Hispanic leaders such as Twenty-fifth Ward alderman
Juan Soliz, who also generally voted with Vrdolyak’s bloc, repeatedly
charged that Washington’s administration had not given Latinos their “fair
share.” In 1987 macla released a statement defending the Washington
administration’s affirmative-action hiring policies for blacks, but it also as-
serted that “for Latinos the results have lagged far behind what was expect-
ed and what is considered equitable.” Ramiro Borja, a leader of Chicago’s
Mexican American community, was far more critical and expressed a wide-
ly held belief that “it’s almost impossible to build a strong coalition be-
tween Hispanics and Blacks.” Borja asserted that blacks cooperate only
with “those Hispanics who can agree with them” and that, in any case,
“usually they treat us pretty much as tokens.” Conversely, many African
American leaders perceived Latino political demands as selfish and exces-
sive. Prominent journalist Lu Palmer, head of the Black Independent Po-
litical Organization, suggested that “tradition and history have shown us
that Hispanics lean toward whites. ...I t ’ s  i n evitable that there will be sig-
nificant conflict between Blacks and Hispanics.”
33
Similar tensions existed between African Americans and Chicago’s
other ethnic groups. The Asian community in recent years has grown even
faster than the Hispanic group has. In 1970 the total Asian-born popula-
138 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 160 ---
tion in metropolitan Chicago was 35,341; ten years later, 128,293 Asian-
born immigrants lived in the area. There was tremendous linguistic, social,
cultural, and economic diversity within this population, which was 27 per-
cent Filipino, 21 percent Indian, 14 percent Korean, 3 percent Vietnamese,
and 35 percent “other Asians,” including Japanese and Chinese. In several
respects, part of the Asian community shares political and economic char-
acteristics with Cuban Americans. Many fled their homelands to escape
Marxism-Leninism and then adopted conservative Republican politics as
residents of the United States. Other Asians, particularly the Indians, Pak-
istanis, and Filipinos, generally entered the Chicago area with fluency in
English and advanced academic or technical backgrounds that permitted
quick assimilation into a petit bourgeois environment. Koreans draw his-
torical parallels between their own entrepreneurial efforts to promote cap-
ital accumulation and the earlier strategies of Jewish immigrants who took
“the small-business route to success.”
34
Washington partially responded to Asian political concerns in 1984 by
creating the Advisory Committee on Asian American Affairs and by ap-
pointing Japanese American lawyer Paul Igasaki as permanent liaison to the
Asian American community. Nevertheless, Washington remained highly
unpopular among Koreans, Chinese, and many other Asians, despite his
appointment of Asians to Chicago’s library and public health boards. No
Asian Americans were members of the mayor’s cabinet or held seats on the
board of education. In June 1987 the Advisory Committee called for a
“stronger commitment to finding and hiring qualified Asian-Americans at
all levels of city government.”
35
Nearly as large as the Asian American community is the Arab Ameri-
can community, which numbered more than 120,000 in the Chicago met-
ropolitan area in 1980. Socioeconomic divisions split the Arab American
community, much as they did other ethnic groups. The Lebanese (26 per-
cent of all Chicago Arabs), the Iraqis (12 percent), and the Egyptians (4
percent) represent a relatively affluent, well-educated, middle-income stra-
tum. Conversely, the 41,850 Palestinians (35 percent) in the area exhibit
several socioeconomic traits paralleling those of African Americans—high
rates of unemployment, low household income (56 percent of all families
earn less than $15,000 annually), subjection to random racist violence and
police surveillance.
Since many Arab Americans own small businesses in interracial mar-
kets, some conflicts with black patrons and entrepreneurs were perhaps in-
evitable. Black community leaders increasingly charged that Arab Ameri-
cans exploited their black clientele: that their grocery and liquor stores re-
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 139


--- PAGE 161 ---
fused to buy wholesale goods from black vendors, charged exorbitant prices
for dated items, and employed clerks who harassed black customers. Black-
Arab tensions polarized sharply in mid-1985, when a Jordanian grocer
shot and killed a young black man on Chicago’s South Side. The National
Black United Front’s local chapter, led by Northeastern Illinois University
professor Conrad Worrill, pr otested the killing and denounced the Arab
grocer’s actions. Subsequently, Worrill began receiving telephone death
threats. Although black-Arab meetings were held to reconcile differences,
conflicts between the two communities persisted, undermining joint polit-
ical activities.
36
Tensions between Washington and many elements of the liberal white
community also flared up occasionally. For example, most white gay and
lesbian organizations had opposed Washington during his 1983 primary
campaign. After the campaign, the mayor spoke frequently on behalf of
gay and lesbian rights; in June 1986 he prominently attended a Gay Pride
parade that drew thirty thousand participants. But Washington’s political
overtures to white gays were frequently viewed as inadequate. The admin-
istration failed to hire a full-time, paid liaison to the gay community until
mid-1987. Washington personally endorsed a gay-rights ordinance before
the city council in 1986 but did not press his allies to support it, and the
measure died. Ten of the nineteen black aldermen and two of the four His-
panic aldermen voted against the proposed ordinance. Some gay activists
perceived Washington’s shortcomings as symbolic of the general homo-
phobia of nearly all black leaders, which made long-term coalitions highly
problematic. Al Wardell, co-chairperson of the Illinois Gay and Lesbian
Task Force, insisted: “We have never been successful in getting strong
black support....W e  haven’t even been able to get Operation push to do
much of anything.”
37
The Washington administration’s efforts to create political linkages
among various racial and ethnic constituencies even extended to white,
blue-collar neighborhoods. In 1984 white ethnic groups organized a Save
Our Neighborhoods, Save Our City convention, which promoted a self-
defined “white ethnic agenda.” One of their specific demands was the cre-
ation of a “home equity insurance plan” to establish an insurance fund that
would “guarantee that people would not lose money when selling their
homes in racially changing neighborhoods.” Washington not only en-
dorsed their proposal but also boldly agreed to speak before the hostile
white ethnic convention.
38
Such political overtures seemed foolish to many black critics, since low-
to-moderate-income white ethnics formed Vrdolyak’s reactionary political
140 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 162 ---
base. Moreover, they contributed to a sense of frustration and cynicism
among many black activists. Efforts to expand the administration’s politi-
cal base among Hispanics, Asians, and others didn’t address festering prob-
lems within the African American community. By 1985 Lu Palmer was
stating publicly that thousands of black Chicagoans were “disillusioned”
with Washington and had “turned off from politics.”
39 Even black progres-
sives who generally sympathized with the mayor’s ambitious multiracial
focus questioned the immediate viability of his strategy. “The mayor has
reached out to those communities and yet there has been little reciprocity,”
observed Robert Starks. “How much longer can the public expect Black
people to reach out and make efforts to coalesce when they are continual-
ly rejected?”
40
IV
Had Jane Byrne seized upon these discontented elements within Washing-
ton’s bloc and developed a coherent, programmatic alternative to the in-
cumbent’s agenda, results of the February 24, 1987, Democratic primary
might have been different. But Byrne’s campaign never developed popular
enthusiasm or mass support, for several reasons. She repeatedly attacked
the incumbent’s administration for bureaucratic scandals, tax increases, and
rising crime figures, but she was unable to justify or explain away the chaos
and disorder of her own administration. Byrne had been responsible for a
$94 million deficit, which Washington had eliminated. During her tenure,
the total number of jobs in the city declined 6.1 percent. Her own public
record, in short, was a major liability.
Byrne also attempted to distance herself from her former political ally,
Vrdolyak, and the continuing charges that her conduct of the 1983 campaign
had been overtly racist. Rhetorically subdued, she appealed to racial and eth-
nic unity and condemned what she termed Washington’s racially “divisive
tactics.” Although the media applauded this strategy, it failed to provoke the
active support of the hard-core Vrdolyak-oriented ethnics, who generally
perceived the election in crude racial terms. Finally, Byrne made special
efforts to take the decisive Hispanic vote away from Washington. But, in the
words of Illinois commerce commissioner Ricardo Tostado, Byrne frequent-
ly appeared “silly” by “doing political spots in broken Spanish and making
commercials for Mexican restaurants.”
41
What was remarkable was not that Byrne lost but that she very nearly
won. Washington received 575,020 votes, representing 53.1 percent of the
electorate, while his two opponents received 505,919, 46.7 percent.
42 In
the city’s ten wards where blacks total 95 percent or more of the electorate,
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 141


--- PAGE 163 ---
Washington earned 239,836 votes, or 98.8 percent of all ballots. But in the
six white ethnic wards with 95 percent or more white voters, Washington
obtained 1,245 fewer votes than he had in the 1983 general election. In the
six liberal North Lakefront wards, Byrne defeated Washington by a 54-to-
46 popular-vote margin, and the incumbent received 9,599 fewer votes
than in the 1983 general election.
The limitations of Washington’s multiethnic strategy were most pain-
fully evident in the city’s 129 predominantly Hispanic precincts. Despite
the incumbent’s many Latino appointments and special programs for His-
panic constituents, the overall Hispanic vote went to Byrne by a 48-to-45
margin. Washington won the Puerto Rican precincts with 62.2 percent,
but Byrne carried the fifty-eight heavily Mexican American precincts by a
57-to-37 margin. Some Chicanos voted for Byrne because of their politi-
cal ties to the Democratic machine; for others, racism was a prime factor,
and they cast their votes against the mayor solely because he was black.
Washington’s failure to win the Hispanic vote probably contributed to the
defeat of city clerk candidate Gloria Chevere. The Puerto Rican candidate
easily won in black wards, garnering 77 percent of the vote. Her margin
over Kozubowski was smaller in Puerto Rican precincts, where she re-
ceived 62.2 percent. But in Mexican precincts, Chevere split evenly with
her pro-Byrne opponent, 41.8 to 41.4 percent. The Washington campaign
was able to claim a “victory” in the Hispanic community only because his
1987 totals there were dramatically higher than in the 1983 Democratic
primary. Nevertheless, a strong Hispanic-black electoral alliance did not
materialize, and Washington won the Democratic nomination largely be-
cause of Byrne’s ineptitude.
43
Other ethnic minorities courted by the Washington administration failed
to provide majorities. In the Thirty-ninth Ward, the six largely Korean pre-
cincts gave Washington only 22.5 percent of the vote. Chinese precincts
voted overwhelmingly for Byrne, giving the incumbent 11.3 percent. Jewish
voters, traditionally strong supporters of liberal Democrats, endorsed Byrne
by a 60-to-40 margin.
44
Washington’s three white opponents in the general election—Repub-
lican nominee Donald Haider, Vrdolyak as the candidate of the Solidarity
Party, and Hynes as head of the Chicago First Party—recognized the
mayor’s vulnerabilities. But none of them was prepared to initiate a com-
mon strategy to produce a single white challenger for the April 7, 1987,
general election. Haider’s campaign was underfinanced and all but ignored
by Illinois Republican leaders, and the former Democrat had difficulty at-
tracting media attention. Hynes and Vrdolyak virtually ignored the mayor
142 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 164 ---
and hurled accusations at each other, in an effort to consolidate the white
vote. Hynes levied the charge that Vrdolyak had met with and received
support from Chicago’s organized crime leader. These polemics only par-
tially obscured the fact that both major white candidates were in substan-
tial agreement on virtually all policy issues. Both opposed affirmative ac-
tion, gay and lesbian rights, and economic and social welfare reforms, and
both favored property-tax reduction and hiring increases in the police de-
partment. The struggle was essentially over which faction, the Daley bloc
or Vrdolyak’s organization, would control the broken remnants of the old
Regular Democratic machine.
45
This dissension among Washington’s opponents worked to the mayor’s
advantage. Both downtown newspapers endorsed him, and the Chicago
Federation of Labor threw him its support. Byrne endorsed Washington
and urged her supporters to vote for the incumbent in the general election.
Several aldermen who belonged to the Vrdolyak bloc and represented all-
white wards pledged neutrality or made private overtures to the Wash-
ington campaign. By late March, Washington held a commanding 51 per-
cent in opinion polls, with Hynes at 17 percent, Vrdolyak at 13 percent,
and Haider at 4 percent.
Political pressure from Rostenkowski, Lipinski, and other influential
white leaders for a single white challenger finally forced Hynes to quit the
mayoral race only two days before the election. Hynes admitted that his de-
cision was designed solely to block Washington’s reelection: “Harold Wash-
ington will win if they both remain in the race.” Although polls had indicat-
ed that only 40 percent of Hynes’s supporters would vote for Vrdolyak,
Hynes’s last-minute departure gave Vrdolyak’s struggling campaign a tre-
mendous boost. Nearly all of the white officials who had encouraged Hynes
to run immediately shifted their allegiance to Vrdolyak. Washington’s allies
curiously underestimated the racist motives behind Hynes’s action and erro-
neously assumed that the black incumbent would pick up a major share of
Hynes’s votes. Deputy campaign manager Jacky Grimshaw confidently pre-
dicted that Washington would “pick up Lakefront voter support” and even
some voters on the all-white Northwest and Southwest Sides, elevating the
mayor’s total “to nearly 60 percent of the vote.”
46
As forecast, Washington easily carried the general election, winning
600,290 votes (53.4 percent) to his opponents’ combined 524,622 votes
(46.6 percent). The incumbent’s share of support in the black wards was still
impressive at 99 percent. But in other electoral sectors, there were some
signs of erosion. Washington’s overall 1987 vote was actually 19,636 votes
below Republican Bernard Epton’s 1983 mayoral vote. In less than one
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 143


--- PAGE 165 ---
week, Vrdolyak more than doubled his electoral base, winning 42 percent
of the vote; Haider received a minuscule 4 percent. Liberal and moderate
white Democrats who had long opposed Vrdolyak’s vulgar race-baiting tac-
tics could not summon the courage of their ideological convictions to cast a
vote for a black progressive candidate. By the tens of thousands, at the last
possible moment, they embraced the local advocate of white supremacy.
Despite Byrne’s endorsement, only 6 percent of the former mayor’s primary
voters went to Washington in the general election; Vrdolyak received 85
percent. Vrdolyak scored heavily in wards previously committed to Hynes;
in Lipinski’s Twenty-third Ward on the Southwest Side, for example,
Vrdolyak held a 35-to-1 margin over the mayor. Overall, Washington won
about 15 percent of the white vote citywide, compared to 74 percent for
Vrdolyak. In the six wards where 95 percent or more of the voters were
white, Washington’s share dropped to 4.6 percent. A majority of Jewish vot-
ers also endorsed Vrdolyak by 51 percent, compared to 36 percent for Wash-
ington. The mayor’s own public estimate that he would receive approxi-
mately 24 percent of the white vote not only was unrealistic but also seri-
ously underestimated the power of racism as a motivating factor in white
American electoral behavior.
47
More sobering were the electoral returns from minority precincts. The
small Indochinese community went for Washington by 58.5 percent. But
most Asians voted like whites of all ideological persuasions. The city’s two
predominantly Chinese precincts voted heavily for Vrdolyak, giving the in-
cumbent 16.7 percent. Korean precincts were only somewhat better, voting
24.4 percent for Washington. The Hispanic wards were sharply divided.
Chevere had worked vigorously as one of Washington’s deputy campaign
managers, and tremendous mobilization efforts had targeted Latino neigh-
borhoods. Puerto Rican voters responded positively, giving Washington 74
percent to Vrdolyak’s 17.8 percent and Haider’s 2.4 percent, according to
precinct analyses conducted by the Chicago Reporter. Some election observ-
ers claimed that a majority of Mexican Americans had actually voted for
Washington.
48 But the interpretation of many political analysts was that the
Hispanic community had been deeply divided over the Washington re-
election campaign and that thousands of Latinos strongly opposed any stra-
tegic alliance with the African American community.
The meaning of Vrdolyak’s defeat was understood by every Democrat,
reformer, and Regular in the city. White Northwest Side state representa-
tive Alfred Ronan delivered the political consensus: “Mayor Washington is
the boss of the city of Chicago.” The mayor expanded his majority bloc on
the city council with the addition of several progressives and liberals.
49
144 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 166 ---
Vrdolyak was forced to resign as chairman of the Cook County
Democratic Party, to be replaced by white moderate George Dunne, who
had been one of the few leading Democrats to endorse Washington in the
1983 general election.
What was much less certain were the implications of Washington’s re-
election for the city’s diverse ethnic and racial constituencies. Washington
had promised the initiation of the “Action Agenda” to promote improve-
ments in public housing, education, health, and employment.
50 But the
persistence of fiscal problems and an uncertain tax base threatened to turn
such promised reforms into a bitter illusion. Within weeks of the election,
conflicts began to erupt inside city hall between administrators of a fiscal-
ly conservative bent and those who favored more radical social change.
Some leftist elements within the Washington coalition strongly sug-
gested that Chicago’s black middle class was incapable of transcending its
programmatic and ideological positions to move toward a more radical
transformation of the political economy of race, ethnicity, and class. Abdul
Alkalimat of Chicago’s People’s College argued that while Washington
was a “progressive Democrat he [was] not a revolutionary.” The mayor had
given “a great nod to a partnership with business. This partnership helps to
push a conservative model in solving Chicago’s problems.” In contrast,
Alkalimat observed, the progressive elements that supported Washington
should have done so critically and with reservations, by consolidating their
“power on the basis of broad-based democratic people’s organizations” and
by clarifying “the class content of Black power.”
51 In this regard, leftists in
Chicago critically failed to develop structures outside of governmental
agencies that could simultaneously support and critique the Washington
administration’s policies from the Left. The failure to do so has meant that
the contradictions that separated blacks, Hispanics, and various ethnic mi-
norities remain partially unaddressed; the structural economic and social
problems that plagued Chicago’s working class were discussed in a limited
and truncated fashion.
V
This essay was originally written only days before Harold Washington’s
unexpected death in late 1987. Washington had failed to identify a logical
successor who would support and defend the progressive accomplishments
of his administration.
When Washington died no one in his coalition was prepared to contin-
ue his struggle against the Cook County Democratic organization. African
Americans soon became divided ideologically, between progressive alder-
Harold Washington’s Chicago | 145


--- PAGE 167 ---
man Timothy Evans and conservative deputy mayor Eugene Sawyer.
Latinos who had been a central force within the Washington coalition be-
gan to defect to the Democratic machine. In 1989 state’s attorney Richard
Daley completed the machine’s return to power, trouncing Sawyer by a
massive margin of 100,000 votes. Daley consolidated his political position
immediately after becoming mayor. By the mid-1990s Daley appeared to be
just as secure a mayor as his father was at the peak of his political influence.
The lesson of Harold Washington is that black leadership in the civil
rights and Black Power periods depended too heavily upon personalities.
The charisma of a Harold Washington was no substitute for an effective
political organization, which could have kept together the various class and
ethnic forces that had challenged the Democratic machine during the
1980s. Black leadership must go beyond the model of personal political
activism symbolized by the life and legacy of Harold Washington.
146 | Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 168 ---
PART FOUR
Beyond Boundaries:
The Future of Black History in the Present


--- PAGE 169 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 170 ---
149
I
In terms of race relations, America’s society is more thoroughly integrated
today than at any point in its history. The number of black elected officials
increased from barely 100 in 1964 to about 7,000 when I wrote this essay
in 1990. The figure just a few years later is more than 11,000. The number
of African Americans enrolled in colleges and universities has quadrupled;
the number of black-owned banks and financial institutions has increased
tenfold; the percentage of African Americans in the middle class and pro-
fessions has significantly expanded.
Perhaps the most striking changes in public perceptions of race have
occurred in popular culture, social institutions, and the media. American
music, theater, public education, sports, and the arts are now heavily influ-
enced by the rhythms and patterns of African American life. Black images
in commercial advertisements are commonplace. Blacks remain underrep-
resented in the ownership and management of cultural and social institu-
tions, but as employees and prominent public representatives, they are
nearly everywhere.
Despite these symbols of racial advancement, however, incidents of racist
harassment, vigilante violence, and social disruption have escalated in recent
years. In the late 1980s, a pattern emerged—and continues: hundreds of Af-
rican American students have been victimized by intimidation or outright
threats on university campuses across the country. White youth have formed
10
The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony


--- PAGE 171 ---
“white student unions” at several institutions to push back affirmative action
and the preferential recruitment of minorities as faculty and students.
Civil rights organizations point to a disturbing pattern of legal indict-
ments and political harassment of black elected officials and to the growth
of violence against black-owned property and individuals in urban areas.
Racial tensions in cities such as New York have culminated in a series of
massive public demonstrations by both blacks and whites, with each side ac-
cusing the other of “racism.” A generation removed from the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, which abolished legal racial discrimination in public accom-
modations, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which extended the elec-
toral franchise to all Americans regardless of race, the goal of racial harmo-
ny and integration seems more distant than ever before.
What explains this racial paradox—this emergence of a black middle
class and this acceptance of black cultural achievements within a society
experiencing such a deepening crisis of race relations? Any analysis of the
contemporary status of African Americans in the United States must begin
with analysis of the accomplishments and the contradictions of the Civil
Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
A generation ago, the leaders of the social protest movement for deseg-
regation mobilized millions with one simple demand—“freedom.” In the
context of the Jim Crow South after World War II, freedom meant the
elimination of all social, political, legal, and economic barriers that forced
black Americans into a subordinate status.
Implicit in the demand for desegregation were several assumptions.
Desegregation would increase opportunities for blacks in business, govern-
ment, and society overall. Desegregated educational institutions would
promote greater racial harmony and understanding among young people
from different ethnic communities, which in turn would promote residen-
tial integration. Affirmative-action policies, the strategy of compensating
for past discrimination against minorities, would gradually increase the
numbers of African Americans, Hispanics, and other people of color in
administrative and managerial positions.
It seemed evident that as African Americans escaped the ghetto and
were more broadly distributed across the social-class structure and institu-
tions of society, racial tensions and bigotry would decline in significance.
As blacks were more thoroughly integrated into the economic system, it
was thought, the basis for racial confrontation would diminish.
This thesis was fundamentally flawed. In the first place, desegregation
did not benefit the entire black community uniformly. Black professionals
and managers, those who had attended colleges and technical schools, were
150 | The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony


--- PAGE 172 ---
the principal beneficiaries. Working-class African Americans also benefit-
ed: incomes increased as new opportunities were created in the upper-
income levels of the labor force, and their children for the first time had
access to higher education.
But opportunity in a capitalist society is always a function of social-
class position, which means ownership of capital, material resources, edu-
cation, and access to power. For the unemployed, the poor, and those with-
out marketable skills or resources; for those whose lives were circumscribed
by illiteracy, disease, and desperation, “race” continued to occupy a central
place as a factor in their marginal existence.
Legal desegregation contributed to the popular illusion that the basis
for racial discrimination and conflict no longer existed. The abolition of ra-
cially separate residential districts, hotels, schools, and other public institu-
tions convinced many white Americans that the “Negro question” had fi-
nally been firmly resolved. Black American leaders such as Martin Luther
King Jr. had always insisted upon the achievement of a “color-blind soci-
ety.” The passage of antidiscriminatory legislation had eliminated all basic
impediments to the socioeconomic and cultural advancement of African
Americans, according to this view.
Thus, as many black leaders continued to speak out against current
social injustices or pointed to the growing economic disparities between
blacks and the majority of middle-class whites, their complaints were eas-
ily dismissed as anachronistic, self-serving rhetoric. By raising the issue of
racism, many whites now believed, blacks themselves must be “racist.”
The American civil rights leadership and the black political establish-
ment now find themselves in a quandary largely of their own making.
Their failure to develop a body of politics that takes a qualitative step be-
yond the discourse and strategies of the Civil Rights Movement of a gen-
eration ago is directly linked to the poverty of their theoretical outlook.
II
The central weakness of this African American leadership—largely mid-
dle-class—is its inability to distinguish between ethnicity and race and to
apply both terms to the realities of American capital, power, and the state.
African American people are both an ethnic group (or more precisely, a
national minority) and a racial group. Our ethnicity derives from the cul-
tural synthesis of our African heritage and our experiences in American
society, first as slaves and then as sharecroppers, industrial laborers, the un-
employed, and now as the core of the postindustrial urban underclass in the
semi-destroyed central cities of North America.
The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony | 151


--- PAGE 173 ---
As W. E. B. Du Bois observed nearly a century ago, black Americans
are both African and American, “two souls, two thoughts, two unrecon-
ciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength
alone keeps it from being torn asunder.” This central duality is at the core
of our ethnic consciousness, forming the fundamental matrix for all expres-
sions of African American music, art, language patterns, folklore, religious
rituals, belief systems, the structure of our families, and other manifesta-
tions of our culture and society. Blackness in the cultural context is the
expression and affirmation of a set of traditional values, beliefs, rituals, and
social patterns, rather than physical appearance or social-class position.
Race is a totally different dynamic, rooted in the structures of exploita-
tion, power, and privilege. “Race” is an artificial social construction that
was deliberately imposed on various subordinated groups of people at the
outset of the expansion of European capitalism into the Western Hemi-
sphere five centuries ago. The “racial” consciousness and discourse of the
West was forged above the bowels of slave ships, as they carted their hu-
man cargoes into the slave depots of the Caribbean and the Americas. The
search for agricultural commodities and profits from the extreme exploita-
tion of involuntary workers deemed less than human gave birth to the no-
tion of racial inequality.
In the United States, a race is frequently defined as a group of individ-
uals who share certain physical or biological traits, particularly phenotype
(skin color), body structure, and facial features. But race has no scientific
validity as a meaningful biological or genetic concept. Beyond this, the
meaning of race shifts according to the power relations among the racial
groups.
For instance, in apartheid South Africa, Japanese people were consid-
ered “white” by the regime, whereas Chinese were classified as “colored.”
In Brazil, a person of color could be “white,” “mulatto,” or “black,” depend-
ing upon the individual’s vocation, income, family connections, and level
of education.
Even in rigidly segregated societies such as the American South before
the modern Civil Rights Movement, race was frequently situational—a
function not just of physical appearance but also of the explicit or implied
power relations that connect the individual of color to local or external
constituencies. In many segregated cities such as Washington, D.C., Arab
and African diplomats and foreign representatives were permitted to stay
in “whites only” hotels, which were strictly off-limits to local blacks.
African Americans who owned property or who were well-respected pro-
152 | The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony


--- PAGE 174 ---
fessionals, university professors, or ministers were occasionally granted
social privileges usually extended solely to whites.
Race, therefore, is not an abstract thing but an unequal relationship
between social aggregates, which is also historically specific. The subordi-
nated racial group finds itself divorced from the levers of power and author-
ity within the socioeconomic order. The oppressed racial group’s labor
power, its ability to produce commodities, is systematically exploited, chief-
ly through abnormally low wage rates. It is denied ownership of the major
means of production. It lacks full access to sources of capital and credit. The
racial group’s political status is marginal or peripheral, as full participation
and legislative representation are blocked.
Finally, dominant and subordinate racial categories are constantly rein-
forced in the behaviors and social expectations of all groups by the manip-
ulation of social stereotypes and by using the legal system to coerce. The
popular American myth of the Negro’s sexual promiscuity, prowess, and
great physical attributes, for example, was designed to denigrate the intel-
lectual abilities and the scientific and cultural accomplishments of blacks.
The racist stereotype of the black race’s inclination toward antisocial
behavior, criminality, and violence reinforces the series of discriminatory
codes, employment patterns, and legal harassment aimed at nonwhites.
Institutional and vigilante violence, including lynching, the death penalty,
and the disproportionately large number of African Americans arrested
for crimes that whites commit with impunity, help to justify and reinforce
the stereotypes.
To be white in the United States says nothing directly about an indi-
vidual’s culture, ethnic heritage, or biological background. A society creat-
ed to preserve “white culture” would be either very confused or tremen-
dously disappointed. White culture does not exist. White power, privileges,
and prerogatives within capitalist society do exist.
Whiteness is fundamentally a statement of the continued patterns of
exploitation of subordinated racial groups, which create economic surplus-
es for privileged groups. To be white means that one’s “life chances,” in the
lexicon of American sociologists, improve dramatically. Any white person,
regardless of personal appearance, income, or education, usually finds it
much easier to establish credit, purchase a good home, or start a business
than the average nonwhite person does.
To be white in the United States statistically means that police officers
rarely harass you, that your life expectancy is significantly longer than that
of others, and that your children will probably inherit property and social
The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony | 153


--- PAGE 175 ---
position. Blackness in American racial terms has meant enduring a hun-
dred different insults, harassments, and liabilities experienced daily; living
with the reality that a black university graduate will make less money in his
or her lifetime than the average white graduate of secondary school; expe-
riencing higher death rates due to the absence of adequate health care fa-
cilities in one’s neighborhood; accepting the grim fact that, in 1990, a
young white American male’s statistical likelihood of becoming a victim of
homicide was roughly one chance in 186, while a young black male’s sta-
tistical chance was one in 20.
III
The ambiguity and confusion concerning the crucial differences between
race and ethnicity in the United States are directly attributable to the un-
even merger of the two concepts as they relate to black Americans. People
of African American nationality, whose cultural patterns and social tradi-
tions are derived in part from Africa, have been made to be the subordi-
nate “race.” Physical appearance and phenotype were convenient, if not al-
ways predictable, measures for isolating the members of the oppressed
racial group, “the blacks.”
For white Americans this racial-ethnic overdetermination did not oc-
cur, for several reasons. White Americans originated from many different
countries and cultures, ethnic intermarriage was frequent, and the rigid
economic and legal barriers that confined blacks behind ghetto walls usu-
ally did not exist. By the middle of the twentieth century, millions of white
Americans had no clear ethnic or cultural identity beyond vague generali-
zations. Their sense of aesthetics derived largely from the lowest cultural
common denominator—the mass media and the entertainment industry.
Whites’ racial identity was ruptured from ethnicity and was politically or
socially relevant only insofar as it affected issues of direct personal interest—
such as whether a Hispanic or African American family intended to pur-
chase a home in their neighborhood, or whether their employer planned an
affirmative-action hiring program for minorities. Whiteness was funda-
mentally a measure of personal privilege and power, not a cultural statement.
White capitalist America’s cultural vacuity, its historical inability to
nurture or sustain a vibrant “national culture” drawing upon the most cre-
ative elements of its various ethnicities, helps to explain the present para-
dox of desegregation. Millions of white Americans, devoid of their own
cultural compass, have absorbed critical elements of African American
music, dance, literature, and language. They now accept black participation
in professional athletics and extend acclaim to African American film stars
154 | The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony


--- PAGE 176 ---
and entertainers. In a desperate search for collective identity, whites have
mimicked blacks in countless ways, from the black-faced minstrels of the
nineteenth century to the contemporary white musical groups who sing
reggae and rap.
But whites’ affinity and tolerance for blackness are largely cultural, not
racial. Many whites have learned to appreciate African-derived elements of
music, dance, and religious rituals but would not endorse the sharing of
power or material privileges—because that would undermine the stratifi-
cation of race.
For example, the late Lee Atwater, who ran the Republican National
Committee during President George Bush’s administration, was the archi-
tect of a viciously racist media campaign that was largely responsible for
electing Bush. Atwater’s infamous television advertisement of convicted
felon Willie Horton linked the specter of the black rapist to the Demo-
crats’ supposed weakness on law-and-order issues. Yet Atwater’s much be-
loved personal hobby was playing the blues on his guitar, weakly imitating
African American blues artist B. B. King.
The central characteristic of race relations in the 1990s is “interaction
without understanding.” White students purchase the latest recordings of
black singers and cheer the latest exploits of black athletes while at the
same time bitterly protesting the imposition of course requirements that
mandate classes in African American politics, history, or literature. White
employers encourage the recruitment of black junior executives to their
firms but shudder at the prospect of minorities’ moving into their exclu-
sive neighborhoods or joining their elite private clubs. White religious
leaders espouse pious platitudes about ethnic understanding and racial rec-
onciliation while doing relatively little to bring their white, upper-class
congregations into close contact with the gritty problems of the ghetto.
Racial integration, within the framework of capitalism, has produced the
symbols of progress and the rhetoric of racial harmony without empower-
ing the oppressed.
IV
Perhaps the greatest irony in this post–civil rights situation is that African
Americans born after 1960 often have great difficulty identifying the real-
ities of the oppressive race and class structures they encounter today. And
that’s because of the transformation of white racial etiquette.
No white politician, corporate executive, or religious leader now uses
the term nigger in public. African Americans coming to maturity in the
1980s and 1990s have never personally experienced Jim Crow segregation.
The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony | 155


--- PAGE 177 ---
They cannot say how they feel about being denied the right to vote, be-
cause their electoral rights are guaranteed by law. They have never person-
ally participated in street demonstrations, boycotts, picket lines, and sei-
zures of government and academic buildings. Few have tasted the pungent
fumes of tear gas or felt the fiery hatred of racist mobs. The absence of a
personal background of struggle casts a troubled shadow over the current
generation of black Americans, who are poorly equipped to grapple with
the complexities of the racial and class domination that they face.
Integration has also crippled African Americans in terms of their “cul-
tural literacy.” Under traditional racial segregation, the strict barriers that
were established forced a wide variety of professions and social classes into
intimate interaction. Black physicians had to look for patients in the black
community. African American attorneys depended upon black clients.
Black storekeepers looked to blacks for patronage.
Black social organizations, civic associations, and religious institutions
reflected the broad spectrum of social class, from custodians to school-
teachers and civil servants. The sense of shared suffering and collective co-
operation was the basis for an appreciation of the community’s racial iden-
tity and heritage. African American history was taught in segregated
schools and churches, and pictures of prominent black leaders were fre-
quently displayed.
Denied access to the white media, blacks established their own network
of race-oriented publications. A separate cultural and artistic underground
developed in the cities, creative enclaves that produced the classical legacy
of modern jazz and the urban blues.
But as the racial boundaries were lowered and as white public discourse
became largely race-neutral, the terrain for black cultural awareness dimin-
ished. Young African Americans no longer were forced to confront their
ethnicity or cultural history. In effect, we are witnessing the development
of a substantial segment of our black population that is post-black—with-
out any cultural awareness, historical appreciation, or political commit-
ment to the traditions, customs, values, and networks that have been the
basis for black identity in America.
In all racially bifurcated societies, the government, legal system, major
political parties, and other institutions of state power are designed—explic-
itly or implicitly—to preserve white power and perpetuate the domination
of nonwhites. In the United States, racial superiority and racial preroga-
tives retain tremendous influence within the actual power relations and
public policies of governmental structures and political parties.
By the decade of the 1980s, racial polarization in America had crystal-
156 | The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony


--- PAGE 178 ---
lized into an apartheid-type, two-tiered political system. Blacks, as a racial
group, will often vote for a white liberal candidate over a black one, if in
their judgment the former’s agenda is more progressive. But most whites,
taken as a racial group, find it difficult if not impossible to vote for any
African American candidate, regardless of his or her qualifications, expe-
rience, or education. When white Democrats are confronted at the polling
booth with a choice between a black Democrat who clearly articulates their
class and political interests versus a white Republican, the vast majority
consistently defect to the white candidate.
Under the leadership of former president Ronald Reagan, who vigor-
ously opposed civil rights legislation, affirmative action, and other racial re-
forms achieved in the 1960s, the Republican Party transformed itself into
a multiclass, white united front, dedicated largely to the ideology of con-
servatism, anticommunism abroad, and preservation of the hegemony of
corporate capital over labor.
This ideological drift to the right has influenced the behavior of a
growing number of black politicians, who seek to further their own careers
outside the boundaries of traditional civil rights politics. Positioning them-
selves further to the right to capture the support of upper-class white vot-
ers, they increasingly advance positions that are alien to the black freedom
struggle. A recent example of this nascent trend is Douglas Wilder, elect-
ed governor of Virginia in 1989, in the Southern state that was the home
of the Confederacy during the Civil War.
Wilder’s campaign largely ignored the state’s black electorate and con-
centrated exclusively on winning one-third of the state’s white vote. This
percentage, combined with a strong black turnout, would guarantee victory
over his Republican opponent. To achieve this goal, Wilder reversed him-
self on many liberal policy positions that he had taken before. During the
campaign, he embraced the death penalty, opposed statehood for the
District of Columbia, and supported anti-union right-to-work laws.
Wilder’s case illustrates two political realities of the post–civil rights
period. First, with the end of racial segregation, the black community, iron-
ically, lacks structures of accountability that would modify or effectively
check the public or political behavior of its own elected officials. Second,
growing numbers of African Americans in government, in the legal sys-
tem, and in political parties are trying to transcend their own racial desig-
nation of black in order to further their own careers.
This creates an ever-growing sense of alienation and frustration for the
millions of African American poor, working-class, and unemployed, who
are still trapped in the ghetto and who see little real significance in the ele-
The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony | 157


--- PAGE 179 ---
vation of a Wilder to high office. Black representation in government
rarely improves the quality of their lives, and their actual material condi-
tions have become worse overall since 1980. The “post-black politicians”
are irrelevant to the problems of the oppressed.
The challenges of race, class, and power confronting black Americans
are far more complicated than Martin Luther King Jr. ever anticipated
when he stood on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial at the 1963 March
on Washington, delivering his “I Have a Dream” speech. The objective
should not be the realization of a utopian, color-blind society. The objec-
tive should be a democratic social order that seeks to achieve certain goals:
First, democratic principles must be extended from the electoral system
into the structures of the economy and the social order, making a job or
guaranteed income a human right. Also, public health-care facilities,
housing, and access to transportation must be available to all. Finally, eth-
nicity must be clearly separated from race, a distinction that would pre-
serve America’s diverse cultural and ethnic heritages while abolishing all
the forms of institutional discrimination that are justified by the perpetu-
ation of racial categories. We must destroy race without uprooting culture
and ethnicity.
V
Will whites be willing to give up their centuries of power and privilege
over oppressed African Americans, Hispanics, and other people defined by
racial categories of subordination? Will the white elites who control the
banks and financial institutions, the factories and corporations, the exclu-
sive real estate and country clubs, recognize that a truly multicultural dem-
ocracy will exist only when the power within the economic system and the
government is redistributed—fundamentally redistributed?
This could require a radical restructuring of capitalism itself, as those
who are most disadvantaged generate new social protest movements de-
manding a more equitable division of resources. It is also possible that
white American politicians, corporate leaders, educators, and intellectuals
will try to follow the model for race relations developed in post-apartheid
South Africa: nonwhite domination of the government and public institu-
tions and the concomitant expansion of the black middle class, all the
while preserving white domination of the legal system, private property,
and the economy.
What is the role of the religious community in addressing America’s
crisis of race and class inequality? It is relatively easy to stand before one’s
congregation and solicit funds for a Hispanic or African American voca-
158 | The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony


--- PAGE 180 ---
tional training center or request canned goods and secondhand clothing for
minority women on welfare. It is a very different thing to ask one’s peers
and associates to question the preferential status and material benefits they
possess simply by the fact of being white.
There will be no racial peace in America until millions of whites come
to terms with the uncomfortable truth that black oppression, poverty, and
high unemployment rates are hardly accidental, are hardly the symptoms
of an absence of the work ethic among blacks. Institutional racism and
class domination are structural and elaborate, benefiting certain privileged
classes at the cost of common misery for others.
The major contribution that religious institutions can make to human
relations is a commitment to achieve the deconstruction of white racial
privilege within society as a whole. More succinctly, this would mean a
commitment to “racial suicide” for the social category “white.”
So long as millions of white Americans confuse race with ethnicity and
perceive their world in immutably racial terms tied to an eclectic mixture
of biological myths, racist stereotypes, and IQ tests, they will be unable to
fully overcome their own crippled consciousness. And without a cultural
metamorphosis among middle-class whites, one that would force them to
confront the terrible social and economic consequences of institutional rac-
ism, no racial dialogue or peace with the ghetto will be possible. Without
social justice, there will be no peace.
The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony | 159


--- PAGE 181 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 182 ---
161
I
On October 16, 1995, the largest public gathering of African Americans in
history occurred in Washington, D.C., in the shadow of the nation’s Cap-
itol. They had come together under the slogan the Million Man March,
with an agenda emphasizing racial pride, personal responsibility, and patri-
archal family relations. Estimates of the crowd’s size ranged from a low of
five hundred thousand to well over one million.
1 Black men made the pil-
grimage from thousands of cities, towns, and communities throughout the
country and represented many different social classes, religious faiths, and
political orientations. The African American who initiated this demonstra-
tion had been vilified in the national media for more than a decade as racist
and anti-Semitic. Yet this leader had the political insight to recognize and
respond to the deep sense of social crisis within this community, the levels
of rage, social alienation, and violence that were destroying an entire popu-
lation of young African American males. In a language both spiritual and
visionary, he exhorted black men to transform their lives, to protect their
families, to give their time and financial support to black institutions. Par-
ticipants often felt emotionally overwhelmed, surrounded by a virtual sea of
black humanity, responding to a historic moment.
Louis Farrakhan had brought off an event of a type achieved by no pre-
vious African American leader—not even Martin Luther King Jr. King
had been the main orator, originator, and chief political architect of the
11
Black Fundamentalism: Louis Farrakhan and the
Politics of Conservative Black Nationalism


--- PAGE 183 ---
historic March on Washington, D.C., of August 28, 1963, which repre-
sented the height of the Second Reconstruction. But the 1963 protest
march had been approved in advance by the Kennedy administration, and
its goal had been pressure on the U.S. Congress to pass the legislation that
would outlaw racial segregation in public accommodations. The larger au-
dience that day was the American public, and the overall theme was inter-
racial harmony and cooperation.
The Million Man March, in contrast, did not focus primarily on issues
of public policy or the passage of new legislation aimed at African Amer-
icans. The social philosophy behind its agenda was deeply conservative and
pessimistic about the likelihood that whites would ever recognize or re-
spond to blacks’ grievances. With the exception of several prominent
speakers such as Jesse Jackson, few addresses at the march called exten-
sively for militant actions against the Republican-controlled Congress or
the most conservative Democratic president since Woodrow Wilson. The
political logic behind this was relatively clear. Reaganism, the “Contract
with America,” and the growing ideological conservatism of both major
parties constituted a retreat from the programs and policies of the Civil
Rights Movement. White liberals and liberalism had virtually ceased to
exist, and affirmative-action policies were widely denounced as “reverse
discrimination.” To most of the African American men who responded to
Farrakhan’s call to Washington, it seemed that black people had little alter-
native but to turn inward. If white institutions, politics, and society could
not be transformed democratically to include racialized minorities, African
Americans on their own had to employ their resources and skills for the
survival and uplift of their race. In the language of an earlier racial conser-
vative, Booker T. Washington, black folk had to “cast down their buckets
where they are.”
In the immediate aftermath of the Million Man March, many black
organizations reported significant increases in membership. Even groups
that had not endorsed the march or that had long histories of hostility
toward Farrakhan personally, such as the National Urban League and the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, gained fresh
recruits and renewed commitment. One measure of the long-term impact
of the Million Man March was seen a year later, on election day in Novem-
ber 1996. The total number of American voters declined from 104.4 mil-
lion in 1992 to 95.8 million in 1996, despite the addition of 5 million more
registered voters during this four-year period. Turnout declined from 55.2
percent in 1992 to only 48.8 percent in 1996, the lowest rate since 1924.
Nearly 500,000 fewer African American women voted in 1996 than in
162 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 184 ---
1992. Against this downward trend were African American male voters.
Exit polls estimated that approximately 1.5 million more African American
men participated in the 1996 presidential election than in the election of
four years earlier.
Ideologically, this black male electorate was clearly more conservative
than its black female counterpart. David Bositis, an analyst at the Joint
Center for Political and Economic Studies, observed that “black women
were 11 percentage points more Democratic in their presidential vote than
black men, 89 to 78 percent. The comparatively large black Republican
congressional vote—18 percent—is likewise undoubtedly attributable to
the increased number of black male voters.” In 1996 labor unions, civil
rights organizations, and the Democratic Party had all initiated many ef-
forts to increase the size and turnout percentage of the African American
electorate. What, then, explains the decline in the number of black women
voters and the dramatic increase in involvement by African American
males in the political process? Weighing the evidence, Bositis observed:
There was only one major relevant event of note in the past year or so
that focused primarily on black men, and that was the Million Man
March . . . at which Farrakhan exhorted black American men to take
more responsibility for their lives by registering to vote and by voting.
In reviewing a variety of possible alternative hypotheses to account for
the sharp increase in the black male vote, I find it highly implausible
that there was another factor that rivaled the Million Man March in
bringing about this change.
1
While the great majority of African Americans had endorsed, with
varying degrees of enthusiasm, the Million Man March, by no means was
that support universal. Prominent African American feminists such as
Angela Davis and Julianne Malveaux denounced the deliberate exclusion
of women from the mobilization, arguing that Farrakhan’s reactionary con-
cepts of women were patriarchal and misogynist. Lesbian and gay rights
activists pointed to the many blatantly homophobic statements made by
Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam (noi) about black homosexuality. Many
liberal elected officials, trade unionists, and civil rights leaders who feared
being identified with Farrakhan’s long history of vicious anti-Semitism, in-
cluding his characterization of Judaism as a “gutter religion,” refused to
support the march. The response of black progressives and radicals to the
mobilization often seemed contradictory. The entire black Left understood
the factors that underlay the widespread popular response to Farrakhan’s
call for the march: high levels of unemployment, the deterioration of cen-
Black Fundamentalism | 163


--- PAGE 185 ---
tral cities, cutbacks in social services, the rapid expansion of the criminal
justice system and the mass incarceration and institutionalization of sever-
al million African American young men, the abandonment of affirmative
action, the general disarray of moderate black leaders and civil rights orga-
nizations in addressing the contemporary social crisis. It was indeed true
that Farrakhan was an anti-Semite, but this was not central to his overall
program and was not a significant factor in his growing appeal to a young
generation of African Americans.
The aspects of the social phenomenon surrounding Farrakhan that were
most disturbing were its dynamic yet deeply reactionary character, its clever
manipulation of racial slogans and symbols evoking black pride and mili-
tancy, and an economic analysis taken almost verbatim from Booker T.
Washington’s program of black petty entrepreneurship and political coop-
eration with white conservatives. The march had contributed to some ex-
tent to a revitalization of black male activism and civic engagement. Yet it
had also provoked bitter divisions over such issues as patriarchy, reproduc-
tive rights, homophobia, and the meaning and social construction of gen-
der within the black community. The deeper fear was that Farrakhan would
consolidate the enormous political capital generated by the march’s success
toward utterly reactionary purposes. Despite the militancy of his rhetoric,
Farrakhan would inevitably find common cause with the most reactionary
and even racist elements in white political life.
Within less than a year, many of the worst fears about where Farrakhan
intended to take the black movement became apparent. In June 1994, the
Reverend Benjamin Chavis, then executive secretary of the naacp, had ini-
tiated the National African American Leadership Summit, an effort to
forge a united front across ideological and political perspectives within the
black community. After Chavis was fired from his naacp position, he be-
came essentially a client of Farrakhan, financially and politically depen-
dent. In 1995 and 1996, the National African American Leadership Sum-
mit’s constituency became increasingly smaller and ideologically narrower.
Organized labor, civil rights organizations, and elected officials largely kept
their distance, because it was soon clear that the summit had degenerated
into a front organization controlled by Farrakhan. Many prominent cul-
tural nationalists such as Maulana Karenga and Haki Madhubuti backed
away from the summit, partially because its leadership failed to hold a
comprehensive evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of the march.
The summit failed to maintain contact with thousands of volunteers and
was plagued by organizational problems.
Nevertheless, when the National African American Leadership Summit
164 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 186 ---
called for a national political convention at St. Louis in September 1996, at
least three thousand representatives gathered to participate. On the con-
vention’s final day, the Reverend James Bevel, one of Martin Luther King
Jr.’s former lieutenants and a recent ideological convert to political conser-
vatism, was given the podium. Bevel proudly introduced as a major speak-
er to the convention delegates “the man of the hour,” Lyndon La Rouche.
Many African Americans in the audience were stunned: they immediately
recognized La Rouche as a leader of fascist extremism in the United States
and a racist defender of the former apartheid regime of South Africa. To
others, who were unfamiliar with La Rouche’s public record, it remained in-
explicable why this white man was invited to speak from the central podi-
um to an audience of black nationalists and activists. What did this all
mean? Instantly the crowd turned against Bevel and La Rouche, booing
them off the stage and intimidating them into silence. A fistfight erupted
between several black nationalists and some supporters of La Rouche,
which was broken up by Farrakhan’s security force, members of the Fruit of
Islam. Throughout the country, perplexed African American activists asked
themselves why a notorious white supremacist and fascist would be permit-
ted to address a black political convention. Only Farrakhan could have giv-
en permission for La Rouche to speak.
What seems at first to be a curious paradox was no puzzle at all. There
were significant elements in their respective ideologies that brought Farra-
khan and La Rouche into agreement. Months earlier, in a similar vein, Re-
publican vice presidential candidate Jack Kemp had publicly praised Far-
rakhan’s emphasis on “personal responsibility,” black self-sufficiency, and
morality. There was a logical convergence between the black Right and the
white Right, which embraced capitalist economics, morality, and patriarchy.
The reason that Farrakhan’s message of personal responsibility, patri-
archy, and racial self-help resonated so profoundly among millions of black
people was that it was not new. The political consciousness of African Amer-
icans harbored distinct memories of earlier formations and movements with
strikingly similar goals and objectives. The contemporary influence of Farra-
khan can be understood only against a background of the inner history of
black folk, who through their own experiences and in their own language
constructed an approach toward social development that would ensure their
collective survival in a hostile world. It is partially in this sense that Far-
rakhan can be understood only as a conservative: his entire program pre-
sumes the permanent boundaries of race and racial antagonisms and the
need to construct racial institutions that promote order, social stability, and
patriarchal households within the black community. To explain the wide-
Black Fundamentalism | 165


--- PAGE 187 ---
spread popularity and appeal of Farrakhan today, at least within a significant
segment of black America, we must examine the historical roots of his con-
servative ideology.
II
Historians of the African American experience have tended to emphasize
the long struggle by black people for equal treatment and civil rights. Al-
though the quest for equality has always been the central feature of black
activism, it was by no means universal as a response to white domination.
Just as influential as inclusion or integration has been the idea of black na-
tionalism. Over the past 150 years, many divergent organizations identi-
fied with black nationalism have emerged, reflecting a wide spectrum of
ideologies, but several core elements have been characteristic of this tra-
dition. First and foremost was the belief that African Americans were an
oppressed nation or national minority trapped inside a predominantly
white society, a nation that had developed its own culture, social institu-
tions, and collective interests. Instead of perceiving themselves as Ameri-
cans who “happened to be black,” black nationalists often viewed them-
selves as either people of African descent or Africans who happened to
reside in the United States. Ontologically, the realization of critical self-
awareness could be achieved only by grounding oneself in the rituals, cul-
ture, and traditions generated by and among black people. Also central to
black nationalism was the logical insight that an oppressed people could
survive in a hostile environment only if they constructed institutions and
enterprises to provide goods, services, and resources to their own group.
Black nationalists were therefore skeptical about the long-term viability of
relationships or alliances with Euro-Americans and tended to link their
own struggles domestically to larger efforts to achieve black empower-
ment and self-determination globally.
With some variations, these tenets have been the foundation of black
nationalist politics from the militant emigrationism of Martin Delany in
the 1850s to Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association
(unia) in the 1920s. For decades, many black nationalists have advocated
some type of territorial separation between the races inside the United
States, since they see interracial harmony as impossible. As early as 1916,
writer Arthur Anderson suggested that one Southern state should be occu-
pied solely by blacks, who would be permitted to secede and create their
own government. By the late 1920s, the Communist International partially
recognized the political claims of the Garveyites by defining the thousand-
mile crescent of millions of African Americans across the Deep South as a
166 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 188 ---
“black belt nation.” Even W. E. B. Du Bois, often a hostile critic of black
nationalism, described black America during the nadir of the Great De-
pression as “a nation in a nation.”
2
The Garvey movement was largely responsible for transforming the
ideology of black nationalism into a mass protest movement with large
numbers of working-class, poor, and rural supporters. The historical con-
text for this transformation was World War I and its immediate after-
math, as national independence and “home rule” movements erupted in
Asia, the Caribbean, and Europe. In the United States, the Red Summer
of 1919 culminated in widespread lynchings and racist violence against
blacks. Among white Americans, a nativist movement developed with
the rebirth of the Ku Klux Klan, which claimed three million members
by the early 1920s. Garvey was an astute student of these nationalist
movements and incorporated many of their techniques and strategies
into his own program.
First, Garvey inspired the development of a political organization that
often seemed decentralized and chaotic, yet was based on himself as the
central, dominant personality of the movement. To become a “Garveyite”
was not merely to acquire a distinct political outlook or to become a mem-
ber of a unia local branch. Political loyalty within the organization rested
on a deep personal attachment to Garvey himself. Garvey’s understanding
of Caribbean and African American rural cultures, traditions, and histories
of resistance during slavery and colonialism was extremely complex. By
holding great public demonstrations and rituals, the unia incorporated
many of these cultural themes. The unia’s African Legion nurtured the
image of a black paramilitary force that would someday overturn the sys-
tem of white power. Garvey’s Negro Factories Corporation and Black Star
Steamship Line symbolized the desire of poor and working-class blacks to
provide for their own economic welfare. Sociologist E. Franklin Frazier
described Garvey’s brand of black nationalism as a deep spiritual and oth-
erworldly movement, which merged black religiosity with the pageantry of
grand rituals:
[Garvey] not only promised the despised Negro a paradise on earth,
but he made the Negro an important person in his immediate envi-
ronment. He invented honors and social distinctions and converted
every social invention to his use in his effort to make his followers feel
important. While everyone was not a “knight or sir,” all his followers
were fellow-men of the Negro race .... The women were organized
into Black Cross Nurses and the men became uniformed members of
the vanguard of the great African army.
3
Black Fundamentalism | 167


--- PAGE 189 ---
But Garveyism was, at the same time, deeply conservative. Although
there were “left-wing Garveyites” who incorporated a socialist analysis into
their black nationalist politics, Garveyism was a social philosophy most
clearly expressed by the slogan Race First. Garvey himself appreciated rev-
olutionary movements throughout the world, and even to some extent pat-
terned unia programs after those developed by insurgents in the Irish rev-
olution of 1916–1921 against Great Britain. Yet Garvey’s challenge, as he
saw it, was basically the construction of a distinctly racial political culture
of solidarity and resistance, giving self-confidence and hope to the most
oppressed sectors of his people. As sociologist Doug Gutknecht observed:
“Garvey rather than trying to create a movement based on traditional class
politics, believed cultural and racial questions were primary: the struggle
for mobility and opportunity to compete rested on a viable set of cultural
institutions and race self-pride. Garvey’s symbolic style of politics often
alienated him from those possessing resources, political contacts, formal
means of disseminating information, etc.”
4
In practical terms, Garvey’s version of racial solidarity required an ex-
plicit rejection of liberal black intellectuals such as W. E. B. Du Bois and
reformist organizations like the naacp.Black elites who favored racial inte-
gration, from this perspective, were clearly working against the best inter-
ests of Negroes. Blacks should not “beg” whites for social equality and ac-
ceptance but should establish their own racial standards and values for
group development. It was only a short step from this Race First dogma to
the argument that the only whites who were capable of honest and sincere
dialogue with black people were overt racists and white supremacists. In the
early 1920s, Garvey made contacts with representatives of the Anglo-Saxon
Club and the White American Society, which were part of a growing Ku
Klux Klan–oriented movement in the post–World War I period. A decade
later, Garvey even identified his political accomplishments with those of
European fascism, proclaiming that unia activists were “the first fascists.”
5
Another essential element of Garveyism was the charismatic personal-
ity of the leader. Max Weber originally defined charisma as a type of lead-
ership generated by great moments of social instability and unrest. The
charismatic leader challenges the status quo by evoking the deepest emo-
tions and energies of his audience, revealing the power “to revolutionize
men from within.”
6 Such powerful personalities articulate an alternative vi-
sion of the world as it should be, and motivate their followers to construct
that world. Garvey’s entire career as a black leader closely follows Weber’s
classic model: he was simultaneously prophetic, personally courageous,
intensely emotional, ambitious, and deeply aware of his mission in history.
168 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 190 ---
A critical reciprocity intimately bound together the leader and his follow-
ers. In most charismatic relationships, according to Thomas Spence Smith,
“the leader is a vehicle for the idealizing transferences of his audience, the
audience for the leader’s mirroring transferences.” The charismatic leader
“needs his idealizing disciples or followers. He is nothing without a follow-
er: with one, he is a prophet or a lord.”
7 It was difficult for such leadership
to acknowledge mistakes or accept criticism from subordinates. Either one
embraces every element of the leader’s agenda and his personal authority
or one is judged disloyal and potentially a traitor to the cause.
When these distinct elements were combined—charismatic leader-
ship, autocratic hierarchies, social conservatism, a reductionist definition
of racial categories, extreme hostility toward external critics—a new ten-
dency emerged in the black nationalist tradition that could be termed
black fundamentalism. Unlike the black nationalist formations of the nine-
teenth century, this conservative tendency manifested itself in strict disci-
plinary terms, and members of the unia were routinely silenced, expelled,
or harassed if they challenged or criticized Garvey’s authority. This was
particularly the case for those who had risen high in the organization’s
hierarchy and those who had close personal relations with the leader. The
best illustration of this is provided by Garvey’s first wife, Amy Ashwood
Garvey. Ashwood had been the “lady secretary” of the unia, traveling in
Garvey’s behalf as a noted public lecturer and political organizer. She con-
tributed to the unia’s newspaper, Negro World, and served as an officer of
the Black Star Steamship Line. In late December 1919, Ashwood and
Garvey were married before thousands of unia members and supporters.
Within several months, the marriage fell apart. Garvey accused his wife
of infidelity and drunkenness, while Ashwood responded with charges of
infidelity against him. For the next six years, the pair was constantly in
court, charging each other with a series of offenses, including bigamy. In
1922 Garvey married Ashwood’s former roommate, Amy Jacques, who
had been the maid of honor at their 1919 wedding.
Both the U.S. and British governments were largely responsible for the
destruction of the Garvey movement. Despite Garvey’s advocacy of racial
separatism, the unia challenged white authorities by its emphasis on colo-
nial independence and militant protests. When Garvey named himself the
“provisional president of Africa,” Du Bois and other middle-class Negro
leaders thought him ridiculous. Those in power did not share their opin-
ion. Negro World was banned in several countries and territories in Africa
and the Caribbean. unia leaders and organizers were subjected to harass-
ment, arrest, and in some cases death. The U.S. government launched an
Black Fundamentalism | 169


--- PAGE 191 ---
effort to destroy the unia from within and charged Garvey himself with
mail fraud. The unia leader was convicted and imprisoned; in 1927 he was
expelled from the United States, never to return. Although the unia had
virtually disappeared as an organization, Garvey had forever transformed
the ideology of black nationalism as a mass movement. The charismatic
legacy of Garveyism brought together a series of contradictory ideas and
themes: racial awareness and cultural pride, social conservatism, black cap-
italism, anticolonial protest, political militancy.
8
III
From its founding by Fard Muhammad in Detroit during the late 1920s
and early 1930s, the Nation of Islam reflected most of the core themes of
traditional black nationalism. This small religious sect mixed an unortho-
dox Islam with a patriarchal, conservative outlook on black issues and in-
terests. Under the patriarchal guidance of Elijah Muhammad, the organi-
zation grew from its marginal existence in the ghettos of Chicago and the
Midwest to its development as a significant voice within black America
during the period of the Second Reconstruction. The genius of Elijah Mu-
hammad lay in his construction of a religious community that resonated
with the familiar values of conservative black nationalism, such as racial
pride and self-sufficiency, combined with a number of innovations that
permitted an autocratic and highly centralized formation. These innova-
tions would expand the tendency toward racial fundamentalism established
by Garvey into a truly autocratic, hierarchical movement.
Theologically, the Nation of Islam taught its members that Euro-
Americans were literally “devils,” incapable of overcoming their racial ha-
tred. Since no spiritual dialogue or reconciliation with white America
was possible, African Americans had to separate themselves from its evil
influences. Divine intervention would one day eliminate the sickness of
white domination. Meanwhile, from the standpoint of racial survival,
Elijah Muhammad taught that blacks should seek their own separate ter-
ritory. An all-black state could be administered and controlled by African
Americans as a protective shield; behind it they could develop economic
enterprises, schools, social institutions, and families. Consequently, the
Nation of Islam did not seek to challenge white authorities in govern-
ment or throughout American society. They minimized their involve-
ment in politics and elections and opposed any overt protest for desegre-
gation and civil rights. Muhammad defined miscegenation as a type of
“mongolization” that would culminate in the genetic and social destruc-
tion of the black race. African American leaders who favored integration,
170 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 192 ---
such as Martin Luther King Jr., were clearly disloyal to their own peo-
ple’s best interests. Muhammad met with King on one occasion, but he
frequently denounced the civil rights leader for encouraging African
Americans “to submit to the white man and to become one of them.”
9
Like other conservative black nationalists before him, Elijah Muham-
mad advocated the creation of black-owned businesses and thought them
central to the collective advancement of the race. By the 1960s and early
1970s, for example, the Nation of Islam had established a series of suc-
cessful commercial enterprises, including restaurants, supermarkets, and
farms. It had purchased thousands of acres of land to produce grain, beef,
and dairy products for urban black markets. According to Claude Andrew
Clegg III, Muhammad’s biographer, by 1971 the Nation of Islam’s farm in
Michigan had “roughly one hundred cows [which] were being milked
every day, and twenty thousand chickens were producing enough eggs to
keep Chicago retail operations well supplied.” The Temple Farms holding
in Georgia “consisted of a large dairy, a cannery, seven hundred head of
cattle, and almost a thousand acres of corn, soybeans, and peanuts.”
10 Al-
though most of the agricultural enterprises were unsuccessful, the attempt
to gain a measure of black economic sufficiency won the support of many
of the Nation of Islam’s critics.
In effect, the Nation of Islam preached an economic strategy of “black
capitalism” strikingly similar to that championed more than a century ago
by Booker T. Washington. Like the founder of Tuskegee Institute, Mu-
hammad believed that capitalism had no color line. Anyone with the will
and energy to build an enterprise providing goods and services to his peo-
ple should be rewarded. This faith in black entrepreneurship explained
Washington’s hostility to labor unions, socialism, and racial politics. Sim-
ilarly, Muhammad was deeply opposed to communism, partly on the
grounds that it was atheistic. The Nation as a whole was apathetic toward
black militancy and activism inside organized labor and maintained its
distance from Marxist politics of any kind. When Malcolm X caucused
with Fidel Castro during the Cuban leader’s visit to the United Nations
in 1960, for instance, Muhammad was furious.
11
It is in these contexts—strict racial separatism, autocratic leadership,
defense of capitalism, and opposition to communism—that the Nation of
Islam must be interpreted as a deeply conservative and fundamentalist
movement among black people. Militancy is, after all, a “style” rather than
a coherent philosophy of politics. The members of the Nation were mil-
itant believers in a creed that projected an alternative racial universe, a
way of viewing the world through an inverted prism of race. Ideologically,
Black Fundamentalism | 171


--- PAGE 193 ---
the orientation of this sect was inherently antidemocratic, patriarchal,
and intolerant.
Given its fundamentalist orientation, it is not at all surprising that the
Nation of Islam inevitably sought to establish relationships with white
conservatives. In Chicago, the national headquarters of the Nation, Mu-
hammad cultivated a cordial understanding with that city’s powerful polit-
ical boss, Richard J. Daley. The Cook County Democratic machine’s vast
resources ruthlessly dominated the politics of the black community, silenc-
ing critics and preserving the most rigid system of residential segregation
in the country. The Chicago police department routinely harassed and vic-
timized black residents, with Daley’s consent. Yet the Nation of Islam in
Chicago rarely experienced the sort of police raids and harassment that
occurred frequently in other cities. Both the Daley machine and the Na-
tion feared the rise of a black radical movement that might challenge the
political status quo. Clegg speculates that “Muhammad and Daley appar-
ently shared common ground that minimized the chances of confrontation
between them. Perhaps the Muslims greased the machine with money
from time to time. Possibly the mayor feared offending the black electo-
rate by openly persecuting Muhammad, who was definitely one of the
more influential and affluent African-Americans in the city. Whatever the
case, the result was a political symbiosis that lasted until Muhammad’s
death in 1975.”
12
Muhammad developed even more cordial relationships with white su-
premacists. John X. Ali, who was appointed national secretary of the Na-
tion of Islam in 1958, served as the primary contact with the far Right. Au-
thors Louis Lomax and Karl Evanzz have suggested that Ali was also
working covertly as the top informant for the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation inside the Nation. It was through Ali that eccentric Texas million-
aire H. L. Hunt made a substantial donation to the Nation of Islam. Hunt
apparently endorsed the racial separatism and political conservatism of the
group as an alternative to the Civil Rights Movement.
As mosques were organized in Atlanta, Richmond, Miami, and other
Southern cities, the Nation of Islam more aggressively pushed its call for a
separate black territory or “homeland.” The first practical step toward this
objective was to establish a land base somewhere in the Deep South. This
may have been the motivation for the Nation of Islam’s secret dialogue
with the Ku Klux Klan. On January 28, 1961, Malcolm X and Jeremiah X,
the minister of the Atlanta mosque, met with leaders of the kkk. Unknown
to both parties, however, the fbi was present, and the agency secretly re-
corded the discussion. The Nation’s representatives and the Klansmen first
172 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 194 ---
shared their views on race and quickly found common ground. Malcolm X
reportedly attributed “the whole struggle to a Jewish conspiracy carried out
by unsuspecting blacks.” The two parties agreed to establish a truce be-
tween their respective organizations, as long as the Nation continued its
opposition to the movement for desegregation. To establish good faith, the
Klan offered to help the Nation of Islam obtain as much as twenty thou-
sand acres of land in either Georgia or South Carolina. Only days before
his assassination four years later, Malcolm X publicly revealed his detailed
negotiations with the Ku Klux Klan:
They wanted to make this land available to him so that his program
of separation would sound more feasible to Negroes and therefore
lessen the pressure that the separationists were putting upon the
white man. I sat there. I negotiated it. I listened to their offer. And
I was the one who went back to Chicago and told Elijah Muham-
mad what they had offered ....F r o m  that day onward the Klan
never interfered with the Black Muslim movement in the South.
Jeremiah attended Klan rallies . . . they never bothered him, never
touched him ....W hen the brothers in Monroe, Louisiana, were
involved in trouble with the police . . . Elijah Muhammad got old
[ James] Venable. Venable is the Ku Klux Klan lawyer. He’s a Ku
Klux Klan chieftain, according to the Saturday Evening Post , that
was up on the witness stand. Go back and read the paper and you’ll
see that Venable was the one who represented the Black Muslim
movement in Louisiana.
13
An even more bizarre relationship subsequently developed between the
Nation of Islam and the American Nazi Party, led by George Lincoln
Rockwell. The Nazis, like the kkk, bitterly opposed civil rights and social
equality for black people and espoused a program of race hatred and anti-
Semitism. But Rockwell viewed the racial policies of the Nation of Islam
as worthy of his support. Muhammad biographer Clegg observed that
Rockwell and Elijah Muhammad “exchanged correspondence and appar-
ently worked out an agreement of mutual assistance.” Both Malcolm X and
Raymond Sharrieff, the supreme captain of the Fruit of Islam (the Nation’s
security force), privately questioned the public relationship with Rockwell
and the Nazis. But Muhammad insisted that Rockwell be permitted to
appear at Muslim meetings. On June 25, 1961, Rockwell and twenty oth-
ers wearing Nazi uniforms attended a speech by Malcolm X in Washing-
ton, D.C. On February 25, 1962, Elijah Muhammad himself spoke pub-
licly on “Savior’s Day” at the Chicago International Amphitheatre, before
an audience that included Rockwell and other Nazi Party members. Mal-
Black Fundamentalism | 173


--- PAGE 195 ---
colm X would later charge that there was a “conspiracy” among the Nation
of Islam, the Ku Klux Klan, and the Nazis. Clegg also observed, “When
black separatists seek accommodation and rapprochement with racists and
reactionary elements of a society, they compromise the moral force behind
their struggle for liberation regardless of how noble their intentions may
be. To a certain extent, Muhammad had done exactly that by entertaining
the Georgia Klan and countenancing Rockwell. Even worse, he had al-
lowed the Nation to stray dangerously close to the ideological pathway of
white supremacy.”
14
The larger political question to be answered here is why Elijah Mu-
hammad sought an informal alliance with fascists and racists. In one of
his last speeches, Malcolm X provides part of the answer. Through the
beginning of the 1960s, he declared, “there was not a better organization
among black people in this country than the Muslim movement. It was
militant. It made the whole struggle of the black man in this country pick
up momentum because of the unity, the militancy, the tendency to be un-
compromising. All of these images created by the Muslim movement
lent weight to the struggle of the black man in this country against op-
pression.” But beginning in 1960, Elijah Muhammad began to move the
organization in a new, more conservative direction. Malcolm focused his
attention primarily on Muhammad’s corrupt personal behavior, which he
described as “more mercenary . . . more interested in wealth . . . and, yes,
more interested in girls.” Muhammad had fathered several children by
his private secretaries, acts of adultery for which any other Muslim would
have been summarily punished or expelled. But a more probable cause
was the rapid acceleration of the black freedom movement during these
years. Beginning in January 1960, the sit-in desegregation protests erupt-
ed across the South. In 1961 the Congress of Racial Equality was lead-
ing “freedom rides” throughout Georgia and Alabama. Medgar Evers
was at the forefront of the fight for desegregation as state leader of the
naacp in Mississippi. Hundreds of idealistic, militant young people es-
tablished the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in late 1960,
to campaign for civil rights and to register African American voters. It
was precisely at this historical moment that the Nation of Islam deem-
phasized politics, became overtly antagonistic to the Civil Rights Move-
ment, and grew ever more autocratic and conservative ideologically. Mal-
colm suggested that the Nation would never attack the Klan or the
Nazis: “I defy them to do so. They can’t do it. Because they both have the
same paymaster.”
15
174 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 196 ---
IV
Louis Farrakhan emerged as a prominent spokesperson for conservative
black nationalism directly as a result of Malcolm X’s assassination. He was
born Louis Eugene Walcott in Boston; his West Indian mother had been
a Garveyite, and she supported his involvement in the Nation of Islam,
beginning in 1955. Given the name Louis X, the young man moved quick-
ly up the organizational hierarchy. At Harlem’s Temple No. 7, he was a
lieutenant in the Fruit of Islam and Malcolm X’s protégé. In 1957 Louis X
became the leader of the Boston mosque. When Malcolm X broke from
the Nation in 1964, his most bitter critic was Louis X. Defending the black
patriarch of the Nation, Louis X denounced Malcolm X as a “hypocrite”
and a traitor “worthy of death.” Following Malcolm’s assassination, Louis
X later was named to lead Harlem’s Temple No. 7 mosque. Renamed Louis
Farrakhan, the charismatic minister had, by the late 1960s, been appoint-
ed “national representative” of the Nation of Islam.
With the death of Elijah Muhammad in 1975, the Nation of Islam was
thrown into organizational chaos. One of Muhammad’s sons had sided
with Malcolm X during the schism with his father. This was Wallace Mu-
hammad, who, surprisingly, emerged as the new leader. He rapidly trans-
formed the Nation; renouncing the group’s separatist ideology, he brought
it into compliance with the formal tenets and practices of orthodox Islam.
During these years Farrakhan withdrew from the reformed Islamic orga-
nization and “reestablished” the old Nation of Islam—going back to the
fundamentalist precepts and practices of its former patriarch. Although the
majority of former Nation members remained loyal to Wallace Muham-
mad and adapted themselves to the new rituals of mainstream Islam, Far-
rakhan carved out his own public image as a militant spokesperson for con-
temporary black nationalism. In the 1984 presidential campaign of Jesse
Jackson, Farrakhan’s Nation of Islam provided security for the black can-
didate for a time. Farrakhan’s articulate, charismatic style won over a new
generation of black activists in the 1980s and 1990s—an ironic situation
for many of them, who had been inspired by the powerful personality of
the late Malcolm X.
Over the next several years, Farrakhan tried to “repackage” himself as a
mainstream leader of the African American community. Although Jackson
disavowed Farrakhan’s support during his 1988 presidential campaign, the
Nation of Islam won praise as it involved itself in voter-registration cam-
paigns and electoral activity. Farrakhan crusaded against the illegal drug
market within black communities, which destroyed the lives of thousands of
Black Fundamentalism | 175


--- PAGE 197 ---
blacks. He encouraged a dialogue among prominent gangs in the ghettos of
major cities, to reduce the level of social violence. Under Farrakhan’s leader-
ship, the Nation of Islam dramatically increased its international visibility in
many different ways. Libya offered an estimated $1 billion to finance the
Nation of Islam’s various programs within the United States. In early 1996
Farrakhan traveled across the globe on a well-publicized nineteen-nation
tour, highlighted by personal audiences with the leaders of Iraq, Nigeria,
Sudan, and South Africa. Later that year he challenged the U.S. embargo of
Cuba by visiting that island nation and engaging in a lengthy political dia-
logue with Fidel Castro. Despite all of these external changes, the central
ideology of the Nation of Islam remained as fundamentalist and conserva-
tive as ever. Farrakhan astutely employed the radical style he had learned
from Malcolm X in his personal and political overtures to Castro, Nelson
Mandela, and other Third World revolutionaries. But the actual content of
the Nation’s program was strict racial separatism, patriarchy, and extreme
intolerance of any critics of the movement.
On issue after issue, Farrakhan’s positions on major public policies are
as reactionary as those of Newt Gingrich and his “Contract with America”
Republican Congress. To this day, Farrakhan retains his belief in “racial
purity” and opposes integration as a strategy for black advancement. He
still supports in principle a separate state for all African Americans and a
territorial division of the country along racial lines. On several occasions,
he has expressed support for the death penalty as a punishment for many
different “crimes,” such as interracial sex. He has described homosexuality
as “unnatural and sick.”
15 His economic philosophy, like that of Elijah Mu-
hammad, is a version of black entrepreneurial capitalism, the political
economy of Booker T. Washington.
From the vantage point of white extreme conservatism, Farrakhan’s ra-
cial fundamentalism has unmistakable parallels with fascist and white racist
ideologies and organizations. By the early 1980s, Farrakhan’s activities and
speeches had come to the attention of British fascists, who quickly em-
braced the black Muslim’s program of racial separatism. The publication of
the National Front, a paramilitary organization with a record of racist as-
saults and attacks against black people in Great Britain, praised Farrakhan
as “God-sent.” The National Front subsequently distributed leaflets defend-
ing the Nation of Islam’s positions. Back in the United States, in the wake
of the controversies surrounding Farrakhan’s statements about Jews and Zi-
onism, white American racists developed an appreciation for him as well.
At the 1985 Savior’s Day conference, one guest speaker was Arthur Butz, a
so-called revisionist critic of the Holocaust and author of The Hoax of the
176 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 198 ---
Twentieth Century. Farrakhan was publicly praised by Ku Klux Klan leader
Tom Metzger for his recognition that the American system was a “rotting
carcass” and that the Jews were “parasites.” The Nation of Islam occasion-
ally initiated the dialogue with the white Right. For example the July 1990
issue of The Spotlight, the publication of the fascist, racist Liberty Lobby,
featured an interview with Farrakhan. The Muslim leader is quoted as
observing that “America was founded by white people for white people.”
16
An evaluation of Farrakhan’s current relationship with racist extremist
Lyndon La Rouche requires some background information on the latter’s
political history. From 1949 until his expulsion in 1966, La Rouche was an
activist in the Socialist Workers Party, a Trotskyist organization. At the
height of the mobilization against the Vietnam War, La Rouche estab-
lished his own radical sect, the National Caucus of Labor Committees.
Within a few short years, the La Rouche group mutated from the Left to
the ultra-Right, embracing a fascist agenda of extreme anticommunism,
racism, and anti-Semitism. In 1973 the La Rouchites initiated “Operation
Mop Up,” a series of violent assaults against members of the U.S. Com-
munist Party. Armed with clubs, pipes, and other weapons, La Rouche’s
cult tried to disrupt public meetings and physically intimidate radical ac-
tivists. Much of La Rouche’s violence and hatred focused on the black
movement. In 1977 La Rouche declared that African Americans who fight
for equal rights are obsessed with “zoological specifications of microcon-
stituencies’ self interests” and “distinctions which would be proper to the
classification of varieties of monkeys and baboons.” La Rouche’s publica-
tions and organization aggressively attacked black leaders who represented
a variety of political perspectives, including Congressman Parren Mitchell,
then head of the Congressional Black Caucus, Atlanta mayor Andrew
Young, and Jesse Jackson. La Rouche’s followers also carried out a racist as-
sault against prominent activist/artist Amiri Baraka.
17
In these same years, La Rouche actively courted leaders of the Ku Klux
Klan and white fascism. In 1974 his front organization, the National Dem-
ocratic Policy Committee, collaborated with racist groups in Boston to
support an anti-busing candidate for Congress. The following year, the
ndpc initiated a legal defense campaign on behalf of Roy Frankhouser,
Grand Dragon of the Pennsylvania chapter of the Ku Klux Klan. La
Rouche later provided intelligence information on the U.S. anti-apartheid
movement to the Bureau of State Security ( boss) of the apartheid regime
in South Africa.
As La Rouche’s cult grew to perhaps one thousand dedicated members
and supporters, it began an extensive involvement in electoral politics. As
Black Fundamentalism | 177


--- PAGE 199 ---
the ndpc’s presidential candidate in the 1980 Democratic primaries, La
Rouche won 185,000 votes in fifteen states and received $526,000 in pub-
lic funds from the Federal Election Commission. La Rouche’s public ad-
dresses revealed a bizarre philosophy—a mixture of paranoia, racism, and
right-wing ideology. For example, La Rouche insisted that Queen Eliza-
beth II of England was “a kingpin of the global drug traffic”; that former
secretary of state Henry Kissinger and Vice President Walter Mondale
were “Soviet agents”; and that David Rockefeller’s “program for world re-
organization is modeled after the conceptions of Hitler’s finance minister.”
At the same time, La Rouche as a presidential candidate strongly defend-
ed the expansion of nuclear power and praised the call for the Star Wars
nuclear weapons system aimed at the Soviet Union.
18
According to the Village Voice of May 17, 1988, “By early 1981 La
Rouche was well received within the upper reaches of the Reagan admin-
istration. His advocacy of fusion won him support in the Department of
Energy, and the Pentagon was receptive because of Star Wars, which La
Rouche claims to have invented. He became an ally in Reagan’s war on
drugs. La Rouche and his wife Helga met with top cia officials to brief
them on political and military matters in West Germany, where La Rouche
is also well known. More importantly, La Rouche had access to the Na-
tional Security Council adviser Judge William Clark.”
19 Through the early
years of the Reagan administration, La Rouche’s political influence grew
dramatically. His front organizations, which generated millions of dollars
in contributions each year, included the Schiller Institute, the National
Anti-Drug Coalition, and the pro-nuclear Fusion Energy Foundation,
which, according to researcher Eugene H. Methvin, “rakes in tax-exempt
dollars without disclosing to donors its bizarre political links.” An expen-
sive weekly newsmagazine, the Executive Intelligence Review, and a nation-
al newspaper, New Solidarity, promoted La Rouche’s political analysis to
hundreds of thousands of readers. La Rouche became recognized as a ma-
jor political force. He was granted private audiences with Indian prime
minister Indira Gandhi, Mexican president José López Portillo, Argen-
tinian president Raul Alfonsin, and cia deputy director Bobby Ray Inman.
La Rouche’s fundraising efforts generated $30 million in 1984 alone, to fi-
nance his unsuccessful campaign in that year’s Democratic presidential
primaries. Dennis King, author of Lyndon La Rouche and the New American
Fascism, estimated that La Rouche’s organization generated more than
$200 million between 1980 and 1988.
20
La Rouche’s successes in electoral politics led him to reevaluate his
racist positions on civil rights and black politics in general. Perhaps he took
178 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 200 ---
careful notes from Reagan’s cultivation of a coterie of black apologists for
his reactionary policies, such as economists Thomas Sowell and Walter
Williams, television journalist Tony Brown, U.S. Civil Rights Commission
chairman Clarence Pendleton, and the director of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, Clarence Thomas.
In any case, by the mid-1980s La Rouche had concluded that his orga-
nization had to develop allies within the African American community. The
first significant step toward this goal was the organization of a rally at
Washington, D.C.’s Lincoln Memorial in January 1985. La Rouche front
organizations sponsored the event, which was theoretically held in honor of
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s birthday. At least five thousand African Amer-
icans attended the rally, which also featured banners in support of President
Reagan’s Star Wars nuclear weapons scheme: “I Have a Dream, and Build
the Beam.” Quietly La Rouche began to recruit dozens of African Ameri-
cans into his organization and to develop close relationships with others
who might benefit from his financial contributions. In the latter category
was Congress of Racial Equality leader Roy Innis, who first met La Rouche
in the early 1980s. In October 1984 Innis testified as a “character witness”
for La Rouche in a slander suit against nbc. Innis claimed in the trial that
La Rouche was neither a racist nor an anti-Semite and that “the composi-
tion of his organization indicates to me that he’s not a racist.”
21 La Rouche’s
prize recruit, however, was the Reverend James Bevel, who had been a top
aide to King.
The mainstream leadership of the black community was not fooled by
La Rouche’s new tactics. The ndpc was without question a dangerous,
anti-black, anti-Semitic cult. In the Atlanta Voice of April 12–18, 1986,
the A. Philip Randolph Institute declared: “La Rouche appeals to fear, ha-
tred and ignorance. He seeks to exploit and exacerbate the anxieties and
frustrations of Americans by offering an array of scapegoats and ene-
mies—Jews, Zionists, international bankers, blacks, labor unions—much
the way Hitler did in Germany.” In 1985 African American leader Julian
Bond accused La Rouche of “using the elderly and the politically unso-
phisticated to promote his brand of right-wing totalitarianism, his alli-
ance with Nazis and the Klan, his support for the white supremacists in
South Africa, and for President Reagan’s ‘Star Wars’ Program.”
22
One of La Rouche’s sharpest and most perceptive black critics was the
Reverend Benjamin Chavis, a former political prisoner and at that time exec-
utive director of the United Church of Christ’s Commission on Racial Jus-
tice. In his nationally syndicated column, in August 1986, Chavis sharply
denounced “La Rouche and his band of fanatics” for attempting “to win
Black Fundamentalism | 179


--- PAGE 201 ---
black recruits.” La Rouche’s front organizations have played upon “the black
community’s fear of the growing drug problem and the aids epidemic. They
have gotten black recruits with their strong anti-drug line and their sugges-
tion that all aids victims be quarantined.” Through his ndpc, La Rouche
“dupe[d] some black and Hispanic candidates into running on his ticket and
to vote for his candidates.” Chavis warned African Americans that the “La
Rouche organization is clearly racist, works closely with the Klan, and is a
supporter of the South African government as well.. . . It is trying, through
its many tentacles, to infiltrate the black community.” La Rouche’s support-
ers responded to these and other African Americans’ criticisms with racist
and inflammatory rhetoric. One of La Rouche’s white candidates in Balti-
more, Debra Freeman, smeared Congressman Parren Mitchell as “a house
nigger for the Zionists.”
23 In March 1985, the La Rouchite newspaper New
Solidarity bitterly denounced Farrakhan for “building a Nazi-communist ter-
rorist movement closely linked to the Greens and their backers in the United
States.”
24
La Rouche’s empire was seriously threatened when in 1989 the cult
leader and six of his top aides were convicted of federal fraud and tax eva-
sion charges, receiving prison sentences of up to fifteen years. From his
cell, La Rouche vowed, “They can’t crush the organization. . . . It has a
tough leadership and no matter how many people get bumped off, it will
survive for generations to come.” It was during the federal government’s
successful prosecution of La Rouche that the organization accelerated its
efforts to cultivate friends and allies among black Americans. In 1992 La
Rouche launched his presidential campaign by selecting the Reverend
James Bevel as his vice presidential running mate. A surprising number of
African American leaders were recruited to endorse the campaign; among
the most prominent were the Reverend Hosea Williams, field director of
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and county commissioner
of De Kalb County, Georgia, and Amelia Boynton Robinson, a Civil
Rights Movement veteran and a 1990 recipient of the Martin Luther King
Jr. Freedom Medal. In a press statement published in the La Rouche news-
paper New Federalist on October 26, 1992, African American supporters of
La Rouche stated: “It is time to secure the victories of the civil rights
movement that was led by Dr. Martin Luther King, and guarantee the eco-
nomic and moral future of our posterity. For these reasons we hereby
endorse the La Rouche–Bevel candidacy, and encourage all citizens to join
our new movement and vote La Rouche–Bevel on Nov. 3.” The endorsers
of this statement included (besides Williams and Robinson) Joseph Dick-
son, publisher of the Birmingham World newspaper; the Reverend Floyd
180 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 202 ---
Rose, former editor of the Macon Reporter; and Mattie Harkness, former
president of the Pickens County, Alabama, chapter of the naacp.25
La Rouche’s publications began to make favorable references to Farra-
khan and the activities of the Nation of Islam. The Nation gradually reci-
procated, citing data generated by La Rouche’s research for its own publi-
cations. According to the New Federalist of September 28, 1990, Dr. Abdul
Alim Muhammad, an noi spokesman, told a meeting of La Rouchites: “To
Mr Lyndon La Rouche and his wife, and to those members of his organi-
zation, especially those of his organization . . . who put out the New Fed-
eralist newspaper and the Executive Intelligence Review , I want to say on
behalf of Minister Louis Farrakhan and the entire Nation of Islam, how
much we admire you and respect you for the great work that you are
doing.” The noi publication The Final Call of December 24, 1990, report-
ed that Dr. Muhammad spoke in Paris at an international conference
sponsored by the Schiller Institute. In the next few years, the Nation of
Islam and the Schiller Institute collaborated in public forums at Howard
University and the University of the District of Columbia. In 1994, fol-
lowing Chavis’s ouster as head of the naacp, representatives of the Nation
of Islam once again joined forces with the La Rouchites. On September 1,
1994, the Schiller Institute organized and paid for a public forum in
Washington. It featured Dr. Muhammad, who in turn accused the Anti-
Defamation League of B’nai B’rith of “engineering” Chavis’s removal. Dr.
Muhammad also used the occasion to attack Imam W. Deen Mohammed,
Elijah Muhammad’s son, as “this functionary of the adl network.”
26
When La Rouche was paroled from federal prison in 1994, Farrakhan’s
political influence had never been greater. The La Rouche organization
then moved aggressively to deepen its extensive relationship with the Na-
tion. After the Million Man March, Bevel began working closely with Far-
rakhan’s representatives and with Chavis, as head of the National African
American Leadership Summit. At the first anniversary of the march, some
50,000 to 100,000 people gathered before the United Nations to mark the
“World Day of Atonement.” According to the La Rouche publication New
Federalist, the demonstration’s major themes were “Atonement, Reconcili-
ation, and Responsibility” and were “jointly agreed upon by the rally lead-
ers,” Farrakhan, Chavis, and Bevel. The rally’s keynote address was deliv-
ered by Farrakhan, who spoke for nearly three hours.
But Bevel, in a rambling, virtually incoherent statement, characterized
the 1995 Million Man March and the 1996 World Day of Atonement as
“God breaking in, and people breaking out, to join forces to create a new
nation.” Bevel declared: “So, the new people, like a new baby, must not fol-
Black Fundamentalism | 181


--- PAGE 203 ---
low the old beaten path of the errant elders who are lost and have gone
astray. The new people must listen to the voice of God, atone for the sin and
crime of violence, murder, and war, and create a new world devoid of this
old pagan, heathen, barbaric, human-sacrificing ritual. ...A n d  those who
argue that there is a greater priority than addressing this human and social
disease are likened unto the shoeshine boys who were fighting over which
one was going to have the number-one shoeshine stand as the Titanic was
making its descent.” Despite Bevel’s bizarre statements and his role as a La
Rouche lieutenant, many prominent African Americans joined him on the
platform at the Day of Atonement demonstration, including Harvard Uni-
versity professor Cornel West, the Reverend Al Sharpton, comedian and
social critic Dick Gregory, and Pan-Africanist activist Kwame Toure.
27
It was supremely ironic that Chavis, who had so clearly comprehended
the dangers of La Rouche’s fascist and racist politics a decade earlier, be-
came politically and even financially dependent upon the La Rouche–
Farrakhan liaison. Chavis’s personal tragedy symbolizes the political con-
tradictions of black fundamentalist nationalism: its autocratic character, its
conservative economic ideology, and its active collaboration with white su-
premacy and fascism. The dangerous connections between Farrakhan and
La Rouche only repeat the historical pattern of Garvey’s associations with
white racists in the 1920s, and Elijah Muhammad’s relationship with the
Nazis and the Ku Klux Klan a generation later. Perhaps the greatest trag-
edy of all is that the vast majority of African Americans are still unaware
that some of their most prominent and charismatic leaders have funda-
mentally compromised and betrayed their interests by consorting with
those who oppose their very existence as a people. In 1985, Julian Bond
suggested that if La Rouche became successful, “a section of black America
will have become allied with its own worst enemy.” Unfortunately, Bond’s
prediction proved to be all too true.
182 | Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 204 ---
183
For well over a century, there has been an ongoing debate within the Afri-
can American community regarding different strategies that could be em-
ployed to promote group economic advancement and greater income equal-
ity with white Americans. The personalities advocating specific programs
and organizational affiliations have shifted dramatically over the decades,
but the general ideological conflict over what strategic vision is appropriate
for black economic development has remained remarkably consistent. In its
most basic terms, the debate concerns the complex relationships among
race, class, and economic power. How does a minority group, with limited
resources of capital and credit, devise a strategy to lift incomes and to pro-
mote group economic development?
One approach to this challenge of black economics has started with
race. The argument here is simple: race is the most important factor in
determining the availability of jobs, career advancement, access to credit
and capital. Race must therefore be used as a framework for coordinating
black producers and consumers to achieve empowerment within the capi-
talist system. The opposite approach begins from the point of view of class.
Black Americans overwhelmingly are working people, who share common
class interests with workers of different racial and ethnic backgrounds. By
building solidarity between African American leadership and the labor
union movement, and by increasing black union membership and partici-
12
Black Leadership and Organized Labor:
From Workplace to Community


--- PAGE 205 ---
pation, the black community will increase its political and economic clout.
The enhanced power of the African American and labor movements will
place greater pressure on government to support more-progressive social
policies like affirmative action and vocational training programs, which
disproportionately aid racialized minorities. An increase in the incomes
and standard of living for the entire working population, combined with
liberal government policies aimed at reducing poverty and joblessness, will
dramatically improve the economic condition of the black community.
While it is certainly true that these two arguments are not mutually
exclusive—labor unions and capitalism have coexisted for many years—
nevertheless, the division between these two poles has fostered very dif-
ferent perspectives among African American leaders. The first architect of
the blueprint for black capitalist development was Booker T. Washington,
founder of Tuskegee Institute in 1881 and the National Negro Business
League in 1900. Washington aggressively opposed labor unions and urged
African Americans to seek employment as scabs to undercut racist white
workers. By building black-owned businesses that provided goods and ser-
vices to a mostly segregated market, African Americans would create jobs
for themselves. This strategy of economic self-reliance was later accompa-
nied by an explicit rejection of government as a tool for addressing income
inequality. In the generations of black leadership since Washington, the
strategy of capitalist development has been embraced by advocates of both
racial integration and black nationalism. Marcus Garvey, the Jamaican black
nationalist and leader of the Universal Negro Improvement Association in
the 1920s, was a staunch proponent of Washington’s economic strategy. In
the 1980s black conservatives who were aligned with the Reagan admin-
istration, including economists Thomas Sowell, Glen Loury, and Walter
Williams, preached racial self-help, black private entrepreneurship, and a
reduction of government regulations and restrictions on the market. Today
many of the same economic ideas are being championed by two seemingly
very different black leaders: Colin Powell and Louis Farrakhan. Both men
would favor blacks becoming “less reliant” on government programs; both
support efforts at black entrepreneurship; both probably believe that the
black middle class has the unique responsibility to uplift the rest of the
black community. Although one leader is the darling of moderate Republi-
canism and white suburbia and the other has his core constituency in the
black inner cities, that does not alter the similarities of their economic argu-
ment. As Peter Drier has noted: “According to Farrakhan, the road to black
success is through entrepreneurship: by blacks owning businesses and keep-
ing economic resources in the African American community. This goal res-
184 | Black Leadership and Organized Labor


--- PAGE 206 ---
onates with the American Dream, but it is a far cry from economic reality.”
What was “tragically absent” from Farrakhan’s address at the 1995 Million
Man March, notes Drier, was any mention of “the institution that has
played perhaps the largest role in improving the economic condition of
black Americans: unions.”
1
The case against the economic strategy of black-labor solidarity rests
partially on the long history of racial discrimination within the white work-
ing class. Historian William H. Harris has eloquently characterized racial
exclusion as a central theme for the entire history of American labor:
The importance and centrality of race in America comes forth in so
much that has been part of the American labor movement, and raises
without question the most important issue with which organized
labor must contend if labor will continue to have a major place in
American society. History is replete with examples of why this is so.
For instance, railway engineers were not solely responsible for the fail-
ure of Eugene V. Debs’ Pullman strike. The decision of numerous
black workers to refuse to join the American Railway Union, and
thus, in effect, become strikebreakers, contributed to Debs’ failure as
well. Yet, the very reason that black workers did not make common
cause with the American Railway Union, namely because white rail-
way unionists would not permit blacks to join the unions or to take
certain railroad jobs such as engineers, brakemen, and conductors,
requires historians to question whether the term scab really fits their
actions. Is one a scab or strikebreaker when one takes a job during a
strike that the striking workers, all of whom are white, have them-
selves gone on strike to keep black workers out? During the late 19th
and 20th centuries, white workers initiated more than 100 strikes in
order to keep black workers from gaining access to certain jobs.
2
The pattern of racial exclusion was deeply entrenched in the American
Federation of Labor ( afl) and was only partially broken when the Con-
gress of Industrial Organizations ( cio) organized workers of both races.
Racial progress was particularly slow in many craft trades. In 1960, for ex-
ample, only 1.5 percent of all employed electricians were nonwhite. It was
only when the Department of Labor under President Lyndon Johnson
decided to pressure the skilled trade unions to desegregate that this rigid
pattern of exclusion began to soften. In 1969 the Nixon administration be-
gan to implement what was termed the Philadelphia Plan, which was spe-
cifically designed to increase the number of African Americans and other
racial minorities in the skilled trades. The Department of Labor directly
funded several minority apprenticeship programs, such as the National Ur-
Black Leadership and Organized Labor | 185


--- PAGE 207 ---
ban League’s Labor Education and Advancement Program, which trained
African Americans for skilled jobs as carpenters, ironworkers, heavy-
equipment operators, and electricians. By 1980 nearly 5 percent of all em-
ployed electricians were African Americans. By 1995 approximately 15
percent of the one million jobs in the skilled trade unions belonged to
black workers.
But black workers have learned that access to apprenticeship programs
does not necessarily mean regular full-time employment. Under the Phil-
adelphia Plan, contractors who bid for government-financed construction
projects were required to meet goals for minority employment established
by affirmative-action guidelines. The contractors shifted the burden of
achieving these goals to the union locals that supplied the workers. And
it is at the local level that racial bias is still perpetuated. In Philadelphia,
Local 542, for example, once maintained mandatory hiring halls, where
all job assignments were placed. But as competition for jobs increased, the
white-dominated locals allowed contractors to hire union members with-
out going through the hiring halls. In effect, this permitted white foremen
to select their relatives and friends for positions and to discriminate against
minorities. One report of Local 542 indicated that while 30 percent of all
workers sent out for jobs were minorities, they worked only 16 percent of
all hours worked by local members.
The retreat from equality represented by the Philadephia Plan is also
symbolic of the distinctly different experiences that African Americans
and whites have in the workplace, regardless of whether they are members
of unions. The critics of African American–labor solidarity would make
the argument that race is a more profound factor in determining what hap-
pens on the job, or in the availability of employment, than class is. There
is considerable evidence to support this thesis.
First, social scientists for decades have observed a wage gap between
whites and African Americans that is profoundly structural—regardless of
education, vocational training, or other factors, nearly all blacks at all lev-
els still earn less than whites. During the Civil Rights and Black Power
Movements, and especially with the implementation of affirmative-action
and equal employment opportunity measures, the income gap between
blacks and whites narrowed dramatically. In 1967 black men earned 45
percent less than white men. By 1977 the wage gap had diminished to 29
percent. After that, the racial wage gap stagnated and to some extent was
eroded.
3 Economist James P . Smith illustrates the racial stratification of
wages by isolating the work experiences of college-educated African
American men since the 1960s. Smith observes: “Among new college
186 | Black Leadership and Organized Labor


--- PAGE 208 ---
graduates, black men earned 83 percent as much as comparable white men
in 1967–1968; by 1971–1972 there was complete wage parity. After 1971–
1972, wage gains of young black workers steadily eroded. For college grad-
uates, this erosion marked both decades until we had come roughly full cir-
cle with a wage differential in 1990 little different than that with which we
started.” What was even more striking was the decline of wages between
races within the same cohorts. Smith notes that “among college graduates
who entered the job market in 1971, wages of blacks exceeded those of
comparable whites by 2 percent. Within this cohort, black males’ wages
were only 75 percent as much as those of their white counterparts 18 years
into their careers in 1989.”
4
The racial wage gap also persists among union members. In 1987 Afri-
can American union workers earned an average of $387 per week, compared
with $458 per week for white union members. By 1994 white unionists
received $514 a week on average, compared with $405 for black union mem-
bers. The African American unionists’ wage was only a small amount above
the average weekly wage of $385 for all unionized and non-unionized, non-
supervisory workers.
5
The racial stratification of the work experience even extends to the
rates of joblessness and reemployment. In periods of economic hardship,
whites are far more likely than blacks to gain reemployment. For example,
in the period 1979–1983, 77.9 percent of white men were reemployed,
compared with only 63.1 percent of black men. For women workers, the
figures were 62.9 percent for whites, 53.8 percent for blacks. The racial
division of displaced workers who found reemployment was particularly
sharp for workers who had less than three years’ tenure on their last job. In
1984–1986, a period of relative economic growth, for displaced workers
who had been employed on their previous job for less than one year, 81.7
percent of all white men were reemployed, compared with only 66.6 per-
cent of the African American men. For displaced women workers in this
category, white women again had higher rates of reemployment over black
women, 61.2 percent versus 52.4 percent. In the managerial, administra-
tive, and professional occupations, sectors where there are still relatively
small numbers of minorities, African American displaced workers are at
least as competitive as their white peers in obtaining new jobs. This is also
the case when blacks had been employed at their previous jobs for eleven
or more years.
6
Once African Americans are out of work, it takes most of them a much
longer time to be reemployed in the same occupation or industry than it
does whites. Citing data from a 1988 Department of Labor survey, econ-
Black Leadership and Organized Labor | 187


--- PAGE 209 ---
omist Lori G. Kletzer observes: “In the 1984–86 period, 15.5 percent of
white men and 11.4 percent of white women reported experiencing no job-
lessness following displacement; among blacks, the percentages were much
smaller, 5.4 percent of men and 6.6 percent of women. At the other end
of the joblessness distribution, long-term joblessness—that exceeding 26
weeks—was more prevalent for sampled blacks than for sampled whites.
For the 1984–86 period, 37.8 percent of black men and 29.5 percent of
black women reported at least 26 weeks without work, compared with 18.8
percent of white men and 22.4 percent of white women.” For displaced
workers who had been unemployed for more than one full year, the racial
stratification of experience remained: for men, the jobless rates were 5.0
percent for whites, 9.5 percent for blacks; for women, 6.6 percent for
whites and 14.8 percent for African Americans.
7
As a consequence of the racialized patterns of discrimination in career
advancement, unequal wages, job displacement, and reemployment, most
black American workers have been losing ground economically over the past
two decades. Only a minority of African American workers who have high
levels of skills and education, and those located in professional, technical,
and administrative positions, have done comparatively well. Lou Ferleger
and Jay R. Mandle note that “while the proportion of black families with
incomes of more than $50,000 (adjusted for inflation) increased from 4.7
percent in 1970 to 8.8 percent in 1986, the percentage of poor black fami-
lies—those with incomes of less than $10,000—also increased, from 26.8
percent to 30.2 percent.”
8 About one-fourth of all black adults are no longer
in the formal labor force, and in some urban communities like Harlem, that
measurement exceeds 40 percent. The informal economy, both legal and
illegal enterprises and markets, increasingly supports growing numbers of
black working people. This development has had a devastating impact, par-
ticularly among young African Americans, many of whom have no experi-
ence or expectation of obtaining a real job in their lifetimes.
There is no question that race remains a critically important factor in
determining the life chances—employment, income mobility, housing,
health care, education—of all African Americans, even a generation after
the Civil Rights Movement. But African Americans as a group have al-
ways understood that race does not and cannot explain everything. Much
more than white American voters, the black electorate usually makes its
political choices based on ideology, rather than the race of individual can-
didates. Similarly, from their practical experiences in the workplace, most
blacks and other minorities have concluded that a strategy of class solidar-
ity and unions, with all of their problems and contradictions, still repre-
188 | Black Leadership and Organized Labor


--- PAGE 210 ---
sents the best approach for increasing income and improving the econom-
ic life of their communities. The best evidence of this is provided by pub-
lic opinion polls. In one 1989 Associated Press/Media General national
survey, more than 1,100 adults were asked about their attitudes toward
organized labor. When non-union workers were asked, “Would you join a
union at your place of work?” those responding “yes” included 56 percent
of all African Americans, 46 percent of all Hispanics, and only 35 percent
of non-Hispanic whites. When asked whether they had a generally “favor-
able” opinion of unions, 62 percent of both blacks and Hispanics respond-
ed positively, compared with only 43 percent of whites.
9
This pro-union perspective is deeply rooted in the social consciousness
and the political terrain of black history. Particularly, this intimate connec-
tion to the labor movement is based on the activist leadership of black
trade unionists like A. Philip Randolph, who founded the Brotherhood of
Sleeping Car Porters in 1925. Randolph directly linked the struggles of the
black working class for higher wages and better working conditions with
the cause for desegregation and civil rights. In the 1950s and 1960s, despite
all of its many contradictions, organized labor provided critical support for
the mass desegregation campaigns across the South. It was labor, not the
mainstream of the Democratic Party, that endorsed the 1963 March on
Washington, calling for the adoption of the Civil Rights Act. During the
Black Power movement in the late sixties, the most significant radical ten-
dency of African American activism was arguably not the highly publi-
cized Black Panther Party but the League of Revolutionary Black Work-
ers. From Montgomery to Memphis, black trade unionists and working-
class people generally were central to the African American struggle.
There is a common recognition among black workers that their earn-
ings, fringe benefits, and general working conditions improve with union-
ization, relative to black non-union labor. In 1987, for example, black
union members earned an average of $387 per week, 51.8 percent more
than black non-union workers, who averaged $255 per week.
10 It is for
these reasons that African Americans are assuming an increasingly impor-
tant role within the labor movement. While white male membership in
unions has declined from 55.8 percent of all white male workers in 1986
to 49.7 percent in 1994, African American representation has increased in
these same years from 14 percent to 15.5 percent. Even more important is
the race and gender profile of organized labor today. As of 1995, only 14.8
percent of all white workers age sixteen and above were union members.
Black men now have the highest union membership rate, 23.3 percent, fol-
lowed by black women workers, at 18.1 percent.
11
Black Leadership and Organized Labor | 189


--- PAGE 211 ---
With their growing numbers, African Americans in recent years have
become more directly involved in politics. As late as 1984, African Ameri-
cans were leaders of only two of the afl-cio’s ninety-five affiliates: Henry
Nicholas headed the predominantly black National Union of Hospital and
Health Care Employees, and Frederick O’Neal was president of the Asso-
ciated Actors and Artists of America. By the end of the 1980s, a group of
powerful black leaders had emerged: William Lucy, secretary-treasurer of
the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees (1
million members); Mary H. Futrell, president of the National Education
Association (1.6 million members); John N. Sturdivant, president of the
American Federation of Government Employees (at 700,000 members,
the largest union of federal workers); Marc Stepp, vice president of the
United Automobile Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of
America; Leon Lynch, vice president of the United Steelworkers of Amer-
ica; Henry Nicholas, still president of the National Union of Hospital and
Health Care Employees; and Robert L. White, president of the National
Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees.
12 With this new concentration
of black leadership, the Coalition of Black Trade Unionists (cbtu), found-
ed in 1972 as a pressure group for African Americans within the labor
movement, exerted greater political influence.
This new power became apparent during the 1995 contest between
John J. Sweeney, president of the Service Employees International Union,
and afl-cio secretary-treasurer Thomas R. Donahue, for the afl-cio
presidency. Black union leaders were not consulted in the selection of the
candidates, and the cbtu decided to pressure both to accept fundamental
changes in the federation. Among the cbtu’s list of demands were that
more minorities and women be included in the delegations sent to afl-cio
conventions; that more African Americans be hired for federation staff
positions; and that black labor leaders be consulted in the future “in draft-
ing of strategies for organizing industries and plants that employ a higher
percentage of minorities.” Sweeney’s October 1995 election as president
pointed the federation toward a more progressive position on issues of race
and gender. The afl-cio 1995 convention voted to increase the number of
racial minorities and women on its executive council. With these changes,
the number of minorities on the executive council increased from four out
of thirty-five (11 percent) to eleven out of fifty-four (20 percent).
13
What are the prospects for African American and other minority work-
ers as they enter a new century? The globalization of capital and the infor-
mation revolution have greatly transformed the system of production and
even the character of work in the United States. Demographically the racial,
190 | Black Leadership and Organized Labor


--- PAGE 212 ---
ethnic, and gender composition of the American working class is changing
rapidly. For the period 1990–2005, the Bureau of Labor Statistics projects
an increase in the percentage of white males sixteen years and over in the
civilian labor force of 17.4 percent. For women and minorities, the project-
ed percentages are significantly higher: women workers, 26.2 percent;
African Americans, 31.7 percent; Asian/Pacific Island Americans, 74.4 per-
cent; and Hispanic Americans, 75.3 percent from their 1990 numbers.
14
The current national debate about competitiveness in the global econ-
omy, for example, must take into account the demographic transformation
of the U.S. labor force. For many years, both organized labor and capital
largely ignored the black worker. They can no longer afford to do so. As
Lou Ferleger and Jay R. Mandle observe:
More than at any time in the past, the interests of the black labor force
coincide with those of the nation as a whole. . . . If the United States
is to compete effectively in the future, it will require a renewed atten-
tion to the productive competence of its labor force—including its
sizable African-American component. If this is not done, not only
will African-Americans suffer economically, but the country’s busi-
nesses will continue to decline in world marketplaces.
15
In the growing trend toward multiculturalism, at least at the present
time, the corporations are in some respects ahead of both organized labor
and public and private institutions such as universities. Globalization has
forced multinational corporations to approach markets in entirely new
ways. Both employees and consumers are increasingly multiethnic and
transnational. Managers recognize that cross-cultural awareness and fluen-
cy enhance efforts to enter and exploit new markets. Global corporations
that traditionally were run exclusively by Europeans and white North
Americans now frequently recruit managers from non-western societies or
from black, Asian, and Latino populations inside the United States. Large
firms have initiated “cultural audits” or diversity workshops for their man-
agers and sales personnel. In the United States, corporations now often
fund multicultural events for employees during African American History
Month or on Cinco de Mayo. “Corporate multiculturalism” is the coordi-
nated attempt to manipulate diversity to maximize profits. Labor must
surely be as “multicultural” as capital as it considers the demographic trends
and social composition of the U.S. and global workforce.
The long-term question confronting organized labor, however, is
whether it will merge the interests of the black freedom movement with its
own agenda for social reform. “Race-based” politics cannot address the
Black Leadership and Organized Labor | 191


--- PAGE 213 ---
basic economic interests and problems within the African American com-
munities, and the majority of black workers implicitly understand this. But
organized labor will not make its case for solidarity to minority workers
unless it develops the capacity to address class and racial issues simultane-
ously. An example is provided by Randolph’s Negro March on Washington
Movement of 1941, which pressured the Roosevelt administration to sign
an executive order outlawing segregation in defense industries. To Ran-
dolph, racial equality as a goal was always tied to economic parity, but the
issue of race could not be simplistically reduced or subordinated to the cat-
egory of class. Historian William H. Harris reminds us that “Randolph
saw the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters as an agency to be involved
in fomenting social change across the fabric of America and, if he had his
way, across the fabric of the world.”
16 The twelve-year struggle to achieve
a contract for the members of the Brotherhood with the Pullman Compa-
ny was important but not enough. Labor had the moral and political obli-
gation to fight for social justice and the dismantling of institutional racism.
The basic challenge ahead of black labor is the construction of an alter-
native political culture, which can transcend the ideological boundaries and
the political limitations of black liberal leadership in the Democratic Party
and the civil rights community. “Organizing” is not just a means to articulate
grievances or to demand higher wages. Its power lies in the transformation
of its subjects. Ordinary people begin to see themselves in a different way.
Workers acquire a new sense of power and possibility—that they can change
the way things are, both at the workplace and at home. The rhetoric of divi-
siveness and racial exclusivity offers no hope for black working people to
challenge corporate capital or to reverse the conservative trends in public
policy on issues of race. Most black people really understand this. The act of
organizing requires people to make effective connections with others who
speak different languages or who represent different cultural traditions, na-
tionalities, ethnicities, and religions. There is no monochromatic model for
democratic social change in a pluralistic society.
To restate the political query raised by Martin Luther King Jr. in the
aftermath of the triumph over legal segregation: “Where do we go from
here?”—black labor will be able to lead only when it is able to incorporate
critical elements of African American popular culture into its approach to
organizing and into its normal political discourse. The model I have in
mind here is the Civil Rights Movement. Oppressed people throughout
the world for centuries engaged in civil disobedience, the disruption of the
normal activities of the state and civil society. But in the context of the de-
192 | Black Leadership and Organized Labor


--- PAGE 214 ---
segregation struggles across the South, civil disobedience was articulated as
the “sit-in movement.” The creative site of popular protest moved from the
courtroom to the street, to the segregated lunch counters and department
stores. Black workers saw themselves as actors in their own history. The
new protest terminologies, such as “sit-ins” and “freedom rides,” estab-
lished a way of talking about empowerment and resistance. That new lan-
guage must come from the expressions of daily life and the reflections of
struggle that black workers themselves feel and know as their reality.
Black Leadership and Organized Labor | 193


--- PAGE 215 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 216 ---
195
1. The Racial Contours of the Constitution
Originally published in Howard Law Journal 30, no. 4 (1987): 661–73.
1. For example, the Virginia slave code of 1694 stipulated that no slave was per-
mitted to leave any plantation without written permission of the master. Slaves
accused and convicted of robbing a store or residence were usually given sixty lash-
es and were then secured to a public pillory with their ears nailed to the posts.
After a period of time, their ears were lashed from their heads. In South Carolina,
the legislature was somewhat less tolerant of black misconduct. In 1686 South
Carolina blacks were barred from engaging in certain types of trade. In 1722 sher-
iffs were permitted to search blacks for weapons and to whip them on the spot. For
serious offenses, such as running away, slaves could be killed; for petty crimes,
blacks were branded on their faces. Northern colonies were equally repressive. In
1703 Massachusetts passed a statewide curfew, requiring blacks to be off the streets
by nine o’clock in the evening. Two years later interracial marriages were outlawed.
Before 1700 Pennsylvania had no separate laws for free Negroes or slaves, but in
the early eighteenth century blacks were barred from white courts. Interracial mar-
riages were declared illegal; blacks accused of rape were castrated; no slave was per-
mitted to travel more than ten miles from the master’s residence without a written
pass. See Paul C. Palmer, “Servant Into Slave: The Evolution of the Legal Status
of the Negro Laborer in Colonial Virginia,” South Atlantic Quarterly 65 (Summer
1966): 355–70; Adele Hast, “The Legal Status of the Negro in Virginia, 1705–
1765,” Journal of Negro History 54 ( July 1969): 217–39; and Robert C. Twombly
NOTES


--- PAGE 217 ---
and Robert H. Moore, “Black Puritan: The Negro in Seventeenth-Century Mas-
sachusetts,” William and Mary Quarterly 24 (April 1967): 224–42.
2. Vincent Harding observes: “The threat of Black struggle was used as a
means to solidify white people, to array lower-class whites into a colony-wide po-
lice force against the Black quest for freedom” (Harding, There Is a River: The
Black Struggle for Freedom in America [New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1981], p. 33).
3. About 40 percent of the population was essentially a landless proletariat, and
at least 80 percent of all white indentured servants “died, became landless workers,
or returned to England.”
4. John Adams admitted candidly, “The state of Connecticut has always been
governed by an aristocracy, more decisively than the empire of Great Britain is.
Half a dozen, or at most a dozen families have controlled that country when [it
was] a colony, as well as since it has been a state” (Staughton Lynd, “Beyond
Beard,” in Barton J. Bernstein, ed.,Towards a New Past: Dissenting Essays in Ameri-
can History, p. 48 [New York: Pantheon, 1968]).
5. Poor whites often harbored and assisted black runaway slaves. Colonial his-
torian Gerald W. Mullin notes: “Some whites openly aided fugitive slaves ....
Many slaves evidently knew which White men, especially among watermen and
officials, were lenient enough or sufficiently gullible enough to let them pass as
f r e e ....The insurrectionist, Gabriel Prosser, and his lieutenants made extensive
use of rivers and watermen, bogus passes, whites who sold them supplies, and reli-
gious revivals in order to plan the wholesale destruction of the new capital city.”
See Mullin, Flight and Rebellion: Slave Resistance in Eighteenth Century Virginia
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1972), pp. 113, 117, 128.
6. See Julian D. Mason, ed., The Poems of Phillis Wheatley (Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 1966), pp. 33–35.
7. Herbert Aptheker, A Documentary History of the Negro People in the United
States, from Colonial Times Through the Civil War (New York: Citadel, 1951),
pp. 7–8.
8. Harding, There Is a River,p .4 3 .
9. David Brion Davis, The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, 1770–
1823 (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1975), pp. 279–80.
10. Donald L. Robinson, Slavery in the Structure of American Politics, 1765–
1820 (New York: Harcourt, 1971), pp. 81–83, as quoted in Harding, There Is a
River,p .4 5 .
11. Davis, The Problem of Slavery , p. 282.
12. Winthrop D. Jordan, White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Ne-
gro, 1550–1812 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1968), p. 342.
13. Davis, The Problem of Slavery , pp. 24, 173–74.
14. Herbert Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts (New York: International
Publishers, 1963), pp. 207–8.
15. Benjamin Franklin led antislavery forces in Philadelphia and subsequently
196 | 1. The Racial Contours of the Constitution


--- PAGE 218 ---
became chairman of the Pennsylvania Abolition Society. Virginia governor James
Wood later became president of the Virginia Abolition Society.
16. In 1780 Pennsylvania adopted provisions for emancipating all blacks when
they achieved the age of twenty-eight. Two years later Virginia passed a bill allow-
ing individual slaveholders to free their own chattel.
17. Davis, The Problem of Slavery ,p .8 7 .
18. Ibid.
19. Ibid., p. 170; Mullin, Flight and Rebellion , pp. 11, 29, 60–61. See also
Robert McColley, Slavery and Jeffersonian Virginia (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1964). Mullin notes that Washington used “less substantial, pre-fab”–type
shacks for his slaves, which were “small, temporary, and were moved from quarter
to quarter following the seasonal crop” (p. 51). Washington also believed that his
slaves stole “everything they could lay their hands on.” He kept his meat and corn
houses always locked and closely watched his hogs and sheep. Washington even
ordered the killing of all slaves’ dogs, because the animals “aid[ed] them in their
night robberies” (pp. 60–61).
20. Thomas Jefferson,Notes on Virginia, 1784–1785, as quoted in Jordan,White
Over Black, pp. 374 and 436.
21. Jordan, White Over Black , p. 436; William Cohen, “Thomas Jefferson and
the Problem of Slavery,”Journal of American History 36 (December 1969): 503–26;
William W. Freehling, “The Founding Fathers and Slavery,” American Historical
Review 77 (February 1972): 81–93.
22. During the war, he had proposed that young free blacks “be colonized to
such place as the circumstances of the time should render most proper, sending out
with arms, implements of household and of the handicraft arts . . . to declare them
a free and independent people, and extend to them our alliance and protection”
( Jordan,White Over Black, pp. 546, 552). Madison’s definition of political democ-
racy explicitly excluded Negroes. In 1820 the former president insisted that the
removal of all Negroes from the United States was imperative: “The repugnance of
the Whites to their continuance among them is founded on prejudices themselves
founded on physical distinctions, which are not likely soon if ever to be eradicat-
ed” (ibid., p. 533).
23. Theoretically, a democratic society required the “complete incorporation” of
freed blacks, Madison wrote in 1788. But racial integration was “rendered impos-
sible by the prejudice of whites, prejudices which proceeding principally from the
difference in colour must be considered as permanent and insuperable”(ibid., pp.
533–34).
24. Lynd, “Beyond Beard,” p. 50.
25. Davis, The Problem of Slavery , pp. 323–25.
26. Ibid., pp. 100, 123–24.
27. US Const, Art I, 9, Clause 1.
28. Davis, The Problem of Slavery , pp. 127–28.
29. US Const, Art I, 2, Clause 3.
1. The Racial Contours of the Constitution | 197


--- PAGE 219 ---
30. US Const, Art IV, 2, Clause 3.
31. Somerset v. Steward, Lofft 1, Eng. Rep. 98, pp. 499, 510 (K.B., 1772) (per
Lord Mansfield, Chief Justice of the King’s Bench).
32. US Const, Art IV, 2, Clause 3.
33. John Hope Franklin, From Slavery to Freedom , 3d ed. (New York: Knopf,
1967), pp. 151–52.
34. Davis, The Problem of Slavery , pp. 130, 323–25.
35. Ibid.
36. Ibid., p. 323; see also Jordan, White Over Black, p. 324.
37. Ibid.
38. Aptheker, A Documentary History of the Negro People , pp. 209–10.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid., pp. 27, 102.
42. Jordan, White Over Black, p. 374.
43. US Const, Amend XIV, 1.
44. Jordan, White Over Black, p. 374.
2. Black History and the Vision of Democracy
Originally published in Harry C. Boyte and Frank Riessman, eds., The New
Populism: The Politics of Empowerment , pp. 198–206 (Philadelphia: Temple
University Press, 1986).
Aptheker, Herbert. American Negro Slave Revolts . New York: International
Publishers, 1963.
Douglass, Frederick. “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” Black Scholar 7
( July–August 1976): 33–37.
Edet, Edna M. “One Hundred Years of Black Protest Music.” Black Scholar 7
( July–August 1976): 38–48.
Fite, Gilbert C. Cotton Fields No More: Southern Agriculture, 1865–1980 .L e x -
ington: University of Kentucky Press, 1984.
Focus 13 (March 1985): 4–5.
Levine, Lawrence W. Black Culture and Black Consciousness: Afro-American Folk
Thought from Slavery to Freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977.
Litwack, Leon F.Been in the Storm So Long: The Aftermath of Slavery. New York:
Knopf, 1979.
Marable, Manning. How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America . Boston:
South End Press, 1983.
Ransom, Roger L., and Richard Sutch. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic
Consequences of Emancipation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1977 Survey of Minority-Owned Business Enter-
prises. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1979.
198 | 1. The Racial Contours of the Constitution


--- PAGE 220 ---
White, Walter.Rope and Faggot. New York: Arno, 1969.
Woodward, C. Vann.Origins of the New South, 1877–1913. Baton Rouge: Lou-
isiana State University Press, 1951.
3. Booker T. Washington and the Political Economy of Black
Accommodation
Originally published in Thomas D. Boston, ed., African American Economic
Thought, Vol. 2, Methodology and Policy , pp. 157–73 (New York and London:
Routledge, 1996); and in Charles W. Eagles, ed., Is There a Southern Political
Tradition? pp. 51–71 ( Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1996).
1. Thomas Holt, Black Over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina
During Reconstruction (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1977), p. 68.
2. Benjamin E. Mays, “Black Colleges: Past, Present, and Future,”Black Scholar
6 (September 1974): 32.
3. J. John Harris, Cleopatra Figgures, and David G. Carter, “A Historical Per-
spective of the Emergence of Higher Education in Black Colleges,” Journal of
Black Studies 6 (September 1975): 56.
4. Mays, “Black Colleges,” p. 32.
5. Daniel C. Thompson, “Black Colleges: Continuing Challenges,” Phylon 40
( June 1979): 185.
6. U.S. Bureau of the Census, The Social and Economic Status of the Black Popu-
lation in the United States: An Historical View, 1790–1978 (Washington, D.C.: Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 1979), pp. 13, 92, 96, 120, 138; Robert William Fogel and
Stanley L. Engerman, Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro Slavery
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1974), p. 125; and Roger Ransom and Richard Sutch,One
Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of Emancipation (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1977), pp. 150–54, 182–85.
7. Gilbert C. Fite, Cotton Fields No More: Southern Agriculture, 1865–1980
(Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1984), p. 32.
8. Florette Henri, Black Migration: Movement North 1900–1920 (Garden City,
N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1976), pp. 39–40; and C. Vann Woodward, Origins of the
New South, 1877–1913 (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1951), p.
213. The average annual death rate of black prisoners leased to private contractors
was 11 percent in Mississippi in 1880–1885. In Arkansas, the death rate was 25
percent in 1881.
9. Sterling D. Spero and Abram L. Harris,The Black Worker: The Negro and the
Labor Movement (New York: Atheneum, 1968), pp. 49–50.
10. Monroe Work, Negro Year Book and Annual Encyclopedia of the Negro (Tus-
kegee, Ala.: Tuskegee Institute Press, 1912), pp. 22, 168, 176–78.
11. Louis R. Harlan, Booker T. Washington: The Making of a Black Leader, 1856–
1901 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1972), pp. 144–46, 255, 272–73, 278–80.
3. Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation | 199


--- PAGE 221 ---
12. Bureau of the Census, Social and Economic Status of the Black Population ,
pp. 14, 72, 73, 76, 78; and August Meier, Negro Thought in America, 1880–1915
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1963), p. 127.
13. Harlan, Washington: Black Leader, p. 141; and Louis R. Harlan, Booker T.
Washington: The Wizard of Tuskegee, 1901–1915 (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1983), pp. 130–31, 135.
14. Jack T. Kirby,Darkness at the Dawning: Race and Reform in the Progressive
South (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1972), p. 171.
15. Meier, Negro Thought, pp. 123–24, 253.
16. Manning Marable, “Booker T. Washington and African Nationalism,”
Phylon 35 (December 1974): 398.
17. P . Olisanwuche Esedebe, Pan-Africanism: The Idea and Movement, 1776–
1963 (Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1982), p. 48.
18. Harlan, Washington: Wizard of Tuskegee, pp. 267–69; and Manning Mara-
ble, “A Black School in South Africa,”Negro History Bulletin 37 ( June–July 1974):
258–61.
19. Harlan, Washington: Black Leader, p. 227.
20. Booker T. Washington, Up from Slavery (1901), in Three Negro Classics
(New York: Avon, 1965), pp. 146–50.
21. Harlan, Washington: Black Leader, pp. 222, 224.
22. Meier, Negro Thought, p. 111.
23. Harlan, Washington: Black Leader, pp. 90–91.
24. Spero and Harris, The Black Worker, pp. 129, 131; and Philip S. Foner,Or-
ganized Labor and the Black Worker, 1619–1973 (New York: International Publish-
ers, 1974), p. 79.
25. Foner, Organized Labor and the Black Worker , p. 99; Woodward, Origins of
the New South , pp. 363–64; and Spero and Harris, The Black Worker , pp. 359,
363–66.
26. Meier, Negro Thought, p. 101.
27. Henri, Black Migration,p .3 3 .
28. Woodward, Origins of the New South , p. 368; and Fite, Cotton Fields No
More,p .2 1 .
29. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Talented Tenth,” in Booker T. Washington et al.,
eds., The Negro Problem, pp. 31–75 (New York: Arno, 1969).
30. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Lecture in Baltimore,” December 1903, in Herbert
Aptheker, ed., Against Racism: Unpublished Essays, Papers, Addresses, 1887–1961,
1887–1961, by W. E. B. Du Bois (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press,
1985), pp. 75–77.
31. Harlan, Washington: Wizard of Tuskegee, pp. 153–55.
32. Oliver Cromwell Cox, “The Leadership of Booker T. Washington,” Social
Forces 30 (1951): 91–97.
33. Louis R. Harlan, Separate and Unequal: Public School Campaigns and Racism
in the Southern Seaboard States, 1901–1915 (New York: Atheneum, 1969), pp. 12,
200 | 3. Booker T. Washington and Black Accommodation


--- PAGE 222 ---
13, 250, 255–58; and Bureau of the Census, Social and Economic Status of the Black
Population,p .1 7 .
34. Woodward,Origins of the New South , pp. 437–39.
35. Henri, Black Migration,p .3 7 .
36. Harlan, Separate and Unequal, pp. 134, 256.
37. Woodward,Origins of the New South, pp. 351–55; C. Vann Woodward,The
Strange Career of Jim Crow (New York: Oxford University Press, 1974), pp. 99,
116–18; and Monroe N. Work,Negro Year Book, 1918–1919 (Tuskegee, Ala.: Tus-
kegee Institute Press, 1919), p. 374.
38. See Michael Reich, Racial Inequality: A Political-Economic Analysis (Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1981), p. 269.
39. Foner,Organized Labor and the Black Worker, pp. 74, 102.
40. Woodward,Origins of the New South , p. 361.
41. Manning Marable, “The Land Question in Historical Perspective: The
Economics of Poverty in the Blackbelt South, 1865–1920,” in Leo McGee and
Robert Boone, eds.,The Black Rural Landowner—Endangered Species: Social, Politi-
cal and Economic Implications , pp. 15–19 (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1979);
and Bureau of the Census, Social and Economic Status of the Black Population,p .1 5 .
42. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Negro and Social Reconstruction,” in Aptheker,
Against Racism, p. 114.
4. W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture
Originally published in Hartmut Heuermann, ed.,Classics in Cultural Criticism,
Vol. 2, pp. 173–94 (Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 1990).
1. W. E. B. Du Bois,The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States
of America, 1638–1870 (New York: Longman, Green, 1896; reissued, New York:
Social Science Press, 1954).
2. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Philadelphia Negro: A Social Study (Philadelphia:
Ginn, 1899).
3. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Negro (New York: Henry Holt, 1915); and W. E. B.
Du Bois, Black Folk Then and Now: An Essay in the History and Sociology of the Negro
Race (New York: Henry Holt, 1939).
4. W. E. B. Du Bois,Black Reconstruction in America: An Essay Toward a History
of the Part Which Black Folk Played in the Attempt to Reconstruct Democracy in Amer-
ica (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1935).
5. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk: Essays and Sketches (Chicago:
McClurg, 1903).
6. Ibid., pp. 3–4.
7. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Scientific Reasons Against Race Antagonism,” Boston
Globe, July 19, 1914.
8. W. E. B. Du Bois, Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil (New York: Har-
court, Brace, 1921; reprint, New York: Schocken, 1969), pp. 30, 42.
4. W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 201


--- PAGE 223 ---
9. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Freedom of Speech,” Crisis 37 (August 1930): 280.
10. W. E. B. Du Bois, “In Black,” Crisis 20 (October 1920): 263, 266.
11. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Criteria of Negro Art,” Crisis 36 (October 1926): 290,
292, 294, 295–97.
12. W. E. B. Du Bois,A Bibliography of Negro Folk Songs(Atlanta: Atlanta Uni-
versity Press, 1903).
13. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 251.
14. W. E. B. Du Bois, “John Work: Martyr and Singer,”Crisis 32 (May 1926):
32–34.
15. W. E. B. Du Bois, review of Congaree Sketches, by Edward Clarkson Lever-
ett Adams, Amsterdam News, August 27, 1927.
16. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Our Music,” Crisis 40 ( July 1933): 165.
17. Gerald Horne, Black and Red: W. E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Re-
sponse to the Cold War, 1944–1963 (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1986), p. 15.
18. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Elizabeth Prophet, Sculptor,” Crisis 36 (December
1929): 407, 427–29. Also see Du Bois, “Can I Become a Sculptor? The Story of
Elizabeth Prophet,” Crisis 39 (October 1932): 315.
19. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Possibilities of the Negro: The Advance Guard of the
Race,” Booklover’s Magazine 2 ( July 1903): 3–15.
20. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Tanner,”Crisis 28 (May 1924): 12.
21. W. E. B. Du Bois, “A Chronicle of Race Relations,”Phylon 1 (1940): 175–92.
22. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Drama Among Black Folk,” Crisis 12 (August
1916): 169, 171–72.
23. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Negro and the American Stage,” Crisis 28 ( June
1924): 56–57.
24. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Autobiography of W. E. B. Du Bois: A Soliloquy on
Viewing My Life from the Last Decade of Its First Century (New York: International
Publishers, 1968), pp. 85, 137.
25. Ibid., p. 270; and Paul Buhle,Marxism in the USA: From 1870 to the Present
Day (London: Verso, 1987), p. 107.
26. Du Bois, “The Drama Among Black Folk.”
27. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Can the Negro Serve the Drama,”Theatre Magazine 38
( July 1923): 12, 68.
28. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Ethiopian Art Theatre,” Crisis 26 ( July 1923):
103–4.
29. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Krigwa Players’ Little Negro Theatre,”Amsterdam
News, October 5, 1927; and Du Bois, “Krigwa,” Crisis 30 ( June 1925): 59.
30. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Beside the Still Water,”Crisis 38 (May 1931): 168–69.
31. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Humor of Negroes,” Mark Twain Quarterly 5
(Fall–Winter 1942–1943): 12.
32. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Prize Fighter,” Crisis 8 (August 1914): 181; and
Du Bois, “As to Pugilism,” Crisis 25 (April 1923): 247.
202 | 4. W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 224 ---
33. W. E. B. Du Bois, “A Chronicle of Race Relations,” Phylon 1 (1940):
90–97; 2 (1941): 388–406.
34. Horne, Black and Red, p. 15; and W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Winds of Time,”
Chicago Defender, May 10, 1947.
35. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Problem of Amusement,” Southern Workman 26
(September 1897): 181–84.
36. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Christmas,” Crisis 3 (December 1911): 65, 68.
37. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Of the Giving of Life,” “Of the Shielding Arm,” “Of
the Grim Thrust,” and “The Frank Truth,” Crisis 4 (October 1912): 287–89.
38. W. E. B. Du Bois, Brownies’ Book 1 ( January 1920): 23–25; Du Bois,
Brownies’ Book 1 (August 1920): 234; and Du Bois, Brownies’ Book 2 (February
1921): 52–53.
39. W. E. B. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn: An Essay Toward an Autobiography of a
Race Concept (New York: Schocken, 1968), pp. 271–72.
40. Elinor Desverney Sinnette “ ‘The Brownies’ Book’: A Pioneer Publication for
Children,” in John Henrik Clarke, Esther Jackson, Ernest Kaiser, and J. H. O’Dell,
eds., Black Titan: W. E. B. Du Bois,pp. 164–75 (Boston: Beacon Press, 1970).
41. W. E. B. Du Bois, letter published in the New York Globe , September 8,
1883.
42. W. E. B. Du Bois, letters published in the New York Globe, December 6,
1884, and December 27, 1884.
43. W. E. B. Du Bois,Moon (March 1906). The only copy in existence is avail-
able at the Moreland Room of the library at Howard University, Washington, D.C.
44. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Negro Writers,”Crisis 19 (April 1920): 298–99.
45. W. E. B. Du Bois, “An Institute of Negro Art,”Crisis 24 ( June 1922): 58–59.
46. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Du Bois Literary Prize,” Crisis 38 (April 1931):
137.
47. See W. E. B. Du Bois, The Quest of the Silver Fleece: A Novel (Chicago: A.
C. McClurg, 1911).
48. See W. E. B. Du Bois, Dark Princess: A Romance (New York: Harcourt,
Brace, 1928); and Manning Marable, W. E. B. Du Bois: Black Radical Democrat
(Boston: Twayne, 1986), p. 133.
49. See W. E. B. Du Bois,The Black Flame: A Trilogy (New York: Mainstream
Publishers): Book 1, The Ordeal of Mansart (1957); Book 2,Mansart Builds a School
(1959); Book 3, Worlds of Color (1961).
50. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Song of the Smoke,” Horizon 1 (February 1907):
4–6.
51. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Tragedy of Atlanta, From the Point of View of the
Negroes,” World Today 11 (November 1906): 1173–75.
52. W. E. B. Du Bois, “A Litany of Atlanta,”The Independent 61 (October 11,
1906): 856–58.
53. Horne, Black and Red, pp. 256–59, 266.
54. “Says Dr. DuBois Would Have Faced Charges,” Afro-American, May 20,
4. W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture | 203


--- PAGE 225 ---
1944, quoted in W. E. B. Du Bois, The Correspondence of W. E. B. Du Bois, Vol. 2,
Selections, 1934–1944, ed. Herbert Aptheker (Amherst: University of Massachu-
setts Press, 1976), pp. 401–2.
55. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn,p .9 4 .
56. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America , p. 703.
5. The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois
Originally published with the title “The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois:
Sociocultural and Political Dimensions of Black Religion,” Southern Quarterly
23, no. 1 (Spring 1985): 15–33.
1. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Immortality,” in Sydney Strong, ed., We Believe in Im-
mortality (New York: Coward-McCann, 1929), p. 18. Despite the title of the book
that includes his essay, Du Bois observed, “My thought on personal immortality is
easily explained, I do not know.”
2. W. E. B. Du Bois,The Autobiography of W. E. B. Du Bois: A Soliloquy on View-
ing My Life from the Last Decade of Its First Century (New York: International Pub-
lishers, 1968), p. 124.
3. W. E. B. Du Bois, As the Crow Flies, Amsterdam News, October 24, 1941.
4. Du Bois, Autobiography,p .5 7 .
5. “Great Barrington News” and “From the Berkshire Hills,” New York Globe,
September 29, 1883; December 29, 1883; and November 22, 1884.
6. W. E. B. Du Bois, Introduction to Milton Rogovin, “Store Front Churches,”
Aperture 10, no. 2 (1962).
7. W. E. B. Du Bois,Dusk of Dawn: An Essay Toward an Autobiography of a Race
Concept (New York: Schocken, 1968), pp. 107–8; and Du Bois, Autobiography,p p .
67, 81–82. Writing at the age of ninety, Du Bois added: “I never did, and indeed,
so strong was the expression of her wishes that never in my life since have I felt at
ease drinking at a bar ....W hen the Murphy crusade for total abstinence swept
the valley, I as a boy was one of the first to don the blue ribbon. I kept the pledge
until I went as a student to Germany.”
8. Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 83, 88. For a time, Du Bois and his mother lived
“next to the horsesheds of the Congregational church.” Du Bois’s family was Epis-
copalian, but he and his mother joined the church, becoming its only “colored
communicants.”
9. Ibid., pp. 82, 89–90.
10. Ibid., p. 103; Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn , p. 22; and W. E. B. Du Bois, The
Correspondence of W. E. B. Du Bois, Vol. 1, Selections, 1877–1934, ed. Herbert Ap-
theker (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1973), p. 5.
11. Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 107, 280.
12. Du Bois, Correspondence, 1:5, 18–19.
13. Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 110–11, 127.
14. Ibid., pp. 114, 115–16.
204 | 4. W. E. B. Du Bois and the Politics of Culture


--- PAGE 226 ---
15. “My journey was done, and behind me lay hill and dale and Life and Death.
How shall man measure Progress there where the dark-faced Josie lies? How many
heartfuls of sorrow shall balance a bushel of wheat? ...A n d  a l l  this life and love
and strife and failure,—is it the twilight of nightfall or the flush of some faint-
dawning day?” (W. E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk: Essays and Sketches
[Greenwich: Fawcett, 1961], p. 64).
16. Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 118–20, 280.
17. Ibid., pp. 114, 119–20.
18. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, pp. 141–42.
19. Ibid., pp. 141–43, 187–91.
20. Ibid., p. 143.
21. Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 124, 127.
22. Ibid., p. 133.
23. Francis L. Broderick, W. E. B. Du Bois: Negro Leader in a Time of Crisis
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1959), pp. 18–19, 23.
24. Du Bois, Autobiography, p. 186.
25. Ibid., pp. 187–88.
26. As quoted in Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 209–10.
27. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Philadelphia Negro: A Social Study (Philadelphia:
Ginn, 1899); Du Bois,The Negroes of Farmville, Virginia: A Social Study(Washing-
ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office, January 1898); Du Bois, ed., Some Efforts
of American Negroes for Their Own Social Betterment: Report of an Investigation under
the Direction of Atlanta University: Together with the Proceedings of the Third Confer-
ence for the Study of the Negro Problems, held at Atlanta University, May 25–28, 1898
(Atlanta: Atlanta University Press, 1898).
28. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 144.
29. Ibid.
30. As quoted in August Meier, Negro Thought in America, 1880–1915: Racial
Ideologies in the Age of Booker T. Washington (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1963), p. 190.
31. Du Bois, Correspondence, 1:131.
32. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Credo,”Independence 57 (October 6, 1904), p. 787; re-
printed in Du Bois, Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil, 1920 (New York: AMS,
1969), pp. 3–4.
33. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Postscript,”Crisis 34 ( July 1927): 167–68.
34. W. E. B. Du Bois, Preface to Reverdy C. Ransom, The Negro: The Hope or
the Despair of Christianity (Boston: Ruth Hill, 1935).
35. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Negro and the Church,” Crisis 6 (October 1913):
291; Du Bois, “Will the Church Remove the Color Line?” Christian Century 48
(December 9, 1931): 1554–56.
36. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Christianity,”Horizon 1 ( June 1907): 3–10.
37. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Opinion” and “The Nine New Bishops,”Crisis 20 (Au-
gust 1920): 165–66, 182.
5. The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois | 205


--- PAGE 227 ---
38. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Methodists,”Crisis 12 ( July 1916): 137; “Opinion,”
Crisis 29 (November 1924): 7.
39. W. E. B. Du Bois, “A Chronicle of Race Relations, 1939,”Phylon 1 (1940):
90–97.
40. Du Bois, Correspondence, 1:308–11.
41. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Church,” Crisis 11 (April 1916): 302.
42. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Editorial,” Fisk Herald 5 ( January 1888): 8.
43. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Careers Open to College-Bred Negroes. Two Addresses
Delivered by Alumni of Fisk University, in Connection with the Anniversary
Exercises of Their Alma Mater.” (Nashville: Fisk University, 1898), pp. 1–14.
44. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Religion of the Negro,” New World 9 (December
1900): 614–25; reprinted as “Of the Faith of the Fathers” in Du Bois, The Souls of
Black Folk, pp. 140–51.
45. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Postscript,”Crisis 38 ( June 1931): 207.
46. W. E. B. Du Bois, ed., The Negro Church: Report on a Social Study Made
under the Direction of Atlanta University: Together with the Proceedings of the Eighth
Conference for the Study of Negro Problems, held at Atlanta University, May 26, 1903
(Atlanta: Atlanta University Press, 1903).
47. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Men of the Month,” Crisis 12 (May 1916); 18.
48. Meier, Negro Thought in America, p. 180, 218–21.
49. Ibid., pp. 186–87. In 1912 Walters was president of the Colored National
Democratic League, which campaigned actively for Woodrow Wilson. Walters so-
licited a statement from the Democratic presidential nominee pledging his com-
mitment to the civil rights of blacks. On the basis of this letter, which Walters later
published in his autobiography, Du Bois tendered his resignation from the So-
cialist Party and publicly supported Wilson. Once elected, Wilson implemented
a strict segregation policy throughout the federal government and repudiated his
promises to the small black electorate (Alexander Walters, My Life and Work
[New York: Fleming H. Revell, 1917], p. 126); Du Bois,Correspondence, 1:211–13;
Du Bois, Autobiography, p. 264.
50. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Postscript,”Crisis 36 ( January 1929): 21–22.
51. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Postscript,” Crisis 39 ( July 1932): 234–35; Du Bois,
As the Crow Flies; Du Bois, “The Winds of Time,” Chicago Defender , January 4,
1947.
52. W. E. B. Du Bois,A Bibliography of Negro Folk Songs(Atlanta: Atlanta Uni-
versity Press, 1903).
53. W. E. B. Du Bois, “John Work: Martyr and Singer,”Crisis 32 (May 1926):
32–34; Du Bois, “Postscript,” Crisis 34 ( July 1927): 167; Du Bois, “Men of the
Month,” Crisis 12 (May 1916): 18; and Du Bois, “Men of the Month,” Crisis 3
(March 1912): 190.
54. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Black Man Brings His Gifts,” Survey Graphic 53
(March 1, 1925): 655–57. Handy was quite pleased with Du Bois’s comments, and
on April 7, 1925, he forwarded an autographed copy of his collection, Blues: An
206 | 5. The Black Faith of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 228 ---
Anthology, to the black leader. Handy noted, “The service you are rendering our
Race in particular and the American people in general . . . is incalculable”
(Du Bois, Correspondence, 1:313).
55. At Fisk University, Du Bois became a member of the Mozart Society. Even
late in life he affirmed, “It did great things for my education” (Du Bois, Autobiog-
raphy, p. 123).
56. Du Bois, Correspondence, 1:328–29.
57. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Men of the Month,” Crisis 15 (March 1918): 229–31.
58. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Our Music,” Crisis 40 ( July 1933): 165.
59. W. E. B. Du Bois, Editorial in Crisis 7 (December 1913): 80–81; Du Bois,
“The Sermon on the Tower,”Crisis 31 (December 1925): 59; Du Bois, Darkwater,
pp. 123–33.
60. Du Bois, As the Crow Flies; Du Bois, “John Brown and Christmas,” Cri-
sis 5 (December 1909): 1–3; Du Bois, “Postscript,” Crisis 35 ( June 1928): 203–4.
61. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Pan-Africa,” People’s Voice [New York] (February 7,
1948); Du Bois, “Shall We Fight for Freedom?” Chicago Defender, April 13, 1946.
Du Bois occasionally suggested in his writings that Christ should appear again, but
only as a Negro (Du Bois, As the Crow Flies).
62. Herbert Aptheker, “The Historian,” in Rayford W. Logan, ed., W. E. B.
Du Bois: A Profile, pp. 249–73 (New York: Hill and Wang, 1971).
63. August Meier and other historians view the contradictory strands of Du
Bois’s public career as “an ambivalence that is perhaps the central motif in his ide-
ological biography.” The duality they describe is fundamental to the political, so-
cial, and psychological behavior of most blacks who live and work in an institu-
tionally racist society. Du Bois’s theoretical achievement is his dialectical unity of
opposites, the ability to create sound political programs on the quicksand of racist
violence and segregation (Meier, Negro Thought in America, p. 190).
64. W. E. B. Du Bois, “St. Francis of Assisi,” Voice of the Negro 4 (October
1906): 419–26.
6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois
Originally published in Bernard Bell, Emily Grosholz, and James Stewart,
eds., W. E. B. Du Bois on Race and Culture: Philosophy, Politics and Poetics ,p p .
193–218 (New York and London: Routledge, 1996).
1. C. L. R. James,The Future in the Present: Selected Writings(Westport, Conn.:
Lawrence Hill, 1990), pp. 202, 208.
2. Kwame Nkrumah, Revolutionary Path (New York: International Publishers,
1973), pp. 42–43; Kwame Nkrumah, Africa Must Unite (New York: International
Publishers, 1970), pp. 122–33, 135.
3. Harold R. Isaacs, “Pan-Africanism as ‘Romantic Racism,”’ in Rayford W.
Logan, ed., W. E. B. Du Bois: A Profile , pp. 213, 240, 242 (New York: Hill and
Wang, 1971).
6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 207


--- PAGE 229 ---
4. Francis L. Broderick,W. E. B. Du Bois: Negro Leader in a Time of Crisis(Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press, 1959), pp. 130, 135–36, 228.
5. Herbert Aptheker, “The Historian,” in Logan,W. E. B. Du Bois, pp. 258–60.
6. W. E. B. du Bois,Dusk of Dawn: An Essay Toward An Autobiography of a Race
Concept (New York: Schocken, 1968), pp. 115–16.
7. Ibid., p. 116.
8. Ibid., p. 111.
9. Isaacs, “Pan-Africanism as ‘Romantic Racism,”’ p. 223.
10. Broderick, W. E. B. Du Bois,p .1 6 .
11. Ibid., p. 20.
12. Not until the publication of Ron T. Takaki’s book A Pro-Slavery Crusade:
The Agitation to Re-open the African Slave Trade (New York: Free Press, 1970) was
there another examination of this issue in any substantial manner.
13. Review by Stephen B. Weeks, American Historical Review 2 (April 1897):
555–59.
14. William Claypole and John Robottom, Caribbean Story , Book 2, The In-
heritors (London: Longman, 1981), pp. 79–80.
15. Manning Marable, “Booker T. Washington and African Nationalism,”Phylon
25 (December 1974): 398. Also see Louis R. Harlan, “Booker T. Washington and
the White Man’s Burden,”American Historical Review71 ( January 1966): 441–67.
16. Claypole and Robottom,Caribbean Story, p. 80; and W. E. B. Du Bois,The
World and Africa: An Inquiry Into the Part Which Africa Has Played in World History
(New York: International Publishers, 1965), pp. 7–8.
17. Robert A. Hill, ed., The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement
Association Papers (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), 1:534.
18. Review in Political Science Quarterly 18 (December 1903): 695–97.
19. Review in The Nation 111 (September 25, 1920): 350–52.
20. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Black Soldier,” Crisis 16 ( June 1918): 2.
21. Isaacs, “Pan-Africanism as ‘Romantic Racism,”’ p. 238.
22. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Migration,” Crisis 7 (February 1914): 190; Du Bois,
“The Latest Craze,” Crisis 11 ( January 1916): 133–34, On Chief Alfred Sam, see
William E. Bittle and Gilbert Geis, The Longest Way Home: Chief Alfred C. Sam’s
Back-to-Africa Movement (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1964); J. Ayo
Langley, “Chief Sam’s African Movement and Race Consciousness in West Af-
rica,” Phylon 32 (Summer 1971): 164–78; and “Chief Alfred Sam,” in Hill, The
Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers , 1:536–47.
23. For example, “Germany,”Crisis 11 (February 1916): 184.
24. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The African Roots of the War,” Atlantic Monthly 115
(May 1915): 707–14.
25. Broderick, W. E. B. Du Bois, p. 129.
26. J. P . Tumulty to W. E. B. Du Bois, November 29, 1918, W. E. B. Du Bois,
The Correspondence of W. E. B. Du Bois , Vol. 1, Selections, 1877–1934, ed. Herbert
Aptheker (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1973), pp. 231—32.
208 | 6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 230 ---
27. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn, p. 260.
28. Ibid., p. 261. Moton was probably distressed to learn that the preeminent
opponent of the “Tuskegee philosophy” was to be his roommate aboard the Orizaba.
29. “The Future of Africa,” Advocate of Peace 81 ( January 1919): 12–13; and
“Letters from Dr. Du Bois,” December 8 and 14, 1918, in Crisis 17 (February
1919): 161–62.
30. F. P . Schoonmaker, Major, General Staff, to Intelligence Officers, Secret
Memo, January 1, 1919, Du Bois, Correspondence, 1:232. Du Bois soon obtained a
copy of the secret order, which was stamped by division headquarters.
31. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Pan-African Movement,” in Philip S. Foner, ed.,
W. E. B. Du Bois Speaks: Speeches and Addresses, 1920–1963 , p. 163 (New York:
Pathfinder Press, 1972).
32. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn, p. 261.
33. George Padmore,Pan-Africanism or Communism (Garden City, N.Y.: Path-
finder Press, 1972), p. 98.
34. James, The Future in the Present, p. 207.
35. Of the heroic conduct among French West African troops during the war,
Du Bois wrote: “Against the banked artillery of the magnificent German Army
were sent untrained and poorly armed Senegalese. They marched at command in
unwavering ranks, raising the war cry in a dozen different Sudanese tongues. When
the artillery belched they shivered, but never faltered. They marched straight into
death; the war cries became fainter and fainter and dropped into silence as not a sin-
gle black man was left living on that field” (The World and Africa,p .7 ) .
36. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, pp. 98–99.
37. Du Bois, The World and Africa,p .1 0 .
38. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn, p. 262.
39. Du Bois, The World and Africa , p. 10. Padmore notes that “the American
officials in President Wilson’s entourage were afraid that the Congress might dis-
cuss, among other things, the lynching of Negroes in the United States and the
treatment of Afro-American troops in France. The American statesmen had
good reason to be alarmed, for apart from maintaining racial segregation between
black and white troops serving under the Stars and Stripes, the US Army author-
ities in France tried to impose their racial prejudices on the French people” (Pad-
more, Pan-Africanism or Communism , pp. 99–100). Also see “The Denial of Pass-
ports,” Crisis 17 (March 1919): 237–38; and “Negro Passports Refused,” Messen-
ger 2 (March 1919): 4.
40. Du Bois, The World and Africa,p .1 0 .
41. James, The Future in the Present, p. 207.
42. Du Bois, The World and Africa, pp. 11–12.
43. Nkrumah, Africa Must Unite, p. 133.
44. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, p. 103.
45. Ibid., pp. 104–5. In his capacity as Pan-African Conference secretary, Du
Bois also notified U.S. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes and Sir Auckland
6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 209


--- PAGE 231 ---
Geddes, British ambassador to the United States, that a second meeting would be
held. He emphasized to Hughes that it “has nothing to do with the so-called Gar-
vey movement and contemplates neither force nor revolution in its program.” See
Du Bois to Hughes, June 23, 1921, and Hughes to Du Bois, July 8, 1921, Du Bois,
Correspondence, 1:250–51.
46. Du Bois, “The Pan-African Movement,” in Foner,W. E. B. Du Bois Speaks,
pp. 169–71.
47. Du Bois, The World and Africa , pp. 240–41; Padmore, Pan-Africanism or
Communism, p. 112.
48. Du Bois, The World and Africa, p. 240.
49. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, pp. 110–11.
50. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn, pp. 277–78.
51. Hill, The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association
Papers, 1:cxv–cxvii.
52. Extracts from Garvey speech, Baltimore, December 18, 1918, in ibid.,
p. 332.
53. The other delegates selected were the black socialist journalist Asa Philip
Randolph and anti-lynching activist Ida B. Wells Barnett (D. Davidson, “Bureau
of Investigation Reports,” December 5, 1918, in ibid., pp. 377–81).
54. Garvey scholar Robert A. Hill suggests that Garvey himself wrote these
speeches. Garvey, Editorial, Negro World, March 1, 1919, in ibid., pp. 377–81.
55. Cadet’s charges against Du Bois had been sent on either March 22 or 23,
1919, but Du Bois had left France on March 22. Cadet quickly tired of pursuing
the unia’s agenda at the peace conference and for most of the remainder of the
year worked in Paris as an auto mechanic. He returned to Haiti in late 1919 and
eventually “became a vodun high priest of the cult of Damballah (the serpent god)”
(ibid., pp. 308, 393).
56. “Addresses Denouncing W. E. B. Du Bois,”Negro World, April 5, 1919, in
ibid., pp. 395–96.
57. Ibid., p. 399.
58. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Marcus Garvey,” Crisis 21 (December 1920): 58–60,
and 21 ( January 1921): 112–15.
59. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, p. 106.
60. Ibid., pp. 106–7.
61. Theodore G. Vincent, Black Power and the Garvey Movement (San Fran-
cisco: Ramparts Press, 1972), p. 58.
62. John Henrik Clarke, ed.,Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa (New York:
Vintage Books, 1974), p. 97. As Clarks writes, Garvey and Du Bois were both
“Pan-Africanists and both of them had as their objectives the freedom and re-
demption of African people everywhere. Yet, there was no meeting of minds on the
methods of reaching these desirable goals” (p. 97).
63. Du Bois, The World and Africa, p. 241.
64. Ibid., p. 242; Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, pp. 117–20.
210 | 6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 232 ---
65. Nkrumah, Africa Must Unite , p. 133. Also see W. E. B. Du Bois, “Pan-
Africa in Portugal,” Crisis 27 (February 1924): 170.
66. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Opinion,”Crisis 32 (October 1926): 283.
67. Du Bois, The World and Africa, p. 242.
68. Du Bois, “Opinion,” Crisis 32 (October 1926): 283.
69. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, p. 121.
70. Du Bois, The World and Africa, p. 243.
71. “The Pan-African Congresses,” Crisis 34 (October 1927): 263–64. Marx’s
statement on race and class oppression is “Labor with a white skin cannot emanci-
pate itself where labor with a black skin is branded.” In 1914 Du Bois stated the same
concept: “So long as black laborers are slaves, white laborers cannot be free.” See
Manning Marable, “Why Black Americans Are Not Socialists,” in Phyllis and Julius
Jacobson, eds.,Socialist Perspectives, pp. 63–95 (New York: Karz-Cohl, 1983).
72. Du Bois, The World and Africa, p. 243.
73. Du Bois, “Postscript,” Crisis 36 (December 1929): 423–24.
74. Du Bois, “The Winds of Time,” Chicago Defender, September 29, 1945.
Historians disagree as to the actual relationship between Williams and Padmore.
Padmore himself claimed kinship to Williams in a personal letter to Du Bois, but
Padmore biographer James R. Hooker confirms that the two men were not relat-
ed. See James R. Hooker, Black Revolutionary: George Padmore’s Path from Commu-
nism to Pan-Africanism (New York: Praeger, 1967).
75. Azinna Nwafor, “The Revolutionary as Historian: Padmore and Pan-
Africanism,” in Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism ,p .x x v .
76. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, pp. 111, 117.
77. Robert A. Hill, “C. L. R. James in England, 1932–1938,”Urgent Tasks,n o .
12 (Summer 1981): 19–27.
78. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, p. 123.
79. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Autobiography of W. E. B. Du Bois: A Soliloquy on
Viewing My Life from the Last Decade of Its First Century (New York: International
Publishers, 1968), pp. 344–45.
80. W. E. B. Du Bois, As the Crow Flies, Amsterdam News, June 22, 1940; As
the Crow Flies, Amsterdam News, December 26, 1942.
81. W. E. B. Du Bois to George A. Finch, February 11, 1941, W. E. B. Du Bois,
The Correspondence of W. E. B. Du Bois , Vol. 2, Selections, 1934–1944, ed. Herbert
Aptheker (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1976), p. 277.
82. W. E. B. Du Bois to Amy Jacques Garvey, February 9, 1944; Garvey to Du
Bois, April 4, 1944; Garvey to Du Bois, April 5, 1944; Du Bois to Paul Robeson,
April 7, 1944; Du Bois to Harold Moody, April 7, 1944; Du Bois to Garvey, April
8, 1944; Garvey to Du Bois, April 24, 1944; Garvey to Du Bois, April 26, 1944,
in ibid., pp. 375–83.
83. Du Bois, Autobiography, p. 326.
84. James became the leading black theoretician of the Workers Party during
the early 1940s. But he and his faction, the “Johnson-Forest tendency,” feuded with
6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois | 211


--- PAGE 233 ---
the orthodox Trotskyists over the nature of the Soviet Union and other issues relat-
ed to race, class, and social change in the Third World and in advanced capitalist
societies. James’s other associates of the period who became Marxist theorists of
note include Grace Lee (now Grace Lee Boggs) and Ray Dunayevskaya. See Paul
Buhle, “Marxism in the USA,” and James and Grace Lee Boggs, “A Critical Remi-
niscence,” Urgent Tasks, no. 12 (Summer 1981): 28–38, 86–87; C. L. R. James,
Modern Politics: Selected Writings (Westport, Conn.: Lawrence Hill, 1980); and
C. L. R. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution (Westport, Conn.: Lawrence
Hill, 1977).
85. C. L. R. James, “Kwame Nkrumah: Founder of African Emancipation,”
Black World 21 ( July 1972): 4–10.
86. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, pp. 132–33.
87. W. E. B. Du Bois to J. B. Danquah, September 12, 1944; Du Bois to Nor-
man W. Manley, October 10, 1944, in W. E. B. Du Bois, The Correspondence of
W. E. B. Du Bois , Vol. 3, Selections, 1944–1963, ed. Herbert Aptheker (Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 1978), pp. 1–3.
88. Du Bois had learned about the proposed meeting from a press release pub-
lished in the March 17, 1945, issue of the Chicago Defender . It is curious why
Padmore chose not to inform Du Bois directly. Aptheker suggests that “while Du
Bois and Padmore knew each other before, during the work that led to this con-
gress they became friends, though significant disagreements marked their rela-
tionships” (Du Bois to Padmore, March 22, 1945, in ibid., pp. 56–57).
89. Du Bois to Padmore, April 11, 1945; Padmore to Du Bois, April 12, 1945;
Du Bois to Padmore, July 9, 1945; Du Bois to Padmore, July 20, 1945; Padmore
to Du Bois, August 17, 1945, in ibid., pp. 60–61.
90. Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, pp. 139–48.
91. Ibid., p. 139.
92. Ibid., pp. 141–42.
93. Ibid., p. 115.
94. Du Bois, The World and Africa, pp. 258–59.
7. Political Intellectuals in the African Diaspora
1. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks , ed. Quinton Hoare
and G. Nowell Smith (London: International Publishers, 1971), p. 3.
2. Ibid., p. 12.
3. Ibid., p. 10.
4. Tony Martin,Literary Garveyism: Garvey, Black Arts, and the Harlem Renais-
sance (Dover, Mass.: Majority Press, 1983), p. 92.
5. Ibid., p. 15.
6. Claude McKay, The Negroes in America , ed. Alan L. McLeod (Port Wash-
ington, N.Y.: Kennikat Press, 1970), p. 73.
7. Reprinted in Addison Gayle, Jr., ed.,The Black Aesthetic (Garden City, N.Y.:
Anchor Books, 1972), p. 167.
212 | 6. The Pan-Africanism of W. E. B. Du Bois


--- PAGE 234 ---
8. Martin, Literary Garveyism,p .8 .
9. Ibid., pp. 31–32, 39–49, 64, 77.
10. P . Olisanwuche Esedebe, Pan-Africanism: The Idea and Movement, 1776–
1963 (Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press. 1982), pp. 95–96, 100, 104.
11. Ibid., pp. 105–6.
8. Peace and Black Liberation: The Contributions of W. E. B. Du Bois
Originally published in Science and Society 47 (Winter 1983–1984): 15–33.
1. See Mark Sapir, “Jobs with Peace: Extending the Peace Movement,” WIN
(February 1983): 8–10; Special Issue, “Directions for Disarmament,” WIN (No-
vember 1982); Employment Research Associates,The Price of the Pentagon: The In-
dustrial and Commercial Impact of the 1981 Military Budget (Lansing, Mich., 1982).
2. Melvin B. Tolson, “A Legend of Versailles,” in Dudley Randall, ed., The
Black Poets (New York, 1971), p. 118.
3. Ibid., p. 82.
4. Andrew Young, “Tribute to Paul Robeson,” in Paul Robeson: Tributes, Selected
Writings (New York: International Publishers, 1976), p. 27.
5. This is not, by any means, to minimize the many decisive contributions of
Paul Robeson to the legacy of the American peace movements. The point here is
that Robeson and Du Bois played different roles in the same struggle. Robeson was
much more influential than Du Bois as a cultural and political symbol of resistance.
6. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Credo,”Independent 57 (October 15, 1904): 787.
7. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Books,” Horizon 1 ( June 1907): 10. This is not to say
that Du Bois was ever really a pacifist. As he noted in his autobiography, “I revered
life. I have never killed a bird nor shot a rabbit ....N e a r l y  a l l  o f  m y  s choolmates
in the South carried pistols. I never owned one. I could never conceive of myself
killing a human being. But in 1906 I rushed from Alabama to Atlanta where my
wife and six-year-old child were living. A mob had raged for days killing Negroes.
I bought a Winchester double-barreled shotgun and two dozen rounds of shells
filled with buckshot. If a white mob had stepped on the campus where I lived I
would without hesitation have sprayed their guts over the grass” (Du Bois, The
Autobiography of W. E. B. Du Bois: A Soliloquy on Viewing My Life from the Last Dec-
ade of Its First Century (New York: International Publishers, 1968), p. 286.
8. W. E. B. Du Bois, Brownies’ Book 2 (September 1921): 271–72.
9. New York Times, October 27, 1931.
10. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Peace, Freedom’s Road for Oppressed Peoples,”Worker,
April 17, 1949, p. 8.
11. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The World Peace Movement,” New World Review
(May 1955): 9–14.
12. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The African Roots of War,”Atlantic Monthly 115 (May
1915): 707–14.
13. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Peace,”Crisis 10 (May 1915): 27.
8. Peace and Black Liberation | 213


--- PAGE 235 ---
14. Robert C. Tucker, ed.,The Lenin Anthology (New York: Norton, 1975), pp.
261, 266–67.
15. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Opinion,”Crisis 26 (October 1923): 248. It seems evi-
dent that Du Bois did not actually begin to study Lenin’s imperialism until the
Cold War, when he was in his eighties. On December 21, 1954, he asked Marxist
historian Herbert Aptheker for “the best logical follow-up” to Lenin’s study. “It
leaves me a little dissatisfied, or perhaps I would better say, a little at sea in my own
thinking.” See Du Bois to Aptheker, December 21, 1954; Aptheker to Du Bois,
December 24, 1954, in Du Bois, The Correspondence of W. E. B. Du Bois , Vol. 3,
Selections 1944–1963, ed. Herbert Aptheker (Amherst: University of Massachu-
setts Press, 1978), p. 378.
16. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Winds of Time,” Chicago Defender, January 11,
1947.
17. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Opinion,”Crisis 31 (March 1926): 215.
18. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Union of Colour,”Aryan Path (Bombay) 7 (October
1936): 483–84.
19. W. E. B. Du Bois, As the Crow Flies,Amsterdam News, February 14, 1942;
February 21, 1942; May 9, 1942.
20. W. E. B. Du Bois, As the Crow Flies, Amsterdam News, March 8, 1947.
21. W. E. B. Du Bois, Review of Crusader Without Nonviolence, by L. D. Red-
dick, National Guardian, November 9, 1959. In other essays, of course, Du Bois
was very positive in his opinion of King and his version of Gandhi’s satyagraha.S e e
Du Bois, “Gandhi and the American Negroes,” Gandhi Marg 1 ( July 1957): 1–4;
and “Portrait of a Scholar,” Pittsburgh Courier, August 24, 1957, p. 6.
22. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Peace,”Crisis 6 (May 1913): 26.
23. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Realities in Africa: European Profit or Negro De-
velopment,” Foreign Affairs 21 ( July 1943): 721–32.
24. W. E. B. Du Bois, “A Chronicle of Race Relations,”Phylon 5 (1944): 68–69.
25. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Imperialism, United Nations, and Colonial People,”New
Leader, December 30, 1944: 5. Max Gordon, a prominent Communist Party writer,
attacked this essay in the January 5, 1945, issue of the Daily Worker. Significantly,
James W. Ford, a founder of the American Negro Labor Congress and the Com-
munist Party’s vice presidential candidate in 1932, 1936, and 1940, privately apolo-
gized to Du Bois for Gordon’s remarks. “I had hoped to make some comment on
some of your views on the Colonial question with which I do not agree.” He added,
“Nevertheless, I want you to know that I disagree entirely with . . . the Daily Worker
article by Max Gordon, who incidentally expressed his own individual opinion.” See
Ford to Du Bois, January 8, 1945, Du Bois to Ford, January 17, 1945, in Du Bois,
Correspondence, 3:28.
26. W. E. B. Du Bois, “The Rape of Africa,” American Negro 1 (February
1956): 6–13; and Du Bois, “Africa and World Peace,” Bulletin of the World Peace
Council ( June 1960): 16. During these years Du Bois wrote dozens of articles on
the African liberation movements and the relationships between the end of Euro-
214 | 8. Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 236 ---
pean colonialism and the realization of world peace. See, for example, Du Bois,
“Pan Africa,” People’s Choice, April 12 and 26, 1947, May 3, 1947, and various other
issues through March 6, 1948. Also see Du Bois, “Colonial Peoples and the Fight
for Peace,” New Africa (April 1949); Du Bois, “To Save the World—Save Africa!”
New Africa (May 1949); and Du Bois, “Repression Madness Rules South Africa,”
New Africa (May–June 1950).
27. Kwame Nkrumah to Du Bois, November 4, 1946, Du Bois,Correspondence,
3:158–59.
28. Du Bois, “The Winds of Time,” Chicago Defender, June 23, 1945.
29. The council had been formed almost a decade before by Max Hergan, a
black activist in the ymca, and Robeson. Du Bois had been interested in working
with the council for some time but was rebuffed by the politically conservative
Yergan. As Du Bois informed Pan-Africanist leader George Padmore in 1946, the
council “has a constituency and is doing good work. It is charged that the Council
is financed by the Communists, which is probably true. I wanted their cooperation
but was not able to ask them officially because of the hesitation of the naacp.”
Finally, with Yergan’s departure from the council and Du Bois’s firing from the
naacp, joint work was possible. See Du Bois to Padmore, July 12, 1946, Du Bois,
Correspondence, 3:141–44.
30. Du Bois, Autobiography, p. 345.
31. Ibid., p. 350.
32. Ibid., pp. 350–55.
33. Ibid., pp. 358–59.
34. Ibid., pp. 361–62.
35. Du Bois to Du Bois Williams (his granddaughter), October 27, 1950, and
December 4, 1950; Du Bois to Arthur Shutzer, January 24, 1952; Shutzer to Du
Bois, January 28, 1952; Du Bois, Correspondence, 3:296–99, 331–32.
36. William E. Foley, Chief, Foreign Agents Registration Section, to Peace In-
formation Center, August 11, 1950; Du Bois to McGrath, undated; Du Bois to
Foley, January 1951, Du Bois, Correspondence, 3:306–9.
37. Du Bois, Autobiography, p. 369.
38. Ibid., pp. 350–55.
39. The naacp’s repudiation of Du Bois hurt him deeply. In his private cor-
respondence to Judge Hubert T. Delany, he admitted, “I have heretofore refrained
from any attack upon the naacp, since it is, in part, my child. But since this indict-
ment the executive officers of the naacp have warned and frightened their branch-
es from helping in my defense, and on the very day of the verdict, Walter White
was telling persons at a meeting in Milwaukee that my guilt was proven by irref-
utable evidence in the hands of the Department of Justice” (Du Bois to Delany,
December 21, 1951, Du Bois, Correspondence, 3:322–23).
40. George Padmore to Du Bois, March 21, 1951; Du Bois to Padmore, April
11, 1951, ibid., pp. 311–13.
41. Frederic Joliot-Curie to Du Bois, November 28, 1951, ibid., p. 320.
8. Peace and Black Liberation | 215


--- PAGE 237 ---
42. Du Bois, Autobiography, p. 374.
43. Reverdy C. Ransom to the National Council of the Arts, Sciences, and
Professions, October 26, 1951, Du Bois, Correspondence, 3:317–18.
44. Du Bois to Albert Einstein, November 29, 1951; Hubert T. Delany to Du
Bois, November 27, 1951, Du Bois, Correspondence, 3:320–21.
45. Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 394–95. Only when Du Bois reached the age
of ninety did the naacp give evidence of some relaxation of its hostility. Hesitantly
and somewhat belatedly, it expressed willingness to pay tribute on the occasion of
the impressive ninetieth birthday celebration organized, in the main, by left-wing
political groups and friends.
46. R. B. Shipley to Du Bois, February 12, 1952, Du Bois, Correspondence,
3:332.
47. Du Bois, Autobiography, pp. 394–95.
48. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Negroes and the Crisis of Capitalism,”Monthly Review
4 (April 1953): 478–85.
49. “Du Bois Charges Nixon Trying to Lead Us to War,” Los Angeles Tribune,
June 4, 1954.
50. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Formosa and Peace,”Jewish Life 9 (March 1955): 20.
51. W. E. B. Du Bois, “Colonialism and the Russian Revolution,” New World
Review (November 1956): 18–22.
52. George Padmore to Du Bois, December 3, 1954; Du Bois to Padmore, De-
cember 10, 1954; Du Bois to Padmore, January 27, 1955; Carlton B. Goodlett to
Du Bois, June 26, 1957; Du Bois to Goodlett, July 6, 1957; Du Bois to W. A. Do-
mingo, June 11, 1957; Domingo to Du Bois, August 11, 1957, Du Bois,Correspon-
dence, 3:373–75, 408–12.
53. Du Bois to Gus Hall, October 1, 1961, Du Bois,Correspondence, 3:439–40.
54. Francis L. Broderick, W. E. B. Du Bois: Negro Leader in a Time of Crisis
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1959), pp. 228–29.
55. David L. Lewis, King: A Critical Biography (New York: Praeger, 1970),
p. 376.
9. Harold Washington’s Chicago: Race, Class Conflict, and
Political Change
Originally published in Research in Urban Sociology 1 (1989): 81–105.
1. See Abdul Alkalimat and Doug Gills, “Black Political Protest and the May-
oral Victory of Harold Washington: Chicago Politics, 1983,” Radical America 17
(October 1983): 11–127; Florence Levinson,Harold Washington: A Political Biogra-
phy (Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 1983); Paul Kleppner, Chicago Divided: The
Making of a Black Mayor (De Kalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 1985); and
Manning Marable, Black American Politics: From the Washington Marches to Jesse
Jackson (London: Verso, 1985), especially ch. 4, pp. 191–246.
2. Marable, Black American Politics, p. 229.
216 | 8. Peace and Black Liberation


--- PAGE 238 ---
3. “Worst Racial Fears Put to Rest,”in Mayor Washington’s Chicago: A Critical
Examination(Special reprint of a series in the Chicago Sun-Times), October 12, 1986.
4. “How Poor Fare with Mayor,” ibid., pp. 20–21.
5. David Moberg, “The Man Who Wants to Break the Mold,”Chicago 32 (Oc-
tober 1983): 171.
6. John Schrag and Diane Reis, “Other Governments Push MBE Programs,”
Chicago Reporter 16 ( January 1987): 4. The city’s record for equal opportunity for
blacks, women, Hispanics, and other minorities improved under Washington, but
progress was slow. According to researchers Gregory D. Squires and Wendy Winter-
mute: “The current structure for implementing contract compliance in the city of
Chicago is a kaleidoscope of shifting responsibilities, programs and statistics. Any
contract compliance efforts undertaken by the city (and these appear to be few) are
at present dispersed throughout the departments with unclear lines of authority....
Monitoring is, in fact, impossible, since the necessary information is not systemati-
cally collected or reviewed. No information regarding minority employment by city
contractors—indeed, no information of any kind regarding city contracts—is readi-
ly available for monitoring purposes” (p. 20). See Gregory D. Squires and Wendy
Wintermute, Equal Opportunity in City Contracts: An Examination in Chicago’s Con-
tract Compliance Program(Chicago: Chicago Urban League, 1984).
7. Fred Marc Biddle, “City’s Hispanic Businesses Need Help, Study Shows,”
Chicago Tribune, October 6, 1986.
8. Brian Kelly, “The Washington Administration: A Mid-Term Survey,” Chi-
cago 34 (April 1985): 183; and Harold Washington, “Politics, Plans, and Priorities,”
Chicago 33 ( January 1984): 154. Mier is the former director of the Center for Ur-
ban Economic Development at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
9. Moberg, “The Man Who Wants to Break the Mold,” p. 176.
10. Kelly, “The Washington Administration,” p. 183; and Brian Kelly, “Harold
Washington’s Balancing Act,”Chicago 34 (April 1985): 200–201.
11. Statement by Richard Saks in “On the Cutting Edge in Chicago Politics,”
Forward Motion 5 (October–December 1986): 16. An excellent background study
on the economic factors influencing the Washington administration’s strategy is
David Flax-Hatch and Wendy Wintermute, Structural Changes in Illinois Employ-
ment: An Analysis of Growth and Decline Industries (Chicago: Chicago Urban
League, 1985).
12. E. R. Shipp, “Chicago’s Mayor Can Act As a Majority of One,” New York
Times, May 4, 1986; E. R. Shipp, “Chicago Mayor’s Bloc Has Its Debut,”New York
Times, May 10, 1986; Curtis Black, “Three Years After Winning Office, Mayor
Washington Wins Power,”Guardian, May 14, 1986; E. R. Shipp, “Chicago Mayor
Backed on Control of Council,”New York Times, June 14, 1986; and David Fremon,
“Religion/Politics: New Mix Makes Hispanic History,”Chicago Reporter15 (August
1986): 6–7. Gutierrez consciously “sought relationships with the churches, particu-
larly the evangelical ones” during his successful aldermanic race in 1986. He held
prayer vigils, initiated public rallies with prayers, and held breakfast sessions with
9. Harold Washington’s Chicago | 217


--- PAGE 239 ---
clergy. The churches were instrumental in registering several thousand Hispanic
voters, most of whom supported Gutierrez.
13. Steve Neal, “Tax Boost Slices Mayor’s Lead,”Chicago Tribune, October 30,
1986; Curtis Black, “Washington Rolls Over White Machine,”Guardian, October
15, 1986; and Ann Marie Lipinski and James Strong, “Mayor Holds Ax Over Gar-
bage, Health Agencies,” Chicago Tribune, September 19, 1986. Without a tax hike,
the city would have been forced to dismiss 10,666 employees, shutting down one-
third of its public mental care centers and half of its health clinics.
14. Andrew H. Malcolm, “Chicago Expecting a Three-Way Campaign,”
New York Times , December 7, 1986; and Curtis Black, “Get Ready for Another
Round of Racist Politics,” Guardian, December 31, 1986.
15. John Kass, “Daley Revives Mayoral Vote Plan,”Chicago Tribune, November
24, 1986. A September 1986 poll by the Chicago Tribune indicated that almost
three-fourths of all white voters favored a nonpartisan election, with 17 percent
against. Only 23 percent of all black voters polled favored a nonpartisan race.
16. Manuel Galvan, “Mayor to Fight Ballot Ruling,” Chicago Tribune, August
22, 1986; “Referendum Plan Invalid,” New York Times , November 2, 1986; and
Black, “Get Ready for Another Round of Racist Politics.” In July 1986 Washing-
ton’s supporters on the city council voted to place three advisory referendums on
the February 1987 ballot, which technical ly voided Daley’s referendum from the
election. Illinois law states that only three referendums may be placed on the bal-
lot of any single election. Chicago Board of Election commissioners ignored this
provision of state law, as well as thousands of gross irregularities and forgeries on
the referendum petitions.
17. John Kass and Mitchell Locin, “Court Winds Up As a Final Campaign
Stop,” Chicago Tribune, February 24, 1987; and Andrew H. Malcolm, “Chicago Is
Electing Candidates for Mayor Today,”New York Times, February 24, 1987.
18. Steve Neal, “Mayor’s Lead Over Byrne Widens in Poll, Chicago Tribune,
December 22, 1986. In December 1986 the Tribune’s poll gave Washington a sub-
stantial lead over Byrne, 54 to 38 percent.
19. Steve Neal and Jack Houston, “Vrdolyak to Wage Vote ‘War,”’Chicago Trib-
une, November 13, 1986; and John Camper, “Hynes Has a Small But Strong Base,”
Chicago Tribune, December 24, 1986.
20. Mitchell Locin, “For Vrdolyak, Fame Is a Drawback,”Chicago Tribune, De-
cember 24, 1986; Malcolm, “Chicago Expecting a Three-Way Campaign,” and
Andrew H. Malcolm, “Vrdolyak Closer to a Chicago Race,” New York Times ,
November 13, 1986.
21. Steve Neal, “Vrdolyak to Join Mayor’s Race,” Chicago Tribune, November
12, 1986; and Steve Neal, “Vrdolyak Targets the Little Guy,”Chicago Tribune,N o -
vember 17, 1986.
22. Comments by Luis Gutierrez, in “On the Cutting Edge in Chicago Pol-
itics,” pp. 22–23.
23. Moberg, “The Man Who Wants to Break the Mold,” p. 175. This is not to
218 | 9. Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 240 ---
suggest that racism was the “ideological glue” that held Vrdolyak’s city council
together for three years. Patronage and financial interests were the chief motivat-
ing factors behind Vrdolyak, Burke, and others. Racial appeals were a cynical tac-
tic to cement the allegiance of white workers and the poor to a political agenda
that was antithetical to their own interests.
24. Chip Berlet, “Klan Inspires Violence During Chicago Rallies,” Monitor 1
(September 1986): 2; and M. Treloar and Julia Zeta, “Stamping Out Racism, Ho-
mophobia in Chicago,” Guardian, July 23, 1986.
25. Black, “Washington Rolls Over White Machine.”
26. John Camper, Cheryl Devall, and John Kass, “The Road to City Hall: A
Half-Century of Black Political Evolution,” Chicago Tribune, November 16, 1986.
27. Luis Gutierrez and Robert Starks in “On the Cutting Edge in Chicago
Politics,” pp. 8, 28.
28. Black, “Get Ready for Another Round of Racist Politics.” In November
1986 allies of both Jesse Jackson and Washington sponsored a resolution before the
Democratic National Committee (dnc) that would have censured the attempts to
create a white united front candidate against the incumbent. The resolution was
defeated. Later, dnc chairman Paul Kirk declared that the national party “would
support whoever won the Democratic primary.”
29. Richard Saks in “On the Cutting Edge in Chicago Politics,” p. 18.
30. Neal, “Mayor’s Lead Over Byrne Widens in Poll”; and Black, “Get Ready
for Another Round of Racist Politics.”
31. “Keeping Current,” Chicago Reporter 16 (March 1987): 10; and John
Schrag, “Competing Demands for ‘Our Fair Share’ Strain Ties That Bind Tenuous
Alliance,” Chicago Reporter 16 ( July 1987): 7.
32. Michael Kiefer, “New Faces, Old Dreams,”Chicago 33 (March 1984): 127–
30; Jorge Casuso and Eduardo Camacho, “The Puerto Ricans,” Chicago Reporter
13 (December 1984): 1–4; Jorge Casuso and Eduardo Camacho, “Hispanics in
Chicago: Conclusion,” Chicago Reporter 14 (April 1985): 1–4. According to the
1980 Census, Cubans clearly represent an elite socioeconomic stratum within the
Hispanic community, while Puerto Ricans remain the most oppressed major
group, in terms of unemployment, residential discrimination, vocational discrimi-
nation, substandard health care, and other criteria. Cubans are disproportionately
represented among Chicago’s managers and professional class (17.2 percent of all
Cubans versus 8.6 percent of Puerto Ricans and 6.4 percent of Mexican Ameri-
cans), and a large percentage of Cuban families earned more than $30,000 annu-
ally in 1980 (29.8 percent versus 16.8 percent for Mexican Americans and 9.2 per-
cent for Puerto Ricans).
33. Schrag, “Competing Demands for ‘Our Fair Share,”’ pp. 1, 7–8; and David
Fremon, “Religion/Politics: New Mix Makes Hispanic History,” Chicago Reporter
15 (August 1986): 6–7.
34. Kiefer, “New Faces, Old Dreams,” pp. 127, 130–33.
35. Schrag, “Competing Demands for ‘Our Fair Share,”’ p. 8.
9. Harold Washington’s Chicago | 219


--- PAGE 241 ---
36. Kevin B. Blackstone, “Chicago’s Arab-Americans Fight Ethnic Stereo-
types,” Chicago Reporter 15 (April 1986): 1–5.
37. Schrag, “Competing Demands for ‘Our Fair Share,”’ p. 9; and Treloar and
Zeta, “Stamping Out Racism, Homophobia in Chicago.”
38. Kelly, “Harold Washington’s Balancing Act,” p. 200; and Curtis Black, “Re-
elected Mayor to Push ‘Action Agenda,”’ Guardian, April 22, 1987. Jean Mayer, a
leader of the Southwest Parish and Neighborhood Federation, states that Wash-
ington received a poor reception at the white ethnic convention in 1984: “[He] lis-
tened to us say some not very nice things about him [but] showed a lot of guts and
took it like a man.”
39. Kelly, “Harold Washington’s Balancing Act,” pp. 182–83. Of blacks in the
eleven largest metropolitan areas in the United States, blacks in Chicago ranked
lowest overall in a number of social indicators. The disparity between white and
black median family incomes was greatest ($25,644 versus $12,716 in 1980 income);
the percentage of blacks below the poverty level was highest (34.5 percent); the dif-
ference in labor force participation rates between whites and blacks was greatest
(66.3 percent for whites versus 56.6 percent for blacks). See Chicago Urban League,
Research and Planning Department, A Perspective on the Socio-Economic Status of
Chicago-Area Blacks (Chicago: Chicago Urban League, 1983).
40. Schrag, “Competing Demands for ‘Our Fair Share,”’ p. 7.
41. Julio Ojeda, “Analysis of Hispanic Precincts Shows Mexican/Puerto Rican
Split,”Chicago Reporter16 (April 1987): 4; and Raymond Davis and Manuel Galvan,
“Washington Wins at Wire,”Chicago Tribune, February 25, 1987.
42. Sheila Jones, a member of the ultra right-wing political cult of Lyndon La
Rouche, sought the Democratic mayoral nomination and received fewer than three
thousand votes. See R. Bruce Dodd and Mitchell Locin, “Second Wave of Oppo-
nents Hits Mayor,” Chicago Tribune, February 26, 1987.
43. Ojeda, “Analysis of Hispanic Precincts,” pp. 3–4; and “Mayoral Vote 1983
and 1987,” Chicago Reporter 16 (May 1987): 8.
44. Schrag, “Competing Demands for ‘Our Fair Share,”’ pp. 8–9.
45. Curtis Black, “Washington Out Front as Rivals Self-Destruct,” Guardian,
April 1, 1987.
46. Editorial, “Harold Washington for Mayor,” Chicago Tribune , April 7,
1987; R. Bruce Dodd and John Camper, “Hynes Quits Race for Mayor,” Chi-
cago Tribune , April 6, 1987; and Mitchell Locin, “Candidacy Lacked Fire, Ef-
fective Plan,” Chicago Tribune, April 6, 1987. Throughout the mayoral campaign,
public-opinion polls consistently indicated that Vrdolyak was generally per-
ceived as being “unfit to be mayor.” In late March, 49 percent of registered vot-
ers polled stated that they were “absolutely opposed” to Vrdolyak. Thirty-six per-
cent of all Hynes’s supporters polled were also “absolutely opposed to Vrdolyak
as mayor.” Forty-four percent of all white voters had an “unfavorable” opinion
of him. See R. Bruce Dodd, “Voters Reject Vrdolyak Pitch,” Chicago Tribune ,
March 23, 1987.
220 | 9. Harold Washington’s Chicago


--- PAGE 242 ---
47. Manuel Galvan, “Washington Stumps for Votes Right Up Until the End,”
Chicago Tribune, April 8, 1987; Mark Eissman and James Strong, “Mayor’s Race
Ends in Spring,” Chicago Tribune, April 7, 1987; Schrag, “Washington Mutes Op-
position But Gains Few New Supporters,” Chicago Tribune, April 9, 1987; and
Mitchell Locin and Manuel Galvan, “Mayor Grips Council’s Reins,”Chicago Trib-
une, April 9, 1987.
48. Data collected from exit polls by the Midwest Voter Registration Educa-
tion Project showed that Mexican Americans supported Washington by 49.3 per-
cent in the Democratic primary and by 76.1 percent in the general election. See
“Hispanic Vote Analysis Faulty,”Chicago Reporter 16 ( July 1987): 11. Also see Julio
Ojeda, “Hispanic Vote Split Again,” Chicago Reporter 16 (May 1987): 9; and
Schrag, “Washington Mutes Opposition But Gains Few New Supporters.” The
Chicago Tribune also estimated Washington’s support within the four predomi-
nantly Hispanic wards at 62 percent in the general election.
49. Robert Davis and Terry Wilson, “Mayor Seen Keeping Control of City
Council,” Chicago Tribune, April 8, 1987; Dean Baquet and Ann Marie Lipinski,
“Lucky 13 Are Council’s Class of ’87,”Chicago Tribune, April 9, 1987; Dirk Johnson,
“Washington, Victorious in Chicago, Is in Control,”New York Times, April 9, 1987;
and Dirk Johnson, “Chicago Mayor Gains Power in Party,”New York Times, June 26,
1987.
50. Curtis Black, “Re-Elected Mayor to Push ‘Action Agenda,”’ Guardian,
April 22, 1987.
51. Abdul Alkalimat, “Mayor Washington’s Bid for Re-Election: Will the
Democratic Party Survive?” Black Scholar 17 (November–December 1986): 7, 12–
13; and Curtis Black, “How Should Left Relate to Washington?” Guardian, June
24, 1987.
10. The Rhetoric of Racial Harmony
Originally published in Sojourners 19, no. 7 (August–September 1990): 14–18.
11. Black Fundamentalism: Louis Farrakhan and the Politics of
Conservative Black Nationalism
1. Peter Drier, “What Farrakhan Left Out: Labor Solidarity or Racial Separa-
tism?” Commonweal 122, no. 22 (December 15, 1995): 10–11. For general interpre-
tation of the Million Man March and its political aftermath inside black America,
see Manning Marable,Speaking Truth to Power: Essays on Race, Resistance, and Rad-
icalism (Boulder: Westview, 1996), pp. 139–45.
2. See Edwin S. Redkey, The Flowering of Black Nationalism: Henry McNeal
Turner and Marcus Garvey (New York: Vintage, 1974), pp. 236–41; and Alphonso
Pinkney, Red, Black, and Green: Black Nationalism in the United States (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1976).
11. Black Fundamentalism | 221


--- PAGE 243 ---
3. E. Franklin Frazier, “Garvey: A Mass Leader,” in John Henrik Clarke, ed.,
Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa (New York: Vintage, 1974), pp. 236—41.
4. Doug Gutknecht, “The Importance of Symbolic and Cultural Politics in the
Marcus Garvey Movement,” Mid-American Review of Sociology 7, no. 1 (1982):
87–107.
5. Mattias Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad: Louis Farrakhan and the
Nation of Islam (Durham: Duke University Press, 1996), p. 272.
6. Quoted in Thomas Spence Smith, “The Release of the Romantic Impulse:
Charisma and Its Transformations,”Current Perspectives in Social Theory10 (1990):
31–62.
7. Ibid., pp. 31–62.
8. There is a substantial body of sociological literature on the politics of charis-
ma and charismatic leadership. Some references include K. Miyahara, “Charisma:
From Weber to Contemporary Sociology,” Sociological Inquiry 53 (1983): 368–88;
and C. Camic, “Charisma: Its Varieties, Preconditions, and Consequences,”Socio-
logical Inquiry 50 (1980): 5–23.
9. Elijah Muhammad held a private meeting with Martin Luther King Jr. in
Chicago on February 23, 1966. The meeting did little to improve the relations
between the two leaders. See Claude Andrew Clegg III,An Original Man: The Life
and Times of Elijah Muhammad (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1997), pp. 131,
195–96, 237–38.
10. Ibid., p. 253.
11. Elijah Muhammad was deeply hostile to communism. See ibid., p. 156.
12. Ibid., pp. 272–73.
13. Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad, p. 273.
14. Ibid., p. 274.
15. Ibid., pp. 321, 335–37.
16. Ibid., pp. 275–77.
17. See Dennis King, Lyndon La Rouche and the New American Fascism (New
York: Doubleday, 1989).
18. “Lyndon La Rouche: Beyond the Fringe,” Newsweek, April 7, 1986.
19. See James Ridgeway, “Lyndon La Rouche in the Can: Where the Wild
Things Are,” Village Voice 34, no. 8 (February 21, 1989).
20. Eugene H. Methvin, “Lyndon La Rouche’s Raid on Democracy,” Reader’s
Digest 129, no. 772 (August 1986): 90–94.
21. William Bastone, “Roy: No Pride and Joy,”Village Voice 33, no. 28 ( July 12,
1988).
22. A. Philip Randolph Institute, “La Rouche Fringe Really Anti-Black?”
Atlanta Voice, April 12–18, 1986.
23. Benjamin F. Chavis, “La Rouche Invades Black Community,” New York
Voice, August 2, 1986.
24. “Day of Resistance Against Neo-Nazis,” New Solidarity, March 5, 1985.
222 | 11. Black Fundamentalism


--- PAGE 244 ---
25. “Leaders of 1960s Civil Rights Movement Endorse La Rouche–Bevel,”
New Federalist, October 26, 1992.
26. Gardell, In the Name of Elijah Muhammad, p. 278.
27. Charisse Jones, “Thousands Rally at United Nations on ‘Day of Atone-
ment,’ New York Times, October 17, 1996; and James L. Bevel, “World’s Day of
Atonement Was God Breaking In,” New Federalist, October 28, 1986.
12. Black Leadership and Organized Labor: From Workplace
to Community
Originally published in Steven Fraser and Joshua A. Freeman, ed., Audacious
Democracy: Labor, Intellectuals, and the Social Reconstruction of America, pp.
199–212 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997).
1. Peter Drier, “What Farrakhan Left Out: Labor Solidarity or Racial Separa-
tism?” Commonweal 122, no. 22 (December 15, 1995): 10–11.
2. William H. Harris, “The Black Labor Movement and the Fight for Social
Advance,” Monthly Labor Review 110, no. 8 (August 1987): 37–39.
3. Louis Uchitelle, “Union Goal of Equality Fails the Test of Time,”New York
Times, July 9, 1995.
4. James P . Smith, “Affirmative Action and the Racial Wage Gap,” American
Economic Review 83, no. 2 (Spring 1986): 14–27.
5. Norman Hill, “Blacks and the Unions: Progress Made, Problems Ahead,”
Dissent (Fall 1989): 496–500; Larry T. Adams, “Union Membership of Wage and
Salary Employees in 1987,” Current Wage Developments40 (February 1988): 8; and
Uchitelle, “Union Goal of Equality Fails the Test of Time.”
6. Lori G. Kletzer, “Job Displacement, 1979–86: How Blacks Fared Relative to
Whites,” Monthly Labor Review 114, no. 7 ( July 1991): 17–25.
7. Ibid., pp. 23–24.
8. Lou Ferleger and Jay R. Mandle, “Whose Common Destiny? African
Americans and the US Economy,” Socialist Review 20, no. 1 ( January–March
1990): 151–57.
9. Gregory Defreitas, “Unionization Among Racial and Ethnic Minorities,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46, no. 2 ( January 1993): 284–301. Also see
Opinion Research Service, American Public Opinion Data (Boston: Opinion Re-
search Service, 1990); and Thomas A. Kochan, “How American Workers View
Labor Unions,” Monthly Labor Review 102, no. 4 (April 1979): 23–31.
10. Hill, “Blacks and the Unions,” p. 497.
11. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Union Members in 1995,” Internet Homepage,
February 16, 1996.
12. Douglas C. Lyons, “The Growing Clout of Black Labor Leaders,” Ebony
44, no. 8 ( June 1989): 40–46.
12. Black Leadership and Organized Labor | 223


--- PAGE 245 ---
13. Drier, “What Farrakhan Left Out,” p. 11.
14. Howard N. Fullerton Jr., “Labor Force Projections: The Baby Boom Moves
On,” Monthly Labor Review 114, no. 11 (November 1991): 31–44.
15. Ferleger and Mandle, “Whose Common Destiny?” p. 156.
16. Harris, “The Black Labor Movement and the Fight for Social Advance,”
p. 38.
224 | 12. Black Leadership and Organized Labor


--- PAGE 246 ---
225
Abernathy, Ralph David, xv
Abolitionist movement, 6, 13, 196n15
Abrahams, Peter, 93
Acheson, Dean, 120, 121
Adams, John, 196n4
Adolphus, Johnson, 14
Affirmative action, 150, 162, 164,
184, 186
Africa: African Diaspora and, 42, 94,
96, 97–107, 123–24; Du Bois on,
42, 44, 117–18, 214nn25–26;
music and, 47; resettlement of
blacks in, 4, 7, 10; see also Pan-
Africanism
African Diaspora, 42, 94, 96, 97–107,
123–24
African Freedom Charter, 93
African Legion, 167
African Methodist Episcopal (AME)
church, 50, 68, 71, 80, 122
African Methodist Episcopal Zion
church, 71
African Repository, 105
“African Roots of the War, The” (Du
Bois), 81, 115
Alabama United Mineworkers
(UMW), 32–33
Alfonsin, Raul, 178
Ali, John X., 172
Alkalimat, Abdul, 145
Alliance, 17
AME, see African Methodist
Episcopal church
American Church Institute for
Negroes, 68
American Federation of Government
Employees, 190
American Federation of Labor (AFL),
185
American Federation of Labor–
Congress of Industrial Organiza-
tions (AFL-CIO), 190
American Federation of State,
County, and Municipal
Employees, 190
American Labor Party, 120
INDEX


--- PAGE 247 ---
American Nazi Party, 173–74, 179,
182
American Negro Labor Congress,
214n25
American Revolution, 3, 4, 5
Amoah III, Chief, 89
Amsterdam News, 47
Anderson, Arthur, 166
Anglo-Saxon Club, 168
Annan, J. S., 94
Anti-Defamation League of B’nai
B’rith, 181
Anti-Semitism: American Nazi Party
and, 173; Farrakhan and, 163, 164,
176–77; La Rouche and, 177, 179;
Muhammad and, 181
Aptheker, Herbert, 73, 76–77, 114,
212n88, 214n15
Armattos, Raphael, 94
Armstrong, Henry, 51
Art: African Diaspora and, 103; Du
Bois and, 48
Associated Actors and Artists of
America, 190
Athletics/sports, 51–52
Atlanta Compromise address, xi, 31;
racial accommodation and, 31–33,
34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 42
Atlanta race riot (1906), 56
Atlanta University, 24, 30, 42, 47, 48,
54, 57–58, 66, 70, 79, 117
Atlanta University Pulications, 42
Atwater, Lee, 155
Autobiography (Du Bois), 62, 118, 123
Baker, Ella, xiv–xv
Banks, black-owned, 27, 38, 149–50
Baptist church, 62–63, 66–67, 68
Baptist World Alliance, 68
Baraka, Amiri, 177
Barnett, Ida B. Wells, 210n53
Baseball, 52
Belafonte, Harry, 57
Bellegarde, Dantes, 85
Berry, Edwin C., 128
Bevel, Reverend James, 165, 179, 180,
181–82
Bibliography of Negro Folk Songs, A
(Du Bois), 47, 71
Bilandic, Michael, 135
Bishop, Reverend Samuel H., 68
Black Belt, 25–26
Black colleges/universities, 24–25, 27,
31, 36; Atlanta University, 24, 30,
42, 47, 48, 54, 57–58, 66, 70, 79,
117; Fisk University, 61, 64–65,
69, 71, 78, 207n55; Hampton
Institute, 23, 24, 30, 34; Howard
University, 24, 181; Lincoln Uni-
versity, 24; Morehouse College,
24; Tuskegee Institute, xi, 23, 24,
27–31, 33, 34–35, 37, 38, 39, 70,
78, 81, 84; Wilberforce University,
65–66, 71, 79
Black faith, Du Bois and, 59–73
Black Flame, The (Du Bois), 55
Black Folk Then and Now: An Essay in
the History and Sociology of the
Negro Race (Du Bois), 41
Black freedmen, see Free blacks
Black freedom movement, 174
Black fundamentalism, 169;
Farrakhan and, 161–66, 175–77,
180, 181–82; Garvey and, 166–70;
Nation of Islam and, 163, 170–77,
181; see also Black nationalism
Black Independent Political
Organization, 138
Black Jacobins: Toussaint L’Ouverture
and the Haitian Revolution, The
( James), 91, 107
Black liberation, Du Bois and, 114–26
“Black Man Brings His Gifts, The”
(Du Bois), 71
Black Man’s Burden, The (Morel), 80
Black nationalism, 166; Garvey and,
226 | Index


--- PAGE 248 ---
xiii, 57, 86–88, 90, 91, 103, 106,
114, 166–70, 182, 184, 210n54,
210n62; Nation of Islam and, 163,
170–77, 181; see also Black funda-
mentalism
Black Panther Party, 189
Black Power Movement, 186, 189
Black Reconstruction in America (Du
Bois), xvi, 41, 57, 58, 114
Black Star Steamship Line, 167, 169
Black Worker, The (Spero and Harris),
26
Blues: An Anthology (Handy), 47,
206n54
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 30, 105
Boll weevil, 17–18
Bond, Julian, 179, 182
Book of American Negro Spirituals
( Johnson), 47
Borja, Ramiro, 138
Bositis, David, 163
Boxing, 51
Bragg, George Freeman, 70
Broderick, Francis S., 76, 124
Brooks, Judy, 15, 16
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters,
189, 192
Brownies’ Book, 53–54, 115
Brown, John, 72
Brown, Tony, 179
Bruce, John Edward, 100
Bukharin, N. I., 115
Bumstead, Horace, 66
Bureau of State Security, 177
Burghardt, Mary, 60
Burke, Edward, 131, 219n23
Bush, George, 155
Butz, Arthur, 176–77
Byrne, Jane, 131, 132, 133, 135, 136,
137, 141, 142, 143, 144
Cadet, Eliézer, 87, 88, 210n55
Calman-Levy, Madame, 83
“Can the Negro Serve the Drama?”
(Du Bois), 50
Capital (Marx), 90
Capote, Truman, 57
Carnegie, Andrew, 29
Carson, Clayborne, xv
Carter, Marlene, 131, 135
Carver, George Washington, 28
Case for West Indian Self-Government,
The ( James), 91
Casimir, J. R. Ralph, 104
Castro, Fidel, 171, 176
Catholic church, 68–69; Great
Barrington, 60
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),
178
Cerda, Maria, 138
Chamberlain, Joseph, 79
Chavis, Reverend Benjamin, 164,
179–80, 181, 182
Chevere, Gloria, 136, 137, 142, 144
Chicago: Nation of Islam and, 172;
Washington and, xv–xvi, 127–46,
217nn6, 11–12, 38–39, 218n16,
219n28, 221n48
Chicago Defender, 52
Chicago Equity Fund, 128
Chicago Federation of Labor, 143
Chicago Housing Partnership, 128
Chicago’s People’s College, 145
Chicago Urban League, 132
Children, Du Bois on, 52–54
Childress, Alice, 56, 57
Christianity, see Church(es)
Christianity, Islam, and the Negro Race
(Blyden), 105
“Christmas Poem, A” (Du Bois), 111
Church(es): Baptist, 62–63, 66–67,
68; Catholic, 60, 68–69; Congre-
gational, 60, 61, 204n8; Du Bois
and, 59–73; lending establish-
ments of, 27; politics and, xiii–xiv;
Protestant, 69; see also Episcopal
Index | 227


--- PAGE 249 ---
church; Methodist church;
Religion
Circle of Peace and Foreign Relations,
89–90
Civil disobedience, 192–93
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 150, 189
Civil Rights Movement, 19, 150–51,
152, 162, 172, 174, 180, 186, 188,
192–93
Civil War, 14, 15–16, 23–24
Clair, Matthew W., 68
Clarke, John Henrik, 88, 210n62
Clark, William, 178
Clay, Nathaniel, 137
Clegg, Claude Andrew, III, 171, 172,
173, 174
Clemenceau, Georges, 82, 83, 87
Clement, Rufus E., 57–58
Cleveland, Grover, 31
Clockster, Warner, 16
Coalition of Black Trade Unionists,
190
Cold War, xvi, 56, 112, 113, 118
Colleges/universities: African Ameri-
cans in, 149–50; Harvard Univer-
sity, xvi, 36, 41, 49, 60, 65, 78,
100; New York University, 100;
Princeton University, 52; Rutgers
University, 71; University of
Berlin, xvi, 78; University of the
District of Columbia, 181; Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, 66, 79; see
also Black colleges/universities
Colonial America, 3–4
Color and Democracy: Colonies and
Peace (Du Bois), 114
Colored National Democratic League,
206n49
Committee for the Negro in the Arts,
56–57
Common Ground Network, 136
Communist International, 103, 107,
166
Communist Party, 91, 116, 117, 124,
177, 214n25
Congregational church (Great
Barrington), 60, 61, 204n8
Congressional Black Caucus, 177
Congress of Black People, 92
Congress of Industrial Organizations
(CIO), 185
Congress of Racial Equality, 174, 179
Constitutional Convention, 7–8
Constitution, U.S., xii, 3–11
Convention People’s Party (Ghana), 95
Convict-leasing system, 26
Cook County Coalition for New
Politics, 135
Cook County Democratic Party,
Washington and, xv–xvi, 127–46
Corn, 25
Cotton, 9, 14, 16–18, 25, 38
Cotton gin, 9, 14, 16–17, 18
Cotton States and International
Exposition (1895), 31
Council on African Affairs, 92, 96,
118, 215n29
Cox, Oliver C., 35
Cravath, Erastus, 65
“Credo” (Du Bois), 67
Crisis, 42, 45–46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52,
53, 54, 59, 68, 70, 71, 72, 80, 81,
90, 114, 115, 116
“Criteria of Negro Art” (Du Bois), 46
Cuffe, Paul, 80
Cullen, Countee, 77
Cultural and Scientific Conference for
World Peace, 115, 118–19
Culture: African Diaspora and, 102–4;
art, 48, 103; dance, 48; Du Bois
and, 41–58; Harlem Renaissance
and, 54, 55, 71, 102–3; literature,
54–56, 57, 103–4; popular, 51–54;
theater, 48–51; see also Music
Daily Worker, 117, 214n25
228 | Index


--- PAGE 250 ---
Daley, Richard M., 131, 132, 133,
143, 146, 172, 218n16
Dance, Du Bois and, 48
Danquah, J. B., 92, 93, 105, 107
Dark Princess (Du Bois), 54–55
Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil
(Du Bois), 44–46, 72
Davis, Angela, 163
Dayton, Jonathan, 8
De Bardeleben Coal Company, 33
Declaration of Independence, 4
De Graft Johnson, J. W., 105
Delany, Hubert T., 122, 215n39
Delany, Martin, 166
Democratic Party, 71, 112, 125, 157,
163, 189; Cook County, xv–xvi,
126–46
Department of Justice, 121
Department of Labor, 185–86
Department of State, 123
Desegregation, 150–51, 174, 192–93
Diagne, Blaise, 82–83, 85, 89, 107
Dickson, Joseph, 180
Donahue, Thomas R., 190
Double consciousness theory, Du Bois
and, 43–44, 47, 49, 57, 73, 207n63
Douglass, Frederick, xiii, 13
Drier, Peter, 184–85
Dube, John Langalibalele, 30
Du Bois, Alexander, 60
Du Bois, Shirley Graham, 123
Du Bois, Violet, 77
Du Bois, William Edward Burghardt,
xvi, 28, 30, 34, 38–39, 75, 100,
103, 105, 204n7, 211n71; Africa
and, 42, 44; arrest and trial of,
121–23; on black Americans, 152;
black faith of, 59–73; black
nationalism and, 167; culture and,
41–58; double consciousness
theory and, 43–44, 47, 49, 57, 73,
207n63; Garvey and, 168, 169;
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
and, xvi, 34, 42, 44, 57, 58, 59, 67,
68, 81, 84, 87, 91, 93, 96, 114,
118, 121–22, 123, 124, 215nn29–
30, 216n45; Pan-Africanism and,
30, 42, 67, 71, 75–96, 114, 125,
210n62; peace and black liberation
and, 114–26, 213nn5, 7; see also
Pan-Africanism
Dunayevskaya, Ray, 211n84
Dunbar, Paul Laurence, 54
Dunham, Katherine, 48
Dunne, George, 145
Dusk of Dawn (Du Bois), 53–54, 77
Eastman, George, 29
Education, 24–25, 26, 35, 38, 149; see
also Black colleges/universities;
Colleges/universities
Einstein, Albert, 118, 122
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 123
Elizabeth II (queen of England), 178
Emancipation Exposition (1913), 50
Employment: equal employment
opportunity and, 186; labor unions
and, 183–93; wage gap and,
186–87
Enlightenment, 4
Episcopal church, 67, 68, 72; African
Methodist, 50, 68, 71, 80, 122;
Great Barrington, 60; New
Haven, 60
Episcopal Parish of St. Luke (New
Haven), 60
Epton, Bernard, 127, 143
Equal employment opportunity, 186
Este, Charles H. D., 104
Ethiopian Art Theater, 50
Ethnicity, race versus, 151–59
Evans, Timothy, 131, 146
Evanzz, Karl, 172
Evers, Medgar, 19, 174
Executive Intelligence Review, 178, 181
Index | 229


--- PAGE 251 ---
Farmers’ Improvement Society of
Texas, 30
Farrakhan, Louis, xi–xii, xiv, xv, xvi,
161–66, 175–77, 180, 181–82,
184–85
Fauntroy, Walter, xv
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
121, 122, 172
Federalists, 9
Ferleger, Lou, 188, 191
Ferris, William H., 103
Final Call, The, 181
First Baptist church (Farmville,
Virginia), 66–67
First Continental Congress, 5
Fisher, W. A., 47
Fisk University, 61, 64–65, 69, 71, 78,
207n55
Fite, Gilbert C., 33
Football, 52
Ford, James W., 214n25
Fothergill, John, 7
Fourteenth Amendment, 11
Francis of Assisi, Saint, 73
Frankhouser, Roy, 177
Franklin, Benjamin, 7, 196n15
Franklin, John Hope, 8–9
Frazier, E. Franklin, 167
Free blacks, 10, 16, 24, 25, 197nn22,
23
Freedom rides, 174, 193
Freeman, Debra, 180
Fruit of Islam, 173, 175
Fugitive Slave Law of 1793, 8
Fusion Energy Foundation, 178
Futrell, Mary H., 190
Gandhi, Indira, 178
Gandhi, Mohandas K., 72–73
Garrison, William Lloyd, 117
Garvey, Amy Ashwood, 92, 107, 169
Garvey, Amy Jacques, 93, 94, 169
Garvey, Marcus Mosiah, xiii, 57,
86–88, 90, 91, 103, 106, 114,
166–70, 182, 184, 210n54, 210n62
Geddes, Auckland, Sir, 209n45
Ghana, 42, 95, 124
Gift of Black Folk, The (Du Bois), 68
Gingrich, Newt, 176
Glenn, Joseph B., 68–69
Gold Coast Leader, 104
Gold Coast Youth Conference, 93
Goodlett, Carlton B., 124
Gordon, Max, 214n25
Graham, Shirley, 48
Gramsci, Antonio, 97–99
Great Depression, 44, 72, 90, 91, 106,
167
Gregory, Dick, 182
Griggs, Sutton E., 70
Grimshaw, Jacky, 135, 143
Gunner, Bryon, 70
Gutierrez, Luis V., 131, 133–34, 135,
217n12
Gutknecht, Doug, 168
Haddon-Smith, G. B., 86
Haider, Donald, 132, 142, 143, 144
Hall, Gus, 124
Hall, Prince, 10
Hampton Institute, 23, 24, 30, 34
Handy, William Christopher, 47, 71,
206n54
Hansberry, Lorraine, 56, 57
Harding, Vincent, 196n2
Hard-Shell Baptist church
(Alexandria, Tennessee), 62–63
Harkness, Mattie, 181
Harlan, Louis R., 28
Harlem, 47, 54, 91, 96, 121
Harlem Opera Society, 48
Harlem Renaissance, 54, 55, 71,
102–3
Harper, P . M., 94
Harris, Abram L., 26
Harris, William H., 185, 192
230 | Index


--- PAGE 252 ---
Harrison, Hubert H., 100
Hartford Theological Seminary, 65
Harvard University, xvi, 36, 41, 49, 60,
65, 78, 100
Hayes, Roland, 71
Hayford, J. E. Casely, 104, 106
Heard, Fannie, 18
Heard, Joshua, 16, 18
Hellman, Lillian, 118, 120
Henderson, Lenneal, 56
Hergan, Max, 215n29
Hill, Robert A., 210n54
History of Negro Revolt, A ( James), 91
Hitler, Adolf, 117, 178
Hlubi, Marko, 94
Hoax of the Twentieth Century, The
(Butz), 176–77
Hobson, J. A., 115
Homosexuality, Farrakhan and, 163,
164, 176
Hooker, James R., 211n74
Hope, John, xvi
Horizon, 55, 115
Horne, Gerald, 48, 56
Hornowski, Chester, 132
Horton, Willie, 155
Houenou, Touvalou, 107
House, Colonel, 82
Howard, John, 52
Howard University, 24, 181
Hughes, Charles Evans, 209n45
Hughes, Langston, 103, 113
“Humor of Negroes, The” (Du Bois),
51
Hunt, H. L., 172
Hunton, Addie W., 89
Hunton, Alphaeus, 92
Hynes, Thomas C., 133, 135, 142–43,
144, 220n46
IAFA, see International African
Friends of Abyssinia
“If We Must Die” (McKay), 103
Igasaki, Paul, 139
“I Have a Dream” speech (King), 158
Illinois Gay and Lesbian Task Force,
140
Imperialism (Lenin), 81
In Battle for Peace (Du Bois), 114
Independent, The, 56
Inman, Bobby Roy, 178
Innis, Roy, 179
Institute of Negro Literature and Art,
54
International African Friends of
Abyssinia (IAFA), 92, 107
International African Opinion, 92
International African Service Bureau,
92, 107
International Defense Committee, 122
International Union of Students, 122
Isaacs, Harold R., 75–76, 78, 80
Jackson, Jesse, xiii, 20, 131, 136, 162,
175, 177, 219n28
James, C. L. R., 75, 91, 92, 93, 107,
211n84
James, William, 65
Jarrett, Vernon, 137
Jefferson, Thomas, 4, 6–7
Jeremiah X, 172
Jesus, 72–73
Jim Crow codes, xiv, 3, 10, 19, 20, 24,
37, 52, 64, 69, 70, 73, 101, 102,
150, 155
Johnson, J. Rosamond, 47, 71
Johnson, Jack, 51
Johnson, James Weldon, 47
Johnson, Lyndon, 185
Johnson, Wallace, 94
Johnson-Forest tendency, 211n84
Johnston, Sir Harry, 86
Joliot-Curie, Frederic, 122
Jones, Robert E., 68
Jones, Sheila, 220n42
Jordan, Winthrop D., 5, 11
Index | 231


--- PAGE 253 ---
Judaism, see Anti-Semitism
Kalb, Reuben F., 17
Karenga, Maulana, 164
Kelly, Edmund, 131, 133
Kemp, Jack, 165
Kennedy, John F., 162
Kenyatta, Jomo, 42, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95,
106, 107
King, B. B., 155
King, C. D. B., 89
King, Dennis, 178
King, Martin Luther, Jr., xiii, xv, 117,
125, 151, 158, 161–62, 165, 171,
179, 192
Kirk, Paul, 219n28
Kissinger, Henry, 178
Kletzer, Lori G., 188
Knights of Columbus, 68
Koi, A. J., 106
Kouyate, Tiemoho, 107
Kozubowski, Walter, 137, 142
Krigwa Players in Harlem, 50
Ku Klux Klan, 69, 134, 167, 168,
172–73, 174, 177, 179, 180, 182
LaBardie, Alma, 94
Labor unions, 26, 32–33, 37, 38, 163,
171, 183–93
La Rouche, Helga, 178
La Rouche, Lyndon, 165, 177–82,
220n42
Laski, Harold, 89
Laurens, John, 5
League of Africans, 106
League of Colored Peoples, 106
League of Revolutionary Black
Workers, 189
Lee, Grace, 211n84
“Legend of Versailles, A” (Tolson),
113
Lenin, V. I., 72–73, 81, 115–16,
214n15
Leopold (king of Belgium), 80
Lightfoot-Boston, H. J., 105
Ligue de la defense de la race Negro,
107
Ligue universelle, 107
Lincoln, Abraham, 122
Lincoln University, 24
Lipinski, William, 133, 143, 144
Lippmann, Walter, 49
“Litany at Atlanta, A” (Du Bois), 55,
56
Literacy tests, voting and, 36
Literary clubs, African Diaspora and,
103
Literature: African Diaspora and,
103–4; Du Bois and, 54–56, 57
Logan, Warren, 28
Lomax, Louis, 172
López Portillo, José, 178
Louis, Joe, 51–52
Loury, Glen, 184
Love, Joseph Robert, 79
Lucy, William, 190
Lushington, Claude, 94
Lynch, Leon, 190
Lynchings, 17, 37, 64, 68, 167,
209n39
Lynd, Staughton, 7
Lyndon La Rouche and the New
American Fascism (King), 178
McCarran Act, 124
McCarthyism, xvi, 56, 112, 114, 120
MacDonald, Ramsay, 89
McGrath, J. Howard, 121
McKay, Claude, 103
Madhubuti, Haki, 164
Madison, James, 5, 7, 22–23, 197nn
Madison, Jesse, 131
Makonnen, T. R., 92, 93
Malcolm X, xiii, 171, 172–74, 175, 176
Malveaux, Julianne, 163
Mandela, Nelson, 176
232 | Index


--- PAGE 254 ---
Mandle, Jay R., 188, 191
Manley, Norman W., 93, 94
Mann, Thomas, 118
Mansfield, Lord Chief Justice, 8
Manye, Charlotte, 71
Marable, Fannie, 13
Marable, James, 18
Marable, Manning, 16, 18
Marable, Morris, 13–15, 16–17, 18,
19
March on Washington (1963), 162,
189
March on Washington Movement of
1941, 92, 192
Marryshaw, T. Albert, 92, 104, 107
Martin, Luther, 9
Marx, Karl, 90, 211n71
Mayer, Jean, 220n38
Mays, Benjamin E., 24
Meier, August, 207n63
Methodist church: African Methodist
Episcopal, 50, 68, 71, 80, 122;
Alexandria, Tennessee, 62–63;
Great Barrington, 60
Methvin, Eugene H., 178
Metzger, Tom, 177
Mier, Robert, 129–30
Miller, “Pop,” 61
Miller, Henry, 57
Milliard, Peter, 93, 94
Million Man March, xi, 161, 162–64,
181, 185
Mitchell, Parren, 177, 180
Mohammed, Imam W. Deen, 181
Mondale, Walter, 178
Moody, Harold A., 93, 106
Moon, 54, 55
Morehouse College, 24
Morel, E. D., 80
Morrill Act of 1862, 24
Morris, Gouverneur, 7
Moton, Robert Russa, 81, 87
Muhammad, Abdul Alim, 181
Muhammad, Elijah, xiii, 170–71, 172,
173, 174, 175, 176, 181, 182
Muhammad, Fard, 170
Muhammad, Wallace, 175
Music: African Americans and, 156;
Du Bois and, 47–48, 63–64,
71–72, 207n55
NAACP,see National Association for
the Advancement of Colored
People
National African American
Leadership Summit, 164–65, 181
National Alliance of Postal and
Federal Employees, 190
National Anti-Drug Coalition, 178
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), 49–50; Baker and, xiv;
Chavis and, 164, 181; Chicago
and, 132; Crisis and, 42, 45–46,
47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 59, 68,
70, 71, 72, 80, 81, 90, 114, 115,
116; Du Bois and, xvi, 34, 42, 44,
57, 58, 59, 67, 68, 81, 84, 87, 91,
93, 96, 114, 118, 121–22, 123,
124, 215nn29–30, 216n45; Evers
and, 174; Garvey and, 168;
Million Man March and, 162;
Pan-Africanism and, 89, 90–91;
Waldron and, 70; White and, 91,
121, 215n39
National Association of Funeral
Directors, 29
National Bar Association, 29
National Black United Front, 140
National Caucus of Labor
Committee, 177
National Colored League of Boston,
65
National Democratic Policy
Committee, 177, 178, 179, 180
National Education Association, 190
Index | 233


--- PAGE 255 ---
National Front, 176
National Negro American Political
League, 71
National Negro Bankers Association,
29
National Negro Business League, xiv,
28–29, 39, 184
National Negro Retail Merchants
Association, 29
National Union of Hospital and
Health Care Employees, 190
National Urban League, 162; Labor
Education and Advancement
Program of, 185–86
Nation of Islam, xi, xiv, 163, 170–77,
181
Nazis, see American Nazi Party
Negritude movement, 55
Negro Agricultural and Technical
College, 36
“Negro and the American Stage, The”
(Du Bois), 49
“Negro and the Church, The” (Du
Bois), 68
Negro and The World and Africa, The
(Du Bois), 76
“Negro Artist and the Racial
Mountain, The (Hughes), 103
Negro Church, The (Du Bois), 70
Negroes in America, The (McKay), 103
Negro Factories Corporation, 167
Negro in Africa and America, The
(Tillinghast), 80
Negro March on Washington
Movement of 1941, 92, 192
Negro Methodist Zion church (Great
Barrington), 60
Negro Organization Society, 30
Negro Society for Historical
Research, 100
Negro, The (Du Bois), 41
Negro Worker, 106
Negro World, 86, 87, 103, 104, 169
Neptune, 86
New Federalist, 180, 181
New Review, 49
New Solidarity, 178, 180
New York Globe, 54
New York University, 100
Niagara Movement, 42, 70, 76, 103
Nicholas, Henry, 190
Nikoi, G. Ashie, 94
Nixon, Richard M., 123, 185
Nkrumahism, 95
Nkrumah, Kwame, 42, 75, 89, 93, 94,
95, 97, 106, 117–18, 124
Nobel Anniversary Committee dinner
(1947), 116
Normal School for Negroes, 30
North, migration to the, 38
Notes on Virginia ( Jefferson), 6
Nyerere, Julius, 97
Ogilvie, Richard, 133
O’Neal, Frederick, 190
O’Neill, Eugene, 41
O’Neil, Raymond, 50
“Operation Mop Up,” 177
Organic intellectuals, in African
Diaspora, 99–101, 102, 103,
104–5, 107
Organized labor, see Labor unions
Ouverture, Toussaint L’, 117
Oveltree, John W., 33
Owen, Chandler, 87, 88
Padmore, George, 30, 82, 88, 90, 91,
92, 93–94, 96, 106, 107, 122, 124,
209n39, 211n71, 212n88, 215n29
Paine, Thomas, 4
Painter, Reverend C. C., 60, 61
Palmer, Lu, 138, 141
Palmer, Paul C., 195n1
Pan-African Association, 79; Confer-
ence of (1900), 30, 42, 71, 79
Pan-African congresses, 42, 83–86,
234 | Index


--- PAGE 256 ---
88–91, 92, 93–95, 105, 114, 118,
209n45, 212n88
Pan-Africanism: African Diaspora
and, 97–107; Du Bois and, 30, 42,
67, 71, 75–96, 114, 125, 210n62;
Universal Negro Improvement
Association and, 103–4; see also
Pan-African Association; Pan-
African congresses
Pauling, Linus, 118
Peabody Education Fund, 29
Peace, 112–26; Du Bois and, 114–26,
213nn5, 7; modern movement for,
111–12; Robeson and, 113–14,
213n5
“Peace” (Hughes), 113
“Peace, Freedom’s Road for Oppressed
Peoples” (Du Bois), 115
Peace Information Center, 120, 121
Pendleton, Clarence, 179
Pennsylvania Abolition Society, 6,
196n15
People’s Voice,96
Philadelphia Negro, The (Du Bois), 41,
66, 76
Philadelphia Plan, 185, 186
Phylon, 48, 51, 117
Pinckney, Charles Cotesworth, 7, 8
Poetry: African Diaspora and, 103,
104; of Du Bois, 55–56
Poitier, Sidney, 57
Political intellectuals, in African
Diaspora, 97–107
Poll taxes, 17, 36
Popular culture, 51–54
Populism, 17
Powell, Adam Clayton, 96
Powell, Colin, 184
Princeton University, 52
Prison Notebooks, The (Gramsci),
97–99
“Problem of Amusement, The” (Du
Bois), 52
Progressive Party, 112
Prophet, Elizabeth, 48
Prosser, Gabriel, 196n5
Protestant church, 69
Pucinski, Roman, 133
Punch, 86
Quakers, 5, 7, 65
Quest of the Silver Fleece, The (Du
Bois), 54
Race, ethnicity and, 151–59
Race First, Garvey and, 168
Racial accommodation, Washington’s
policy of, 31–33, 34, 35, 36, 38,
39, 42
Racial harmony, rhetoric of, 149–59
Randolph, Asa Philip, xiii, 87, 92,
189, 192, 210n53
Randolph, Edmund, 5
Ransom, Reverdy C., 70, 122
Ransom, Roger L., 16, 25
Rao, N. S. Subba, 116
Reagan, Ronald, 20, 112, 157, 162,
178, 179, 184
Reconstruction, xii, 18, 24, 25, 29, 31,
63; Second, xii, xiv, 19, 162, 170
Red Summer (1919), 167
Religion: race and class inequality
and, 158–59; slaves and, 19; see
also Church(es)
“Religion of the Negro, The” (Du
Bois), 69–70
Republican Party, xii, 17, 157, 165,
184
Reyes, Benjamin, 138
Robeson, Paul, 57, 71, 91–92, 93, 106,
113–14, 118, 213n5, 215n29
Robinson, Amelia Boynton, 180
Robinson, Jackie, 52
Rockefeller, David, 178
Rockwell, George Lincoln, 173, 174
Rogers, J. A., 100
Index | 235


--- PAGE 257 ---
Rogge, O. John, 119, 120, 121
Rojas, John, 94
Ronan, Alfred, 144
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 117, 192
Roosevelt, Theodore, 17
Rose, Reverend Floyd, 180–81
Rostenkowski, Dan, 132, 133, 143
Rutgers University, 71
Rutledge, John, 7
Said, Mohammed, 92
Saks, Richard, 136
Sam, Chief Alfred, 80
Santayana, George, 65
Santiago, Miguel, 138
Save Chicago, 133
Save Our Neighborhoods, Save Our
City, 140
Sawyer, Eugene, 146
Sayre Election Law of Alabama, 17
Schiller Institute, 178, 181
Schneider, Joseph, 132
Schoonmaker, F. P ., 82
Schuyler, George S., 55
SCLC, see Southern Christian
Leadership Conference
Scudder, Reverend, 60, 61
Second Reconstruction, xii, xiv, 19,
162, 170
Segregation, 17, 36–38; Jim Crow
codes and, xiv, 3, 10, 19, 23, 24,
37, 38, 52, 64, 69, 70, 73, 101,
102, 150, 155
Senghor, Leopold, 97
Service Employees International
Union, 190
Seventy Negro Spirituals (Fisher), 47
Sharecroppers, 16, 25
Sharpton, Reverend Al, 182
Sharrieff, Raymond, 173
Sierra Leone Company, 7
Sikyi, Kobina, 104
Sit-in movement, 193
Slave rebellions, 14, 15–16
Slavery, xii, 3, 4, 5–11, 13–16, 18, 19,
20, 24, 47, 64, 119, 195n1,
196nn2, 5, 197nn16, 19
Smith, James P ., 186–87
Smith, R. L., 30
Smith, Thomas Spence, 169
SNCC, see Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee
Society for the Relief of Free Negroes
Unlawfully Held in Bondage, 5
Society of Friends, see Quakers
“Sojourner, The” (Sikyi), 104
Soliz, Juan, 138
Somerset decision, 8
“Song of the Smoke, The” (Du Bois),
55–56
Sons of Freedom, 54
Souls of Black Folk, The (Du Bois), 42,
43, 47, 62, 63, 114, 205n15
Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC), xiv, xv, 180
Sowell, Thomas, 179, 184
Spero, Sterling D., 26
Spirituals, 63–64
Sports, see Athletics/sports
Spotlight, The, 177
Squires, Gregory D., 217n6
Starks, Robert, 135, 141
Star of Ethiopia, The (Du Bois), 50
Star Wars, 178, 179
Stepp, Marc, 190
Stockholm Appeal, 120
Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC), xv, 19, 174
Sturdivant, John N., 190
Suppression of the African Slave-Trade
to the United States of America,
1638–1870, The (Du Bois), 41,
78–79
Supreme Court, U.S., 123, 124
Sutch, Richard, 16, 25
Sweeney, John J., 190
236 | Index


--- PAGE 258 ---
Talented Tenth, 34, 76
Tanner, Henry O., 48
Taylor, R. W., 33
Taylor, Robert R., 28
Temple Farms, 171
Tennis, 52
Theater: African Diaspora and,
103–4; Du Bois and, 48–51
Thomas, Clarence, 179
Thompson, Daniel C., 24–25
Three-fifths compromise, 8
Tillinghast, Joseph A., 80
Tolson, Melvin B., 113
Torres, Manuel, 131
Tostado, Ricardo, 141
Toure, Kwame, 182
Toussaint L’Ouverture ( James), 92
Trotsky, Leon, 93, 211n84
Trotter, William Monroe, 70
Truman, Harry S., 112, 120, 123
Tumulty, J. P ., 81
Turner, Henry M., 80
Turner, Nat, 70
Tuskegee Institute, xi, 23, 24, 27–31,
33, 34–35, 37, 38, 39, 70, 79, 81,
184
UNIA, see Universal Negro
Improvement Association
Unions, see Labor unions
United Automobile Aerospace and
Agricultural Implement Workers
of America, 190
United Church of Christ’s
Commission on Racial Justice, 179
United Gold Coast Convention, 105
United Nations, 118, 181
U.S. Steel Company, 29, 32, 33
United Steelworkers of America, 190
Universal Negro Improvement
Association (UNIA), 86–88, 91,
103–4, 166, 167, 168, 169–70,
184, 210nn53, 55
Universities, see Black colleges/univer-
sities; Colleges/universities
Up from Slavery (Washington), 29
Valle, Miguel del, 138
Van Lennep, Edward, 60
Verrios, Joseph, 138
Versailles Peace Congress, 81, 82, 84,
87, 210nn53, 55
Victoria (queen of England), 79
Vietnam War, 125
Vigilante violence, 17, 37, 38, 56, 149
Villard, Henry, 117
Vincent, Theodore G., 88
Virginia Abolition Society, 196n15
Vocational institutes, 24, 25, 26; see
also Black colleges/universities
Voting rights, xii, xiii, 7, 10, 17, 24,
36, 150
Voting Rights Act of 1965, 150
Vrdolyak, E. R. “Fast Eddie,” 128,
130, 131, 132, 133–34, 135, 138,
140–41, 142–43, 144, 145,
219n23, 220n46
Wage gap, racial, 186–87
Waldron, J. Milton, 70
Wallace, Henry, 76, 112, 118
Walling, William English, 49
Walls, William, 136–37
Walters, Alexander, 71, 206n49
Wardell, Al, 140
Wardingley, Ray, 132
Washington, Booker T., xi–xii, xiii,
xiv, xv, xvi, 23, 26, 27–39, 42, 57,
70, 79, 114, 162, 164, 171, 176,
184
Washington, George, 6, 197n19
Washington, Harold, xv–xvi, 127–46,
217nn6, 11–12, 218n16, 219n28,
220nn38–39, 221n48
Wasu, 106
Webb, Dan K., 133
Index | 237


--- PAGE 259 ---
Weber, Max, 168
Wells, H. G., 89
West, Cornel, 182
West African National Secretariat, 95
West African Student’s Union, 105–6
West Indian Federation, 124
Wheatley, Phillis, 4
White, Robert L., 190
White, Walter, xvi, 91, 121, 215n39
White American Society, 168
Wilberforce University, 65–66, 71, 79
Wilder, Douglas, 157–58
Williams, Eric, 42
Williams, Henry Sylvester, 30, 79–80,
91, 211n74
Williams, Magnus, 94
Williams, Reverend Hosea, 180
Williams, Walter, 179, 184
Wilson, James, 9
Wilson, Woodrow, 81, 82, 206n49,
209n39
Wintermute, Wendy, 217n6
Wood, Charles Winter, 28
Wood, James, 196n15
Woodward, 37–38
Work, Alice, 71
Work, John Wesley, 47, 71
Work, Monroe N., 28
Workers Party, 211n84
World and Africa, The (Du Bois), 79,
90
World Day of Atonement, 181
World Federation of Trade Unions, 93
World Peace Council, 122
World Today, 56
World Tomorrow, 115
World War I, 17–18, 38, 81, 82–83,
115, 167, 209nn35, 39
World War II, 92, 116–17
Worrill, Conrad, 140
Yearwood, E. de Lisle, 94
Yergan, Max, 92, 93
Young, Andrew, xv, 113, 177
Zulu Christian Industrial School, 30
238 | Index

