=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Blueprint-for-Black-Power-Study-Cell-Guide-Book-Updated.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 8
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:47:13.967081
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable  
Dr. Amos N. Wilson 
(1941 - 1995) 
Former Social Caseworker, Psychological Counselor, 
Supervising Probation Officer, Training Administrator in the 
New York City Department of Juve nile Justice, Assistant 
Professor of Psychology at the City University of New York, 
Master Teacher, Organizer, and Author 
 
Dr. Amos Wilson - Consciousness 
The late, Honorable Dr. Wilson was born in Hattiesburg, 
Mississippi in 1941. Familiarly referred to as Brother Amos, 
he provided the  average person with an acute analysis of 
where we are and the things that affect us. He served as a 
council to energize our race and those in positions of 
influence as to how to carry out their leadership 
responsibilities.  Dr. Wilson's activities transcended academia 
into the fields of business, owning and operating various 
enterprises in the greater New York area. 
 
Amos Wilson - Education & Genetic Criminality 
 
One of Two RBG Blakademics 
Required Textbooks 
The RBG Blueprint Study Cell 
Ice Breaker mp3s for Downloads 
Play Dr. Amos Wilson- Histroy as an 
Instrument of Power 
Play Dr. Amos Wilson-On The Fallicies Multi-
Culturalism 
 
OTHER REQUIRED TEXTBOOK 
 
 
 
Professor Marimba Ani and 
Yurugu Tutorial


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 2 
 
RBG Blueprint for Black Power Video Playlist 
Blueprint is our school's required textbook. Please visit  and join  our study cell at RBG 
Worldwide 1 Nation: There you will find our discussions . In this group we study in detail one of 
RBGz required textbooks (Dr. Amos Wilson's Blueprint for Black Power) in both print and video 
form. We comment on and discuss chapters/clips: then plan, develop and implement. 
Blueprint for Black Power: A Moral, Political, and Economic 
Imperative for the Twenty-First Century 
Blueprint for Black Power details a master plan for the power 
revolution necessary for Black survival in the 21st century. 
Blueprints posit  that an African American/Caribbean/Pan -African 
bloc would be most potent for the generation and delivery of Black 
power in the United States and the World to counter White and 
Asian power networks. Wilson frames this imperative by 
deconstructing the U.S. elite power structure of government, 
political parties, think tanks, corporations, foundations, media, 
interest groups, banking and foreign investment particulars. Potentially strong Black institutions 
as the church, media and think tanks; industry; collectives such as investment clubs and credit 
unions; rotating credit associations such as Afrikan -originated esusu, to ntine and partner are 
analyzed. Pan-Afrikanism, Black Nationalism, ethnocentrism and reparation are assessed, often 
misused and underused financial institutions as securities, mutual funds, stocks, bonds, 
underwriting, and incubators advocated, thus elucidating oft-negated opportunities for economic 
empowerment.


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 3 
Extracts from Textbook: 
 
"The oppressed and downtrodden, having been 
traumatized by the abuse of power by their powerful 
oppressors, often comes to perceive power itself as 
inherently evil, as by n ature corrupting and therefore as 
something to be eschewed, denied and renounced. 
The pursuit of power is viewed as unworthy of virtuous 
persons, and the desire to possess it as sinful. Therefore, 
many among the powerless and poor feel compelled to find 
in their powerlessness and poverty the emblematic signs of 
their Godliness and redemptive salvation. 
How convenient a precept for rationalizing and maintaining 
the power of the haves over the have -nots! As the result of their ideological 
manipulation by the powerful and their own reactionary misperception of reality, the 
poor and powerless have been made to perceive the pursuit, possession and 
application of power in their own behalf as unbecoming to themselves. 
This is even more the case when through their naïve acceptance of the self -serving 
deceptive propaganda perpetrated by the powers -that-be, their own reactionary self -
negation, and their nursing of their internalized inferiority complexes, the poor huddled 
masses perceive the possession and exercise of  power as the inherent and exclusive 
prerogative of the ruling classes or races." 
"To a significant degree Afrikan Americans accept and obey predominant White 
American power and its authorities (at least from social -psychological standpoint) 
because they a gree with the rules of their establishment and expression as defined by 
White Americans; share with White Americans the moral, legal, and other values and 
perspectives which justify them; and to some extent (limited and of recent origin) 
because they, i.e. , Blacks, have been permitted by White Americans to participate in 
political and social processes by which White power is given legitimacy. 
To a limited degree, Afrikan Americans have been permitted access to certain positions 
of competent and legitimate a uthority. These factors contribute mightily to their 
acceptance of White American power (domination) and the White American monopoly 
of positions of authority as legitimate. 
These forms of giving consent to the social power status quo on the part of Blacks  help 
to obscure as well as deny the fact that they are in fact a dominated and severely 
exploited group (regardless of class); and helps to obscure the fact that their uncritical 
acceptance of the 'rules,' moral beliefs, perspectives, and their customary -traditional 
participation in the 'American (White) political -economic process and system is


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 4 
tantamount to the legitimating of their own oppression and to the consensual ensurance 
of their own powerlessness. 
Rules, beliefs and consent are manufactured by th ose in power to justify, legitimate and 
serve their interests. In its origins White American power was not legitimated (i.e., 
voluntarily or contractually consented to, morally justified or politically -socially ratified) 
by Afrikan Americans who at the tim e of its origination were held in captivity (slavery) 
and to this point in time have been largely excluded from significantly participating in 
American legitimating processes. 
From the historical point of view of Native and Afrikan Americans, White power, in 
whatever form, is illegitimate. This is because such power rests essentially on the near 
physical and genocidal decimation of Native Americans, the theft of their properties, on 
the exploitation or forced labor (enslavement) of Afrikans, and on the syst ematic 
exclusion by Whites of both Black and Native Americans from the influential exercise of 
practically all forms of 'legitimate' power and authority in the United States. 
The rules and beliefs which provide the means for legitimating White power were i n fact 
pre-established, preordained and imposed on Blacks against their will by Whites from 
the beginning. The illegitimacy of White American power is founded on the illegitimacy 
of its original sins--genocide, theft of property, and enslavement." 
"For social power to be exercised effectively the power holder must possess or control 
some important or valued material and/or social resource(s) which is the basis of his 
power. By strategically rewarding or depriving others of these resources, he may use 
them to influence behavior in ways compatible with his interests. 
Resources when used for such ends are referred to as power bases or resources. 
Power bases or resources may include physical safety, health and well -being, wealth 
and material possessions; jobs a nd means to a livelihood; knowledge and social skills; 
social recognition, status and prestige; love, affection, social acceptability; a satisfactory 
self-image and self-respect… 
We have no intentions to review the quite sizable number of possible power bases here. 
We shall constrain ourselves to brief, but pertinent, discussions of those power 
resources which are of important relevance to Afrikan Americans and the power 
relations between them and European Americans. These power resources include 
property, organization, race consciousness and ideology. 
We do not include state politics in our discussion at this juncture because in the context 
of contemporary Afrikan American social, political and economic culture and the more 
basic issues it must resolve, sta te politics is of secondary importance to the Black 
community. Black politics and activism without the Black ownership of and control over 
primary forms and bases of power such as property, wealth, organization, etc., is the 
recipe for Black political and non-political powerlessness.


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 5 
The rather obtuse pursuit of political office and the ballot box as primary sources of 
power by the Black community and its politicians without its concomitant ownership of 
and control over important resources has actually hind ered the development of real 
Black power in America. More ominously, there appears to be a paradoxical and 
positive correlation between the number of Blacks elected and appointed to high office 
and retrogressions in the civil and human rights extended to Black Americans during the 
past twenty years. 
Increases in homelessness, poverty, unemployment, criminality and violence in the 
Black community; disorganization of the traditional Black family, inadequacies in 
education, increases in health problems of all types, and a host of other social and 
political ills have all attended increases in the number of Black elected and appointed 
officials. That is, the more elected and appointed Black politicians, the more social -
economic problems the Black community has suffered. 
While we are not implying a causal relationship between the increase of the number of 
Black appointed and elected officials and the increased misery indices of the Black 
community, we are implying or asserting that their increase obscures those things which 
are responsible for and do little to ameliorate or uproot the increasing prevalence of 
social and economic problems in the Black community. 
The community's concern with the election and appointment of Black political figures 
helps it to maintain false hopes that their attainment of office will significantly resolve its 
problems. The activities of Black politicians, given the current inadequacy of social 
organization and economic resources, harmfully distract the Black community's 
attention from r ecognizing and eradicating the true causes of its problems and the 
remediation of its powerlessness." 
"The responsibility of the Afrikan American community [is to ensure] Afrika's economic 
development. The ignoring of Afrika by the Western nations provide windows of 
opportunity open to native Afrikans to drastically reduce the massive outflow or flight of 
capital, which has been estimated to exceed 80 percent of the Gross Domestic Product, 
and to reinvest it in their own countries. 
Afrikan peoples and natio ns across the Diaspora must apprise themselves of a full, 
ongoing knowledge of the social, economic and cultural history of Afrikan nations as 
well as their contemporary status and reorganize their sociocultural and economic 
structures so as to initiate and fuel continental Afrika's growth and development. 
The Afrikan American community, especially, should vastly overhaul and reconstruct its 
educational orientation toward knowledge of the Motherland. It must realize that its own 
economic salvation is coterm inous with or tied to that of Afrika's. It must invest money 
and human resources in Afrika's development and perceive its economic prosperity as 
its special responsibility and mission…


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 6 
The Afrikan American community must become vigilantly and jealously int erested in 
U.S. and European policies toward Afrika and seek to influence those policies in both its 
own and Afrika's favor." 
 
Other Books by Dr. Amos Wilson 
 
http://www.africawithin.com/wilson/wilson_books.htm 
 
The Falsification of Afrikan Consciousness: Eurocentric History, Psychiatry and the 
Politics of White Supremacy 
Price: $18.00 - Paperback 
Description 
This book presents two ground -breaking lectures by Amos Wilson. The first, Europ ean 
Historiography and Oppression Exposed: An Afrikan Perspective and Analysis, was among the 
first contemporary analyses which delineated the role Eurocentric history -writing plays in 
rationalizing European oppression of Afrikan consciousness. It explicat es why we should study 
history, how history-writing shapes the psychology of peoples and individuals, how Eurocentric 
history as mythology creates historical amnesia in Afrikans in order to rob them of the material, 
mental, social and spiritual wherewithal  for overcoming poverty and oppression. Moreover, this 
engrossing lectures the relationship between the rediscovery and rewriting of Afrikan history and 
achievement of liberation and prosperity by Afrikan peoples. The second lecture, Eurocentric 
Political Dogmatism: Its Relationship to the Mental Health Diagnosis of Afrikan People, 
advances the contention that the alleged mental and behavioral maladaptiveness of oppressed 
Afrikan peoples is a political -economic necessity for the maintenance of White dominat ion and 
imperialism. Furthermore, it indicts the Eurocentric mental health establishment for entering into 
collusion with the Eurocentric political establishment to oppress and exploit Afrikan peoples by 
officially sanctioning these egregious practices thr ough its misdiagnosing, mislabeling, and 
mistreating of Afrikan peoples’ behavioral reactions to their oppression and their efforts to win 
their freedom and independence.


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 7 
Understanding Black Adolescent 
Male Violence: Its Remediation 
and Prevention 
 
Price: $37.95 - Paperback 
Description 
In this ground-breaking volume, Amos Wilson 
shows in brilliant detail how American society 
creates and sustains Black-on-Black 
adolescent criminality in its inner-cities across 
the United States. He boldly asserts that 
Black-on-Black adolescent violence is rooted 
in historical and contemporary White-on-Black 
violence. He further argues that White-on-
Black violence induces in the Afrikan American 
community a pervasive false consciousness, 
one which interacts with the adolescent crises 
of Black males and the socioeconomic 
conditions which typify inner-city communities 
to spawn criminality and violence. More than 
an explanatory analysis of Black male 
adolescent criminality, Understanding Black 
Adolescent Male Violence provides very 
practical and workable remedial and 
preventative approaches to this problem which 
threatens the vitality of the Afrikan American 
community.  
 
Developmental Psychology of the 
Black Child 
From: $16.95 - Paperback 
Are Black and White Children the 
same? Is the Black Child merely a 
White Child who 'happens' to be 
'painted' Black? Are there any significant 
differences in the mental and physical growth 
and development of Black and White Children? 
What effects does race awareness have on the 
mental and personality development of Black 
Children? Are such leisure time activities as 
the playing of certain games, watching TV, 
going to the movies, listening to the radio, 
hazardous to the mental health of Black 
Children? Is the use of Black English a sign of 
mental inferiority? Why do Black Children 
generally score lower than White Children on 
I.Q. tests? Do Black parents socialize their 
children to be inferior to White Children? Why 
have integrated schools and busing failed so 
many Black Children? If you have been looking 
for a single source which deals with these and 
related controversial questions from a black 
perspective, then this book may be the book 
for you. For between its covers, The 
Developmental Psychology of the Black Child, 
the first of a UBCS series of books dealing with 
the growth, development, and education of the 
black child, in a scholarly but readily 
understandable way, forthrightly confronts 
these and other issues.  
 
 
Black-On-Black Violence: The Psychodynamics of Black Self-Annihilation in 
Service of White Domination 
By Dr. Amos N. Wilson 
Price: $17.00 - Paperback - Afrikan World Infosystems (November 1991)  
Description 
The Psychodynamics of Black Self -Annihilation in Service of White Domination represents a 
distinct milestone in criminology and Afrikan Studies. Its explanatory perspectives  on the 
sociopsychological and politicoeconomic causes of Black -on-Black Violence are exceptionally 
insightful, incisive and iconoclastic. The Psychodynamics of the Black -on-Black criminal are 
presented here with a depth and clarity rarely seen before.


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG StreetScholars Think Tank                                                                                        July, 2010 Updated 
 
 Page 8 
The main thesis of this book is that the operational existence of Black -on-Black in the United 
States is psychologically and economically mandated by the White American -dominated status 
quo. The criminalization of the Black American male is a psychopolitical ly engineered process 
designed to maintain the dependency and relative powerlessness of the Afrikan American and 
Pan-African communities.  
Black-on-Black Violence, however, moves far beyond blaming the victimizer. Its meticulous and 
painstaking exposure of  the psycho -social and intrapsychical dynamics of Black -on-Black 
criminality is startlingly revealing. Its analyses of the collective psyches of both the White 
American and Black American communities are unsparingly and powerfully instructive. The 
reader will not be left unmoved.  
Although Professor Wilson argues that Black -on-Black Violence is orchestrated by White 
America’s need to maintain its oppressive domination of Black America, and of Western 
Europe’s need to continue-without end-its economic exploitation of Africa, he also contends that 
the ending of Black-on-Black violence is the primary, if not sole, responsibility of African people 
in America and abroad. This book, in revealing the anatomy of Black -on-Black violence, 
simultaneously lays the practical, intellectual and political foundations for its social eradication.  
 
 
Awakening the Natural Genius of Black Children 
By Dr. Amos N. Wilson 
Price: $15.00 - Paperback - Afrikan World Infosystems 1st edition (December 1992) 
Description 
Afrikan children are naturally precocious and gifted. They begin life with a 'natural head start.' 
However, their natural genius it too frequently underdeveloped and misdirected by (1) the fact 
that the racist and imperialist status quo politically mandate s their intellectual under -
achievement and social mal-adaptiveness; (2) belief in the myth that intelligence is fixed at birth 
and that Afrikans are innately less intelligent than Europeans; (3) a lack of knowledge of their 
positively unique developmental psychology; (4) a lack of confidence in their ability to equal or 
surpass the intellectual performance of any other ethnic group; and (5) the general lack of infant 
and early childhood educational experiences which stimulate, sustain and actualize their 
abundant human potential. Awakening the Natural Genius of Black Children provides effective 
means by which these political and social maladies may be fully remedies. Intelligence is not 
fixed at birth. The quality of children’s educational experiences during  infancy and early 
childhood are substantially related to their measured intelligence, academic achievement and 
prosocial behavior. In this volume, Amos N. Wilson, author of the bestseller, The Developmental 
Psychology of the Black Child, surveys the daily  routines, child-rearing practices, parent -child 
interactions, games and play materials, parent -training and pre -school programs which have 
made demonstrably outstanding and lasting differences in the intellectual, academic and social 
performance of Black children.  
 
 
Designed by RBG Street Scholar

