=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: BOB MARLEY - 1, Bob Marley, A Biography - David V. Moskowitz - Greenwood Biographies - Ebook.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 149
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:57:19.398222
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
BoB Marley



--- PAGE 3 ---
Recent Titles in Greenwood Biographies
Arnold Schwarzenegger: A Bography
Louise Krasniewicz and Michael Blitz
Blle Holday: A Bography
Meg Greene
Elvs Presley: A Bography
Kathleen Tracy
Shaqulle O’Neal: A Bography
Murry R. Nelson
Dr. Dre: A Bography
John Borgmeyer
Bonne and Clyde: A Bography
Nate Hendley
Martha Stewart: A Bography
Joann F . Price
Mchael Jordan: A Bography
David L. Porter
Alex Rodrquez: A Bography
Wayne Stewart
Steven Spelberg: A Bography
Kathi Jackson
Madonna: A Bography
Mary Cross
Jacke Robnson: A Bography
Mary Kay Linge



--- PAGE 4 ---
BoB Marley
a Biography
David V . Moskowitz
greenwood  biographies
Greenwoo D Press
west Port, connecticut  • l onDon



--- PAGE 5 ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Moskowtz, Davd V . (Davd Vlado), 1969 –
 Bob Marley : a bography / Davd V . Moskowtz.
  p. cm. — (Greenwood bographes, ISSN 1540-4900)
 Dscography: p.
 Includes bblographcal references and ndex.
 ISBN-13: 978–0–313–33879–3 (alk. paper)
 ISBN-10: 0–313–33879–5 (alk. paper)
 1. Marley, Bob. 2. Reggae muscans —Jamaca—Bography. I. Ttle.
 ML420.M3313M66 2007
 782.421646092—dc22  
 [B]   2007018313
Brtsh Lbrary Catalogung n Publcaton Data s avalable.
Copyrght © 2007 by Davd V . Moskowtz
All rghts reserved. No porton of ths book may be  
reproduced, by any process or technque, wthout  
the express wrtten consent of the publsher.
Lbrary of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2007018313
ISBN-13: 978 –0–313–33879–3
ISBN-10: 0–313–33879–5
ISSN: 1540–4900
Frst publshed n 2007
Greenwood Press, 88 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06881
An mprnt of Greenwood Publshng Group, Inc.
www.greenwood.com
Prnted n the Unted States of Amerca
The paper used n ths book comples wth the 
Permanent Paper Standard ssued by the Natonal 
Informaton Standards Organzaton (Z39.48–1984).
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
v


--- PAGE 6 ---
For Jack, welcome to the world
v


--- PAGE 7 ---
v


--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents
Series Foreword x
Acknowledgments x
Timeline: Events in the Life of Bob Marley x
Chapter 1 Country Boy to Ghetto Youth 1
Chapter 2 Out of the Ghetto, nto the Lmelght 11
Chapter 3 From Top of the Rock to Top of the World 29
Chapter 4 Reggae Internatonal 51
Chapter 5 Home to Mount Zon 67
Chapter 6 The Legacy and the Legend 77
Chapter 7 The Marley Famly 85
Selected Discography 103
Bibliography 113
Index 119
Photo essay follows page 66
v


--- PAGE 9 ---
v


--- PAGE 10 ---
series Foreword
In response to h gh school and publ c lbrary needs, Greenwood devel -
oped th s dstngushed ser es of full-length b ographes spec fcally for 
student use. Prepared by f eld experts and profess onals, these engag ng 
bographes are ta lored for h gh school students who need challeng ng 
yet access ble bographes. Ideal for secondary school ass gnments, the 
length, format and subject areas are des gned to meet educators’ requre-
ments and students’ nterests.
Greenwood offers an extens ve select on of b ographes spann ng 
all curr culum related subject areas ncludng soc al stud es, the sc -
ences, l terature and the arts, h story and pol tcs, as well as popular 
culture, cover ng publ c fgures and famous personal tes from all t me 
perods and backgrounds, both h storc and contemporary, who have 
made an mpact on Amer can and/or world culture. Greenwood b -
ographes were chosen based on comprehens ve feedback from l -
brarans and educators. Cons deraton was g ven to both curr culum 
relevance and nherent nterest. The result s an ntrgung mx of the 
well known and the unexpected, the  sants and s nners from long-ago 
hstory and contemporary pop culture. Readers w ll fnd a wde array of 
subject cho ces from fasc natng crme fgures lke Al Capone to nspr-
ng poneers l ke Margaret Mead, from the greatest m nds of our t me 
lke Stephen Hawk ng to the most amaz ng success stor es of our day 
lke J. K. Rowlng.
Whle the emphass s on fact, not glorfcaton, the books are meant 
to be fun to read. Each volume provdes n-depth nformaton about the 
subject’s lfe from brth through chldhood, the teen years, and adulthood. 
x


--- PAGE 11 ---
A thorough account relates fam ly background and educat on, traces 
personal and professonal nfluences, and explores struggles, accompl sh-
ments, and contrbutons. A tmelne hghlghts the most sgnfcant lfe 
events aga nst a h storcal perspect ve. B blographes supplement the 
reference value of each volume.
x SERIES  F O REWO RD


--- PAGE 12 ---
aC knowledg Ments
My sncerest thanks go to my wfe, Jen, and our chldren Heather, Lucas, 
Kate, and Jack. Wthout ther boundless patence there would never be 
enough tme for me to work on projects such as th s. Thanks also go to 
Dr. Walter Clark whose gudance and tutelage have helped me to pursue 
the research that nterests me most. Further thanks to Photofest Inc. for 
ther knd permsson to use the mages contaned n ths book.
x


--- PAGE 13 ---
x


--- PAGE 14 ---
tiMeline: events in the liFe 
oF Bo B Marley
 1945 Nesta Robert Marley, the only chld of Cedella Mal-
colm and Captan Norval Snclar Marley, was born at 
2:30 p.m. on February 6, 1945. The brth took place on 
Cedella’s father’s (Omerah Malcolm’s) farm n Nne 
Mle, St. Ann’s Parsh, Jamaca. Bob stayed on ths fam-
ly farm untl he was sx.
 1951 Bob went to lve wth hs father n Kngston, Jamaca. 
When Cedella arrved the followng year to look n on 
Bob, she dscovered that he had not been lvng wth 
hs father but had nstead been stayng wth an elderly 
woman named Mrs. Grey.
 1952 Once mother and son were reunted, they returned to-
gether to ther rural Jamacan home n St. Ann.
 1955 Bob learned that hs father had ded, hs mother moved 
to Kngston (wthout hm) to earn a better lvng.
 1956 Bob was moved from hs grandfather’s farm to lve wth 
hs mother’s sster, for whom he tended a herd of goats.
 1957 Bob was reunted wth hs mother when he moved to 
Kngston to jon her. Ths otherwse happy reunon was 
marred by the fact that they now lved n Kngston’s 
west-sde ghetto known as Trench Town.
 1959 After attendng several area schools, ncludng Ebenezer, 
Wesley, and St. Aloysus, Bob ended hs formal educa-
ton when he qut school. He spent hs tme playng 
x


--- PAGE 15 ---
soccer, hangng out wth other ghetto youth, and gradu-
ally pckng up musc.
 1960 Together wth hs closest frend Bunny, born Nevlle 
Lvngston, Bob began to cultvate hs muscal talents. 
He and Bunny bult rudmentary nstruments and to
-
gether they practced sngng by mtatng Fats Domno, 
Lous Jordan, and the harmones of Curts Mayfeld’s Im
-
pressons. Also durng ths year, Bob and Bunny began 
studyng sngng wth the Jamacan recordng artst Joe 
Hggs. Hggs not only provded sngng lessons, but he 
added Peter Tosh (born MacIntosh) to the group.
 1962 At age 16, Bob was taken to sng for producer Lesle 
Kong, who ssued hs frst recordngs, “Judge Not,” “One 
Cup of Coffee,” and “Terror,” on the Beverley’s mprnt.
 1963 Bob, Peter, and Bunny recorded for Clement “Coxsone” 
Dodd, who was one of the three bggest producers of 
Jamacan popular musc on the sland. Under the name 
The Walng Walers, the group released the sngle 
“Smmer Down,” whch brought them consderable suc
-
cess n Jamaca.
 1965 The Walng Walers contnued to have success wth 
a seres of sold-sellng sngles. By the end of the year, 
t was clear that Bob was the natural front man for the 
group. Ths led to frcton that ultmately broke up the 
orgnal three-member group. Early n the year, Bob 
met Rta Anderson (Alpharta Constanta Anderson), 
whom he soon marred.
 1966 Together, Bob and Rta had three chldren, although 
Bob had many other chldren outsde hs relatonshp 
wth Rta. Later n ths year, Bob moved to Wlmng
-
ton, Delaware. Bob remaned n Wlmngton for seven 
months, durng whch tme he worked a varety of odd 
jobs tryng to make enough money to launch hs own 
Jamaca-based record company. Whle n Wlmng-
ton, Bob stayed wth hs mother, who had prevously 
relocated to the Unted States.
 1969 Bob, Peter, and Bunny (under the name of the Walers) 
recorded a seres of successful sngles for Johnny Nash 
and Danny Sms’s JAD label. In the mddle of the year, 
Bob was agan n Delaware makng and savng money to 
open hs own studo n Jamaca.
xv TIMELINE


--- PAGE 16 ---
1970 The Walers begn recordng a seres of now classc 
sngles for producer Lee “Scratch” Perry n what would 
be a legendary lneup: Bob Marley, Bunny Waler, Peter 
Tosh, and the Barrett Brothers (Aston and Carlton) as 
the rhythm secton.
 1971 Bob, Peter, and Bunny, along wth ther rhythm secton 
Aston and Carlton Barrett, were n London workng for 
Nash and Sms on a record deal for CBS records. At the 
end of the year, the group was abandoned n London 
wth no means to return to Jamaca. Bob made contact 
wth Island Records’ head, Chrstopher Blackwell, who 
fronted hm the money to get the band back to Jamaca 
and make an album. Ths assocaton quckly made Is
-
land Records the most mportant reggae musc label.
 1972 The Walers released Catch a Fire, whch was the frst 
album-length recordng of reggae musc. The album had 
modest success and a degree of crossover appeal due to 
the rock and roll style gutar and keyboard overdubs that 
Blackwell added to the orgnal tracks. In January 1973, 
the album was released n the Unted States and forever 
changed the way that reggae musc was packaged and 
marketed. Catch a Fire was soon unversally recognzed 
as the frst genune reggae album n hstory.
 1973 The Walers launched ther frst offcal tour, whch 
ncluded televson appearances on the 
Old Grey Whistle 
Test and Top Gear. Also n ths year, the Walers released 
ther second record on the Island label, Burnin’.
 1974 The Walers reached nternatonal exposure due to Erc 
Clapton’s cover of the Walers song “I Shot the Sherff.” 
The song went to number one and sparked an enormous 
amount of nterest n the reggae style. Whle they were 
experencng the most success they had yet had, the 
orgnal three-member Walers core dsbanded. Bob 
contnued to use the Walers name for the rest of hs 
lfe. Wthout Peter and Bunny, Bob went on to release 
the Natty Dread album at the end of the year.
 1975 In January, the orgnal Walers offcally dsbanded. The 
Natty Dread album was released nternatonally n Feb-
ruary. Much of the summer and fall of the year was taken 
up by an nternatonal tour n support of the new album. 
Several shows were recorded n England and made nto 
 TIMELINE xv


--- PAGE 17 ---
the frst Walers concert album, called Live! The album 
sold well n the UK and was released n the Unted 
States n 1976.
 1976 Bob appeared on the cover of Rolling Stone magazne. 
Bob Marley and the Walers released the Rastaman Vi-
bration album then toured for three months to support 
the release. At approxmately 8:45 p.m. on December 3, 
gunmen broke nto Marley’s house at 56 Hope Road and 
opened fre. Bob and Rta were each shot once and ther 
manager, Don Taylor, was shot several tmes. Everyone 
survved, but ths forced Bob nto self-mposed exle n 
fear for hs lfe.
 1977 In the wake of the assassnaton attempt, Bob released a 
flurry of records. Exodus was ssued on June 3, 1977.
 1978 Kaya album released n early 1978. The Exodus and 
Kaya releases both spawned successful tours. Bob set up 
the Jamacan Peace Concert, whch featured several 
mportant reggae acts. The concert was produced to help 
settle some of the volence that had been tearng the 
sland apart.
 1979 Bob and the Walers released the Survival album n 
October of 1979. The album was another bg success 
and led to another nternatonal tour whch was 
launched n Boston at the end of October.
 1980 The sessons that produced the Survival materal also 
yelded the songs for the album Uprising. Uprising was 
released n June and was supported by another nterna-
tonal tour wth dates n the Unted States and Western 
Europe, durng whch the Walers played for over one 
mllon people. Durng the North Amercan leg of the 
Uprising tour, Bob collapsed whle joggng n New York’s 
Central Park. It was soon dscovered that he had suf-
fered a stroke and the rest of the tour was canceled. The 
last lve show that Bob Marley and the Walers played 
was on September 23, 1980, at Pttsburgh’s Stanley The
-
ater. In the wake of hs collapse, Bob was dagnosed wth 
termnal cancer n hs stomach, lungs, and bran. At the 
end of the year, Bob traveled to Bad Wessee, Germany, 
seekng nontradtonal cancer treatment from Dr. Josef 
Issels. Dr. Issels was able to extend Bob’s lfe, but could 
not successfully treat the cancer.
xv  TIMELINE


--- PAGE 18 ---
1980 On October 4, Amercan popular muscan Steve Won-
der released a trbute to the cancer-strcken reggae su-
perstar. The song was reggae-lke n style and was called 
“Master Blaster (Jammn’).” It went on to be a serous 
ht on the U.S. rhythm and blues charts and topped out 
at number fve on the pop charts.
 1981 At 11:45 on Monday, May 11, 1981, Robert Nesta 
Marley, the frst thrd-world muscan who rose to nter
-
natonal super stardom, ded. In death, Bob was treated 
as a Jamacan natonal hero. He was awarded Jamaca’s 
Natonal Order of Mert and gven a state funeral. 
Afterward, Bob’s body was taken to hs St. Ann’s brth
-
place where t remans. Snce hs death, Bob’s chldhood 
home n St. Ann and hs house at 56 Hope Road have 
become places of plgrmage for ardent fans. Although 
there are many albums that have been released after 
Bob’s death, the Confrontation album (released n 1983) 
was the only posthumous release that was conceved of 
by Bob before he ded.
 1984 The most popular collecton of Bob’s greatest hts, Leg-
end, was released. The album went on to become the 
hghest-sellng reggae album of all tme.
 1999 The collecton of Bob’s greatest hts, Legend, receved ts 
10th platnum certfcaton, sgnfyng that t had sold 
more than 10 mllon copes. Ths contnues to easly 
hold the record for the hghest-sellng reggae boxed set.
 TIMELINE xv 


--- PAGE 19 ---
xv 


--- PAGE 20 ---
Robert Nesta Marley was the frst and possbly the only superstar to emerge 
from the thrd world. From hs meager rural begnnngs, Bob blossomed 
nto a man of such sgnfcant mport and nfluence that hs attempted 
assassnaton n 1976 was poltcally motvated. Bob’s muscal nfluence 
s stll felt. Hs was the frst reggae act to release a full-length LP , whch 
mmedately changed the marketng model that had exsted for 30 years. 
Beyond ts commercal mpact, Bob’s musc has a unversal qualty that 
transcends race, color, economc class, even language. For example, t s 
known that hs musc s lstened to by such dverse groups as the Maor 
people of New Zealand and the Hop Indans lvng n Amerca’s Grand 
Canyon.
Although he lved a short lfe, only 36 years, Bob penned an enormous 
quantty of songs. And unlke some songwrters, Bob was nvolved n all 
aspects of the creaton of hs musc. He worked on each of the nstrumental 
parts, wrote the lyrcs, and had hs hand n the control room whle the 
ntal tracks were beng lad down, n addton to beng nvolved n the 
edtng and overdubbng process that yelded the fnal product. Bob’s 
sound was so characterstc of reggae that t vrtually cornered the “roots 
reggae” desgnaton. Hs rhythm secton poneered the standard roots reg
-
gae groove, whch they called “one drop” rhythm. One drop rhythm was 
acheved when the drummer accented only the thrd beat of a four beat 
measure. The classcal musc of Western Europe typcally accented the 
frst and the thrd beat n a four beat measure, and Amercan rock and roll 
musc emphaszed beats two and four. Ths unque reggae rhythm sepa
-
rated t from the musc from whch t grew and made t dstnctly Jamacan 
chapter 1
Country Boy to  
ghetto youth
1


--- PAGE 21 ---
2 BOB  M ARLEY
n character. Bob so lked ths style of playng that he wrote a song that 
llustrated the rhythm (the song s called “One Drop”) and ncluded lyrcs 
about the fne qualty of ths rhythm. In addton to hs achevements n 
formng the reggae sound, Bob was also an expert lyrcst. The equal of 
any contemporary hp-hop word slnger, Bob was able to craft emotonally 
powerful chans of words that are pleasng to lsten to on the surface but 
that pack a serous punch when ther meanngs are explored. He was able 
to draw the meanng and the emoton out of each word and then expertly 
hde them n relaxed “sland”-soundng musc. Bob dd ths on purpose. If 
hs musc was too overtly poltcal or venomous, t would not be commer
-
cal or rado frendly. Bob also knew hs way around a good rock and roll 
song. Hs musc s often delvered n the standard verse/chorus form wth 
addtonal weght added to the chorus materal. Ths s a tme-honored 
rock and roll form wth roots from Elvs to the Beatles.
Regardless of Bob’s poverty-str cken ch ldhood, h s adult l fe con -
taned the trappngs of success. At the heght of hs career n the late 
1970s, Bob lved n a bg house n downtown Kngston, the captal cty 
of Jamaca. The house contaned all of the standard lvng spaces, plus 
rehearsal and recordng spaces so that Bob and hs band could work where 
they lved. A typcal day at ths house, 56 Hope Road, was to spend the 
mornng playng soccer and smokng ganja (Jamacan slang for mar
-
juana), the afternoon conductng busness and meetng wth people who 
often wanted Bob to gve them money, and the evenng rehearsng and 
recordng, contnung well nto the nght. Bob dd acqure some of the 
symbols of a wealthy person. For example, he drove a BMW , whch was 
certanly an ndcaton of hs monetary standng. However, Bob dd not 
really care much for such symbols and reportedly bought the car because 
BMW could stand for Bob Marley and the Walers. Lke hs chldhood 
home n St. Ann’s Parsh, the house at 56 Hope Road has been converted 
nto a museum. The upsta rs bedrooms are now gallery space that house 
tems such as a large map of the world w th push pns markng all of the 
places where Bob and the Walers toured. Bob’s son Zggy’s old room (hs 
son’s actual name s Davd) has been made nto a bus ness offce and a 
lbrary. Bob’s master bedroom s also on the second floor and t has been 
preserved just the way that t was when he ded.
As well as the attracton that Bob’s musc had, he also had a very mag
-
netc personalty. Bob was descrbed as open, honest, and approachable, 
especally to hs ghetto brothers and ssters. However, when deceved by a 
busness assocate or cornered by an ntervewer, Bob could become qute 
nasty; he would quckly gve the person a serous look that made everyone 
understand that he should not be taken for granted. Another way that


--- PAGE 22 ---
COUNTRY  B OY  TO  G HETTO  Y OUTH  3
Bob separated hmself from the Western world was n hs speech. Whle 
Englsh s the offcal language of Jamaca, most Jamacans actually speak 
a pdgn verson of the language ncludng words adopted from varous 
Afrcan languages and a great deal of slang. So, f Bob wanted to be un -
derstood he spoke n plan Englsh, but f he wanted to confuse the person 
he was talkng to or wanted to purposely obscure hs meanng, then he 
swtched nto a thck Jamacan accent that was completely unntellgble 
to anyone who was not from the sland.
As a professonal performer, Bob presented a knd of front that man -
fested tself n the way he acted and the way he looked. He favored denm 
shrts and pants, boots, and stockng hats (called tams). On stage he often 
fell nto a trance-lke state whle sngng. He would keep hs eyes closed 
and flal hs arms whle swngng hs long dreadlocks. All of these compo
-
nents together created Bob Marley the legend.
Bob’s mpact was felt durng hs lfe and contnues to be felt today. 
Snce 1991, Bob Marley and the Walers have sold n excess of 21 mllon 
records (these statstcs dd not begn to be collected untl 10 years after 
hs death). Further, Bob has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, he was 
nducted nto the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, he receved the Grammy 
Lfetme Achevement Award, and he was awarded the Jamacan Order of 
Mert. Regardless of these (and many other) awards, the true test of Bob’s 
worth s tme. T wenty-fve years after hs death, the musc of Bob Marley 
and the Walers s as popular, mportant, and pertnent as t was the day 
t was released.
Jamaica
Jamaca s one of the larger Carbbean slands and s located about two 
hundred mles south of the slands at the southern tp of Florda (the 
Florda Keys). The sland tself s lttle more than a mountan stckng 
up through the surface of the ocean; however, due to ts clmate Jamaca 
s an sland paradse. The low-lyng coastal areas contan the majorty of 
the sland’s populaton, and the majorty of the people lvng n the nte-
ror have tradtonally lved off the land. In fact, much of the Jamacan 
economy has been based on the exportaton of ther crops, such as coffee, 
sugarcane, bananas, coconuts, ctrus fruts, and pmento. The populaton 
of the sland s sparse n ts nteror, but qute dense n the ctes of Kngs
-
ton (the captal), Montego Bay, Negrl, and Ocho Ros. An nterestng 
dualty on the sland s the great dsparty between the wealthy and the 
poor. Jamaca s stll part of the thrd world as many of ts nhabtants do 
not have runnng water, electrcty, or telephone servce. Conversely, the


--- PAGE 23 ---
4 BOB  M ARLEY
sland’s ctes are as modern as any n the Unted States. Ths economc 
dvde also creates an unstable envronment that s often marked by po -
ltcal unrest and volence. It was nto these crcumstances that Nesta 
Robert (the order of hs names was later reversed) Marley was born at 
2:30 p.m. on February 6, 1945.
Birth in nine mile
Bob was born n the rural nteror of the sland n a parsh called 
St. Ann. Jamacan parshes are vaguely equvalent to countes n the 
Unted States. Bob was born to a black Jamacan mother, Cedella Malcolm, 
and a whte Jamacan father, Captan Norval Snclar (or Sant Clar) 
Marley. The two were an odd par as Cedella was only 18 and Norval, a 
member of the Brtsh army, was n hs early sxtes. Bob’s brth took place 
on hs maternal grandfather’s farm. Omerah Malcolm was a landown
-
ng black man who was a respected nhabtant of the vllage called Nne 
Mle. Bob’s brthplace s a small rural communty that s located hgh n 
the nteror mountans of the sland. Bob’s mother and father had met on 
Omerah’s farm, and the two were marred there on June 9, 1944. The 
weddng was not the usual happy occason, as Captan Marley announced 
that he would be departng Nne Mle the followng day. He had been of
-
fered a government job n Kngston and had no ntenton of returnng to 
St. Ann. The captan dd return, however, on the occason of Bob’s brth. 
After a week’s stay, the captan agan returned to Kngston and gradually 
lost touch wth hs wfe and son.
Because the captan was not takng fnancal responsblty for hs new 
famly, Cedella had to support her son. Her father allowed her to open a 
small grocery store on the famly property where she could sell the crops 
that she helped grow. There s some dsagreement about Cedella and Bob’s 
care durng hs early lfe. Stephen Davs noted n hs bography of the reg
-
gae superstar that Captan Marley left Omerah wth enough money to 
buld Cedella and Bob a small cabn to lve n and startup money for the 
grocery store. Regardless, Cedella and Bob were poor and barely scrapng 
by at ths tme. Whle Bob was stll a baby, the captan contacted Cedella 
to request that she send Bob to Kngston to lve wth hm. Bob’s mother 
wanted no part of ths separaton from her chld; however, the captan dd 
not let the ssue drop completely.
Bob began hs formal educaton at age four when he began attendng 
the Stepney School. Stepney was a basc school and provded Bob wth 
rudmentary educaton n letters and numbers. Durng hs early edu
-
caton, Bob was sngled out by hs teacher as beng a brght chld and


--- PAGE 24 ---
COUNTRY  B OY  TO  G HETTO  Y OUTH  5
a fast learner. When Bob was sx years old, hs father reappeared n Nne 
Mle and agan tred to convnce Cedella that Bob would be better off 
n Kngston. Ths tme, hs father added that Bob’s educaton would be 
better served at the bgger, better Kngston publc school. Cedella and 
Omerah consdered the captan’s request and decded that t was n Bob’s 
best nterest to attend school n Kngston. Further, Cedella could not af-
ford Bob’s school clothes and lunches. All ths havng been consdered, 
Bob went to Kngston to lve wth hs father and attend publc school.
Cedella and the captan corresponded durng her separaton from her 
son and she was always reassured that Bob was dong well. After sx 
months, Cedella planned to rde the bus nto Kngston to vst her son. 
The captan put her off, sayng that Bob was away on a school trp and ths 
evason foreshadowed Captan Marley’s decet. After a full year had passed, 
Cedella had had enough of the captan’s stallng. She had learned from a 
frend that Bob was not n fact lvng wth the captan at all. She had also 
been told that Bob was unhappy wth hs Kngston arrangements and was 
watng for hs mother’s assstance.
In early 1952, Cedella arrved n Kngston to reclam her son. Ths pre
-
sented a problem as she no longer knew where the captan or Bob lved. 
Cedella had receved word that Bob was lkely lvng on Heywood Street, 
so she went there and began askng about her son. Soon she learned that 
Bob had been lvng wth an elderly woman named Mrs. Grey, and as 
Cedella searched out Mrs. Grey’s house, around the corner came Bob. 
Reunted wth hs mother, Bob took her to meet Mrs. Grey, who nformed 
Cedella that Bob had been lvng wth her snce hs arrval n Kngston. 
The captan’s plan was that by lvng wth Mrs. Grey, Bob would become 
her her when she ded. Wth the captan’s plan exposed and foled, Bob 
and Cedella returned to St. Ann.
Back n hs rural brthplace, Bob agan studed at the Stepney School. 
Whle not studyng, Bob helped hs mother run the grocery store. Wh le 
workng at the store Bob began to exh bt hs sngng talent. Hs mother 
reported that Bob sang trad tonal Jama can vendor songs that he had 
learned whle he was l vng n Kngston. In 1955, Bob learned that h s 
father had ded. In the same year, Bob was aga n separated from Cedella. 
The meager earnngs from the grocery store were not enough to support 
the two of them. Rural Jamacan lfe was and s very dffcult, and although 
slavery was abolshed n the 1830s, the sland stll has undertones of slavery. 
Because she could not support Bob and herself, Cedella opted to take a job 
as a housekeeper n Kngston. She left Bob on Omer ah’s farm and agan 
took the bus to the captal cty. Ths tme, nstead of searchng for her son 
she was searchng for the fnancal means to properly care for hm.


--- PAGE 25 ---
6 BOB  M ARLEY
When Bob was aged 11, Omerah moved Bob to Cedella’s older sster’s 
property, about ten mles away from the famly farm. Here Bob was n 
charge of a herd of goats that he had to care for and look after. Lackng 
any real supervson, Bob and hs cousn, Sledger, were constantly n trou-
ble. These troublemakng ways got the par sent back to Omerah’s farm, 
and Bob spent the next two years under hs grandfather’s watchful eye.
In 1957, Cedella had acheved the fnancal stablty to allow for her 
to call for Bob. However, stablty and prosperty are qute dfferent. Bob 
arrved n Kngston to fnd that hs mother had been lvng n the cty’s 
west-sde ghetto. Whle rural Jamacan lfe s hard, the west Kngston 
ghettos were a testament to the underprvleged n the thrd world. Open 
sewers, malnourshed chldren, dsease, and volence were the character
-
stcs of the place that Bob came to know as Trench Town. Bob and hs 
mother were spared the harshest part of the ghetto, however, and nstead 
lved n the publc housng projects called the “government yard.”
Jamaca had earler enjoyed a tme of greater prosperty and economc 
stablty. Pror to the sugarcane cutters’ strke n 1938, the sland’s 
prosperous sugar and banana ndustres provded a decent lvng for most 
of ts nhabtants. However, ths age of prosperty was forever lost due 
to the strke. An outgrowth of the strke was the creaton of the frst Ja
-
macan labor unons, and from the two strongest unons came the two 
Jamacan poltcal partes. When Jamaca declared ndependence from 
Brtan on August 6, 1962, these rval partes became locked nto a conflct 
that contnues today.
The two partes are the Jamacan Labour Party (JLP) and the People’s 
Natonal Party (PNP), and snce the early 1960s each electon year has 
been marked by volence between the two sdes. The two partes are com
-
pletely opposed n membershp and msson. The JLP was founded by the 
rght-wng labor organzer Alexander Bustamante, who went on to be -
come Jamaca’s frst prme mnster. Bustamante’s party represented the 
whte Brtsh and Anglo-Jamacan colonal class, the mercantle mddle 
class composed of Chnese and Lebanese busnessmen and storeowners, 
and the elte black Jamacans who worked for them. The PNP represented 
the rest of the sland’s populaton, that s, the rural and urban underclass. 
The PNP was begun by Norman Washngton Manley, who also went on 
to become a Jamacan prme mnster.
After Bob arrved n Kngston, he and hs mother moved several tmes, 
fnally settlng n an apartment at 19 Second Street. Whle Cedella was 
at work n the houses of Kngston’s wealthy, Bob attended several schools 
ncludng Ebenezer, Wesley, and St. Aloysus. Although Bob remaned 
a strong student, he lost nterest n school and stopped attendng by the


--- PAGE 26 ---
COUNTRY  B OY  TO  G HETTO  Y OUTH  7
tme he was 14. He then spent hs days playng soccer, hangng out wth 
hs frends n the ghetto, and gettng nto trouble. He also began to get 
nterested n musc. Another famly that lved n hs tenement yard had a 
son named Nevlle O’Rley Lvngston (b. 1947), who went by the name 
Bunny. Together, Bob and Bunny began sngng cover versons of songs 
that they had learned on the rado and eventually even fashoned make
-
shft nstruments out of found materals. Ther przed possesson was a 
gutar made of copper wre, a sardne can, and a pece of bamboo.
An offshoot of Jamaca’s ndependence was the country’s collectve 
search for a new natonal dentty. Ths search created an envronment 
n whch a true Jamacan sound emerged. Untl ths tme, Jamacan musc 
had conssted of mento (a ragged Jamacan calypso) and the Amercan 
rhythm and blues that was broadcast from Lousana and Florda. The de
-
velopment of a unquely Jamacan sound happened fast and took several 
forms. The frst style that developed was called ska. Ths style has a fast 
beat, shufflng rhythms, and a combnaton of elements from mento and 
rhythm and blues. Ska also had an assocated dance, whch was a sort of 
charade n whch the dancers acted out everyday domestc chores such 
as cleanng. Although ska was soon replaced by rock steady, whch was a 
slower, more electrc nstrument drven style, t dd not dsappear. In fact, 
there have been several ska revvals. Ska’s second wave flourshed n the 
Unted States and the Unted Kngdom n the late 1970s and the 1980s 
and featured bands such as the Englsh Beat, Madness, the Selector, and 
the Specals. The md-1990s saw the rse of ska’s thrd wave, wth bands 
lke Less than Jake, the Urge, Sublme, No Doubt, and Reel Bg Fsh.
At the dawnng of the ska era, Bob and Bunny were most nterested n 
the Amercan rhythm and blues sound. Bob partcularly lked Fats Dom
-
no, Huey “Pano” Smth, and Earl Kng. He was also nfluenced by Lous 
Jordan’s jump band style and the close vocal harmones of the Drfters 
and the Impressons. Curts Mayfeld, the leader of the Impressons, had a 
specal nfluence on Bob. Whle Bob rarely covered other people’s songs, 
he actually ncorporated Mayfeld’s song “People Get Ready” nto hs own 
song “One Love.” Once Bob embraced the sngng style of the Drfters 
and the Impressons, he knew that he wanted to form a sngng group and 
take a run at musc stardom.
Whle Bob dreamed of becom ng a famous s nger, Cedella worr ed 
about her hgh school dropout son. She managed to help Bob get a job n 
a weldng shop where he could learn a trade that could support hm. Whle 
Bob never became a welder, the connectons that he made n the weldng 
shop altered the course of hs lfe. One of the other welders was a bud
-
dng muscan named Desmond Dekker. Dekker led the already modestly


--- PAGE 27 ---
8 BOB  M ARLEY
successful sngng group the Aces and he was connected to the Jamacan 
recordng ndustry. In fact, by the end of the 1960s, Dekker’s group had an 
nternatonal ht wth the song “Israeltes.”
Grew Up wailinG
Bob followed hs mother’s wshes and worked n the welder’s shop for 
a tme, because he knew that n order to become a good snger he needed 
tranng. He needed to learn the rudments of how to sng properly and the 
theory behnd the constructon of musc. The man that was able to provde 
hm wth both of those sk lls lved just around the corner from Bob and 
Bunny’s Second Street yard. Joe H ggs (1940–1999) was half of the suc -
cessful pre-ska sngng duo Hggs and Wlson. He had had success n the 
early 1960s and was a well-respected member of the Jamacan musc scene. 
However, unlke other successful artsts from the ghetto, Hggs choose not 
to move out of Trench Town. Instead, he converted hs Second Street yard 
nto an mpromptu musc school where asprng sngers were welcome to 
partcpate n sngng classes. Hggs had perfect ptch and was an expert at 
sngng n close harmony so he was a perfect match for Bob’s desres. More 
mportantly, Hggs conducted hs classes for free and took all comers.
Bob, Bunny, and peter
Bob and Bunny began frequentng Hggs’s yard and soon were learn -
ng how to sng n harmony wth each other. Hggs also ntroduced the 
par to a tall, slghtly older ghetto youth named Peter MacIntosh, who 
would soon go by the name Peter Tosh (1944–1987). On Hggs’s sugges -
ton, Peter joned Bob and Bunny, makng the group a tro. Also, Peter 
had the dstncton of beng the only ghetto youth n Hggs’s yard to have 
a factory-made gutar, whch he soon taught Bob how to play. Together, 
the tro formed a sngng group called the Teenagers. The group also n
-
cluded two female sngers, Beverly Kelso and Cherry Smth, and soon 
added a fourth male snger n the form of Junor Brathwate. The group 
worked well together to create vocal harmony as each snger’s voce was n 
a dfferent range. Bob sang tenor, Bunny sang n a natural-soundng hgh 
falsetto, and Peter sang bass. The group dd covers of those who had nflu
-
enced them, ncludng Sam Cooke, Ray Charles, and the Impressons.
Along wth ther sngng tutelage, Hggs also taught Bob how to con -
struct a song. Bob learned that there were three man song sectons, the 
verse (where the story of the song unfolded), the chorus (a secton that 
repeated the song’s most catchy materal), and the brdge (often composed


--- PAGE 28 ---
COUNTRY  B OY  TO  G HETTO  Y OUTH  9
of a gutar solo). These sectons worked n a specfc order n the construc-
ton of a popular song. The verses and the chorus alternated untl about 
two-thrds of the way through the song, when the brdge was nserted. 
After the brdge, there were typcally repettons of the chorus materal 
untl the song ended. Ths s the standard verse/chorus song form that was 
as popular then as t s now.
In 1961, Bob began wrtng hs own songs and the next natural step was 
to try to get them recorded. Decdng to try to be a solo snger, Bob ap
-
proached Lesle Kong (1933–1971), who was a Chnese-Jamacan studo 
owner and who refused to record the Teenagers. The Jamacan recordng 
ndustry was n ts nfancy n the early 1960s. There were only a few stu
-
dos and the studo owners dd not want to waste money on a recordng 
that was not a guaranteed moneymaker. Also, the three man studos had 
mmedately cornered the market n Jamacan recordng, so together Ken 
Khour (Federal Studos), Duke Red (Treasure Isle Studos), and Clem -
ent “Coxsone” Dodd (Studo One) were already governng the style of 
Jamacan popular musc. Havng been turned away by Kong, Bob enlsted 
the help of hs weldng shop coworker Desmond Dekker. Dekker already 
had an n at the studos and scored a ht for Kong’s Beverley’s label wth 
hs song “Honour Your Mother and Father.” Dekker took Bob back to 
Kong and he audtoned agan. Ths tme, Bob sang for Kong’s most recent 
sensaton, the 14-year-old snger Jmmy Clff. Clff was suffcently m
-
pressed by Bob’s sngng to persuade Kong to record a few of Bob’s songs.
Solo Singles
Bob recorded “Judge Not,” “One Cup of Coffee,” and “Terror” n 1962 
on Kong’s Beverley’s label. Kong released these songs as 45-rpm sngles, 
but wthout any marketng or rado play the sngles were not successful. 
At 16, Bob was a Jamacan recordng artst, although not a successful one. 
At the tme of the release, t was assumed that the three songs were all 
orgnals wrtten by Bob. However, Chrstopher Farley has subsequently 
dscovered that “One Cup of Coffee” was actually a cover of a song by 
Claude Gray, an Amercan snger/songwrter.
One aspect of the Jamacan musc scene n the 1960s was the rse of the 
talent contest. Lke the modern Battle of the Bands, varous Jamacan bus
-
nesses sponsored talent contests to try to f nd the next b g ht. Bob sang 
n several of these contests n the early 1960s and had a modest amount of 
success. Even as hs career was begnnng to take off, however, Bob’s per-
sonal lfe was dffcult. Bob’s mother and Bunny’s father had an affar that 
yelded a baby grl whom they called Pearl. Because th s created an even


--- PAGE 29 ---
10  BOB  M ARLEY
more dffcult monetary stuaton, Cedella decded to marry a more stable 
man. In late 1962, Cedella marred Edward Booker, who was already estab-
lshed n a small Jamacan communty n Wlmngton, Delaware. Cedella 
and Pearl relocated to Delaware wth Booker, and Bob stayed n Jamaca. 
Cedella dd not have enough money for all of them to go; however, she dd 
get Bob a passport and t was at ths tme that hs frst and mddle names 
were reversed. Now homeless, 18-year-old Bob was squatt ng n varous 
spots around Trench Town. By early 1963, Bob was l vng n the corner 
of a k tchen on F rst Street w th hs frend Vncent “Tartar” Ford. Poor 
and desttute, Bob and Tartar often sang to keep ther mnds off of beng 
hungry. Quckly runnng out of optons, Bob rejoned the other members 
of the Teenagers and abandoned all hope of beng a solo snger.
Another musc tutor entered the pcture when the Rastafaran hand 
drummer Alvn “Seeco” Patterson began teachng the Teenagers the n-
trcaces of muscal rhythm. Patterson was already a professonal muscan 
and had deep connectons to the Jamacan musc ndustry. In the summer 
of 1963, Patterson took the Teenagers to audton for Clement “Coxsone” 
Dodd, the owner of one of the best studos on the sland. Dodd’s studo 
was called the Jamacan Recordng and Publshng Company Lmted, but 
everyone n Trench Town knew t as Studo One. Patterson had already 
been talkng the band up to Dodd, and the producer knew the sngs that 
Bob had cut for Kong. The group performed one orgnal and three cover 
songs, but Dodd dsmssed them, sayng that they needed more practce. 
Peter, the most aggressve member of the group, told Dodd that they had 
another song he should hear. The group performed Bob’s orgnal com
-
poston, “Smmer Down,” and Dodd told them that he would record the 
song. “Smmer Down” was a tmely ghetto anthem that warned the youth 
to control ther tempers or the volence n the west Kngston ghetto would 
only get worse.
For the recordng sesson, the band needed to decde on a name that 
they could stck wth, and they chose the Walng Walers based on a pas-
sage n the Bble. As was the custom n the Jamacan recordng ndustry, 
the group was backed by a collecton of studo nstrumentalsts that n-
cluded some now legendary players such as Ernest Rangln on gutar, Rco 
Rodrquez on trombone, Arkland “Drumbago” Parks on drums, and Clu -
ett Johnson on bass. The product of the sesson was a fast ska verson of 
“Smmer Down” that was domnated by horn lnes. All nvolved were 
convnced that the song would be a ht. The song was released n tme 
for Chrstmas 1963 and by early 1964 t had soared to number one on 
the Jamacan charts. The song sat at the top of the chart for two months 
and the Walng Walers were nstant stars.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Wth the success of “S mmer Down,” the Walng Walers became a fx-
ture at Studo One. The recorded regularly and Dodd even allowed Bob 
to lve at the studo. The Walng Walers followed up ther early success 
wth two more hts n 1964. The songs “It Hurts to Be Alone” and “Lone-
some Feelng” were both emotonal songs about the pan of loss and lone-
lness. In 1965, “I’m Stll Watng” was the next Walng Walers ht. The 
song was recorded wth the close harmones of the Amercan doo-wop 
style. Another Walng Walers manstay was to cover Amercan hts and 
nfuse them wth sland style. They dd ths wth songs by the Drfters, 
Aaron Nevlle, and others. Although the group never got reproducton 
rghts from the orgnal songwrters, they never had legal problems be
-
cause ther covers were never popular outsde Jamaca.
From Ska to rock Steady
Lvng n Dodd’s studo gave Bob the opportunty to practce the gutar 
for hours. It also allowed hm to lsten to Dodd’s rhythm and blues and 
soul records. Bob mmersed hmself n the Motown sound and spent hours 
lstenng to the products from the soul studos of the Amercan southeast. 
As Bob was learnng Amercan muscal style, the Jamacan ska style was 
gvng way to rock steady. In rock steady, the beat speed s less than half as 
fast as n ska. Also, the ska horn lne s gone and s replaced by keyboards. 
The gutar s emphaszng the second and fourth beat of a four beat mea
-
sure and the bass s emphaszng beats one and three. The Walng Walers 
chapter 2
out o F the ghetto,  
into the liMelight
11


--- PAGE 31 ---
12  BOB  M ARLEY
adopted ths style change and slowed ther songs down to accommodate 
the new style.
In addton to ther studo tme, the Walng Walers spent the md-
1960s playng lve. They appeared on Vere John’s “Opportunty Hour” 
and the Ward Theater’s “Battle of the Bands.” Growng up n the ghetto, 
Bob had been gven the nckname “Tuff Gong” for hs no-nonsense street 
atttude. Bob dsplayed hs temper after losng one of these talent contests 
to a group called the Unques. Upon the announcement of the wnner, 
Bob flew nto a rage and challenged a member of the wnnng band to a 
fght.
An aspect of the new rock steady style was a subset of songs that were 
assocated wth the “rude boy” lfestyle. Jamacan rude boys were the 
ghetto youth who survved on ther wts and were often prone to short 
tempers and volence. Bob often njected that rude boy swagger nto hs 
songs. Addtonally, rude boy rock steady allowed the bass and drums to 
domnate the song and dd not use the typcal ska horns. The Walng 
Walers created a ghetto anthem wth ther 1965 sngle “Rude Boy.” The 
song glorfed the rude boy atttude and ts lyrcs were flled wth boastng 
and rude boy slang. Agan, Bob and the group had a bg ht. Even wth 
ths orgnal musc success, the Walng Walers contnued to cover other 
artsts’ songs wth Tom Jones’s “What’s New Pussycat” and the Beatles’ 
“And I Love Her.” It was also at ths tme that Bob began the practce, 
whch lasted the rest of hs lfe, of nsertng Bblcal quotatons or para
-
phrases nto hs songs.
The end of 1965 also marked the end of the Walng Walers. Junor 
Brathwate left the group to move to Chcago and Kelso and Smth also 
departed for greener pastures. Reduced to the core three members, the 
Walng Walers also shortened ther name to just the Walers. Ths al
-
teraton of the group sze foreshadowed the constantly changng lneup 
that marked the entre exstence of the Walers band.
In early 1965, Bob met the female snger Rta Anderson (b. 1950). Rta 
was the head of a female vocal tro called the Soulettes. She was also a 
Sunday school teacher, church snger, and respected member of the ghetto 
communty. Lke Bob, Rta also ganed access to Studo One and aspred 
to be a recordng artst. Rta convnced Bob and Peter to arrange for an 
audton for her group. Dodd lked what he heard, but n hs shrewd bus
-
ness manner told the grls that they needed more work. He brought them 
n on probaton and made Bob ther sngng coach and manager.
At frst, Bob was very strct wth the grls and they were scared of hm. 
Soon, though, Bob softened and even admtted that he was attracted to 
Rta. Bob expressed hs feelng for Rta by wrtng her love notes that


--- PAGE 32 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  13
he asked Bunny to delver for hm. The par soon grew closer and the 
resultng love affar lasted the rest of Bob’s short lfe. At the same tme, 
Bob tred of lvng n Dodd’s studo. Seeng no other soluton, Rta took 
Bob n to lve wth her, her nfant daughter Sharon, and her aunt and 
uncle. However, her aunt and uncle were not agreeable to the stuaton 
and threw the par out. Cooler heads soon prevaled; a small shack was 
bult behnd Rta’s aunt and uncle’s house, and Bob, Rta, and Sharon all 
lved there. Bob spent the rest of 1965 workng for Dodd, gettng closer to 
Rta and Sharon, and tryng to advance hs fledglng musc career. At the 
end of the year, the Walers learned ther frst mportant lesson about the 
record ndustry. When they went to collect your annual royaltes for ther 
record sales from Dodd, they were put off and told that ther lvng allow
-
ance was ther royaltes. A fght ensued and Dodd fnally relented, gvng 
the three sngers £60 to splt. Wth ths, Bob’s dstrust of record producers 
began; t contnued to grow worse for the rest of hs lfe.
Bob planned a moneymakng trp to Delaware for early 1966. However, 
he lad down one condton; before he left he wanted to marry Rta. On 
February 10, 1966, Bob and Rta were marred. Frends of the par her
-
alded the weddng as the unon of the two most promsng sngng groups 
on the sland. Just has hs father had done, Bob left Rta the day after the 
weddng to fnd work n the Unted States.
BoB and raStaFariani Sm
Bob’s stay n Delaware lasted for seven months. Durng ths tme, Bob 
worked a varety of menal jobs. He was a laboratory assstant for the Du 
Pont Chemcal Company and he had part-tme jobs as a parkng lot at
-
tendant, fork lft drver, and dshwasher. The rest of Bob’s tme was spent 
wrtng new songs. He dd not partcularly care for the fast pace or the 
clmate n Delaware and looked forward to returnng to Jamaca and Rta. 
Also whle n Delaware, Bob began hs converson from Catholcsm to 
belef n Rastafaransm. Hs mother was appalled by the change, but was 
powerless but to watch as Bob’s ha r grew nto dreadlocks and as he 
talked ever ncreasngly about Hale Selasse and Ethopa.
The wearng of dreadlocks s one aspect of the belefs of Rastafaran ad
-
herents. Sportng these uncombed locks of har has not been unversally 
adopted by members of the group, but Rastas fnd precedents for ths habt 
n passages from the Bble. Rastas beleve dreadlocks to be supported by 
Levtcus 21:5 (“They shall not make baldness upon ther head, nether 
shall they shave off the corner of ther beard, nor make any cuttngs n 
the flesh”) and the Nazarte
 vow n Numbers 6:5 (“All the days of the


--- PAGE 33 ---
14  BOB  M ARLEY
vow of hs separaton there shall no razor come upon hs head: untl the 
days be fulflled, n whch he separateth hmself unto the LORD, he shall 
be holy, and shall let the locks of the har of hs head grow”). One reason 
ths harstyle was adopted was to contrast the knky har of black men 
wth the straghter har of whtes. Ths vsble separaton was also a part of 
the Amercan cvl rghts movement when black Amercans worked ther 
har nto large Afros.
Rastafaransm s one of the many syncretc relgons found n the Ca
-
rbbean; others nclude Santera n Cuba and Voodoo n Hat. Relgous 
syncretsm s the combnng of two dsparate relgous belefs, n ths case 
the combnng of Catholcsm and elements of varous Afrcan relgons. 
The Rastafarans, and ultmately the Marley famly, beleved the then 
emperor of Ethopa, Hale Selasse I (hs name s translated as “Power of 
the Trnty”), was n fact a rencarnaton of Jesus sent to earth to rescue 
them from ther oppresson. Hale Selasse was baptzed Tafar Makonen 
and was gven the ttle/rank of 
ras, whch loosely translates to duke or 
head. He was a descendent of an old bloodlne that traced ts orgns back 
to Menelk, who was the frst son of Solomon and Makeba the Queen 
of Sheba. He was beleved to be the 225th descendant of ths bloodlne 
and was varously referred to as Neguse Negest (Kng of Kngs), Lord of 
Lords, Conquerng Lon of the Trbe of Judah, Elect of God, Lght of the 
Unverse, and Emperor of Ethopa. The pan-Afrcanst and leader of the 
Unversal Negro Improvement Assocaton, Marcus Garvey, found a bass 
n the Old Testament for the belef that Hale Selasse was a rencarnaton 
of Jesus and was the one who orgnally professed Selasse’s defcaton. Se
-
lasse dd nothng durng hs lfe to dscredt ths noton and perpetuated 
ths belef among Rastas all over the world.
Bob returned from Wlmngton n October wth plans to jump start hs 
Jamacan recordng career. The Jamaca to whch he returned was dra -
matcally changed from the one he had left less than a year earler. In hs 
absence, Hale Selasse I had vsted the sland and ths vst was heralded 
by many as the comng of the Redeemer. Even Rta went to vew Selasse 
as he passed by n a motorcade. Upon hs return, Rta told Bob that she 
had seen the marks left on Selasse’s hands from beng hung on the cross, 
the stgmata.
In addton to the Rastafaran fever grppng Jamaca’s underclass, the 
musc of the sland had also changed. Whle Bob was n Delaware, the 
Soulettes had scored a ht wth ther Studo One release “Ped Pper” 
and the Walers had contnued to perform. The group had success wth 
the sngles “Who Feels It,” “Dancng Shoes,” “Rock Sweet Rock,” “The 
Toughest,” “Let Hm Go,” “Dreamland,” and others.


--- PAGE 34 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  15
On Bob’s return, the Walers were also the frst Jamacan group to out-
wardly adopt the look of adherents of Rastafaransm. Bob’s har was 
already startng to knot nto locks, and Peter had stopped shavng and 
cuttng hs har; Bunny had been nterested n Rastafaran belefs earler 
than the other two. Addtonally, the group began followng other tenets 
of Rastafaransm. They adopted the strct Ital det, and engaged n actve 
Bble readng and aggressve ganja smokng. Rasta sentments also began 
appearng n ther musc wth Hale Selasse themed songs and Rasta ph
-
losophy njected nto lyrcs.
The Rastafaran use of ganja (mar juana) has been a po nt of conten-
ton wth the Western world s nce Rastafaransm began. Rastas do not 
smoke ganja for the h gh; the drug s as llegal n Jamaca as t s n the 
Unted States and smok ng ganja has led to many Rastas be ng ja led. 
Instead, Rastas consder ganja the “w sdom weed” of Rastafar ansm and 
smoke t to ga n wsdom. It became part of the r relgous rtes (rtuals) 
as a means for br ngng oneself closer to Jah (God). Rastas found a bas s 
for the use of ganja n the B ble. Psalm 104:14 stated: “He causeth the 
grass to grow for the cattle and herb for the serv ce of man.” Smok ng 
ganja became a sacrament of Rastafaransm. It was used at ther relgous 
meetngs, called grounat ons, and has been descr bed as the “heal ng of 
the [Afr can] nat on.” Further, Rastas have a ceremon al approach to 
smokng ganja through the use of a “chal ce” (a rudmentary water p pe 
that cools and f lters the smoke). Ganja s not the only herb used n 
Rastafaransm; there are numerous others used for medcnal and detary 
purposes.
Another change that occurred wth Bob’s return from Delaware was 
that the Walers splt wth Dodd’s Studo One. Frcton between Bob 
and Dodd had long been gettng worse and the Walers’ Rastafaran ways 
dd not ft wth Dodd’s mage for the studo. Also, the Walers had released 
over a hundred sngles on the Studo One mprnt, fve of whch had 
reached the Jamacan top 10. However, they had seen very lttle money 
from all of ther record sales. Also, Dodd had been sellng Walers sngles 
for ressue n England and makng a healthy proft. None of ths money 
was gven to the Walers, and whle Dodd was gettng rch the Walers 
contnued to struggle for subsstence.
Bob then replaced Dodd wth hs new sprtual gude, a Rastafaran 
elder named Mortmer Planno. Planno dd not just ad Bob n understand
-
ng the ways of Rastafaransm; he also became the Walers’ manager. As 
Bob’s fath grew, so dd hs famly. Rta was pregnant and Bob decded to 
move hs growng famly to the Malcolm famly farm n St. Ann. The 
Marley famly stayed n St. Ann untl 1970. Durng ths perod, Bob only


--- PAGE 35 ---
16  BOB  M ARLEY
traveled to Kngston to conduct occasonal busness. The famly lved by 
subsstence farmng and soon Rta delvered a baby grl named Cedella. 
Throughout ths perod, Bob contnued to wrte songs.
Snce the Walers had splt wth Dodd, they were n need of a record 
label. The group opted to form ther own label, whch they called Wal’N 
Soul’M. The Walers released “Selasse Is the Chapel” and “Ths Man Is 
Back.” For ther work n the studo, the Walers began employng the pro
-
ducer Clancy Eccles (1940–2005). They then released the sngles “Nce 
Tme” and “Str It Up.” For a bref perod everythng went well. However, 
at the end of 1967, the stampng machne that actually made the Wal
-
ers sngles broke and the Wal’N Soul’M mprnt folded. The group’s bad 
experence wth Dodd and the trouble wth ther recorded stamper fore -
shadowed the dffcultes that they would have for the rest of the band’s 
exstence.
The year 1968 dd not treat the band much better. Peter was arrested 
for takng part n a protest aganst the whte supremacst government n 
Rhodesa, Afrca, and Bob and Bunny were each temporarly jaled for 
marjuana possesson. Bob served a month n jal, but Bunny was sen
-
tenced to a year because he was caught wth a sgnfcant quantty of the 
drug. The group turned ths opposton nto the materal on whch they 
based ther songs, makng a postve out of a negatve stuaton. Also, the 
Marley famly ended the year on a hgh note when Rta gave brth to a 
son that they named Davd. Although he was named Davd Marley, he 
quckly earned the nckname Zggy and that s how he s known to the 
world today.
The end of the 1960s was a tumultuous tme for Bob and the Wal -
ers. The group pad careful attenton to the cvl rghts movement n the 
Unted States and dentfed wth the statements made by Martn Luther 
Kng, Jr. They also deepened ther fath n Rastafaransm. Planno took 
Bob to vst a Rasta enclave n Jones Town where he learned of a group of 
Rastas who held themselves to an even strcter doctrne and set of prac -
tces. The members of the group called themselves the T welve Trbes of 
Israel and spent long hours n grounatons that were flled wth prayng, 
drummng, chantng, and smokng ganja. Bob gradually became closely 
assocated wth the T welve Trbes. Because he was born n February, Bob 
became part of the trbe of Joseph. Through the T welve Trbes, Bob met 
the Afrcan Amercan pop snger Johnny Nash. Nash had an nterna
-
tonal ht wth ths song “I Can See Clearly Now,” and through hs con -
nectons, Nash helped the Walers reach a larger audence.
Nash and hs busness partner, Danny Sms, began operatng a record 
label n 1964. The orgnal label, called JoDa, was unsuccessful. However,


--- PAGE 36 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  17
wth ther growng connectons n the Carbbean, Nash and Sms opened 
the Cayman Musc label. The label was based n the Cayman Islands and 
due to the relatve cheapness of makng recordngs n the Carbbean, 
Nash and Sms’s new company prospered. The par also realzed that they 
could make sgnfcant money exportng Jamacan musc to the rest of the 
world. Bob and the Walers audtoned for Nash and Sms and a recordng 
agreement was reached. However, the group could not go drectly nto the 
studo because Bunny was stll n jal.
The Walers were excted about the prospect of workng wth Nash and 
Sms, as the par wanted to promote the band on an nternatonal level. 
Wth the negotatng help of Planno, the Walers and Cayman Musc 
entered nto an agreement n whch the band members were hred as song 
wrters for the label. W th Bunny’s release from prson n September of 
1968, the group began recordng for Cayman Musc and over the next 
four years cut more than eghty sngles.
In early 1969, Sms launched the JAD Records label and used t to record 
more early Walers sngles, such as “Mellow Mood,” “Put It On,” “How 
Many Tmes,” and “There She Goes.” These songs all fell nto the rock 
steady style and dd not dsplay the Rastafaran lyrcs that the group would 
become known for. Early 1969 brought another change to the Jamacan 
popular musc style. The rock steady beat slowed down even further and 
rock steady became reggae. The group Toots and the Maytals ushered n 
the new sound wth the song “Do the Reggay,” and soon the sound swept 
the sland. Concdentally, as the sound that the Walers would become 
famous for was startng to gel, the band was beng gven greater freedom 
from the constrants of ther Cayman and JAD contracts.
Wth ther freedom from Cayman and JAD, Bob and the Walers re
-
turned to the studo of Bob’s frst producer, Lesle Kong. W th Kong, the 
Walers recorded enough materal for an album. The Walers used Kong 
because he was recognzed as one of the hottest producers on the nland 
at the tme and he was also fosterng the new reggae sound. The newly 
recorded songs ncluded “Soul Shakedown Party,” “Stop That Tran,” 
“Cauton,” “Go Tell It on the Mountan,” “Soon Come,” “Can’t You 
See,” “Soul Captve” “Cheer Up” “Back Out,” and “Do It T wce.” Kong 
then ssued these songs as sngles n Jamaca and England, but none of 
them was commercally successful. Kong then nformed the group that he 
planned to release the materal as an album called 
The Best of the Wailers. 
Ths news sent the Walers nto a rage as they all beleved that ther best 
materal was yet to come. Aganst the group’s protests, the album was re -
leased. However, before Kong could reap any benefts, he ded of a massve 
heart attack at age 38.


--- PAGE 37 ---
18  BOB  M ARLEY
lee “Scratch” perry
Agan dsllusoned by the Jamacan record ndustry, Bob planned an-
other trp to Delaware to make enough money to launch hs own record 
label and thereby retan control over the Walers’ musc. In the sprng of 
1969, Bob agan went to lve wth hs mother. Ths tme Bob worked at 
a Chrysler automob le plant n addton to hold ng down several other 
jobs. When he returned to Jamaca several months later, the money that 
he had made went to supportng hs famly. Nevertheless, Bob was ready 
to return to the studo and took the Walers back to Studo One to work 
for Clement “Coxsone” Dodd. The second seres of recordngs wth Dodd 
was even better than the frst, as Dodd had employed a new sound eng
-
neer, Lee “Scratch” Perry (b. 1936).
The unon of the Walers and Perry proved to be a good one and to -
gether they produced a unque sound. The producton was rougher than 
t had been wth Kong, Bob’s vocals were left raw, and the bass and the 
drum were the lead nstruments. The gutar played offbeat chocked-chord 
chops and the sounds was more remnscent of the Walers’ rude boy days. 
The backng band was Perry’s studo group called the Upsetters (the Up -
setter was another of Perry’s ncknames). T wo members of ths band ended 
up playng wth Bob untl he ded. The Barrett brothers, Aston (“Famly 
Man”) on bass, and Carlton (“Carle”) on drums, became the rhythm sec
-
ton for the Walers.
In late 1969 and early 1970, the Barrett brothers, Perry, and the Wal-
ers worked n the studo to create the classcs “Duppy Conqueror” and 
“Mr. Brown.” Both songs were released as sngles wth ther own dub 
versons on the B-sdes. The Jamacan practce of dubbng referred to 
makng a sngle that had the orgnal song on the A-sde and the song 
wthout the lyrcs on the B-sde. Ths was done so that a DJ at sound 
system partes could “toast,” or supply hs own words, over the lyrc-less 
sde to whp the crowd nto a frenzy and then turn the record over and 
play the song n the complete verson. The sound systems were gant 
moble stereos that were used at partes around the sland.
At the begnnng of the 1970s, the Walers agan launched ther own 
record label. Called Tuff Gong, after Bob’s nckname, the new label faled 
as fast as the Wal’N Soul’M mprnt had. Perry, who had separated hmself 
from Dodd and opened hs own record shop and label, nvted the Walers 
to work on hs new Upsetter mprnt. The materal created by the Walers 
wth Perry was some of the band’s best early materal, ncludng “Small 
Axe,” “Corner Stone,” “Don’t Rock My Boat,” and “It’s Alrght.” The 
Walers/Perry collaboraton lasted through the early part of the 1970s and


--- PAGE 38 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  19
yelded over a hundred tracks. Mature Walers/Perry materal reflected 
the group’s Rastafaran nterests wth songs such as “Lvely Up Yourself,” 
“Kaya,” and “400 Years.” “Trench Town Rock” was released n 1971 and 
agan put the Walers on the Jamacan charts.
In 1971, the Walers fnshed ther work wth Perry. The group was look-
ng for another creatve outlet. Bob learned that Nash was gong to work 
on a move soundtrack n Sweden and Nash asked Bob to come wth hm. 
On the way, Bob dropped Rta and the chldren off at hs mother’s, and 
Rta found work as a nurse n a Delaware hosptal.
After Bob and Nash’s work on the Swedsh flm score was complete, 
the par traveled to London, where Nash was tryng to broker a recordng 
contract wth the CBS. When the deal was struck, Bob brought the rest of 
the Walers to London, where he beleved that Sms was workng a smlar 
deal for the Walers. The Walers recorded n the CBS studos, where they 
worked as Nash’s backng band. Whle a separate deal dd not materalze 
for the Walers, they dd get more recordng experence and returned to 
Jamaca wth hgh hopes for future Englsh success.
Back n Jamaca, the Walers recorded at Harry J’s studo and Dynamc 
Sounds. For Harry J’s owner Harry Johnson, the Walers recorded at a vg
-
orous pace for four months. At ths tme, the Walers ncluded Bob, Peter, 
and Bunny plus the Barrett brothers and a 15-year-old keyboard player 
named Tyrone Downe. An unoffcal member of the band was added n 
the form of Alan “Skll” Cole. Cole was one of Jamaca’s most talented 
soccer players and he was a great ft as Bob’s traner and confdant.
The success of “Trench Town Rock” created a great demand for the 
Walers around the sland. It also marked the end to songwrtng that 
was not of substance. Also, for the frst tme the Walers made sgnfcant 
money from one of ther hts. Wth Bob’s share, Bob and Rta establshed 
Tuff Gong Records, a record shop where they sold Walers releases. In ad
-
dton to the money from “Trench Town Rock,” Perry was stll releasng 
Walers sngles and cuttng the band n on the profts. Bob agan ren -
vested hs share and opened Tuff Gong Productons, whch was meant to 
keep up wth the demand for Walers materal. There followed another 
perod of productvty that produced songs such as “Satsfy My Soul,” 
“Mr. Chatterbox,” “Natural Mystc,” “Concrete Jungle,” and “Reggae on 
Broadway.”
Whle Bob was busy makng records and runnng the producton com-
pany, he was kept n balance by Cole who had hm on a schedule of exer-
cse that ncluded a great deal of soccer playng and physcal actvty. Bob 
was also a full-fledged Rastafaran and ate only accordng to the Ital det. 
Ital was the Rasta det of organc foods, no meat other than fsh, no salt,


--- PAGE 39 ---
20  BOB  M ARLEY
and no alcohol. Durng ths perod of extreme actvty, the bond of the 
orgnal three Walers, Bob, Peter, and Bunny, started to fray.
It was also at ths tme that Bob began hs long and tumultuous re -
latonshp wth the Jamacan poltcal scene. He dd ths by gvng the 
Walers’ backng to the People’s Natonal Party (PNP). At ths tme, the 
PNP was led by Mchael Manley, who had been workng to create all
-
ances wth the underclass and the Rastafarans. Manley was the one who 
brought Hale Selasse I to Jamaca and some of Manley’s popularty wth 
the Rastas came from hs relatonshp wth the Ethopan ruler. As a show 
of support, Bob and Rta rode on the PNP Muscal Bandwagon, on whch 
they played and sang songs. Ths showed everyone on the parade route 
that the Walers were supportng the PNP n the 1972 general electon.
iSland recordS and chriS Blackwell
In the fall of 1971, Bob and the Walers returned to England to con -
tnue the pursut of a CBS contact for the Walers. Wth Nash’s help, Bob 
and the Walers launched a three-week CBS-sponsored tour. The tour 
was successful, but dd not lead to record sales for the Whalers. Matters 
were complcated when Nash and Sms dsappeared unexpectedly. Ths 
left the Walers stranded n England wth no ncome or plans. In the face 
of ths bad stuaton, Bob took matters nto hs own hands and went to 
meet wth the head of the London-based Island Records Company, Chrs
-
topher Blackwell. Blackwell already had a sold roster of talent ncludng 
Steve Wnwood’s group Traffc, Cat Stevens, Free, Kng Crmson, and 
Jethro Tull. Although Blackwell specalzed n rock and roll bands, he had 
a deep nterest n the Carbbean musc scene and he was already aware of 
the Walers’ musc.
In the wake of Bob and Blackwell’s meetng, the record producer 
fronted the band £8,000 sterlng, whch was enough money to get back 
to Jamaca and return to the studo. Blackwell’s deal wth the Walers was 
that they would produce a full-length reggae album n exchange for the 
money. Rta and the chldren returned from Delaware and wth everyone 
back n Jamaca, the Walers went back nto the studo.
catch a Fire
The 1972 recordng sesson yelded the Catch a Fire  album. “Catch 
a Fre” was Jamacan slang for someone gettng n trouble or “catchng 
hell.” The album was recorded at Dynamc Sound, Harry J’s, and Randy’s 
studos. The result was a collecton of nne songs ncludng “Concrete


--- PAGE 40 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  21
Jungle,” “Slave Drver,” “400 Years,” “Stop That Tran,” “Baby We’ve Got 
a Date,” “Str It Up,” “Knky Reggae,” “No More Trouble,” and “Mdnght 
Ravers.” The album tself was groundbreakng n format. Up to ths tme, 
reggae songs had been released as sngles wth an A and B sde. W th 
Catch a Fire,  the format changed to the long-playng record, whch al -
lowed greater coheson n the release of blocks of songs.
The or gnal press ng of the album reflected the Wa lers’ creat ve 
sprt. The frst vnyl edton of the album depcted a large stanless steel 
Zppo lght wth the t tle engraved on t. The album jacket was h nged 
on the left-hand sde and revealed a cardboard cutout of the trademarked 
Zppo lghter wndproof mechansm wth a flame shootng out of ts top. 
Illustratve of the album’s ttle, these flames also foreshadowed the Wal-
ers’ rse to nternatonal stardom. The Z ppo lghter jacket was un que, 
but also expensve to produce. As a result, the Z ppo lghter edton was 
held to only 20,000 un ts. Subsequent press ngs of the album were re -
leased w th a trad tonal package that d splayed a large p cture of Bob 
takng a ht off a large cone-shaped splff (Jamacan slang for a marjuana 
cgarette).
For ths album, the Walers were Bob, Peter, Bunny, Aston and Carle 
Barrett, and a varety of Jamacan studo nstrumentalsts. Addtonal vo-
cals were added by Rta and her frends Judy Mowatt and Marca Grffths. 
The collecton of three female backup sngers would later become known 
as the I-Threes. Wth the basc recordng done, Bob took the master tapes 
to London for mxng and overdubbng. At Blackwell’s request, rock and 
roll style overdubs were added by gutarst Wayne Perkns (who was fa
-
mous for hs work at Muscle Shoals studos) and keyboard player John 
“Rabbt” Bundrck (who was also well known for hs work wth Johnny 
Nash and the rock bands Free and The Who). Overdubbng s the process 
of addng new tracks to an already “complete” recordng. W th Perkns 
and Bundrck’s overdubs, the record took on a more manstream rock 
sound, whch Blackwell thought would allow t to reach a larger aud
-
ence. Blackwell’s nstncts were correct and although t was not a bg com-
mercal success, Catch a Fire brought the Walers to the manstream and 
changed the way that reggae musc was made and marketed.
Also n 1972, Rta gave brth to another son, whom the Marleys called 
Stephen. Wth ths new addton, the famly moved out of Kngston to a 
small house n Bull Bay, east of the cty. Ths move sgnaled a change for 
the Marley famly; they had made t out of the ghetto and would never 
lve there agan. Sgnfcantly, Bob often preferred to stay n Kngston, 
at Blackwell’s house at 56 Hope Road, nstead of returnng to Bull Bay 
wth Rta and the chldren each nght. Ths tme spent apart from Rta


--- PAGE 41 ---
22  BOB  M ARLEY
afforded Bob the opportunty to begn hs strng of extramartal affars. 
Through hs adult lfe, Bob fathered chldren wth several women other 
than Rta, though the couple remaned marred untl Bob’s death. In the 
early 1970s, Bob fathered chldren wth Patrca W llams (a son named 
Robbe), Janet Hunt (a son named Rohan), and Janet Bowen (a daughter 
named Karen). The year 1972 also saw the electon of Mchael Manley 
as the prme mnster of Jamaca and wth hm came hopes for a brghter 
future for the Jamacan underclass.
Part of Bob’s deal wth Blackwell was that the Walers retaned all the 
Carbbean rghts to ther recordngs. Ths left Bob free to ssue sngles 
from Catch a Fire  on the sland through hs Tuff Gong record shop. Al -
though hs success was stll modest compared to what t would be by the 
end of the decade, Bob was now recognzed everywhere he went on the 
sland. Further, wth the release of Catch a Fire, t dawned on the Wal -
ers that they were now professonal muscans who would no longer have 
to work other jobs to make a lvng. In the wake of ther frst full-length 
album, the Walers prepared to mount a tour of England and the Unted 
States. For ths, they needed a full-tme keyboard player, as Downe was 
stll too young to travel wth the band. The group found ts new keyboard 
player n the Now Generaton band wth the successful recrutment of 
Earl “Wya” Lndo.
CatCh a Fire  toUr
The Catch a Fire tour began n Aprl 1973 wth the group’s arrval n 
London. Amazngly, the Walers found another release credted to them 
for sale. The African Herbsman album was a collecton of several of the 
group’s more popular songs that had been recorded for Lee “Scratch” 
Perry. Perry had lcensed the materal to Lee Goptal, who had subse
-
quently released the album wthout the approval of the band. The record 
ncluded the songs “Lvely Up Yourself,” “Small Axe,” “Duppy Con
-
queror,” “Trench Town Rock,” “Afrcan Herbsman,” “Keep On Movng,” 
“Fussng and Fghtng,” “Stand Alone,” “All n One” (a medley of “Bend 
Down Low,” “Nce Tme,” “One Love,” “Smmer Down,” “It Hurts to be 
Alone,” “Lonesome Feelng,” “Love and Affecton,” “Put It On,” and 
“Duppy Conqueror”), “Don’t Rock My Boat,” “Put It On,” “Sun Is Shn
-
ng,” “Kaya,” “Rdng Hgh,” “Bran Washng,” and “400 Years.” Although 
the release of ths album was not sanctoned by the Walers, t dd help 
to mantan nterest n the band n between ts frst and second Island 
Records releases. Whle n England, the Walers played 19 shows at clubs 
and unverstes.


--- PAGE 42 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  23
The Walers returned to London at the end of the tour and whle there, 
they made appearances on the BBC programs The Old Grey Whistle Test 
and Top Gear. Elated by ther newfound exposure, the Walers returned to 
Jamaca for some much-needed rest. A problem had developed durng the 
Englsh leg of the Walers’ tour, as Bunny suffered whle tourng due to hs 
strct adherence to the Ital det. Thus, when the Walers returned to Ja -
maca, Bunny nformed Bob that he would not be jonng the band for the 
North Amercan leg of the tour. Bob consulted wth Peter and together 
they decded to recrut Joe Hggs, ther old sngng nstructor, to replace 
Bunny for the tour. Another dffculty that the Walers faced was that 
they needed a full-tme manager to run the now busy band’s schedule. 
Blackwell hred Lee Jaffe to fll ths role and Jaffe set off for the Unted 
States to book shows for the upcomng tour. The Amercan leg of the tour 
featured a long stand at Paul’s Mall n Boston, Massachusetts, followed 
by a move to New York. The New York shows were all booked at Max’s 
Kansas Cty, and the Walers played a week of ggs as the opener for Bruce 
Sprngsteen.
Burnin ’
By 1973, the Bob Marley and the Walers had a successful album out 
wth a major label and had mounted a tour of England and North Amer -
ca. However, they stll had not acheved the type of manstream com -
mercal success that Bob was convnced that they were capable of. The 
next step toward that success was taken wth the November 1973 release 
of the band’s second Island release, Burnin’. Ths release was less heavly 
modfed by Blackwell and reflected the Walers’ nterests n Rastafaran-
sm and Jamacan poltcs.
The cover of the album was a slhouette of the sx core Walers’ heads 
burned nto the sde of a wooden box. The pcture ncluded Bob, Peter, 
Bunny, the Barrett brothers, and Lndo, and the back of the record jacket 
had a large pcture of Bob takng a drag off a large splff. The tracks for 
ths album were recorded at Harry J’s n Kngston and mxed at the Island 
Records studos n London. The only muscan on the album who was 
not pctured on the record’s cover was the hand drummer Alvn “Seeco” 
Patterson.
The album conssted of 10 tracks that ncluded “Get Up, Stand Up,” 
“Hallelujah Tme,” “I Shot the Sher ff,” “Burnn’ and Loot n’,” “Put It 
On,” “Small Axe,” “Pass It On,” “Duppy Conqueror,” “One Foundaton,” 
and “Rasta Man Chant.” Th s lst represented some old and some new 
materal. Addtonally, Bob, Peter, and Bunny each contrbuted songs that


--- PAGE 43 ---
24  BOB  M ARLEY
they had wrtten separately. The album as a unt was a call to acton to the 
Jamacan underclass. The Walers were warnng the ghetto dwellers that 
they needed to take charge of ther own destny nstead of leavng t n the 
hands of those who dd not have ther best nterests at heart.
Burnin ’ toUr
After the album was released, the Walers agan mounted a tour to 
support t. In an attempt to boost the dsappontng sales of ths release n 
the Unted States, Bob and the Walers joned the n-progress Sly and the 
Famly Stone tour of the country. Hggs agan replaced Bunny, as he had 
vowed not to tour after hs experence on the Catch a Fire tour. Ths tour 
was a lucky break for the group, as Sly and the Famly Stone were already 
a popular band n Amerca and they were tourng after ther successful 
Fresh release. Unfortunately, the Walers were fred from the tour after just 
four shows. The reasons for the frng were twofold. Frst, the Walers were 
reportedly outplayng the headlners, and the Sly and the Famly Stone 
crowd were not acceptng of the Walers’ style of musc. The frng agan 
left the Walers stranded n a strange place.
Ths tme, the group was stuck n Las Vegas and needed to fnd a way to 
Calforna to make a scheduled appearance on KSAN-FM. They dd man
-
age to get to San Francsco and make ther appearance, beng met by an 
enthusastc audence that they had attracted on ther prevous tour. Au
-
dences on the Calforna coast mantaned a specal affnty for Bob and 
the Walers throughout the exstence of the band. The KSAN broadcast 
was presented from the Record Plant n Sausalto and comprsed a rousng 
set of songs. The broadcast began wth Bob, Peter, and Hggs performng 
“Rasta Man Chant” acoustcally wth just tradtonal Rastafaran hand 
drums as accompanment. They then went nto full band versons of a 
seres of songs from the frst two Island albums.
The end of 1973 found the Walers back n Jamaca preparng to em
-
bark on the Englsh leg of the Burnin’ tour. Ths tme Hggs also stayed 
n Jamaca, whch left Bob and Peter to front the band. The reduced-
strength Walers played to small crowds who were not excted about the 
performances. The group played 11 shows n England, appearng at clubs 
and unverstes. The poor recepton was made worse when Bob and Peter 
got nto a fst fght and Lndo announced that he was leavng the group to 
return to the Now Generaton band. Wth ths, the Walers headed n op
-
poste drectons, leavng Bob n London to contemplate hs next move.
The year 1974 dawned wth Bob back n Harry J’s studo n Kngston, 
where he was recordng new materal wth a backng band that conssted


--- PAGE 44 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  25
only of the Barrett brothers and a keyboard player named Bernard “Touter” 
Harvey. The tradtonal tght vocal harmones usually produced by Bob, 
Peter, and Bunny were now beng sung by the female vocal tro, the 
I-Threes (Rta, Judy, and Marca.). Ths relatvely strpped down Walers 
unt worked on new songs that reflected on Bob’s ghetto youth as a means 
of escapng the troubles of the present.
The group caught a break when they were asked to open for Amercan 
Motown sngng sensaton Marvn Gaye when he played a beneft show 
on the sland. The concert was sold out and was an excellent opportu
-
nty for the group to feature ts new materal. At show tme, the Walers 
band that took the stage agan ncluded Bob, Peter, and Bunny, plus the 
Barrett brothers’ rhythm secton and Tyrone Downe on keyboards. The 
Walers’ performance was a bg ht and afterward Marvn Gaye’s manager, 
Don Taylor, offered to manage them. Taylor was able to gve Bob hs most 
elusve desre, a guarantee of success n the Unted States, and ultmately 
Bob agreed to brng Taylor nto the fold as the Walers’ manager.
Searchin G For croSSover S UcceSS
Bob was excted about the possblty of crossover success n the Unted 
States, but he was dsmayed that Peter and Bunny were now obvously 
plannng to leave the Walers permanently. Peter had long suffered from 
lack of exposure as Bob was the materal front man for the band, and 
Peter’s own more mltant sentments were not beng used on the early 
Walers records. Bunny also wanted greater freedom to release hs own 
songs, and ths, coupled wth hs refusal to tour, put hm at odds wth Bob’s 
plans for the band’s future.
Wth the band n a state of crss, Bob bused hmself preparng the next 
Walers album. Ttled Natty Dread, the thrd Walers and Island product 
was the frst wthout Peter and Bunny. The record was a turnng pont for 
Bob, as he was fnally strkng out on hs own as the prncpal songwrter 
of the band. In addton to Bob, the Barrett brothers, and Touter, the 
I-Threes provded vocal harmony. Uncredted performers on the album 
ncluded Lee Jaffe on harmonca, and three horn players named Glen da 
Costa, Davd Madden, and Tommy McCook (the horn lne of the Zap 
Pow band).
Wth Bob now actng as a vocal solost wth a backng band, the new 
album art reflected hs central role. He began the album wth hs approx-
maton of a Yoruba lookout call that sgnaled the dawn of the new Wal-
ers band. The Yoruba are a group of people n West Afrca that make up 
about 30 percent of the populaton of Ngera, Benn, and Togo. The Natty


--- PAGE 45 ---
26  BOB  M ARLEY
Dread album cover was an arbrushed pcture of Bob alone n the mddle 
of an abstract background of several colors, and the back of the album 
also depcted Bob only. As was the case wth the prevous Island Records 
releases, the recordng was done n Jamaca and the mxng was done n 
London, under Blackwell’s careful supervson. An oddty of ths album 
was that t exhbted the Walers’ only use of a drum machne. Drum ma
-
chne technology only became wdely avalable n the early 1970s and the 
Walers’ experment wth t ndcated ther nterest n new technology.
Whle n London for the mxng sessons, Bob and Famly Man found 
the next Walers’ gutarst, Al Anderson. Anderson had been playng n 
an Afro-rock band called Shakatu. However, he agreed to supply some 
gutar overdubs on “Lvely Up Yourself ” and “No Woman, No Cry.” After 
ths studo experence, Blackwell offered Anderson the job of gutarst 
for the Walers. At frst Anderson dd not want to gve up hs poston 
n Shakatu, but he soon realzed that the Walers were gong to be a bg 
success. When Anderson agreed to jon the Walers, he became the frst 
non-Jamacan member of the band. As such he had to learn the reggae 
style from the ground up and spent hours rehearsng wth Famly Man 
learnng the proper strummng style.
natty Drea D
Released n 1974, Natty Dread was a collecton of old and new songs. 
The songs on the album were “Lvely up Yourself,” “No Woman, No 
Cry,” “Them Belly Full (But We Hungry),” “Rebel Musc (Three O’Clock 
Road Block),” “So Jah Seh,” “Natty Dread,” “Bend Down Low,” “Talkn’ 
Blues,” and “Revoluton.” The songs collected for ths release exhbt 
Bob’s nterests most drectly, as they cast Bob as a Rasta preacher who 
s dscussng prophecy and revoluton. Addtonally, Bob llustrated hs 
Rasta-based dstrust of the Catholc Church. On the song “Talkn’ Blue,” 
Bob dscussed bombng a church, as the Rastas beleve that the Pope, 
and by extenson standard Catholcsm, are part of the system n place to 
keep them down. Ths negatve system was descrbed by the Rastas wth 
the Bblcal language of Babylon. Thus, when Rasta sngers dscussed the 
Babylon system, they were talkng about anythng that was oppressve to 
the Rastafaran fathful.
Another feature of Rastafaransm that Bob made great use of was the 
purposeful msuse of the Englsh language. Bob could speak plan Englsh 
when he chose to, but he often veled hs meanngs by sngng n the Ja
-
macan dalect or through the Rastafaran practce of alterng language. 
For example, Rasta beleved that Hale Selasse I was Jesus rencarnated


--- PAGE 46 ---
OUT  OF  THE  G HETTO , INTO  THE  L IMELIGHT  27
to save them from the Babylon system. The fathful took the Roman nu -
meral I at the end of Selasse’s name and renterpreted t as the captal 
letter I. Thus, when Rastas say somethng about “I and I” they are talkng 
about themselves and ther god. Many of Bob’s songs made use of ths 
“I and I” language as a means of affrmng hs fath.
Bob’s growng mltant stance was also evdent on Natty Dread. The 
song “Revoluton” was self-explanatory. Smply, Bob was sayng that f 
the youth were gong to create a change n ther lves they had to do 
t for themselves, and watng for the government, or anyone else, to do t 
for them was a waste of tme. “Rebel Musc (Three O’Clock Road Block)” 
was another of Bob’s more ncendary songs. The song was autobograph
-
cal and descrbed an ncdent n whch Bob and Famly Man got caught 
n a road block and knew that ther car would be searched due to ther 
dreadlocks. As the song went, they had to throw away ther ganja to avod 
beng arrested. Other lyrcs n the song ncluded Bob tellng the lsteners 
that they can examne hs lfe because he knows that he s rghteous and 
fathful to Jah (the word used to refer to the Rastas’ God, Hale Selasse).
After the Natty Dread release, Bob was ntervewed by the Jamacan 
daly newspaper. The photographer present at the ntervew was a UCLA 
graduate named Nevlle Garrck. In the ntervew, Bob dscussed the need 
for more tourng to support the Walers records. After the ntervew, Bob 
and Garrck struck up a frendshp that resulted n Garrck becomng the 
art drector for the Walers.
In the wake of Natty Dread, the Walers began recevng some crt -
cal acclam n the Unted States. Ths was the type of support that dd 
not earn them any money n the short term, but lad the groundwork for 
future success. In late 1974, Bob lcensed the recordng rghts of hs song 
“Slave Drver” to Taj Mahal, an Amercan blues snger who was enjoyng 
a perod of prosperty. Bob also lcensed “Guava Jelly” to Barbra Stresand 
for her 1974 Butterfly album. Ths dd not brng the band much money, 
but t certanly ncreased the level of exposure to ts musc. The most 
mportant agreement that Bob made that year was grantng Erc Clapton 
(the Brtsh blues gutar genus) the recordng rghts to the song “I Shot 
the Sherff,” whch appeared on Clapton’s 1974 album, 461 Ocean Bou-
levard. In Clapton’s capable hands, Bob’s song went on to be a number 
one ht n the Unted States and soared to number nne n the UK. Bob’s 
musc was played on Amercan and Englsh rado and he ganed serous 
respect from the rock and roll crtcs.
As Bob’s star contnued to rse, any hope for reconclaton wth the 
orgnal members of the vocal tro faded nto the dstance. Peter and 
Bunny were both workng on solo materal of ther own. Peter was layng


--- PAGE 47 ---
28  BOB  M ARLEY
the groundwork for the album that would become the 1976 Legalize It, 
and Bunny was puttng together the songs for hs 1976 Blackheart Man 
album. Addtonally, Peter launched hs own Intel-Dplo record label 
(Intel-Dplo standng for Intellgent Dplomat).
Undaunted, Bob Marley and the Walers began 1975 wth a major gg. 
The Walers were asked to open for the Jackson Fve when they played 
a concert n Kngston. Ths was Bob’s frst opportunty to really come to 
the front of the band and dsplay hs own personalty and charsma. The 
appearance also featured the debut of Al Anderson on lead gutar and was 
a huge success. In February 1975, Natty Dread was offcally released as the 
thrd Island/Walers product and the album receved postve feedback 
from the press n the UK and the Unted States. W th ths success, the 
new and mproved Walers became an nternatonal success.
As the Walers’ fame grew, so dd Bob’s concerns for the management 
of the band and ts ncreasng revenues. Bob had already worked out a 
deal wth Don Taylor to become the Walers’ manager, but was concerned 
wth Taylor takng a cut of the band’s earnngs. Bob’s bad experences wth 
musc ndustry nsders had tanted hs opnon of Taylor, but he took a 
chance on the would-be manager. Now Bob also needed to be able to 
more carefully look after the band’s earnngs. Ths job was taken up by 
Bob’s Jamacan lawyer Dane Jobson. The Walers also needed an opera
-
tons headquarters. For ths, Bob essentally took over Blackwell’s house 
at 56 Hope Road n Kngston. Here the band had rehearsal space and a 
central locaton for ts headquarters. Wth the band membershp and ts 
supportng forces establshed, the group prepared to tour n support of 
Natty Dread.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Actng as the Walers’ manager, Taylor arranged a major North Amercan 
and a bref Englsh tour for the band. For the purposes of ths tour, Tyrone 
Downe was agan recruted to work wth the group. As Bob was preparng 
to feature hs talents on the world stage, he was also ganng notorety wth 
regard to hs personal lfe. On February 26, 1976, Bob’s e ghth chld was 
born. Ky-Man Marley was the product of Bob’s affar wth Anta Belnavs, 
who was a well-known Car bbean table tenn s champon. Bob was also 
cultvatng a relatonshp wth the Jamacan beauty queen C ndy Break-
speare. Ths relatonshp produced another son n 1978, named Daman, 
and a huge scandal. Bob and Breakspeare’s relat onshp lasted for several 
years and n the course of ths tme the beauty queen went on to become 
Mss World 1976. The med a whrlwnd that surrounded the couple was 
largely based on race. The mxture of whte and black, and Breakspeare’s 
beauty queen good looks coupled w th Bob’s ever-lengthen ng dread -
locks, helped to fuel the meda crcus.
In June 1975, the Wa lers embarked on the North Amer can leg of 
the Natty Dread tour. In add ton to Bob, the Barrett brothers, Down e, 
the I-Threes, and Seeco, the Walers’ entourage also ncluded Taylor and 
Nevlle Garrck (as art stc and l ghtng drector). A Rasta elder named 
Mkey Dan also jo ned the group to prov de Ital food, along w th Dave 
Harper (equpment manager) and Tony “Tony G” Garnett (d sc jockey 
and hype man). The huge tourng retnue ndcated the level of fame that 
the Walers had already acheved. They were now tourng n style wth the 
type of support that allowed them to ext ther hotel room, be chauffeured 
chapter 3
Fro M top o F the roCk to 
top o F the world
29


--- PAGE 49 ---
30  BOB  M ARLEY
to the venue, and walk on stage to perform (a sound check was usually 
requred) wthout any settng up and tearng down.
natty Drea D toUr
Durng ths tour, Bob establshed hs on-agan/off-agan relatonshp 
wth the press. Bob’s frends and band mates have reported that he very 
rarely refused an ntervew, belevng that any press publcty was good for 
the band. However, he also had a reputaton as beng hard to ntervew. 
He was always glad to dscuss the band and Rastafaransm, but when 
questons turned to hs personal lfe, Bob was more evasve. In fact, when 
questoned on ths topc, Bob was known for droppng nto such thck 
Jamacan slang that the ntervewer was left wonderng what was beng 
dscussed.
As the tour progressed, the Walers’ recepton grew more enthusastc. 
Sold-out shows were frequent; for example, the band played for a crowd 
of 15,000 at the Schaefer Musc Festval, n New York’s Central Park. As 
the band toured the Unted States and traveled nto Canada, the set lst 
for the shows became standard, wth “Trench Town Rock,” “Burnn’ and 
Lootn’,” “Them Belly Full (But We Hungry),” “Road Block,” “Lvely Up 
Yourself,” “Natty Dread,” “No Woman, No Cry,” “I Shot the Sherff,” and 
“Knky Reggae.” Other songs appeared on occason, such as “I Shot the 
Sherff” and “Get Up, Stand Up.” At ths tme, the Walers gelled nto 
the tourng machne that they became known for. Bob was a serous 
taskmaster when t came to makng sure that the group performed well on 
stage, and mstakes were not tolerated. The appearance of the group also 
gradually became standard. Bob adopted hs characterstc denm jeans 
and shrt, and by 1975 hs dreadlocks stretched down to hs shoulders. The 
I-Threes also began to soldfy ther standard look, wth heads wrapped n 
red, gold, and green fabrc and tradtonal Afrcan dress.
Whle the tour gave the band greater exposure to the Amer can aud
-
ence, there were many problems. T aylor’s lack of experence showed, as he 
dd not retan a large enough road crew to handle all of the band’s equp-
ment. Frequently there were not enough drvers or roades, and ths led to 
problems wth havng the nstruments ready when the performers arrved. 
T aylor also treated the band, other than Bob, as employees nstead of as 
talented ndvduals, whch led to several fghts.
The Walers closed the North Amercan leg of the tour wth a show at 
the Roxy Theatre on Sunset Str p n Los Angeles, Calforna. The show 
was agan sold out and n attendance were members of the Rollng Stones n 
addton to Cat Stevens, Jon Mtchell, Herbe Hancock, George Harrson


--- PAGE 50 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  31
and Rngo Starr of the Beatles, and members of the Grateful Dead and the 
Band. Ths was an extraordnary dsplay of crtcal support for the Walers. 
The group knew that they had made a sold mpresson on the Amercan 
audence and departed for London prepared to conquer another locaton.
In London, the band played a show at the Hard Rock n Manchester, 
another at the Odeon n Brmngham, and two at the Lyceum n London. 
Blackwell attended the frst Lyceum show and notced how enthusastc 
the crowd reacton was. He quckly ordered moble recordng equpment 
so that the show the followng nght could be recorded. Modern sound 
engneerng technology makes lve recordng so easy that t s done au
-
tomatcally at each show. However, n 1975, an entre truckload full of 
recordng gear had to be brought to the venue to capture the concert. 
Blackwell used hs ndustry connectons to borrow the Rollng Stones’ mo
-
ble studo, whch the band had ordered bult n the late 1960s. It allowed 
the Rollng Stones to record n remote locatons and ths movable equp-
ment had been used to record Led Zeppeln, Deep Purple, and the Rollng 
Stones albums Sticky Fingers (1971) and Exile on Main Street (1972).
Wth lve sound engneer Dave Harper sttng n the Rollng Stones’ 
moble recordng studo outsde the Lyceum Theatre, Bob Marley and the 
Walers took the stage on July 18, 1975. The group tore through an ab
-
brevated set lst that nght after an ntroducton by Tony Garnett. The 
recordng was a success and captured Bob and the group performng sev -
eral of ther bggest hts. They were rushng the tempos just slghtly, and 
ths gave the musc an addtonal sense of urgency. After some further re-
mxng at Island’s Basng Street studos, the recordng was released under 
the ttle 
Live!.
laSt oriGinal wailerS Show
An nterestng sde note wth regard to the year 1975 was that durng 
November, Bob, Peter, and Bunny reunted for ther last tme on stage. 
Amercan popular muscan Steve Wonder was slated to play a beneft 
concert at Jamaca’s Natonal Stadum. The concert was staged to rase 
money for the Jamacan Insttute for the Blnd and Steve Wonder was 
well aware of the Walers’ materal. The reconsttuted Walers performed 
at Wonder’s beneft concert and he was blown away. Wonder even joned 
the Walers on stage for a verson of “I Shot the Sherff.” Much has re
-
cently been made of the Walers/Wonder connecton and t s worth not-
ng that after ther onstage meetng, Wonder wrote a song n trbute to 
Bob called “Master Blaster.” In fact, often when Wonder performed the 
song, he began wth an mprovsatonal chorus, “We’re dong t for Bob


--- PAGE 51 ---
32  BOB  M ARLEY
Marley.” The song goes on to refer to themes n Bob’s lfe such as Jah, 
musc, and unty.
By the end of the summer, the Walers were back n Jamaca workng on 
more new musc. The group then returned to Harry J’s studo to begn re-
cordng the tracks for ther next album. The process was nterrupted when 
on August 27, 1975, Hale Selasse I ded at age 83. The death of the Rasta 
redeemer sent the fathful nto a talspn. Many of the Rasta fathful took 
Selasse’s death as the s gnal that Rastafaransm tself was flawed. How -
ever, others used the death to steel ther determnaton and deepen ther 
belefs; Bob was n ths second group. He called Lee “Scratch” Perry nto 
Harry J’s and together the par created the scorchng song “Jah Lve.”
An nterestng crcumstance n relaton to Selasse’s death s that hs 
body was not recovered for formal bural untl 1991. Selasse had ded 
from complcatons followng a prostate operaton. Hs doctor dsputed 
the meda report that he was responsble for the death of the emperor. 
There was also speculaton at the tme that Selasse was assassnated, 
as there had been repeated attempts to unseat the emperor begnnng n 
the early 1960s. The stuaton was further confused by the dsappearance 
of the body. Ths lack of a corpse convnced many Rasta fathful that Se
-
lasse had not ded. The cry went out n the Rastafaran terrtores: “You 
can’t kll God.” Informaton surfaced n 1991 revealng that Selasse’s 
remans had n fact been secretly bured at the tme of hs death. However, 
wth ths mystery accompanyng Selasse’s demse, many Rastas took the 
crcumstances to mean that ther relgous leader had not ded.
The product of Bob and Perry’s studo collaboraton was the sngle “Jah 
Lve.” The song was as drect a statement of fath as has been uttered for 
any relgon. Here Bob proclamed that Jah (Hale Selasse) was stll alve. 
He followed ths wth hs sentments on understandng fath, told through 
the metaphor of the shepherd. He also crtczed all who beleved that 
Selasse had ded and professed that not only was he stll alve, but that he 
was powerful enough to scatter hs enemes and reman n power.
The fnal fve years of Bob’s lfe were flled wth constant actvty, cre
-
atng new songs, releasng semnal albums, and tourng n support of hs 
efforts. The Walers’ popularty contnually ncreased, and by the end of 
the 1970s the group was known n the most remote places n the world. 
In 1976, Bob kcked off hs actvty wth a full schedule of concerts, n-
tervews, and recordng. Bob reached a sgnfcant mlestone n hs blos-
somng career when he appeared on the cover of Rolling Stone magazne 
and the magazne voted the Walers the “Band of the Year.” Also by 1976, 
Bob and the Walers had taken over the house at 56 Hope Road, even 
though Blackwell was stll ts offcal owner.


--- PAGE 52 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  33
Early 1976 was spent recordng new Walers’ materal and tryng to get 
comfortable wth fame. Now that the Walers were nternatonal stars, 
Bob spent long hours n ntervews tryng to defne to the world what t 
meant to be a Jamacan, a person of mxed race, and a Rastafaran. Whle 
Bob was quckly becomng the representatve of Trench Town, hs hard-
won fame dd begn to provde hm some luxury that hs lfe had lacked. 
For example, Bob was now makng enough money that Cole convnced 
hm to buy a BMW . Generally not nterested n the trappngs of wealth, 
Bob was not orgnally comfortable wth ths purchase untl he notced 
that the BMW could stand for Bob Marley and the Walers, nstead of 
Bavaran Motor Works.
Even wth all of the success carryng the Walers though 1976, there was 
sgnfcant unrest n the band. The nstrumentalsts were stll unhappy 
wth Taylor’s treatment of them, and ths resulted n Lee Jaffe and Al 
Anderson leavng the group. To add nsult to njury, the par mmedately 
joned Peter Tosh’s band, called Word, Sound, and Power. So, n the md
-
dle of the recordng sessons for ther ffth album, the Walers were agan 
reduced to Bob and the Barrett brothers. On the heels of these losses, Bob 
recruted new players for the group. He quckly recruted Earl “Chnna” 
Smth to serve as rhythm gutarst, and wth Blackwell’s help the Amer
-
can blues gutarst Don Knsey joned the Walers on lead gutar. The 
album credts for 
Rastaman Vibration reflect the performance of these new 
addtons to the group. However, wth the sessons already takng place, 
Al Anderson was credted wth the lead gutar parts on the song “Crazy 
Bald Head.” Also present on the album was Seeco on percusson and Ty
-
rone Downe on keyboards.
rastaman Vi Bration
In the mdst of ths tumult, Bob Marley and the Walers ssued ther 
fourth Island Records album n May 1976. The album was ssued wth 
a drawng of Bob on the front of the record jacket. Hs dreadlocks had 
grown down past hs shoulders and he was strkng a contemplatve pose. 
Also promnently dsplayed were the Rastafaran colors, red, yellow, black, 
and green. These colors were derved from the flag of Ethopa and the 
sgnfcance of the colors was defned wthn Rastafaransm as black for 
the people, red for the blood they shed protectng themselves, yellow for 
the gold stolen from ther ancestors, and green for the lost land of Afrca. 
Hstorcally, there have been some dsagreements on the meanngs of the 
colors, but ther orgns n Ethopa are rrefutable. The background of the 
album jacket looked lke burlap fabrc and contaned the statement that


--- PAGE 53 ---
34  BOB  M ARLEY
the album jacket “s great for cleanng herb.” The other text was a quote 
from the Old Testament Blessng of Joseph. Because Bob was alled wth 
the Trbe of Joseph of the T welve Trbes of Israel Rastafaran sect, ths 
passage professed hs strength and generosty.
Rastaman Vibration was the Walers’ bggest success yet. It clmbed to num-
ber eght on the Amercan pop charts. Bob sad of the album that on t he 
was not as concerned wth the musc as wth the message. The themes of 
the songs contaned on the album range from calls for revoluton to ds
-
cussons of poltcs. The tracks were “Postve V braton,” “Roots, Rock, 
Reggae,” “Johnny Was,” “Cry to Me,” “Want More,” “Crazy Bald Head,” 
“Who the Cap Ft,” “Nght Shft,” “War,” and “Rat Race.” Bob’s practce 
of wrtng autobographcal lyrcs was evdent on ths album. “Nght Shft” 
was about hs tme workng n Delaware and talked about hs tme spent 
drvng a forklft and pnng for Jamaca, hs wfe, and hs chldren. “Rat 
Race” was Bob’s take on the role of the Rastas and poltcs. Here Bob 
warns that Rastas wll not be nvolved n any poltcal maneuverng. The 
song was wrtten as Jamaca was becomng embroled n the volence lead
-
ng up to the electon of 1976. Regardless of Bob’s antpoltcal convc -
tons, the events surroundng the 1976 electon forever changed hs lfe.
The most sgnfcant Rastafaran song on the album was “War.” The 
lyrcs of ths song were taken from a speech that Hale Selasse delv -
ered to the Unted Natons on October 4, 1963. In the speech, Selasse 
demanded equalty for people of all colors regardless of locaton or fath. 
Bob’s Rastafaran fath, even n the wake of Selasse’s death, was also 
affrmed on the ttle track, “Rastaman Vbraton.” Also on the album, Bob 
made repeated use of quotatons from the Bble and bblcal paraphrases. 
Ths use of Old Testament materal became a trademark of Bob’s mature 
lyrc wrtng and llustrated hs contnued adherence to the Rastafaran 
fath.
rastaman Vi Bration toUr
The sprng and summer of 1976 brought another Walers tour. In Aprl, 
the group launched the Rastaman Vibration tour, whch was slated to cross 
North Amerca and Western Europe. The tour was the most extensve to 
date and exposed an ever-growng audence to the group. The Walers’ 
tourng band was back up to full strength wth 10 members ncludng Bob, 
the Barrett brothers, the I-Threes, Seeco, Downe, Smth, and Knsey. 
Added to ths were Taylor the manager, Bob’s traner Cole, the cook Tony 
“Glle” Glbert, Garrck the art and lghtng drector, Garnett the band’s 
hype man and road manager, and Denns Thompson as soundman.


--- PAGE 54 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  35
The tour offcally began at the Tower Theater n Upper Darby, Penn-
sylvana. Bob’s mother, Cedella Booker, came to ths show and t was the 
frst tme that she saw her son perform lve n concert. Next the Walers 
played n Washngton, DC, Massachusetts, and New York. They crossed 
nto Canada for shows n Montreal and Toronto and then returned to 
the Unted States to play Buffalo and Cleveland. Next, the group swept 
through the Mdwest before playng Texas and fnshng up the U.S. leg 
wth seven shows n Calforna. After a stop n Mam, the group pressed 
on to Western Europe and played n Germany, Sweden, the Netherlands, 
France, and Wales. The tour ended wth 10 shows n England. On most of 
these stops, the Walers played sold-out houses and were now playng to 
people who already knew the songs.
The show on May 26 at the Roxy Theatre n Hollywood, Cal forna, 
was a partcular hghlght. The Amercan snger/songwrtng legend Bob 
Dylan was n the audence, and the Wa lers played a scorch ng set. Bob 
Marley was a self-professed fan of Dylan’s song wr tng, and the reggae 
superstar treated the folk con to one of the band’s best performances. 
The concert was recorded and has subsequently been released n a two-
CD boxed set. That n ght the Wa lers’ set ncluded an enthus astc n-
troducton by Tony “Tony G” Garnett followed by “Trench Town Rock,” 
“Burnn’ and Loot n’,” “Them Belly Full,” “Rebel Mus c,” “I Shot the 
Sherff,” “Want More,” “No Woman, No Cry,” “L vely Up Yourself,” 
“Roots Rock Reggae,” and “Rat Race.” The band had h t ther tourng 
strde and played a wonderfully t ght set. Bob spent the even ng center 
stage w th th s s gnature Les Paul gu tar, dreadlocks fly ng, and hands 
often rased defantly n the ar. The I-Threes were to Bob’s left n match-
ng black dresses and Afrcan head wraps. The show ended wth an encore 
performance of “Postve Vbraton” and a medley of “Get Up, Stand Up/
No More Trouble/War.”
GUn coUrt
At the end of the tour, the Walers returned to Jamaca to rest and re-
focus ther efforts on ther next recordng. The electon lead-up was stll 
comng to a bol and Kngston was n a state of emergency declared by 
Manley. The Manley government had sgnfcantly weakened ts standng 
on the sland by makng moves that seemed to ally the sland wth Fdel 
Castro’s Communst government n Cuba. Manley’s actons had destab
-
lzed Jamaca’s already weak economy and led to shortages of some of the 
sland’s necesstes, such as cookng ol and food staples.


--- PAGE 55 ---
36  BOB  M ARLEY
Further, a large quantty of hand guns had mysterously appeared on the 
sland and were beng used to escalate the pre-electon volence. In Jamaca, 
possesson of a gun was an especally henous crme. The Jamacan govern-
ment had been patterned on the Brtsh system when the sland acheved 
ndependence n 1962. However, on Aprl 2, 1974, Jamaca establshed 
the Gun Court. The Gun Court was a combnaton court and prson es -
tablshed to prosecute and punsh anyone commttng a crme nvolvng 
a gun. The court was afforded the power to detan crmnals ndefntely 
and subject them to hard labor. Mandatory sentences were enforced untl 
1983, when the practces of the Gun Court were ruled unconsttutonal. 
Durng the Gun Court’s decade of unrestrcted operaton, countless ghetto 
youths were jaled wth no hope of returnng to regular socety.
Another oddty of the 1976 electon was that whle Manley was court
-
ng Castro, the JLP opposton leader, Edward Seaga, was accused of allyng 
hmself wth the Amercan CIA. Ths was apparently done to help hm wn 
control of the sland, but resulted n further destablzng Jamaca to the 
pont that the sland practcally dssolved nto cvl war n the md-1970s. 
Everyone on the sland was affected by the two Jamacan poltcal pow
-
ers wrestlng for control. Recognzng the harm that was beng done, Bob 
proposed to stage a concert for Jamacans, to thank the sland’s populaton 
for ther support of the band. Dubbed the “Smle Jamaca” Concert, the 
event was scheduled to take place on Kngston’s Natonal Heroes Park 
on December 5, 1976. In order to stage such an event, Bob needed the 
approval of the prme mnster’s offce. Ths approval was granted, but n 
an act of pure poltcal maneuverng, the PNP announced the date of the 
next general electon as December 20. In so dong, the PNP created a stu
-
aton n whch t seemed the Bob Marley and the Walers were backng 
the reelecton of Mchael Manley of the PNP .
Ths sent Bob nto a rage, but the concert had already been announced, 
supportng acts were already booked, and Bob and the Walers had already 
recorded the song “Sm le Jamaca” wth Perry n hs Black Ark stud os. 
The concert was meant to defuse the v olence on the sland and reduce 
the constant warrng between the two partes. Bob was essentally tryng to 
save hs ghetto brothers and ssters as the pre-electon volence was always 
hottest n the ghetto. Goon squads recru ted by each party frequently 
clashed on ghetto streets, leadng to a great many “cvlan” deaths.
attempted aSSaSSination
Wth the warped percepton about the “Smle Jamaca” concert, the 
volence of the 1976 electon came drectly to Bob’s 56 Hope Road house.


--- PAGE 56 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  37
T wo days before the concert, Bob and the Walers were at the house on 
Hope Road rehearsng for ther upcomng performance. The band took a 
break and one of the I-Threes, Judy Mowatt, asked Bob to have someone 
take her home. She was pregnant and not feelng well, so Bob asked Gar
-
rck to take the BMW and return Judy to her home. As they were pullng 
out of the drveway at 56 Hope Road, Don Taylor was pullng n to super
-
vse the rehearsal. Bob, Taylor, and Knsey were relaxng n the ktchen 
watng for Blackwell, who was supposed to be comng to meet Taylor.
Unnotced by Taylor, hs car had been followed nto the drveway by 
two others. Sx gunmen slpped out of these two cars and opened fre on 
the house. The ktchen was stuated at the rear of the house, up a few 
stars. Bob, Taylor, and Knsey heard the gunfre and mmedately saw the 
barrel of a gun comng though the ktchen door. Everyone dved for cover 
as the gunman opened fre. Bob ducked for cover by the refrgerator, but 
Taylor was left relatvely exposed n the mddle of the room. When the 
shootng stopped, Taylor had been rddled wth bullets; Bob had been shot 
once and the bullet was lodged n hs left forearm; and Rta had been shot 
once n the head but the bullet dd not perce her skull. A Walers’ assoc
-
ate named Lews Smpson (or maybe Lews Grffths—sources conflct) 
was badly wounded.
Incredbly, no one was klled. Taylor was shot fve tmes n the mdsec-
ton and had to be flown to Mam for surgery. Rta and Bob were both 
taken to the hosptal and treated. Rta was treated and released wth a 
bandage around her head. Bob was nformed that f the doctors removed 
the bullet from hs arm he could lose feelng n hs left hand. Bob refused 
to take the rsk, as he wrote hs songs accompanyng hmself on the gutar, 
so the bullet was left where t had lodged. Overall, thngs could have 
been much worse. The bullets that were spayed nto the ktchen had not 
been accurately amed. In fact, many of them rcocheted around the room 
leavng holes n the walls that are stll vsble today. Eventually, everyone 
made full recoveres from ther wounds over the course of tme.
Surprsngly, Jamacan Prme Mnster Mchael Manley vsted Bob 
whle he was beng treated at the hosptal. Manley placed Bob under the 
protecton of the Jamacan securty servce and he was taken away from 
the hosptal under armed escort. The prme mnster was stll plannng 
for a Walers appearance at the “Smle Jamaca” Concert, so protectng 
Bob was protectng hs own poltcal nterests. Once Blackwell heard 
of the shootng, he made hs manson on Strawberry Hll avalable to 
the wounded Walers. Strawberry Hll s hgh n Jamaca’s nteror Blue 
Mountans. Here Bob spent the nght tryng to sort out the stuaton and 
worryng about the future of hs band, all under heavy guard provded by


--- PAGE 57 ---
38  BOB  M ARLEY
the government and by area Rastas. Bob’s mnd was heavy wth concern 
for hs wounded frends and famly; addtonally, he needed to decde f 
the band was stll gong to play the concert.
December 4, 1976, dawned as Bob was begnnng hs recovery at Straw-
berry Hll. Hs man actvty for the day was collectng the Walers, who 
had scattered n the wake of the shootng, and decdng whether or not to 
play the concert the followng day. Bob was further put on edge wth the 
news that the would-be kllers were stll at large. Bob spent the day tryng 
ftfully to make sense out of the shootng. It was agreed that the assassna
-
ton attempt had been poltcally motvated, but by what poltcal facton 
was stll a mystery (the detals surroundng the event have never been 
fully explaned; the outcome was that Bob was not on the sland when the 
electon was held).
Regardless of hs remanng doubts, Bob took acton. He obtaned a set 
of powerful walke-talkes from the flm crew that Blackwell had hred 
to flm the concert. W th these, Bob was able to round up the band and 
montor the stuaton n Kngston as he contnued to mull over the safety 
of playng the concert. Bob quckly learned that the news of the attempted 
assassnaton had crossed the sland. The supportng bands had all can
-
celed ther appearances at the concert and the stuaton at Heroes Park 
was precarous. Bob took solace n the fact that hs old frend Stephen 
“Cat” Coore, of the band Thrd World, was on the scene and that Coore’s 
band had agreed to perform and test the waters.
Soon, enough of the Walers were found to make a performance pos -
sble. Coore nformed Bob that there were already n excess of 50,000 
people at the venue at 4:00 p.m. Stll at Strawberry Hll, Bob remaned 
undecded about performng. Hs resolve was further tested when Rta 
arrved wth her head stll bandaged and told hm that they should can -
cel the concert. Servng hs party’s own purposes, PNP Housng Mnster 
Anthony Spauldng came on the scene to try to convnce Bob to perform. 
Bob was even more conflcted because the concert had been hs own dea. 
Gvng n to negatve crcumstances was not n Bob’s personalty, but self
-
lessly gvng of hs gfts and prosperty was.
the “Smile Jamaica” concert
After much delberaton, Bob made the decson to perform the con -
cert. He, Spauldng, and Rta rode down nto the cty under heavy guard 
and arrved at the venue to fnd 80,000 people watng for the Walers. In 
pure defance of those who sought to slence hs voce, Bob Marley and 
the Walers took the stage. Checkng to see who else was wth hm, Bob


--- PAGE 58 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  39
counted Carle Barrett hs drummer, Tyrone Downe hs keyboard player, 
Cat Coore the gutarst for the Thrd World band, the horn secton from 
Zap Pow, and fve of the hand drummers from the band Ras Mchael and 
the Sons of Negus. Bob began hs set wth a bref announcement n whch 
he sad that when he came up wth the dea of the concert there was not 
supposed to be any poltcs nvolved. He and the band then launched nto 
a searng 90-mnute set wth the ant-oppresson song “War.”
The Walers’ set was supposed to be short, but Bob was rapt wth the 
sprt of the event and pushed the band to contnue. A hghlght was the 
performance of “So Jah Seh,” whch was lkely the only tme that the group 
played ths song lve. The show contnued through the Walers’ set wth
-
out dsturbance. Durng the Walers’ set, Knsey came on stage wearng a 
brown tunc to hde hs njures. Conversely, Bob lfted hs shrt to show 
the audence that the reports of the attempted assassnaton were true, but 
that he had not succumbed to hs wounds.
After the concert, Blackwell agan gave Bob the use of the house at 
Strawberry Hll. Bob spent the nght plannng hs next move and stll 
grapplng wth the mplcatons of the attempted assassnaton. Bob be
-
leved that the frst move to make to ensure hs safety was to leave the 
sland. He and Garrck left Jamaca the next day, headng for the sland 
of Nassau n the Bahamas. Nassau s one several small slands off of the 
southeastern tp of Florda. The Nassau move was well thought out as 
Blackwell had already moved hs Carbbean base of operatons to ths 
sland due to the constant upheavals n Jamaca. Also, Blackwell was al
-
ready workng on buldng the world-class Compass Pont Studos on Nas-
sau (the studos opened n 1977 and are stll n use wth a clent lst of 
nternatonal stars).
SelF-impoSed exile
Whle Bob assumed that Nassau would be a safe haven from the tur -
mol of Jamaca, the mmgraton offcals on the sland were not sure f t 
was safe for them to have Bob on the sland. After much delberaton, Bob 
and Garrck were gven temporary permsson to stay n Nassau, wth the 
provso that they could be forced to leave the sland at any tme. The par 
then settled n at Blackwell’s Compass Pont house and began plannng 
the Walers’ next move.
Over the next few days, Rta and the Marley chldren along wth the 
rest of the Walers band arrved n Nassau. Everyone was glad to have 
made t to the relatve safety of Nassau and a perod of rest and heal -
ng began. Even as the band members were becomng rejuvenated, Don


--- PAGE 59 ---
40  BOB  M ARLEY
Knsey qut the band and returned to Amerca. Knsey had been shot n 
the attack on the house at 56 Hope Road and beleved that the threat of 
volence perssted for Bob and those close to hm.
Although the Walers were not present to wtness t, the Jamacan 
natonal electon dd take place on December 15, 1976, and PNP head 
Mchael Manley remaned the prme mnster of the country (a poston 
that he held untl 1980). The 1976 electon lead-up had been especally 
bloody. In addton to the volence perpetrated on the Walers and ther 
entourage, over two hundred Jamacans ded n the course of reelectng 
Manley. The sland then descended nto another perod of smmerng un
-
rest n the wake of the electon.
Whle the Walers were solated n Nassau, they were afforded a luxur-
ous exstence for the month of ther stay. At the end of December, Bob’s 
grlfrend Cndy Breakspeare came and vsted the reggae superstar on 
Paradse Island (a smaller land mass that s connected to the northeast 
coast of Nassau). Together, the par enjoyed each other’s company and 
mmersed themselves n ther relatonshp. Soon, ths relatonshp pro
-
duced Bob’s son Daman, hs nnth chld.
Although the lves of the Walers were n perl n Jamaca, they felt 
safer elsewhere. When the band members were prepared to begn record-
ng ther next album, they went to London to see Blackwell and get to 
work. As Blackwell had provded ther prevous gutarsts, he was the 
logcal choce for a recommendaton to replace Knsey. He gave Bob the 
name of a black blues gutarst named Junor Marvn (who worked under 
the names Junor Kerr, Junor Hanson, and others. Marvn was Jamacan 
born, but rased n the Unted States. Further, he had the rght muscal 
credentals, havng studed under Amercan blues legend T. Bone Walker. 
When the Walers arrved n London n 1977, Marvn was already at Is
-
land Studos recordng wth Steve Wnwood. Marvn, Bob, and Blackwell 
met and Marvn was named the new Walers’ lead gutarst.
Through the early part of 1977, the Walers remaned n Blackwell’s 
London studos workng on ther next record. The resultng tracks were 
pared down to 10 and ttled 
Exodus: Movement of Jah People.  Although 
n self-mposed exle from Jamaca, the group kept a careful watch on how 
muscal style was changng on the sland. New materal was beng released 
by bands such as the Itals, Israel Vbraton, and Junor Murvn (of “Polce 
and Theves” fame). Even more sgnfcantly, the band Culture released 
ts ht “T wo Sevens Clash.” The song became a huge ht n Jamaca and 
England wth ts dscusson of Rastafaran mllenaransm. Rastafaransm 
s one of several relgons wth mllenaran belefs that a major change wll 
occur at the end of each 100-year cycle. Rastas beleved that the current


--- PAGE 60 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  41
cycle was to end n 1977 and at that tme the oppressve rule of the Baby-
lon system would end.
exoDus
Durng the Exodus sesson, Lee “Scratch” Perry turned up n London 
and Bob stopped the sesson to spend tme catchng up wth hs old frend 
and producer. Perry was able to update Bob on the evoluton of the Ja -
macan musc scene. He also asked Bob to record a song called “Punky 
Reggae Party.” The song was wrtten by Perry and was meant to cement 
the relatonshp between reggae and Englsh punk musc. An mpromptu 
recordng sesson ensued, and Bob’s voce was backed by a collecton of 
nstrumentalsts from the Thrd World band and the new Englsh reggae 
group Aswad.
The relatonshp between reggae and punk exsted from the md-1970s, 
when the punk style began. Many early punk muscans found a partcular 
knshp wth those on the reggae scene, because both groups felt margnal-
zed and oppressed by parlamentary-style governments that dd not relate 
to the underclass. Muscally, the two styles dd not share many character-
stcs; however, several punk bands covered reggae standards and often 
adopted the reggae style. For example, Junor Murvn’s ht sngle “Polce 
and Theves” was covered by the Clash and was a ht for both groups.
After Bob had completed hs work wth Perry, the 
Exodus sessons re-
sumed. The band had already recorded 20 tracks and added another 10 
n the second flurry of recordng. The group then selected the 10 most 
expressve tracks for the album and on June 3, 1977, 
Exodus was released 
as the sxth Island Records/Walers band product. The album ncluded 
the tracks “Natural Mystc,” “So Much Thngs to Say,” “Gultness,” “The 
Heathen,” “Exodus,” “Jammng,” “Watng n Van,” “Turn Your Lghts 
Down Low,” “Three Lttle Brds,” and “One Love/People Get Ready.” The 
makeup of the band for the release was the same as t had been for Rasta-
man Vibration wth the substtuton of Marvn for Knsey on gutar. Also 
present on the album was the use of a new drummng style that was com-
ng out of Jamaca. Popularzed by Sly Dunbar, of the legendary duo Sly 
and Robbe, the drummng technque of evenly accentng all beats n a 
measure created songs called “rockers,” and the ttle track of the album 
was of ths sort.
The sentments of the new record reflected Bob’s post–assassnaton 
attempt mood. The openng song was called “Natural Mystc,” whch was 
one of Bob’s ncknames and was used to herald hs reappearance after the 
shootng. Next was a tro of songs whose lyrcal content found Bob tryng


--- PAGE 61 ---
42  BOB  M ARLEY
to come to a reconclaton wth the events of December 1976. Each song 
bult on ts predecessor, and through the three Bob casts the fnger of 
gult around the sland at those who sought to harm hm. Although Bob 
was known for hs kndness and hs nterest n unversal love, these songs 
reveal how deeply had been wounded, when he warned hs attackers that 
retrbuton would be swft and panful.
Bob also contnued hs prevously noted nterest n quotng Bble pas
-
sages. The ttle track of the album took a serous tone that was enhanced 
through the rocker rhythm and the use of the Zap Pow horns. Here Bob 
decred the treatment of the Rastafaran fathful and calls for hs brothers 
and ssters to repatrate. The concept of repatraton runs through Ras
-
tafaran belef, but t was not ntended as a lteral nvtaton to return to 
Afrca. Instead, t was meant as a phlosophcal return to Afrca, wth ts 
prde and majesty n one’s head, regardless of one’s locaton.
The rest of Exodus was a mxture of dance and love songs. “Jamm ng” 
was a l ghthearted attempt to put the event of late 1976 beh nd the 
band. “Wa tng n Van,” “Turn Your L ghts Down Low,” and “Three 
Lttle B rds” were all love songs express ng Bob’s feel ngs for Break -
speare. The f nal track was the m xng of Bob’s and Curt s Mayf eld’s 
(of the Impress ons) songwr tng. “One Love/People Get Ready” ex -
pressed unversal love and unty wth a hnt of the Amercan cvl rghts 
movement. The Exodus release was another huge success for the Walers. 
The reacton to the album was so strong that all but three of the songs 
were released as sngles, a feat that was not matched unt l Mchael Jack-
son released Thriller.
exoDus toUr
As was now the custom, the Walers next prepared to tour n support 
of Exodus. The band spent tme preparng for what would be another long 
trp through Western Europe and North Amerca. Whle the preparatons 
for the tour were underway, Bob and Famly Man ran afoul of the London 
polce. The par was stopped whle drvng through northwest London. 
They were searched and t was dscovered that both men had large ganja 
splffs n ther possesson. The polce then searched the apartment where 
Bob had been stayng (away from the place where the rest of the band was 
housed) and they uncovered approxmately a pound of marjuana. Bob 
and Famly Man were ordered to appear n court on charges of possess
-
ng (large quanttes of) a controlled substance. Because nether man had 
been brought up on any prevous charges, they escaped wth a fne and a 
warnng not to appear agan n court for any reason.


--- PAGE 62 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  43
Whle dsapponted at hs bad luck at the hands of the polce, Bob’s 
mood was brghtened when he dscovered that the Ethopan royal fam -
ly was lvng n exle n London at ths tme. Bob had occason to meet 
Crown Prnce Zere-Yacobe Asfa-Wossen, the pretender to hs grandfa -
ther’s throne (Hale Selasse I had been deposed on September 12, 1974; 
wth hs government n dsarray, a group of low-rankng mltary offcers 
had effectvely overthrown the weakened leader and removed hs fam -
ly from the rulershp of the country). The meetng had two outcomes. 
Frst, Wossen gave Bob a gold rng emblazoned wth the golden Lon of 
Judah emblem, a rng that the reggae superstar wore for the rest of hs 
lfe. Also, Bob’s nterest n Afrca (specfcally Ethopa) was deepened 
sgnfcantly.
BoB’S Foot inJUry
The Walers launched the Exodus tour at Pavllon Baltard n Pars, 
France, on May 10, 1977. The tour was off to an mmedate success, but 
tragedy struck when Bob’s rght bg toe was badly njured n a soccer game. 
The game was a frendly match between members of the Walers’ entou -
rage and a group of French journalsts. The njury was sgnfcant and 
upon closer nspecton, Bob realzed that he should see a doctor. The doc-
tor noted that Bob had lost most of hs toenal and nformed hm that he 
needed to stay off of hs feet to gve the njury tme to heal. Bob dd not 
heed the doctor’s warnng as he was aware of the serousness of cancelng 
any prearranged tour oblgatons. Also, Rastafarans do not strctly adhere 
to modern medcne.
Despte the njury, Bob and the Walers contnued the European leg 
of the tour. The group played shows n Belgum, the Netherlands, and 
Denmark, four shows n Germany, two shows n Sweden, and wrapped up 
the European leg wth fve shows n England. The Englsh dates ncluded 
an appearance on the BBC show Top of the Pops  and four shows at the 
Ranbow Theatre. Wth Marvn n the band, the Walers lve show was 
even more electrfyng than t had been. At the end of the London shows, 
Bob was sufferng from hs falure to look after hs njured foot. The toe 
njury had not been allowed to heal properly and Bob’s onstage dancng 
had reopened the njury. Wth the European leg completed on June 4 and 
the Amercan leg not scheduled to start untl the Palladum show n New 
York n July, Bob went to hs mother’s house n Delaware to recuperate. 
Wth the support of the tour, 
Exodus had shot to number one on the Eng-
lsh and German charts, and the pressure was on to make the record a ht 
n the Unted States.


--- PAGE 63 ---
44  BOB  M ARLEY
Bob’s foot seemed to be worsenng nstead of healng and he returned to 
London to see a foot specalst. The doctor gave Bob’s foot a full examna-
ton, even collectng some skn cells for examnaton under a mcroscope. 
The doctor then nformed Bob that the sample revealed mutated cancerous 
cells that could requre the amputaton of the affected toe. Bob asked the 
doctor to explore alternatves and soon learned that there was an alterna
-
tve, but t had accompanyng rsks. Instead of amputatng the toe, a small 
porton of t could be removed and the wound cleaned and redressed. 
Ths alternatve stll dd not please Bob and he sought a second opnon 
n Mam.
Bob’s toe was examned by Dr. W llam Bacon, the doctor who had 
operated on Taylor after the shootng at 56 Hope Road. Bacon seconded 
the London doctor’s opnon, that a part of Bob’s foot needed to be re
-
moved. On July 20, the Amercan leg of the Exodus tour was postponed 
to allow Bob to undergo surgery. Although offcally the tour was only 
postponed, all tckets were refunded and no dates were rescheduled. Bob’s 
surgery was performed at Cedars of Lebanon Hosptal n Mam, and all of 
the cancerous cells were removed. Wth all of the mutated cells removed, 
Bob recovered at a house that he purchased n Mam. The doctor’s rec
-
ommendaton for Bob’s recovery nvolved the snger returnng to eatng 
meat, for ts proten. After two months of recovery and a new det, Bob 
was well agan and ready to return to the road.
Even wthout tour support, Exodus was a ht n the Unted States and 
the Walers were revered on a par wth Amerca rock and roll’s elte. Dur-
ng Bob’s recovery, the Walers had also joned hm n Mam, and once 
the snger had reganed hs strength, the group entered Crtera Record -
ng Studos, n Mam, to begn constructng a new record from the extra 
tracks recorded at the London sessons that had produced Exodus. The 
produce of these mxng and overdubbng sessons n Mam was the next 
Walers album, Kaya. Also, Bob and Taylor were puttng together an -
other Walers summer tour. Ths tour would span the world and attempt 
to make up for the canceled Amercan shows.
Whle plannng the Walers’ next actvtes and completng hs recov-
ery, Bob was also wrtng new songs. Hs thoughts were also occuped wth 
concern for hs sland home. The unrest leadng up to the 1976 electon 
had contnued after the electon was held. The PNP’s socalst leanngs 
were only made worse through contnued control of the sland, and the 
growng lack of confdence n the Manley admnstraton was tearng the 
country apart. The Rastafarans on the sland, by belef a peaceful group, 
began the Jamacan peace movement at the begnnng of 1978 wth the 
hope that the ever-worsenng volence could be stopped.


--- PAGE 64 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  45
one love Jamaican peace concert
In a faled attempt to stem the volence on the sland, Manley declared 
martal law, sent the Jamacan natonal army nto the streets, and gave 
them the order that any known gunman should be mmedately arrested. 
T wo such poltcal goons who were arrested and detaned n the same cell 
were Bob Marley assocates. Claudus (“Claude” or “Jack”) Massop and 
Bucky Marshall were both chldhood frends of Bob n addton to beng 
the ruthless enforcers for the two rulng partes (Massop for the JLP and 
Marshall for the PNP). T red of beng used as poltcal pawns and gun 
fodder, Marshall and Massop began dscussng the possblty of stagng 
another concert for peace n Kngston. The two vowed to get ther partes 
to commt to a ceasefre that would be accompaned by negotatons to 
end the bloodshed and a publc concert to celebrate the sland’s changng 
crcumstances. The plan behnd the plan was that f the level of volence 
was reduced then the army would be removed from the streets and the 
whole stuaton could cool off.
Whle the dea was a good one, Bob was justfably skeptcal, as he was 
sure that members of one or both of the partes that Marshall and Massop 
represented were responsble for the attempt on hs lfe. The two men 
promsed the reggae superstar that they could guarantee hs safety them
-
selves. The crcumstances were made more complcated by the fact that 
Bob had not yet returned to Jamaca. Marshall and Massop had a seres of 
dauntng obstacles to overcome. Frst, they had to get ther warrng, rval 
groups to agree to put asde ther dfferences and then they needed to get 
Bob to return to the sland to headlne a concert.
To assst wth Bob’s return, Marshall and Massop spoke to the leader 
of the T welve Trbes of Israel Rastafaran sect, Vernon “Gad the Prophet” 
Carrngton. They beleved that f the nvtaton came from the T welve 
Trbes, t would be harder for Bob to refuse. Carrngton was convnced 
and he sent members of hs group to meet wth Bob n London to ds
-
cuss the peace accord and possble concert. By February, Massop was n 
London for hs own meetngs wth Bob. Bob and Massop had grown up 
together and the two were frends. However, thngs became straned when 
Bob contended that Massop and the JLP could not ensure hs health, even 
f they had n fact not been responsble for the assassnaton attempt. Mas
-
sop told Bob that the attempt on hs lfe had been for poltcal reasons and 
that the JLP was to blame.
In add ton to members of the T welve Tr bes and Massop, Bob also 
dscussed the possblty of returnng to Jamaca wth PNP representatve 
Tony Welsh, who had been sent to meet wth Bob when the PNP learned


--- PAGE 65 ---
46  BOB  M ARLEY
that Massop was n London. Th s group met over the course of a week 
and dscussed the detals of a truce and the poss blty of a concert. Bob 
fnally conceded and agreed to play the concert, wh ch effectvely ended 
hs exle from Jamaca. The concert was announced to the world press on 
February 23. The One Love Jama can Peace Concert was scheduled for 
Aprl 22, 1978. Bob Marley and the Walers were booked to headlne. Other 
artsts that agreed to perform ncluded orgnal Waler Peter Tosh, Jacob 
Mller and Inner C rcle, the M ghty Damonds, Trnty, Denns Brown, 
Culture, Dllnger, Bg Youth, and Ras Mchael and the Sons of Negus.
As the Walers were gearng up for another tour, they decded to use 
the Jamacan Peace Concert as the kckoff event for the tour. The band 
agan went through a lneup change when Al Anderson returned on 
rhythm gutar and Earl “Wya” Lndo agan joned the group on keyboards. 
In order to buld addtonal hype for the concert and tour, the Walers 
released ther seventh Island Records release, 
Kaya. Wth the momentum 
buldng for the concert, tour, and new album, Bob returned to Jamaca 
after hs 14-month exle.
Bob arrved back n Jamaca on February 26, 1978, wth the expressed 
msson of br ngng peace back to the sland. The One Love Jama can 
Peace Concert was scheduled for Aprl 22 and the T welve Trbes of Israel 
Rastafaran brotherhood was the sponsor of record. The concert was 
not ntended for any pol tcal postur ng; nstead t was meant to undo 
years of damage caused by the nfghtng that had created the current 
state of meltdown. The fact that the warr ng JLP and PNP fact ons had 
agreed to a tenuous ceasefre ndcated that even the poltcal goon squads 
were concerned about the level of bloodshed. The tens on n Kngston 
was ntense, llustrated by the constant presence of the pol ce, wearng 
bulletproof vests and carry ng shotguns, n the yard of the house at 56 
Hope Road.
The concert date dawned and all of Jamaca’s most sgnfcant bands 
were slated to perform. The tense mood of the perod leadng up to the 
concert was contnued at the show wth hundreds of polcemen n atten-
dance. As band after band took the stage n front of the audence of more 
than 32,000 people, the antcpaton grew. Peter Tosh’s set was ncendary 
as he crtczed the government, callng t the “shtstem,” nstead of the 
system. Tosh also flaunted hs onstage freedom when he lt up a large splff 
from the stage, even as polce and government offcals looked on help -
lessly. He contnued hs rebellon, yellng at the crowd that he dd not 
want peace, but nstead wanted equalty. He blazed through seven songs 
and then Ras Mchael and the Sons of Negus played a fve-song set. The 
concert clmaxed when the Walers took the stage as the fnal act.


--- PAGE 66 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  47
Bob walked on stage dressed n a brown burlap pullover shrt wth a 
map of Afrca on the back, decorated n many colors. At hs entrance 
the crowd erupted n loud applause, havng been left doubtng that he 
would ever return to the sland. Bob and the Walers gave a legendary 
50-mnute performance wth a nne-song set lst. That nght they played 
the songs “Lon of Judah” (whch they rarely played lve), “Natural Mys -
tc,” “Trench Town Rock.” “Natty Dread,” “Postve V braton,” “War,” 
“Jammng,” “One Love/People Get Ready,” and “Jah Lve.”
Durng the performance of the song “Jammng,” Bob began an ex -
tended skat vocal (skat sngng s vocal mprovsaton n whch the words 
are made up on the spot or nonsense syllables are used such as “doo” and 
“wop”). Bob sang:
To make everythng come true, we’ve got to be together, yeah, 
yeah. And to the sprt of the most hgh, Hs Imperal Majesty 
Emperor Hale Selasse I, run lghtnng, leadng the people of 
the slaves to shake hands. . . . I’m tryng to say, could we have, 
could we have, up here onstage here the presence of Mr. M
-
chael Manley and Mr. Edward Seaga. I just want to shake hands 
and show the people that we’re gonna unte. . . . we’re gonna 
unte. . . . we’ve got to unte.
Wth ths nvtaton, opposton leaders Seaga and Manley exted the 
front row of the audence, where they had been seated, and ascended the 
stars to the stage. Bob took one hand of each man and joned them over 
hs head n a show of unty. Whle both men were vsbly uncomfortable 
wth the stuaton, Bob reveled n the physcal unon of the two rval 
powers. In addton to the pleasure Bob got from the PNP and JLP peace 
meetng, he was overjoyed when hs chldren joned hm on stage durng 
the fnal song of the Walers’ set.
Kaya
After the One Love Peace Concert, the Walers geared up for an n-
ternatonal tour n support of the Kaya record. The album represented a 
dfferent sde of Bob that he had not prevously revealed n such a system-
atc manner. Although the tracks on the album were recorded n London, 
durng the same sessons that yelded Exodus, the Kaya materal was not 
mltant and the album was nstead flled wth mellow dance musc. The 
name of the album s Rastafaran slang for marjuana and the album con-
tent pad homage to the Rastafaran wsdom weed. In fact, the frst song


--- PAGE 67 ---
48  BOB  M ARLEY
on the album began wth the words “’cuse [excuse] me whle I lght my 
splff.”
The album jacket showed a grany pcture of a smlng Bob, whle the 
back of the jacket dsplayed a colorful pcture of a large splff. Contaned 
on the album were the songs “Easy Skankng,” “Kaya,” “Is Ths Love,” 
“Sun Is Shnng,” “Satsfy My Soul,” “She’s Gone,” “Msty Mornng,” 
“Crss,” “Runnng Away,” and “Tme Wll Tell.” The persons performng 
on the album were the same as had been present on Exodus. In the wake 
of the album’s release, Bob went to New York to meet wth the press and 
musc crtcs.
Kaya toUr
The Walers then began ther world tour n support of the record. The 
tour had three parts, two North Amercan legs wth one European leg that 
separated them. Many houses were sold out, and several performances 
were recorded for posterty usng Blackwell’s own Island Moble Studo. 
The tour was scheduled to begn n Mam, Florda, on May 5, 1978. How
-
ever, the frst sx dates were canceled. Some reports ndcate that ths 
cancellaton was due to unspecfed problems wth Junor Marvn’s health; 
others speculated that the Waler gutarst was strugglng wth cocane 
addcton. The tour then began n earnest n Ann Arbor, Mchgan. 
Shows followed throughout the Mdwest, followed by a swng out to the 
East Coast and then north nto Canada for a par of shows. The group 
then returned to the Unted States for another seres of Amercan dates 
before departng for the European leg of the tour.
The European leg began n England wth a show at the New Bngley 
Hall n Staffordshre. Next, the tour crossed nto France for three dates 
before t headed to Ibza, Span, Sweden for two shows, Denmark, Nor
-
way, and the Netherlands for two shows. The European leg ended wth a 
stop n Belgum and a return to England for another appearance on 
Top 
of the Pops.
The second North Amercan leg of the tour began n Vancouver, Brt-
sh Columba, and then came south nto Washngton, Oregon, followed 
by sx shows n Calforna. The hghlght of the Calforna shows was on 
July 21, at the Starlght Amphtheater n Burbank, when Tosh jumped on 
stage durng the encore for an unexpected duet. The band then crossed 
the southern part of the Unted States, performng the sx shows that 
had been canceled at the begnnng of the tour. The popularty of 
Kaya 
was assured through the lengthy tour. The album yelded two ht sngles,


--- PAGE 68 ---
FROM  T OP  OF  THE  R O CK TO  T OP  OF  THE  W O RLD  49
“Is Ths Love” and “Satsfy My Soul.” These songs were also released as 
vdeos to further enhance ther promoton.
Stll n Mam at the end of the tour, Bob recorded a song by Jamacan 
producer Kng Sporty. The song was called “Buffalo Solder,” and ts lyrcs 
connected the Rastafaran struggles to those of the black solders n the 
U.S. cavalry durng the Indan Wars. Noel G. W llams, known as Kng 
Sporty, owned hs own Tashamba and Konduko record labels and was a 
Jamacan DJ and reggae muscan.
BaBylon By BUS
An offshoot of the recordng of several of the Walers shows from the 
Kaya tour was the release of another lve album. Blackwell headed nto 
the studo wth the raw tapes of Walers shows from Pars, Copenhagen, 
London, and Amsterdam. He emerged wth the master tapes for the lve 
album Babylon by Bus. Released n 1978, the album ncluded 13 exemplary 
lve performances ncludng the songs “Postve Vbratons,” “Punky Reg-
gae Party,” “Exodus,” “Str It Up,” “Rat Race,” “Concrete Jungle,” “Knky 
Reggae,” “Lvely Up Yourself,” “Rebel Musc,” “War/ No More Trouble,” 
“Is Ths Love,” “The Heathen,” and “Jammng.”
The album began wth an ntroducton by Bob durng whch he con
-
tnued to assert hs fath n Hale Selasse I. He welcomed the crowd n 
the name of Ras Tafar. He went on to repeat that Selasse was “ever 
lvng” and “ever sure.” Bob further lnked hmself wth Selasse through 
repeated use of the “I and I” word choce of Rastafarans. He then engaged 
n a bref call and response wth the audence that led nto the frst track. 
The album captured the Walers at a new heght of lve performance, and 
the power of Bob’s sngng and hs vocal presence llustrated how far the 
snger had come snce the 
Live! album was released three years earler.
A strange crcumstance unfolded wth the release of the Babylon by Bus 
album: the Walers toured n support of a lve album wthout releasng any 
new studo materal. The group was capable of dong ths because ts n-
ternatonal reputaton had grown to such a hgh level and there were stll 
parts of the world n whch t had not performed. In pursut of newer and 
larger audences, the Walers launched the 
Babylon by Bus tour, wth the 
dea that they would play parts of the world that had not been prevously 
exposed to lve reggae musc.


--- PAGE 69 ---
50


--- PAGE 70 ---
The tour was booked and the Walers prepared to embark on ther frst 
tour of the Far East and the Pacfc Rm. The frst two dates of the tour 
were scheduled for Abdjan n the Ivory Coast. Both of these dates were 
canceled for unknown reasons. However, Bob contnued to pursue Wal
-
ers appearances n Afrca, even wth ths ntal dsappontment. The tour 
then started on Aprl 5, 1979, wth a seres of eght shows n Japan. From 
Japan, the Walers traveled to Auckland, New Zealand, for an appear -
ance. Bob was greeted by a collecton of aborgnal Maors who treated 
hm lke a kng and related ther struggles wth an oppressve whte gov
-
ernment to those of the Jamaca underclass. The New Zealand show was 
followed by an eght-show stand n Australa. Next, the group flew to 
Hawa for two shows before returnng to Jamaca.
Bob now planned hs next move. He had several albums worth of ma -
teral n hs head that he had composed whle on the road. Also, he was 
obsessed wth bookng a Walers concert n Ethopa. Havng spent long 
hours thnkng about and dscussng the black fatherland, Bob beleved 
that the Walers’ next bg tour must nclude an Afrcan appearance. He 
had been hampered n hs efforts by the ongong war between Ethopa 
and the terrtory drectly to the north called Ertrea. The 30-year war for 
Ertrean ndependence lasted from 1961 to 1991 and the war meant that 
Bob could not get a vsa to travel to Ethopa.
BoB in aFrica
Concdently, as Bob was tryng to enter Ethopa, Alan “Skll” Cole had 
turned up n the Ethopan captal, Adds Ababa. Cole had apparently fled 
chapter 4
reggae international
51


--- PAGE 71 ---
52  BOB  M ARLEY
to Afrca n the wake of the assassnaton attempt n Kngston. He had 
used hs soccer-playng credentals to get a coachng job wth the Etho -
pan Arlnes soccer team. Bob was fnally awarded a vsa n late 1978 and 
together he and Cole planned a trp to Ethopa.
Bob left Jama ca and flew to London, then Na rob, and then on to 
Ethopa. Once there, he vsted several places of sgnfcance to hm, most 
mportantly stes connected wth Hale Selasse I. Bob also spent tme on 
a relgous communal farm called Shashaman, attended a rally n support 
of the l beraton movement n Rhodesa, and spent t me soakng up the 
local nghtlfe. Based on these experences, Bob began to work on the song 
“Zmbabwe,” the Afrcan name beng used for Rhodesa durng the struggle 
for nternatonally recognzed ndependence from long-standng whte m-
norty rule.
Bob returned from Afrca refreshed and ready to get back to work. He 
had albums worth of materal n hs head ready for recordng, and hs re -
newed fath n black unty gave a serous edge to hs new musc. Whle he 
had been away, hs lawyer Dane Jobson ran the ever-growng Tuff Gong 
empre. Ths was no small task as she was charged wth the day-to-day 
management of the only multmllon-dollar musc company n the thrd 
world.
The Walers returned to the studo and ther frst product was the 
sngle “Ambush n the Nght.” The song was released on the Tuff Gong 
mprnt n early 1979 and reflected Bob’s steadfast resolve. Here, Bob 
agan addressed hs would-be assassns, holdng them n check because he 
was protected by Selasse’s dvnty.
Whle busy n the studo and wth Tuff Gong busness, Bob was stll 
aware that the tenuous post–One Love Freedom Concert peace had been 
broken. Hs old frend Claude Massop was returnng from a February soc
-
cer match when he was stopped at a polce roadblock. Reports ndcate 
that Massop was unarmed and approached offcers on the scene wth hs 
hands n the ar. The offcers opened fre and Massop was reportedly shot 
44 tmes. Wth acts such as ths, the uneasy peace that had been present 
on the sland snce the One Love Peace Concert was shattered. The rea -
sons for Massop’s executon were never substantated, but rumors swrled 
that he had stolen the money from the Peace concert.
Another of Bob’s long-tme sland frends, Lee “Scratch” Perry, suffered 
a nervous breakdown and was brefly nsttutonalzed at Kngston’s Bel-
levew Hosptal. However, amd the chaos of 1979, Bob worked dlgently 
to fnsh recordng hs next album. Another Walers tour had already been 
planned and Bob wanted to fnsh recordng the new materal before the 
tour began. Durng ths perod, even amd the turmol, Bob found some


--- PAGE 72 ---
REGGAE  I NTERNATIONAL  53
peace n hs lfe. He worked dlgently on hs new record, but also took 
long hours to play soccer and spend tme wth hs chldren. Also, wth 
Yvette Morrs, he fathered hs 11th chld, a daughter named Makeba (the 
Queen of Sheba) Jahnesta.
surViVal
Part of the 1979 recordng process was Bob’s ntroducton to a new 
Blackwell-assgned producer, Alex Sadkn. Sadkn was traned as an audo 
masterng engneer and became a well-known musc producer through hs 
work at Crtera Studos n Mam and at Blackwell’s Compass Pont Stu
-
dos n Nassau, Bahamas. Although he had a short lfe (he ded n 1987 n 
an auto accdent at age 35), he recorded materal for the Talkng Heads, 
Joe Cocker, James Brown, Maranne Fathfull, and others. Hs work wth 
Bob resulted n the 
Survival album. Released n the summer of 1979, the 
workng ttle of the album had been Black Survival, nspred by Bob’s trp 
to Afrca.
The album tself contaned songs on topcs such as rebellon, relgon, 
and escape from oppress on. Conta nng 10 songs n all, the album 
collected some of Bob’s most personal commentary on h s l fe and the 
world surroundng hm. The tracks contaned on the album were “So Much 
Trouble n the World,” “Z mbabwe,” “Top Rankn’,” “Babylon System,” 
“Survval,” “Afrca Unte,” “One Drop,” “Rde Natty Rde,” “Ambush n 
the Nght,” and “Wake Up and Lve.” On ths record, Bob was the leader 
of the oppressed black man n the Western world. He sang of removng the 
oppressors’ chans and the dawnng of a new era n whch black freedom 
and global harmony for the black race exsted. He was the Rastafaran war-
ror on a msson to reunte and brng peace to the Afrcan daspora.
reGGae SUnSplaSh
Wth the album complete, the Walers agan geared up for an extended 
summer tour. They kcked the tour off wth a headlnng appearance n 
the Reggae Sunsplash II concert held at Jarrett Park n Montego Bay n 
early July 1979. The Reggae Sunsplash concert seres had been n part 
Bob’s dea and began n 1978. The Walers would certanly have partc -
pated n the naugural performance, but t took place whle the group was 
off the sland durng the Kaya tour.
Durng the second ncarnaton of the concert, the Walers were the 
natural headlners. The show was hstory-makng n qualty, although ran 
made the venue a mud puddle and hampered the group’s performance.


--- PAGE 73 ---
54  BOB  M ARLEY
The concert was a huge success wth an nternatonal audence n atten-
dance. Because of ths success and the nternatonal appeal, the Reggae 
Sunsplash concert seres contnues currently. Each year the best of Jama-
can reggae talent s recruted for a show on the sland. Ths show then 
serves as the begnnng of an extensve tour promotng Jamacan musc 
around the world.
Hstorcally, the Reggae Sunsplash concerts have been enormously 
successful and have exposed the world to Jamacan musc start such 
as Thrd World, Culture, Steel Pulse, Toots and the Maytals, Fredde 
McGregor, Morgan Hertage, Buju Banton, Beene Man, Elephant Man, 
and others. The seres of concerts stopped n 1999 when the drvng force 
behnd them, Tony Johnson, ded. However, the Reggae Sunsplash show 
reemerged wth a three-day festval held on August 3–6, 2006. The plans 
are agan to make the concert an annual event, and plannng for future 
festvals s already underway.
surViVal toUr
Wth ths auspcous start, the Bob Marley and the Walers’ 25-member 
member Survival tourng group left Jama ca for an extended Amer can 
tour. From Jamaca, the Walers traveled to Boston, Massachusetts, to per-
form n the Amandla Festval at Harvard Unversty. Amandla s a shorted 
form of the phrase meanng “power to the people” n the Shona language 
of Zmbabwe. Ths concert, called the Fest val of Un ty, was organ zed 
by Chester England to benef t the Amandla group, whose m sson was 
to support Afr can lberaton and freedom f ghters. The show ncluded 
lumnares from around the world, such as Amer can soul s nger Patt  
Labelle, and 25,000 people attended. The Amandla show started w th 
the song “Exodus” and ended wth “Zmbabwe” and “Wake Up and Lve.” 
Throughout, Bob was the vo ce of Afr can freedom. Dur ng “Wake Up 
and Lve,” Bob began to scat a speech to the aud ence that ncluded ds-
cusson of brotherhood, un ty, and concern over cond tons n Afr ca. 
The concert earned almost a quarter of a m llon dollars for the cause of 
Afrcan lberaton.
The tour then rolled on wth a seres of dates n the Unted States 
that began wth an appearance at Madson Square Garden wth the Com-
modores and the rap legend Kurts Blow. The band then had a four-day 
stand at New York’s Apollo Theater. Bob had purposely establshed ths 
set of shows n the hstorcally black and lower-class secton of New York. 
By attractng the attenton of the resdents of Harlem, Bob beleved that 
hs musc could truly cross over to a black Amercan audence. Soon, he


--- PAGE 74 ---
REGGAE  I NTERNATIONAL  55
learned that these shows had had a deep mpact and he was beng talked 
about extensvely n black Amercan lstenng crcles.
Durng ths perod, the Survival album was offcally released. In contrast 
to the commerc al fare that had been Kaya, Survival was pure m ltant 
reggae and llustrated Bob at hs hghest potency. In addton to Bob’s long-
standng dscussons of freedom for blacks n Jamaca, the new album now 
ncluded dscussons of freedom for all black people regardless of locaton. 
Ths Pan-Afrcan theme was woven nto the fabrc of Bob’s musc and lfe 
for the rest of hs tme on earth. Bob also contnued to delver hs message 
through hs long-evolvng preference for the quotaton of Bble passages.
The Survival album tself was a testament to Bob’s convctons. The 
front cover of the album contaned small-scale examples of the flags of 
all of the Afrcan natons crca 1979. At the top of the front cover was 
a banner dsplayng the layout for stowage of Afrcan slaves as they were 
transported n shps from Afrca to the Amercas. Supermposed over ths 
was the album’s ttle. The back cover contnued the slave shp banner and 
ncluded the ttles of the songs contaned on the album.
The lneup for the album ncluded the Walers regulars from the prevous 
recordng. However, there was one s gnfcant addton: Carlton “Santa” 
Davs played drums on several key tracks. Dav s had played n several of 
the sland’s most famous bands n the pre-Marley era, such as Soul Syn
-
dcate. He s also cred ted w th appearances w th almost all mportant 
Jamacan popular groups s nce the 1970s, ncludng Jmmy Clff, Black 
Uhuru, Burnng Spear, Bg Youth, Peter Tosh, In Kamoze, Bg Mountan, 
and many others. For the Survival sessons, Santa sat n wth the Walers 
on the song “Afrca Unte.” Santa s certanly a Jamacan reggae con n 
hs own r ght, but h s assocaton wth the Wa lers on the Survival and 
Uprising releases llustrated that he s among the most sought after mus -
cans on the sland.
surViVal toUr continUed
The Survival tour contnued when the group headed north nto Can-
ada before returnng to the Unted States for several East Coast appear -
ances. Although unwllng to let t stop hm, Bob had been fghtng a cold 
snce startng the Survival tour. Incredbly, the cold would stay wth hm 
throughout the tour. In Phladelpha, on November 7, Steve Wonder 
joned the Walers on stage to sng “Get Up, Stand Up” and “Exodus.” 
The Walers then pressed on nto the Mdwest on ther way to the West 
Coast. The Mdwest dates ncluded stops n Mchgan, W sconsn, Ill
-
nos, and Mnnesota.


--- PAGE 75 ---
56  BOB  M ARLEY
The Walers agan crossed the border for a show n Alberta, Canada, 
before begnnng ther trp south along the western coast of the Unted 
States. As had been the case on prevous tours, the Walers were most 
enthusastcally receved n Calforna. They played eght Calforna con-
certs as the tour contnued through the fall. Whle n Calforna, Bob’s 
health mproved. However, he seemed constantly tred and ncreasngly 
passed off hs dutes, such as gvng ntervews, to other members of the 
band. The group then crossed the southern part of the country wth only 
a few stops. The Survival tour drew to a close as the year ended. The band 
played for the frst tme n Trndad and Tobago and concluded the tour n 
Nassau wth an appearance at the Queen Elzabeth Sports Center.
In addton to the strong start to the tour, wth the headlnng appear-
ance on the Reggae Sunsplash II concert and the Amandla success, the 
Survival tour had several other hghlghts. The performance n Santa Bar-
bara, Calforna, on November 25, was recorded and eventually released 
as on VHS (later remastered to DVD). Also, the concert n Oakland, 
Calforna, on November 30, featured a guest appearance by Rollng 
Stones gutarst Ron Wood. The fnal concert of the tour, at the Queen 
Elzabeth Sports Center n Nassau, was presented as a beneft concert for 
the chldren n the Bahamas as part of the Internatonal Year of the Chld. 
That nght, Bob donated the royaltes form the song “Chldren Playng 
n the Streets” to the cause. Bob had wrtten the song for four of hs own 
chldren—Zggy, Stephen, Sharon, and Cedella—who went on to form 
ther own muscal group called the Melody Makers, and the group also 
recorded the song.
UpriSinG
Phlosophcally, the Survivor album was a part of a larger puzzle that 
Bob was tryng to construct. Wth the sounds and messages of the album, 
Bob lad the groundwork for hs “call to acton” for all black people. Ths 
message came n three nstallments as conceved by the songwrter. The 
second part of the trlogy was the next album, Uprising. The thrd, al -
though released posthumously, was the album Confrontation. Bob was 
careful about how he delvered hs thoughts on black acton. The frst step 
was to survve four hundred years of persecuton at the hands of whte op-
pressors; next, the dsenfranchsed black populaton must band together 
and shake loose ther shackles (ether lterally or fguratvely); and thrd, 
they should make the move to a locaton where they could be free to 
lve n peace (Afrca). Even durng the 
Survival tour, Bob was wrtng the 
words for new songs that followed hs phlosophcal trajectory.


--- PAGE 76 ---
REGGAE  I NTERNATIONAL  57
Bob’s vson became a realty, at least n part. Due to the message n the 
song “Zmbabwe,” Afrcan freedom fghters adopted the tune as a rallyng 
pont. Zmbabwe’s Patrotc Front used the song to buoy ther sprts dur -
ng the long fght for freedom and consdered Bob a kndred sprt from 
whom they drew strength. The song gave word to the reasons why many 
of the solders were fghtng the war at all and unted them n a soldarty 
that would eventually lead to vctory. Ths type of prophecy through song 
went far to enhance Bob’s reputaton both durng hs lfe and n death. 
Bob Marley was soon known as the nternatonal voce of freedom and he 
was quckly adopted by oppressed people everywhere (regardless of color) 
as a fgure to rally around.
As the Survivor tour and 1979 came to a close, Bob and the Walers 
worked to set up the band’s schedule for the new year. They had already 
planned a band trp to Afrca, tme n London, and recordng sessons for 
the next album. As expected, the release of Uprising would also spawn a 
massve tour. Ths had several purposes. Frst, t was meant to expose the 
Walers’ musc to an even wder audence. Second, t served the purpose 
of keep ng Bob out of Jama ca for the general elect on of 1980. And 
thrd, t was to take the Walers to Afrca for the frst tme. The coordna-
ton of such a varety of actvtes was a major step. For these purposes, 
Bob renamed hs company Tuff Gong Internatonal, as an ndcaton of 
ther ever-broadenng worldvew.
uprising  toUr
Because the Walers toured n advance of the U.S. release of the Upris-
ing album, offcally June 10, 1980, the band was already playng the new 
songs before the audence had heard them on the recordng. The Upris-
ing tour entourage left Kngston on January 1, 1980, and traveled frst to 
London and then on to Lbrevlle, Gabon, n western Afrca. The country 
of Gabon s on the west coast of the Afrcan contnent. It s bordered by 
Equatoral Gunea, Cameroon, the Republc of Congo, and the Gulf of 
Gunea. Offcally called the Gabonese Republc, the country acheved 
ndependence from France only n 1960. Snce then, ts presdent has been 
El Hadj Omar Bongo Ondmba (who currently has the dstncton of beng 
a very long servng head of state). The country has a lmted populaton 
and abundant natural resources that make t among the most prosperous 
n the regon.
The Walers had been booked to play for the presdent’s brthday 
and the band’s exctement was palpable. W th ths trp, Bob was real
-
zng one of hs longest-sought goals. The show was also meant to expose


--- PAGE 77 ---
58  BOB  M ARLEY
the Walers’ musc to a prevously unntated group of people. The band 
was scheduled to play two shows. Bob was mmensely excted about per-
formng n Afrca; he had ntally sad that he would pay for the tourng 
expenses hmself as long as the Bongo famly pad for the actual Walers 
appearance. He then left t to hs manager Don Taylor to make all of the 
approprate arrangements wth the ol-rch Bongo famly.
retUrn to aFrica
The Walers’ tourng unt, and ther opener Betty Wrght, arrved n 
Afrca and were dsmayed to learn that they were not to play for the 
general publc at all. Instead, they had been slated to perform n a small 
tenns area for only 2,000 of the Gabonese elte. Although Bob was un -
happy wth the arrangement, he was pleased when, durng the group’s 
two-week stay; young Gabonese ctzens approached hm to dscuss Ras
-
tafaransm. After the Walers had played the contracted two shows, the 
band prepared to leave. Ths meant that t was tme to be pad for the en
-
gagements. A dspute arose concernng the agreed-upon fee. Bob had es -
tablshed wth Taylor that the Walers would be pad a total of $40,000 for 
the two appearances. Taylor was apparently demandng a fee of $60,000, 
wth the suspected am of pocketng the other $20,000 for hmself.
A Bongo famly representatve heard that he was beng blamed for the 
msunderstandng and mmedately went to Bob to straghten thngs out. 
Bob reasoned wth the man and learned of Taylor’s decet. Not only had 
Taylor marred an otherwse good Afrcan experence for the Walers, but 
he had cast doubt on Bob’s character n the eyes of the Gabonese elte. 
Bob straghtened everythng out wth the Bongo famly and ther repre
-
sentatve, and then he and Taylor had a huge fght.
Durng ther three-hour argument, Taylor reportedly blamed the whole 
thng on the Bongo famly representatve. Nevertheless, Bob was ncon-
solable. The exact facts of the blowup are not clear, but the result of Bob 
and Taylor’s fght was that Taylor fnally admtted to mshandlng Bob’s 
money. He had establshed a long-runnng practce of recevng as much 
as $15,000 per show as an advance and passng along only $5,000 to Bob 
and the band. Taylor also admtted to stealng from the Walers n another 
manner. Bob would gve Taylor money, sometmes as much as $50,000 at 
once, for Taylor to transfer to Famly Man back n Jamaca. Taylor then 
exchanged ths money on the black market for as much as three tmes ts 
face value. He then kept the ll-gotten gans and gave Famly Man only 
the orgnal amount. The Walers’ manager was apparently not ready to 
gve ths nformaton and whle reports conflct, t s possble that Bob


--- PAGE 78 ---
REGGAE  I NTERNATIONAL  59
had to beat a confesson out of hm. Once Bob knew the truth and the 
nature of the betrayal, he demanded that Taylor return the money. Of 
course, the crooked band manager could not produce hs llegal gans, 
sayng that he had lost all the money gamblng. Ths left Bob no choce: 
agan burned by the musc busness, Bob fred Don Taylor and he and hs 
band left Gabon.
The Taylor ncdent was just the worst of many examples of people n 
the musc ndustry preyng on Bob. He had had trouble gettng properly 
pad for hs musc snce he frst began recordng. Ths led to a general 
detestaton for members of the musc busness and worsened Bob’s dsdan 
for those n power. Over the course of hs career, Bob had only one suc
-
cessful relatonshp wth a musc ndustry nsder. Ths successful unon 
was wth Chrstopher Blackwell, the Island Records label boss. Although 
Bob and Blackwell’s relatonshp sometmes fell on hard tmes, t was wth 
Blackwell’s help that Bob reached nternatonal fame.
From Afrca, the Walers returned to Jamaca and set about the job of 
recordng new materal. Bob had enough new materal n hs head that 
these sessons produced suffcent tracks for two full-length albums. The 
frst record that was produced from these recordngs was ttled Uprising. It 
was released n June 1980 and represented Bob n one of hs more mltant 
phases. Hs lyrcal content was peppered wth bblcal quotes and hs mes-
sages spoke strongly of unty and redempton. Hs experence n Afrca 
was evdent n the new materal, and the band’s sound was heaver to 
reflect Bob’s mood.
The cover of the Uprising album depcted a trumphant dreadlocked 
black man wth hs hands rased n the tradtonal “V” for vctory stance. 
Hs locks were so long that they framed the album ttle, whch appeared 
at hs wast. Behnd hm was an mage of the sun rasng over the top of a 
green mountan (possbly representng the Blue Mountans of Jamaca). 
The album tracks have been crtcally acclamed as some of Marley’s best 
work. The songs on the album are “Comng n from the Cold,” “Real 
Stuaton,” “Bad Card,” “We and Dem,” “Work,” “Zon Tran,” “Pmper’s 
Paradse,” “Could You Be Loved,” “Forever Lovng Jah,” and “Redemp
-
ton Song.”
The collecton was flled wth sold gold hts. In the years snce ts 
release, Uprising has become essental lstenng for all reggae and Bob 
Marley fans. Performng on the album were Bob, the Barrett brothers as 
the rhythm secton, the I-Threes, Junor Marvn, Tyrone Downe, Alvn 
“Seeco” Patterson, and Earl “Wya” Lndo. The songs were all recorded 
and mxed at Tuff Gong Studos n Kngston, Jamaca. The 10-song testa
-
ment to Bob’s phlosophy has only grown more ntense wth age.


--- PAGE 79 ---
60  BOB  M ARLEY
The songs on the album reference Bob’s lfe and pont an accusatory 
fnger n the drecton of those who mstreated or wronged hm. Bob’s 
Rastafaransm was evdent on almost all of the tracks. Bblcal quotatons 
and paraphrases were also present n most songs. Other themes present 
were unty, love, and cooperaton. Due to the rough qualty of Bob’s voce 
on ths album, several bographers have speculated that Bob knew that hs 
health was not good and that he would not lve much longer.
The album contaned several standout tracks wth autobographcal 
lyrcs. “Bad Card” was Bob’s chroncle of hs experences wth Don Tay
-
lor. Taylor was lterally the “bad card” that Bob drew and wth whch 
he “made wrong moves” n hs busness dealngs. “Work” was another 
of Bob’s calls to acton for all oppressed people. The song was structured 
as a reverse countng song n whch Bob counted down from fve. The 
countdown represented the perod untl the ultmate goal of freedom was 
reached. The song ended wth Bob declarng that Jah’s people can make 
t work.
Bob’s use of bblcal quotatons and paraphrases n hs lyrcs reached a 
new heght on 
Uprising. Here Bob repeatedly evoked bblcal sentment, 
story, and prophecy through repeated use of the psalms. An example of ths 
was found n the most popular song from the 
Uprising album, “Redemp-
ton Song.” In ths song, Marley created a seres of mages. Frst he placed 
hmself n a colonal-era slave shp, then he quckly shfted to bblcal 
language from Psalm 88, descrbng beng cast nto a bottomless pt. Bob 
also made use of text from Matthew 24:34 n the song, when he referred to 
kllng prophets, and he agan alled hmself wth Joseph through the use 
of text from Geness 49:24. In the song, Bob was able to overcome these 
dffcult scenaros through the help of almghty Jah. Another nterestng 
feature of the song was that t was Bob’s only track recorded wthout a 
backng band. Here Bob was at hs most personal, sngng wth only an 
acoustc gutar for support. Although he dd not know t at the tme, “Re
-
dempton Song” was the last song that Bob would release durng hs lfe.
After the sessons that produced Uprising were completed, Bob br efly 
vsted M am. He was t red and wanted to rest, plus he needed to 
straghten out h s management s tuaton, as he was gear ng up for an -
other extended Walers tour. At the same tme, he was also acutely aware 
that hs most recent album fulf lled hs record contract w th Island. So, 
n addton to need ng a new manager, he was also soon to be w thout 
a record deal. In M am, Bob met w th Danny S ms, who made t clear 
that Bob’s recordng nterests would be better served by sw tchng labels 
and mov ng to Polygram Records. Bob opted to st ck w th Blackwell’s 
Island Records label. Interestngly, Polygram eventually purchased Island


--- PAGE 80 ---
REGGAE  I NTERNATIONAL  61
Records n a 1989 merger. In 1998, Seagram bought Polygram and ab -
sorbed t nto the Unversal Musc Group.
BoB tUrnS 35
In the face of all of ths tumult, Bob decded to blow off a lttle steam 
and he threw hmself a massve 35th brthday party. The part was held 
on February 6, 1980, at the house at 56 Hope Road. For the bash, Bob 
surrounded hmself wth hs frends and famly and pad specal atten -
ton to all of the chldren gathered n the Hope Road yard. Frequently 
n Bob’s lfe, he was captured n photographs nteractng wth chldren. 
It was clear from these mages that Bob’s often gruff exteror melted away 
when he was n the company of chldren.
Whle n Jamaca celebratng hs brthday, Bob agan notced a change 
n the musc of hs sland home. The reggae style behnd whch he was 
the drvng force was beng nfluenced by a new style called “rub-a-dub.” 
The most popular example of ths style n 1980 was the duo Papa Mchgan 
and General Smley. Mchgan and Smley were born Anthony Farclough 
and Erroll Bennett and emerged on the Jamacan popular musc scene as 
two of the earlest dual DJ outfts. They recorded wth Bob’s old producer 
Clement “Coxsone” Dodd and had nstant success. Ther notable songs 
from ths tme were “Rub a Dub Style” and “Nce Up the Dance.” The 
par realzed Bob’s star power and swtched over to hs Tuff Gong Records 
mprnt.
The rub-a-dub style was very popular n the early 1980s and was char
-
acterzed by a fast tempo, heavy use of the bass drum on beats two and 
four, and DJ toastng. Toastng was the Jamacan predecessor to rappng n 
New York and was acheved when DJs delvered mprovsed lyrcs over a 
prerecorded beat. The beats were taken from “dub plates,” whch were the 
B-sdes of Jamacan sngles released wth the words removed. The emer
-
gence of rub-a-dub, the shft of Mchgan and Smley to Tuff Gong, and 
the Jamacan practce of toastng were just of few of the exctng changes 
n the Jamacan musc ndustry n the early 1980s.
At the same tme, Jamaca was agan descendng nto poltcally mo
-
tvated volence. Bob was aware of ths dangerous stuaton and kept to 
hmself whle on the sland. Hs entourage and famly were always around 
hm, but he was careful to avod a repeat of the 1976 attempt on hs lfe. 
Securty was mantaned around the reggae superstar through the help of 
the T welve Trbes of Israel Rastafaran brotherhood. Durng the run-up to 
the electons of 1980, PNP and JLP clashes resulted n 750 deaths, and 
several pollng statons never opened on the electon day due to the fear


--- PAGE 81 ---
62  BOB  M ARLEY
of volence. Realzng that the Jamacan stuaton was gettng out of con-
trol, Bob retreated to Mam to plan hs next move.
Whle n Mam, Bob learned that Bucky Marshall had been shot and 
klled at a block party n Brooklyn, New York, whch made Bob uneasy 
even n the Unted States. Ths dffcult stuaton was quckly tempered 
by joy when Bob and the band were nvted to perform as part of the n-
dependence day celebratons for the newly establshed Afrcan country of 
Zmbabwe.
Bob was aware that hs song “Zmbabwe” had become qute popular n 
Afrca and that t was a rallyng cry for the dsenfranchsed on the Afrcan 
contnent. However, he was awed by the nvtaton to return to Afrca for 
the purposes of helpng to offcally declare the exstence of a new Afr -
can naton. The leaders of the country formerly known as Rhodesa had 
realzed that the poltcal stuaton was too unstable to contnue. In the 
md-1960s, Ian Smth had set up a whte mnorty party and declared un
-
offcal ndependence from the Brtsh government. Smth was apposed by 
Robert Mugabe and hs Zmbabwe Afrcan Natonal Unon (ZANU) and 
Joshua Nkomo’s Zmbabwe Afrcan People’s Unon (ZAPU). In 1980, 
ths conflct came to a head and a general electon was held. Mugabe and 
ZANU won a landslde vctory, England gave up any colonal tes to the 
country, and Rhodesa was offcally renamed Zmbabwe.
Bob Marley and the Walers were the proud headlners of the Indepen
-
dence Day celebratons that marked the offcal nauguraton of Zmba -
bwe as a free Afrcan naton. Mugabe’s general secretary, Edgar Tekere, 
contacted Bob to nvte hm to be one of the offcatng dgntares at the 
ndependence celebratons, as hs musc had played such a key role n 
emboldenng the sprts of the Zmbabwean freedom fghters. After the 
formal nvtaton to attend the celebraton had been delvered, Bob was 
vsted by two Afrcan busnessmen who nvted hm and the Walers to 
perform as part of the event. Bob was so honored by ths that he made a 
commtment to havng the Walers perform and he promsed to pay the 
band’s travel expenses hmself. He lkely stll had the Don Taylor/Gabon 
fasco n hs head when he made these arrangements.
Although Bob and the band were ecstat c about the r nvtaton to 
Zmbabwe, they were n ser ous d ffculty. The nvtaton had arr ved 
wth very short not ce and the lack of a band manager had not yet been 
resolved. Regardless, Bob and the group pressed on, and three days later 
they landed at Sal sbury A rport. The country’s cap tal c ty was called 
Salsbury, but was be ng renamed Harare. The Wa lers were met at the 
arport by Joshua Nkomo, who had been the leader of the ZAPU move
-
ment and had been made Mugabe’s m nster of home affa rs. Bob was


--- PAGE 82 ---
REGGAE  I NTERNATIONAL  63
amazed that he was also greeted by Mugabe h mself and Brtan’s Prnce 
Charles. Mugabe was on hand to off cally welcome Bob and the band 
and Prnce Charles was the Br tsh representat ve who would lower h s 
country’s flag for the last tme durng the ndependence ceremony.
ZimBaBwe Freedom concert
Shortly after the Walers were welcomed n Salsbury/Harare, a Boe -
ng 707 flled wth equpment arrved. T wenty-one tons of Walers’ gear, 
stagng, lghts, and a 25,000-watt amplfcaton system wth 20 foot tall 
speaker boxes were unloaded and set up by a 12-man road crew. Bob Mar-
ley and the Walers were preparng to gve one of ther most memorable 
performances n ther ancestral homeland. The concert appearance was 
marked by the members of the band as the hghest muscal honor of ther 
careers.
The concert was set for Apr l 18, 1980, and dur ng the ndependence 
day celebratons Rhodesa offcally became Zmbabwe. The Walers agan 
assumed that they would be performng for the Afrcan masses and were ds-
apponted to learn that they were slotted to perform mmedately after the 
ndependence ceremony for an audence of dgntares, ncludng Mugabe, 
Prnce Charles, and Ind a’s Indra Gandh. Bob Marley and the Wa lers 
took the stage at 8:30 n the evenng, mmedately after Zmbabwe’s new 
natonal flag was rased for the frst tme.
When the Walers played ther frst notes n the Rufaro Stadum on 
the edge of the captal cty, pandemonum broke loose. A massve crowd 
had assembled outsde the gates of the venue and when they heard the 
band begn to play they rushed the gates. Excted and expectant, the 
crowd was too bg to control, and the natonal securty force launched 
tear gas drectly nto the crush of gate crashers. Bob and the band were 
removed from the stage whle order was restored. Once the crowd had 
been controlled, the Walers retook the stage. They were told that they 
had only two more mnutes n ther allotted tme and mmedately cut 
nto a scorchng performance of “War.” Wth ther tme elapsed, the band 
then broke nto “No More Trouble,” followed by the show stopper “Zm
-
babwe.” The Walers’ set ended w th all n attendance s ngng along to 
the chorus of the de facto nat onal anthem of the newborn country.
After ther set, the Walers agreed to play another concert the next 
day. Over 100,000 people saw the Walers perform the day after Zmbabwe 
acheved ts ndependence. The band staged a 90-mnute set of Walers 
classcs. However, Bob, who had been notceably shaken the prevous day 
by the tear gas ncdent, dd not seem hs usual self durng the performance.


--- PAGE 83 ---
64  BOB  M ARLEY
After the concerts n Zmbabwe, the Walers left Afrca, and on the plane 
several members of the entourage notced that Bob dd not appear healthy. 
Hs complexon was ashen and he dd not look well.
After the performance n Zmbabwe n Aprl, the Walers launched the 
tour n support of ther Uprising album n May. The tour was slated to be 
the bggest Walers’ undertakng yet. They were set to play n a varety of 
locatons that they had not prevously vsted, such as Swtzerland, Ire -
land, Scotland, and Italy. The tour schedule was rgorous, wth sx shows 
per week and each show set for a d fferent cty. Over the course of the 
tour the band played for over a mllon people, a feat that few have re
-
peated snce.
The tour began at the Hallenstadon n Zurch, Swtzerland. It was 
a frst for the band, whch was well receved by a new crowd. Next the 
group traveled to Germany for a show at the Horse Rdng Stadum n 
Munch. The group was the openng act for Fleetwood Mac as part of 
the Munch Festval on June 1. The tour then alternated pars of shows 
between Germany and France for two weeks. The Dortmund, Germany, 
show on June 12 was staged at the Westfalen Stadum and was broadcast 
on German TV and recorded on vdeo for posterty. Whle tourng, Bob 
was agan wrtng new musc. One example was the song “Slogans,” whch 
was not released untl November 8, 2005, on the album 
Africa Unite: 
The Singles Collection. The song was a testament to the poltcal les and 
posturng that contnually led Jamaca nto volent upheaval.
After leavng Germany for the thrd tme durng the tour, the Wal -
ers performed shows n Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Belgum, and Holland. 
They reentered France for a par of concerts and then moved on to Italy. 
T wo shows n Italy exposed the band to another new audence before the 
Walers moved on to Span, France agan, Ireland, England, and Scotland. 
The concert n Mlan, Italy, on June 27 was performed for an audence n 
excess of 120,000 people who had crammed nto the sold-out San Sro 
Stadum. Incredbly, ths show s stll regarded as the most hghly attended 
musc event staged n Italy. After a month of European dates, the Walers 
embarked for the Amercan leg of the tour.
Leavng Europe, Bob returned to M am for two months between 
the two parts of the tour. W thout management, Bob’s f nancal affars 
were n ru n and th ngs were only gett ng worse. Further, n the wake 
of the sp lt wth Taylor, Bob had sued h s ex-manager for a m llon dol-
lars and Taylor had countersued. All of th s was made worse when Bob 
learned that he could not return to Jama ca to see h s chldren because 
the sland had aga n been plunged nto volence leadng up to the elec -
ton. In M am, Bob spoke to Danny S ms, who warned h m sternly of


--- PAGE 84 ---
REGGAE  I NTERNATIONAL  65
the negat ve consequences of return ng to Jama ca. Sms beleved that 
Bob’s reappearance on the sland at th s t me would be v ewed as an 
endorsement of the Manley PNP government and h s lfe would aga n 
be n jeopardy. Although ths news was grave, S ms dd tell Bob that he 
had been brokerng a deal for the Walers to move to Polygram Records, 
a deal that would be worth several m llon dollars.
BoB’S Failin G health
As the Walers were gearng up for the Amercan leg of the Uprising 
tour, there was ncreasng worry and dscusson about Bob’s health. The 
reggae superstar was even slmmer than he always had been, and hs fea -
tures were drawn and gaunt. Members of the band blamed ths on the busy 
European tourng schedule as they all had ther own malades or alments 
comng off the tour.
In September 1980, the band began the Amercan Uprising tour n Mas-
sachusetts then headed to Rhode Island and New York. The New York 
shows were held at Madson Square Garden as a supportng act to the 
Amercan group the Commodores (Lonel Rche’s orgnal band). Even 
after two months of down tme, Bob stll appeared sck. Not one to talk 
about hs health, Bob brushed off any attempts by members of the band to 
dscuss how he felt. Only once dd he tp hs hand when he mentoned to 
hs gutarst Al Anderson that hs stomach and throat hurt. Hs voce was 
thn and hoarse, and rumors began to swrl about suspected drug use (that 
s, other then the large quanttes of ganja that he regularly smoked).
As the Walers moved through ther frst Amercan shows of the 
Up-
rising tour, Bob’s health was begnnng to vsbly fal. In New York, on 
September 18, the Walers band moved nto the Gramercy Hotel, but Bob 
stayed at the Essex House away from the group. Ths solaton was not spe-
cfcally a cause for alarm, as once n a whle Bob stayed at a locaton away 
from the band to gve hm a place n whch to conduct ntervews and 
band busness. On September 19, Bob sat for several rado ntervews and 
made an appearance at the Jamacan Progressve League. Next he went to 
Madson Square Garden to prepare the group’s sound check.
The Walers’ sound check was postponed because the road crew was 
stll buldng the Commodores’ stage. To Bob’s dsmay, ths postponement 
eventually turned nto an outrght cancellaton. When the Walers took 
the stage that nght n front of 20,000 excted fans, ther road engneer 
had to arrange a decent mx whle the band was movng through ts 
actual set. The Walers played ther two-nght stand at Madson Square 
Garden n support of the Commodores. After the second show, Bob was


--- PAGE 85 ---
66  BOB  M ARLEY
bedrdden. The exerton of beng on stage for the past two nghts had left 
hm completely draned and agan hs health was questoned.
Even though Bob was completely worn out, the tour cont nued on 
around h m. R ta called h m to see f he would be nterested n go ng 
to an Eth opan Orthodox Church, but he could not be ra sed out to 
bed to go anywhere. Shortly, though, Bob felt well enough to take Alan 
“Skll” Cole up on an offer to go for a jog n Central Park. Whle joggng 
through the park Bob had a se zure and called out to Cole. He collapsed 
nto Cole’s arms, unable to move, so Cole carr ed hm back to the hotel. 
After restng for a wh le, Bob rega ned hs ablty to move, but st ll dd 
not feel well.


--- PAGE 86 ---
The Wailers: (from left) Bunny, 
Bob, Carlie, Peter, and Aston ca. 
1971. Courtesy of Photofest.
Bob on stage wearing his signature denim shirt in 1976. Courtesy of Photofest.
66 a


--- PAGE 87 ---
Bob in the hospital after being shot 
in 1976. Courtesy of Photofest.
Bob in a contemplative mood in 1978. 
Courtesy of Photofest.
66 b


--- PAGE 88 ---
The Wailers in 1980. Courtesy of Photofest.
Bob on stage in 1980. Courtesy of Photofest.
66 c


--- PAGE 89 ---
Bob on stage in 1980 with his Gibson Les 
Paul guitar. Courtesy of Photofest.
66 d


--- PAGE 90 ---
chapter 5
hoMe to Mount Zion
After hs collapse n Central Park, Bob rested for several hours. He was 
mmedately joned by Rta and together they tred to reason out what 
was wrong wth hm. Bob deflected Rta’s fears sayng that he was feelng 
better and just needed to rest. Feelng assured that Bob was gong to be all 
rght, Rta agreed to meet hm later at a local dance club. The club, called 
Negrl, was located n Greenwch Vllage, and whle Rta and the other 
I-Threes were there they were told that Bob was not feelng well enough 
to jon them. Bob’s health had agan taken a turn for the worse.
BoB and cancer
The next week dawned wth plans to travel to Pttsburgh for the Sep -
tember 23 show at the Stanley Theater. Rta phoned Bob to meet hm and 
rde to the arport together. Bob told her that he would meet her n Ptts
-
burgh as he stll had another ntervew to do n New York. As t turned 
out, there was no other ntervew. Bob, concerned about hs worsenng 
health, contacted hs personal physcan, Dr. Frazer, and went to have a 
checkup. Bob submtted to a varety of X-rays and a bran scan. The re
-
sults of the tests stopped Bob n hs tracks. The doctor’s dagnoss was that 
Bob had a large cancerous bran tumor. Further, the sezure he had had n 
Central Park had n fact been a stroke.
The doctor drected Bob to cancel the remanng tour dates and m-
medately submt to cancer treatment. The worst of the grm news was 
the doctor’s predcton that Bob had only two or three weeks left to lve. 
In hs typcally defant manner, Bob met ths terrble news by sayng that 
67


--- PAGE 91 ---
68  BOB  M ARLEY
he wanted a second opnon. He then made plans to meet the tour n 
Pttsburgh. Arrvng at the Walers’ hotel n Pttsburgh, Bob was met by 
Rta. Able to read the stuaton n Bob’s face, Rta attempted to cancel 
the tour on the spot. However, sck or not, Bob was stll the leader of the 
group and would not hear of a cancellaton.
On September 23, 1980, Bob Marley and the Wa lers performed 
ther fnal lve show. Staged at the Stanley Theater, a med um-szed yet 
ntmate venue that has subsequently been renamed the Benedum Center 
after substantal renovatons. The nght of the show, Bob came on stage 
and w thout hes taton tore nto an ncredble set ncludng “Natural 
Mystc,” “Postve Vbraton,” “Burnn’ and Lootn’,” “Them Belly Full,” 
“Heathen,” and “Runnng Away/Crazy Baldheads.” As part of the Walers’ 
90-mnute set, the Barrett Brothers moved the rhythms of the songs 
along at a faster than ord nary pace. Although deathly ll, Bob gave h s 
tradtonally energetc performance, followng the openng numbers wth 
“War/No More Trouble,” “Z mbabwe,” “Z on Tran,” “No Woman, No 
Cry,” “Jammng,” and “Exodus.” The crowed erupted n applause at the 
end of the standard set. The Wa lers then broke nto a seres of encores. 
Typcally, Bob dd not enterta n four encores, but he stayed on stage as 
long as he could ths nght.
The frst encore was performed by Bob alone, w th only h s gutar to 
accompany h m. Hs performance of “Redempt on Song” was rendered 
more pognant wth the knowledge that ths was hs fnal show. After ths 
solo performance, the rest of the Walers retook the stage and the second 
encore was a performance of “Comng In from the Cold.” The end of ths 
song should have been the end of the concert. However, Bob mot oned 
to the band to stay on stage and tore nto “Is Ths Love.” The fnal song 
of the n ght was the Wa lers class c “Work.” Constructed as an old-
fashoned countng song (countng down nstead of up), the performance 
of ths song was Bob mark ng the end of the band. As he sang “f ve days 
to go, work ng for the next day, four days to go now, work ng for the 
next day,” the members of the band real zed that ther leader was count-
ng down to the end of the band. W th ths the concert ended, and Bob 
Marley and the Walers left the stage for the fnal tme.
In the wake of the Pttsburgh show, the rest of the Uprising tour was 
canceled and the Walers’ tourng machne was dsmantled. The group 
and entourage refocused ther energes from performng to carng for and 
about Bob. Wth Rta, Bob went to hs mother’s house n Mam to con
-
sder the next move. Bob wanted to pursue a second opnon and to that 
end he submtted to addtonal testng at Cedars of Lebanon Hosptal. The 
doctors at Cedars referred hm to the Memoral Sloan-Ketterng Cancer


--- PAGE 92 ---
HOME  TO  M OUNT  Z ION  69
Center n New York. In early October, Bob was tested by the experts at 
Sloan-Ketterng. Bob’s hopes were that the orgnal dagnoss would turn 
out to be ncorrect. Instead, he quckly learned that hs condton was 
even worse than orgnally reported. He not only had a cancerous tumor 
n hs bran, but he also had cancer n hs lungs and stomach.
more Bad newS
Wth ths more specfc dagnoss, Bob was nformed that he lkely had 
between four and fve weeks left to lve and that he should put hs affars 
n order. As a means of relevng the pressure caused by the tumor n hs 
skull, Bob began recevng radaton treatments to try to reduce the sze 
of the bran tumor. An unfortunate result of the Sloan-Ketterng vst 
was that Bob’s condton was leaked to the meda. On October 8, 1980, 
news of Bob’s cancer was announced on varous rado statons n New 
York. Staton WLIB was the frst to announce Bob’s health concerns over 
the rado. The news spread quckly and soon Bob’s condton was known 
nternatonally.
In order to be near to hs place of treatment, Bob took up resdence n 
New York. He checked nto the hstorc Wellngton Hotel. The hotel’s 
central locaton, just a few blocks south of Central Park, allowed Bob easy 
access to hs outpatent treatments as well as to anythng else he wshed 
to do. Intally, the radaton treatment that Bob had agreed to was suc
-
cessful n controllng hs dscomfort and he grew stronger. In fact, Bob felt 
well enough to attend hs frend Muhammad Al’s frst comeback fght 
aganst Larry Holmes. The fght was blled as the “Last Hurrah” and Al 
fought valantly, but at almost 39 years old, he was beaten by a techncal 
knockout by the much younger Holmes, who was n hs prme and had 
been champon for over two years. Bob also attended the New York per
-
formance of the rock band Queen, whch was tourng n support of ts 
1980 album The Game.
At tmes, Bob even felt well enough to return to hs favorte pastme, 
soccer. He and Cole attempted to play, but Bob soon realzed that he 
was not strong enough to run and he could only st on the sdelne and 
watch. Although Bob was pushng hmself and generally feelng better, 
he took a turn for the worse when he had another mnor stroke. Wth the 
toll that ths took on hs body, Bob was no longer able to stand wthout 
assstance and he began to lose weght. Seeng ths, Bob’s doctors began 
admnsterng chemotherapy. An unfortunate outcome of ths treatment 
was that Bob’s lengthy dreadlocks began to fall out. When ths began, 
Bob requested scssors to cut the rest of hs locks and resgned hmself to


--- PAGE 93 ---
70  BOB  M ARLEY
the loss of ths sgnature characterstc. As the chemotherapy progressed, 
Bob contnued to lose weght and he took on an ashen appearance that 
seemed to sgnal that the end was near.
BaptiSm into the ethiopian  
orthodox chUrch
Realzng her son’s closeness to death, Cedella began pressurng Bob to 
be baptzed nto the Ethopan Orthodox church. At frst Bob ressted as 
he professed hs fath to Hale Selasse. However, Cedella remnded Bob 
that she had been so baptzed whle Bob was n utero. Bob contnued hs 
protest, notng that hs afflaton wth the T welve Trbes made hm a 
natural rval of the Ethopan Orthodox followers. Despte ths argument, 
Bob eventually agreed to be baptzed and on November 4, 1980, Bob 
became a member of the Ethopan Orthodox church. W th ths move, 
Robert Nesta Marley was chrstened Berhane Selasse. Bob’s new name 
meant “Lght of the Holy Trnty.” Even as Bob’s sprtualty grew, hs 
health contnued to declne. As a result of the cancer and strokes he was 
now paralyzed from the wast down and was stll losng weght. It began to 
seem that the chemotherapy tself was hastenng Bob’s death.
BoB and Unconventional  
cancer treatment
Realzng that the current course of acton was not gong to allow 
Bob  to lve much longer, Bob’s physcan referred hm to a German doc-
tor named Josef Issels. Issels was known for hs success wth holstc cancer 
treatment. Although he had been blacklsted by the Amercan Cancer 
Socety, hs unconventonal methods could do no greater harm to Bob 
than the cancer was already dong. Feelng as though there was lttle left 
to lose, Bob, Cole, and Dr. Frazer engaged Dr. Issels as Bob’s physcan of 
last resort.
In early November, Bob and a small group of supporters traveled to 
Bad Wessee, Germany. There they located Issels’ clnc, called Sunshne 
House, standng n the shadow of the Bavaran Alps. Bob’s condton 
upon arrval was so poor that there was concern that the trp tself could 
lead to hs death. Reachng Sunshne House, there was speculaton that 
Bob would only lve for a few more days. Issels mmedately began treat
-
ng Bob. An mportant aspect of the treatment was to gan the trust of the 
wly Rasta.


--- PAGE 94 ---
HOME  TO  M OUNT  Z ION  71
Gradually, Issels ganed Bob’s trust and the doctor set about several 
tasks. Frst, he had to stablze Bob’s quckly deteroratng condton and 
then he could work to control the cancer. The ntal step was to confrm 
Bob’s earler dagnoss. Once Issels took an accountng of the cancer n 
Bob’s head, lungs, and stomach, he began treatng these afflcted areas. 
Issels’ unorthodox treatments nvolved hypertherma, blood transfusons, 
and njectons of THX. Hypertherma was artfcally rasng the patent’s 
temperature to heghts that the body normally dd not have to wth
-
stand. Blood transfusons were used to cleanse the weak and overworked 
cells from the patent’s body. The use of THX was not avalable to Bob 
n the Unted States as ths drug was not cleared for use n the county. 
Interestngly nearly 30 years later, THX has stll not been proven to have 
any postve objectve effect on cancer. However, Bob’s condton began 
to mprove under Issels’ care and treatment.
Remarkably, Bob’s health contnued to mprove over the next several 
weeks. Durng ths perod, he and hs mother lved at Sunshne House n 
a small apartment. As hs condton mproved, Bob was agan able to walk 
short dstances. Hs daly routne ncluded two short walks to hs treat
-
ment sessons. For treatment, Dr. Issels contnued to use hypertherma 
sessons, whch nvolved shootng 180-degree beams of ultravolet heat at 
Bob’s varous tumors. The dea behnd ths type of treatment was that the 
extreme heat would weaken the cancer cells and allow Bob’s own mmune 
system to fght them more effectvely. The treatments were long, frequent, 
and panful, but through t all the noble Rasta endured n slence.
Three months nto hs treatment, and s gnfcantly past when he was 
orgnally expected to d e, Bob celebrated h s 36th b rthday. On Febru
-
ary 6, 1981, Bob enterta ned many of the Wa lers band members at a 
brthday celebrat on n Bad W essee. All of the members of the band 
attended, wth the notable excepton of the Barrett brothers. Bob’s well-
wshers had expected to fnd ther former leader near death. Instead, they 
were greeted by Bob n h gh sp rts, at least passable health, and w th 
some returnng har. A by-product of th s gatherng was that Bob aga n 
became part of the Tuff Gong Internat onal mach ne. Through corre -
spondence w th hs lawyer, D ane Jobson, Bob began aga n oversee ng 
the work of h s busness. Ths flurry of act vty seemed to add to Bob’s 
strength, to the po nt that he began to engage n lght exerc se aga n. 
Even wth ths mprovement, Jobson noted that Bob weghed only about 
100 pounds at hs brthday party.
Whle Bob’s early February health was encouragng, by the end of 
March hs mother aga n notced hs condton worsenng. Hs strength 
was quckly lost and h s ablty to walk unass sted went w th t Cedella


--- PAGE 95 ---
72  BOB  M ARLEY
was no longer able to rase her son from long hours of lyng n bed. Another 
dscouragng sgn came wth Bob’s refusal to eat or drnk. W th ths, Ce-
della knew that Bob was not long for ths world. Helpless to postvely 
affect her son’s health, she nstead worked on rasng hs sprts. To ths 
end, Cedella spent tme sngng to Bob, remndng hm of ther good tmes 
together n the Jamacan hlls and Kngston.
Astonshngly, Dr. Issels choose ths pvotal tme to take a vacaton. 
Cedella was amazed at the doctor’s cavaler atttude to her alng son’s 
health. Issels left Cedella and Bob n the hands of hs assstants n early 
Aprl. At ths pont, Bob was a mere shell of hs former self. Hs weght 
was estmated at just over 70 pounds and he could not care for hmself n 
any meanngful manner. Bob’s lawyer Jobson protested the doctor’s dec
-
son to leave at ths tme, but to no aval.
Makng a bad stuaton worse was Bob’s fnancal stuaton. It was com-
mon knowledge that he dd not have a wll and everyone ncreasngly 
beleved that he could not lve much longer. Further compoundng these 
problems, members of the Walers were makng overseas calls pleadng for 
ther shares of the band’s earnngs. W thout a wll, all of Bob’s earnngs, 
future royaltes, and song lcenses would pass to Rta on hs death.
BoB’S retUrn to miami
Late n Aprl, Dr. Issels returned to Sunshne House and decded to 
perform surgery on Bob to releve the pan that the tumor n hs stomach 
was causng. Bob’s Rastafaran convctons were agan aroused (n oppos-
ton to the nvasveness of surgery). However, Bob’s condton was so poor 
that there was lttle choce. In early May, Bob’s doctor admtted to Ce -
della and Jobson that the most famous Waler would lkely de wthn the 
next two weeks. Issels had lost hope n hs own treatments to assst Bob 
any further. In response to ths news, t was decded that Bob should be 
brought back to the home that he had purchased for hs mother n Mam. 
Plans were made quckly to ensure that Bob was strong enough to make 
the trp. A plane was chartered and the small group made the trp back to 
the Unted States. Unable to care for Bob themselves, Cedella and Jobson 
checked hm back nto the Cedars of Lebanon Hosptal. The staff was 
not nstructed to treat Bob’s now numerous afflctons; nstead they were 
smply meant to keep hm comfortable n hs fnal days.
Bob survved the transatlantc trp, but contnued to weaken. On May 11, 
1981, hs vtal sgns became erratc and Rta was summoned. She was told 
that Bob would l kely only l ve for a few more hours and she should be 
wth hm. Rta sat wth Bob and sang hymns that she knew he would


--- PAGE 96 ---
HOME  TO  M OUNT  Z ION  73
enjoy. Soon, Bob’s breathng became labored and Rta called for Cedella 
to come and be wth her son. By the tme she arrved, Bob’s condton 
had stablzed. Cedella and Rta prayed over Bob and he sad that he was 
feelng a lttle better. Durng ths short rally, Bob sad goodbye to hs sons 
Zggy and Stephen. He also sad that he was thrsty. Cedella gave Bob a 
glass of water, whch he drank completely.
Shortly before noon, the nurses had Cedella help them roll Bob onto hs 
sde for an X-ray. Afterward, Bob slept for a short tme. When he awoke he 
asked hs mother to come close to h m. As she dd, he lost conscousness 
brefly and he quetly slpped away. At approxmately 11:45 on Wednesday, 
March 11, 1981, the ncendary voce of the nternatonal reggae superstar 
Robert Nesta Marley was slenced for the fnal tme.
BoB’S FUneral arranGementS
Bob was memoralzed n a servce held at hs mother’s Vsta Lane house 
n M am the follow ng day. The ent re day fr ends of Bob’s streamed 
through the house, ncludng Sms, Taylor, Blackwell, and varous mus-
cans who had played w th Bob. Bob’s body was on d splay throughout 
the day. He was la d n a bronze casket that showed h s body from the 
wast up. In hs rght hand was a copy of the Bble opened to the T wenty-
Thrd Psalm, and h s left hand rested on h s favorte gutar. The use of 
the T wenty-Thrd Psalm was ntentonal, as th s b blcal passage pro -
clamed that the Lord s the shepherd and that those who dwell n the 
house of the Lord should fear no ev l.
Next, Bob’s body was returned to Jama ca for a nat onal funeral. On 
Tuesday, May 19, Bob’s body was brought back to Jama ca for a two-
day state funeral arranged by the off ce of the pr me mnster. In 1981, 
Edward Seaga was the prme mnster, and Seaga’s offce arranged for Bob 
to receve Jamaca’s thrd hghest award, the Jama can Order of Mer t. 
Bob was posthumously granted th s award and the assoc ated medal that 
reads, “He that does the truth comes nto the lght.” The award was pre-
sented to Bob’s eldest son, Zggy, on Bob’s behalf. Wth ths, Bob became 
the Honorable Robert Nesta Marley, O.M. Seaga also made May 20 a 
natonal day of mourn ng and Bob’s body lay n state. Throughout the 
day, the coffn was on dsplay for mourners to pay ther respects.
Due to Bob’s enormous popular ty, hs body was on d splay n the 
Natonal Arena all of Fr day, May 20. Th s allowed even more mourn
-
ers to v ew h s rema ns and reports ndcate that as many as 40,000 
Jamacans passed through the gates of the arena dur ng the day. As the 
crowd grew and became uncontrollable, the pol ce unleashed tear gas on


--- PAGE 97 ---
74  BOB  M ARLEY
the mourners. Durng the chaos, Bob’s body was guarded by the Jamacan 
polce and members of the T welve Trbes of Israel Rastafaran sect.
In lght of hs converson to the Ethopan Orthodox Church, the 
followng day Bob’s body was brought to that church’s headquarters on 
Maxfeld Avenue. There Bob’s body receved the tradtonal Ethopan 
Orthodox funeral. From Maxfeld Avenue, Bob’s body was taken by mo
-
torcade past hs house on Hope Road on ts way back to the Natonal 
Arena. A publc servce was held, ncludng a performance by many of 
the Walers. A notable omsson was Tyrone Downe, who was too over -
whelmed emotonally to perform. Bob’s mother, hs half-sster Pearl Lv -
ngston, and a frend of the famly sang a song called “Hal,” whch was 
wrtten by Bob’s mother. The I-Threes then sang “Rastaman Chant” and 
“Natural Mystc” wth the support of the Walers.
The publc funeral servce led by Archbshop Yesuhaq began at 11:00. 
Yesuhaq was the Ethopan Orthodox offcal who had baptzed Bob 
the prevous year. The funeral party ncluded Bob’s mmedate famly, 
Governor-General Florzel Glasspole, and former Jamacan Prme Mnster 
Mchael Manley, Alan “Skll” Cole.” Glasspole, Manley, and Cole each 
read bblcal passages as ass gned by Yesuhaq. Cole read l nes from Isa
-
ah and shouted to members of the T welve Tr bes who were n atten -
dance and he thought were be ng gnored. The archb shop read form 
Matthew 5 and then all n attendance rose to the r feet for the Lord’s 
Prayer. The fnal speaker was Prme Mster Edward Seaga, who delvered 
Bob’s eulogy. Seaga’s words and sent ments were part cularly po gnant 
as he and Bob had oppos te vews on how to run Jama ca. Regardless of 
ther dfferences, Seaga spoke the follow ng words:
Hs message was a protest aganst njustce, a comfort for the 
oppressed. He stood there, performed there, hs message reached 
there and everywhere. Today’s funeral servce s an nterna
-
tonal rght of a natve son. He was born n a humble cottage 
nne mles from Alexandra n the parsh of St. Ann. He lved n 
the western secton of Kngston as a boy where he joned n the 
struggle of the ghetto. He learned the message of survval n hs 
boyhood days n Kngston’s west end. But t was hs raw talent, 
unswervng dscplne and sheer perseverance that transported 
hm from just another vctm of the ghetto to the top rankng 
superstar n the entertanment ndustry of the thrd world.
After Seaga’s eulogy, Bob’s casket was loaded nto the open back of 
a blue and whte Chevrolet pckup truck by a mltary detal of sx men


--- PAGE 98 ---
HOME  TO  M OUNT  Z ION  75
clothed n whte coats wth black belts and black pants. A blue blanket 
was tacked to the top of the truck’s bed to shade the casket from the sun. 
As Bob began hs last journey to hs ancestral home n Nne Mle, nyabn-
gh hand drummers played as he went. The truck was followed for a short 
tme by a robed prest wth ncense. The long motorcade began wndng 
ts way from Kngston to St. Ann’s parsh. On the 55-mle route, Bob’s 
body passed thousands of Jamacans on hand to bd ther natonal hero a 
fond farewell. Along the way, Bob’s body passed over the Blue Mountans 
and was wtnessed by a seemngly constant stream of people along the 
sdes of the road.
When the motorcade reached Nne Mle t was greeted by another 
teamng horde of well-wshers. Fve hours after leavng Kngston, Bob’s 
body was fnally comng to ts last restng place. On the grounds of Bob’s 
famlal homestead, a modest whte mausoleum had been bult. Bob’s body 
was enshrned wthn ths sngle-chamber tomb wthn sght of where he 
had been born. The tomb tself was blessed by offcals of the T welve 
Trbes and the Ethopan Orthodox Church. In the presence of hs famly 
and many onlookers, Bob’s tomb was sealed three tmes. The frst seal was 
a red metal plate wth a gold Star of Davd, the second was a metal grate 
that was bolted on, and the thrd was a layer of free concrete that was pat
-
ted nto place by several Rastafarans wth ther bare hands.
Bob was lad to rest wth the knd of pomp and crcumstance that was 
only afforded to heads of state. Durng the funeral and the rde across the 
sland, t was estmated that hs motorcade was vewed by n excess of 
one hundred thousand people. Snce hs enshrnement, Bob’s patrarchal 
home has become a place of plgrmage, to whch people travel from all 
over the world to vst the fallen reggae warror’s remans.


--- PAGE 99 ---
76


--- PAGE 100 ---
Bob receved many sgnfcant rewards durng hs abbrevated lfe. T wo 
of the most sgnfcant were the 1976 Rolling Stone Magazine award for 
Band of the Year and the 1978 Peace Medal of the Thrd World from 
the Unted Natons. However, n death, prase was vrtually heaped upon 
the reggae superstar. These awards are a testament to Bob’s legacy and l
-
lustrate the strength and nfluence of hs muscal style. In 1994, Bob was 
nducted nto the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame n Cleveland, Oho. Wth 
ths he joned a small and elte group of Amercan musc superstars. Snce 
t opened ts doors n 1993, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame has nducted 
only 97 members and Bob Marley s one of them.
Bob has also been honored by recevng the 43rd Grammy Lfetme 
Achevement Award. He has hs own star on the Hollywood Walk of 
Fame, and n 1999 hs album 
Exodus was recognzed by Time magazne 
as the Album of the Century. The Brtsh Broadcastng Company (BBC) 
named Bob’s song “One Love” ther Song of the Mllennum. In 2004, 
Rolling Stone Magazine  ranked hm #11 on ther lst of the 100 Greatest 
Artsts of All Tme. Also, the BBC has recognzed hm as one of the great-
est lyrcsts of all tme. The Jamacan government annually bestows a Bob 
Marley Award for Culture, and the Carbbean Musc Expo presents a Bob 
Marley Lfetme Achevement award each year. Possbly hs hghest honor 
s that snce hs death Bob has sold n excess of 21.3 mllon albums. For 
greater clarty on ths fgure, one must understand that such sales were not 
even counted untl 1991, when SoundScan became a relable entty.
Another dstnct and seldom bestowed honor was awarded to Bob after 
hs death. In 2002, the Gbson gutar company began ssung a lmted 
chapter 6
the lega Cy and the legend
77


--- PAGE 101 ---
78  BOB  M ARLEY
edton Bob Marley Les Paul specal gutar. The Les Paul seres gutar was 
Bob’s favorte electrc gutar for use on stage and n the studo. As a me -
mento of the label’s apprecaton of Bob’s long assocaton wth the Gb -
son brand, the legendary gutar maker joned forces wth the legendary 
reggae muscan. The Marley Gbson Specal was bult to the exact spec
-
fcatons of Bob’s Les Paul on dsplay at the Bob Marley Museum. Bob had 
modfed hs Les Paul n a few mportant ways, and Gbson duplcated 
these characterstcs n the sgnature seres gutar. The ntal run of the 
Bob Marley Les Paul Specal was lmted to 200 gutars.
poSthUmoUS releaSeS
Bob’s lfe after death has had almost as much actvty and nterest as-
socated wth t as dd hs mortal lfe. When Bob ded, he left behnd a 
prodgous lbrary of recordngs; however, there was also a large number 
of unreleased songs that have contnued to surface. Some of the more 
mportant posthumous releases ncluded Legend, Confrontation, Chances 
Are, Africa Unite: The Single Collection,  Talkin’ Blues, Songs of Freedom,  
Natural Mystic, the Legend Lives On: Bob Marley and the Wailers,  and the 
Deluxe Edton re-releases.
ChanCes are and ConFrontation
In 1981, Danny Smms released the nne-song album Chances Are.  
Ths record contaned prevously unreleased materal and new versons 
of prevously released materal. In 1983, Tuff Gong Internatonal and Is
-
land Records released Confrontation. Ths album was conceved of by Bob 
toward the end of hs lfe. He recorded the tracks durng the Uprising ses-
sons and had hs hand n all parts of makng ths release, except choosng 
the specfc songs ncluded and the order they appeared n. Rta stepped 
n to make these decsons.
The album was a testament to Bob’s career. The album cover depcts the 
reggae superstar rdng a whte horse slayng a dragon wth a lance n the 
tradtonal mold of St. George. The back of the jacket ncluded a pantng 
of the frst battle between the Ethopans and the Italans. Called the Bat-
tle of Adowa, ths 1896 battle foreshadowed the f ghtng that eventually 
drove Hale Selasse nto exle. The album conta ned the songs “Chant 
Down Babylon,” “Buffalo Solder,” “Jump Nyabngh,” “Mx Up, Mx Up,” 
“Gve Thanks and Prases,” Blackman Redempton,” “Trench Town,” “Stff 
Necked Fools,” “I Know,” and “Rastaman Lve Up.” The songs represent 
an excellent cross secton of Bob’s wrtng at the apex of hs abltes.


--- PAGE 102 ---
THE  L EGACY  AND  THE  L EGEND  79
legenD
The next major ttle released under Bob’s name was ttled Legend. Re-
leased n 1984, the album was subttled The Best of Bob Marley. However, due 
to the sheer quantty of Bob’s song output, 14 songs could not complete the 
proposed purpose. However, the album dd an admrable job of presentng 
a pcture of Bob’s output over the course of h s career. In typcal Walers 
fashon, the remanng members of the group prepared a tour n support of 
the album. Downe and Marvn shared the sngng dutes and Zggy joned 
the tour to lead the group for the Los Angeles show. Legend spent over two 
years on the Amercan Top 200 Albums charts and t was on the UK charts 
for 129 weeks. Incredbly, the album spent just over 11 years on Bllboard’s 
Top Pop Catalogue Album chart. Ths album went on to become the best-
sellng reggae release of all tme and has been certfed platnum 10 tmes. 
As of 2006, Legend had sold n excess of 12 mllon copes and contnues 
to sell at a brsk pace.
songs o F FreeDom
Another mportant release was the 1992 four-CD boxed set Bob Marley: 
Songs of Freedom. An offcally lcensed product of Tuff Gong and Island 
Records, the orgnal pressng of ths set was lmted to one mllon copes. 
In 1999 there was a second pressng n a slghtly dfferent format, whch 
dd not change the fact that ths was the defntve collecton of Bob’s 
songs, spannng hs entre career. The release began wth several of Bob’s 
earlest sngles and came forward n tme to the acoustc verson of “Re
-
dempton Song.”
the singles Colle Ction
Africa Unite: The Singles Collection was released n November 2005. Unlke 
many of the other posthumous releases, ths album had a defned pur -
pose and delberate desgn. Released for Bob’s 60th brthday celebraton, 
the collecton revels n much of Bob’s most outstandng materal. The 
album was unque n that t contaned materal that spanned Bob’s career 
n addton to ncludng two hp-hop remxes and a prevously unreleased 
track. The fnal three tracks were the most sgnfcant on the release, as 
they were not avalable elsewhere.
Wll..am, a member of the Amercan hp-hop group the Black Eyed 
Peas, was responsble for the remxng of “Afrca Unte.” Completed n De
-
cember 2004, the song took on a new lfe n the hands of a contemporary


--- PAGE 103 ---
80  BOB  M ARLEY
producer/songwrter. The Black Eyed Peas added a stronger beat presence, 
addtonal nstrumental textures, echoes on some vocals, and new words 
sung by Wll hmself. Overall, the remx clocked n at twce the orgnal 
song’s length and receved a hp-hop generaton upgrade that brought n 
nto the new mllennum.
The other remx was really a contemporary mashup. The dea of a mashup 
song s takng two exstng songs and combnng them n a manner that 
creates a thrd song that s a hybrd of the frst two. Here the Englsh 
DJ Ashley Beedle mashed together Bob’s fre-and-brmstone classc “Get 
Up, Stand Up” and Bob’s son Daman’s hot 2005 sngle “Welcome to 
Jamrock.” The combned verson of the song began wth the DJ reversng 
a record and then the beat from “Jamrock” dropped. However, nstead 
of stayng wth Daman’s words, the DJ supermposed Bob’s words. An 
especally nterestng twst was the nserton of the word “Jamrock” at 
the end of each phrase of Bob’s lyrcs. An addtonal treat was the pres
-
ence of Peter Tosh. Tosh sang the second verse n the orgnal song and 
that performance was repeated here (although only n recordng: Tosh has 
been dead snce 1987). Wth ths song, Bob’s message was agan updated 
for the hp-hop generaton, but ths tme passed through the lens of hs 
own son’s song.
The only truly prevously unreleased song on the album was ttled “Slo-
gans.” The song was orgnally recorded n 1979 whle Bob was n Mam. 
The orgnal tape of the song was found n Cedella’s house, and conssted 
of lttle more than vocals and a drum machne beat. Bob’s sons Zggy and 
Stephen took the raw tape materal and bult the rest of the song. They 
added nstrumental lnes that complete the texture and the fnal product 
sounds much lke other materal completed by ther father. The two Mar
-
ley sons enlsted the assstance of the rock gutar legend Erc Clapton to 
supply the lead gutar lnes. The message of the song was stll as mpor
-
tant n 2005 as t was n 1979. Bob sang of hs contempt for the constant 
propagandzng of the Catholc Church and the Jamacan government. 
The slogans that he referred to were those empty promses made from the 
pulpt of the church and the grandstand of the poltcal rally.
the delUxe edition S
Another seres of releases that have come out after Bob’s death and 
are exemplary n qualty and detal are the Deluxe Edtons. Island and 
Tuff Gong records began re-releasng the classc Walers’ materal n 2001 
and, thus far, have ssued Catch a Fire,  Exodus, Legend, Rastaman Vibra-
tion, and Burnin’. These re-releases are unque n that they all contan the


--- PAGE 104 ---
THE  L EGACY  AND  THE  L EGEND  81
orgnal album materal n remastered clarty by producer Dll Levenson. 
The second CD of each set dffers from one release to the next. For Catch 
a Fire, released n 2001, the second CD contaned the prevously unre -
leased Jamacan versons of the songs that appeared on the orgnal album. 
Addtonal songs on the frst CD ncluded versons of “Hgh Tde or Low 
Tde” and “All Day, All Nght.”
The Exodus Deluxe Edton was also released n 2001. Agan, the frst 
dsc contaned the remastered versons of the orgnal songs. However, n 
ths case, Levenson added fve alternate songs and versons of “Roots,” 
“Watng n Van,” “Jammng,” “Jammng (long verson),” and “Exodus.” 
The second dsc contaned a combnaton of studo and lve cuts. The 
studo offerngs were recorded and produced by Lee “Scratch” Perry. Stu-
do songs on dsc two ncluded two versons of “Punky Reggae Party,” 
two cover versons of the Curts Mayfeld song “Keep On Movng,” and 
“Exodus.” The lve songs were recorded at the Ranbow Theater show of 
the Exodus tour on June 4, 1977. Included were “The Heathen,” “Crazy 
Baldhead,” “War/No More Trouble,” “Jammng,” and “Exodus.”
The next Deluxe Edton came out n 2002 wth the re-release of Ras-
taman Vibration.  Agan the frst dsc of the two-CD set contaned the 
remastered versons of the songs on the orgnal album. To ths Levenson 
added eght addtonal songs recorded n Kngston or London at the same 
tme as the orgnal materal was recorded. The second dsc contaned lve 
performances from the Walers May 26, 1976, show at the Roxy Theatre. 
Recorded durng the 
Rastaman Vibration tour, the lve materal was an 
excellent testament to the qualty and potency that Bob had acheved 
wth ths band. Addtonal tracks on the second dsc of ths set were two 
versons of the song “Smle Jamaca,” one labeled part one and the other 
labeled part two.
The Deluxe Edton of Legend was also released n 2002. The frst dsc of 
dgtally remastered tracks was accompaned by a second dsc contanng 
alternate versons of the orgnal 16 songs. These versons were collected 
from remxng sessons datng from 1980 to 1984. The producers that re -
mxed the materal on the second dsc nclude Paul “Graucho” Smykle, 
Errol Brown, Alex Sadkn, and Erc “E.T.” Thorngren. In keepng wth 
the orgnal release of ths album, the 
Legend Deluxe Edton has been a 
consumer favorte.
The most recent Deluxe Edton was released n 2004. The Burnin’ 
nstallment n ths seres contaned the remastered tracks on the frst dsc 
wth the addton of fve songs produced at the tme of the orgnal ses -
sons, but omtted at the tme. Because Burnin’ was such an early album, 
two of the addtonal songs were wrtten by other members of the orgnal


--- PAGE 105 ---
82  BOB  M ARLEY
Walers tro. “No Sympathy” was wrtten by Peter Tosh and Bunny Waler 
wrote “Rencarnated Souls.” The second dsc ncluded a 12-song lve set. 
The lve tracks were recorded va the Island moble studo at the Leeds 
show on November 23, 1973. All of the versons on ths dsc were prev -
ously unreleased and represent the Walers durng ther transtonal phase 
after Peter and Bunny left the group.
Although Bob has been dead for over 25 years, posthumous releases 
from the artst contnue. The reggae superstar’s catalog s now several tmes 
the sze t was at h s passng and shows few s gns of slow ng down. Im -
ports, bootlegs, lve shows, and varous types of complatons surface pro-
gressvely. In 2006 alone there were more than 12 full-length releases n 
Marley’s name. The market s completely flooded wth Bob’s materal and 
the commodfcaton of the reggae legend s completely staggerng.
BoB’S eState
The topc of money turns to the handlng of Bob’s busness affars after 
hs death. As mentoned above, Bob ded ntestate (wthout a wll). Ths 
left control of the largest thrd world musc legacy and a multmllon-dollar 
estate n the hands of hs wfe Rta. There followed years of nasty legal 
battles for the proper dstrbuton of royaltes, property, and ownershp. In 
the wake of Bob’s death, Rta moved the Tuff Gong Recordng studos and 
producton offces to 220 Marcus Garvey Drve, Kngston 11. The home 
offces of the Tuff Gong Internatonal are stll at ths locaton.
Rta’s next step was the converson of the house at 56 Hope Road nto 
a museum and lbrary where nternatonal guests are welcome to take 
guded tours of the property and house. Bob’s former dwellng now hosts 
thousands of toursts each year. The structure of the house remans un
-
changed snce Bob’s passng, but several rooms have been altered to sut 
ther specfc purposes. The upstars bedrooms have been converted nto 
gallery space that contans a world map wth all of Bob’s concert tour per
-
formance locatons marked wth colored thumb tacks. The second-story 
room that was once Zggy’s bedroom has been converted nto a makeshft 
busness offce and lbrary. Here, books and newspaper artcles about Bob 
and the Walers are preserved and made avalable to nvestgators.
Bob’s upstars master bedroom remans n the same condton as t was 
when he last slept there. Although Bob was a very publc person, ths space 
gves tour partcpants a glmpse nto the more prvate sde of the man. The 
man floor of the house contans part of the orgnal Tuff Gong recordng 
studos. The stud os reman n workng order and are st ll n occasonal 
use. Of partcular nterest s the ktchen. Preserved snce the md-1970s,


--- PAGE 106 ---
THE  L EGACY  AND  THE  L EGEND  83
the ktchen at the back of the house st ll exhbts the holes n the walls 
created by the bullets sprayed nto the room durng the 1976 assassnaton 
attempt.
The grounds around the house at 56 Hope Road are now qute crowded. 
Durng Bob’s lfe, these grounds were used for parkng spaces and as a soc-
cer feld. Now the grounds are covered wth a varety of tourst attractons. 
At the edge of the yard s Rta’s Queen of Sheba Restaurant, where trad-
tonal Ital food and frut drnks are served. Behnd the house, where there 
used to be rehearsal space, there s now a newer buldng used to house the 
Bob Marley Theatre. Along the sde of the property s another relatvely 
new buldng that houses the Thngs from Afrca Boutque.
Beyond the management of the property at 56 Hope Road, Rta suf
-
fered from lack of experence when handlng Bob’s estate. Trouble arose 
wth vrtually every facet of the management of Bob’s vast empre. 
Money was msapproprated, relatonshps wth members of the Walers 
band were tarnshed, and a great deal of tme and money was spent tryng 
to fgure everythng out. One serous msstep was taken n 1986, when 
the remanng members of the Walers band were essentally forced nto 
sgnng away ther rghts to future royaltes for a flat fee. The amounts 
of money ended up beng pennes on the dollars of the future, but were 
mmedate payoffs.
In 1987, Rta’s handlng of the Marley estate agan took a turn for the 
worse. Rta, her accountant Martn Zolt, and her lawyer Davd Sten
-
berg were collectvely accused of fraud. Rumors had been swrlng around 
Jamaca that Rta was hdng money n the Caymans and thus separat -
ng Bob’s estate nto taxable and untaxed ncome. At ths pont, Rta 
was taken out of the management role and replaced by a court-apponted 
bank admnstrator. Ths led to many problems n the Marley famly, as 
ther collectve assets were frozen and even Cedella’s house n Mam was 
temporarly sezed.
the leGal Battle
The detals of much of the early proceedngs from Rta, Zolt, and 
Stenberg’s tral are murky. However, t was found that the tro was gulty 
of fraud, breach of fducary duty, and volatons of the Racketeer Influ -
enced and Corrupt Organzatons Act (RICO). Because Bob ded ntes-
tate, Jamacan law ruled that Rta was responsble for 10 percent of hs 
estate outrght, plus 45 percent held as a lfe nterest. Bob’s 11 chldren 
were each enttled to equal shares of the remanng 45 percent outrght, 
plus a remander nterest n Rta’s 45 percent lfe estate.


--- PAGE 107 ---
84  BOB  M ARLEY
Also dscovered durng these ntal proceedngs was the fact that from 
1981 to 1986, those controllng Bob’s estate mplemented several schemes 
that allegedly dverted foregn musc assets and royalty ncome away from 
Bob’s estate and nto accounts held outsde the estate. Rta, Zolt, and 
Stenberg protested, sayng that these dverted funds were used to establsh 
new corporatons for the purposes of mnmzng tax lablty and leavng 
more money for Bob’s benefcares. Lawyers for the State named at least 
four schemes and produced sgned documents provng the colluson of the 
three mplcated n the sut. In short, Rta and her representatves were 
not reportng the majorty of the royaltes that Bob’s musc was earnng.
For a tme, lawsuts, decet, and chaos overshadowed Bob’s muscal leg
-
acy. The end result of these legal machnatons was that the Bob Marley 
estate was put up for sale as a unt by the Jamacan government. Chrs 
Blackwell, Bob’s longtme frend and record company boss, purchased 
the ownershp of the estate for the mnuscule sum of 8.6 mllon dollars. 
Blackwell’s company, Island Logc Inc., was successful n the aucton for 
Bob’s estate aganst the opposton of members of Bob’s own famly. For 
8.6 mllon dollars, Blackwell ganed the rghts to all of Bob’s songs, hs re
-
cordngs, and hs future royaltes. Subsequently, Blackwell sold the rghts 
to Bob’s catalogue to the German record company Polygram n 1989. Poly
-
gram was absorbed by Seagrams n 1998, and the new musc collectve was 
named the Unversal Musc Group. Thus, Bob’s musc changed hands yet 
agan.
Even through all of the legal dffcultes and troubles wth defnng 
ownershp, Bob’s legacy perssted. Although the ntal lcensng was lost, 
Bob’s famly has remaned well off fnancally, as they control all other 
aspects of hs output. Also, unreleased materal was not covered by the 
orgnal court arrangement and through the surfacng of many addtonal 
versons and studo outtakes; much of Bob’s musc s agan controlled by 
hs famly. Regardless of where the ownershp of Bob’s musc les, n hs 
own words, hs truest legacy was n hs chldren.


--- PAGE 108 ---
The two remanng matrarchs of the Marley famly are the prncpal 
keepers of the famly legacy. Bob’s mother Cedella and wfe Rta contnue 
to carry on Bob’s work even more than 25 years after hs death. Although 
Cedella was not always actve n Bob’s career durng hs lfe, she has be
-
come qute actve after hs death. As the oldest member of the Marley 
famly, she s the protector of hs legacy.
cedella marley Booker
Cedella Marley Booker (born July 23, 1926) stll lves n the house that 
Bob bought her n Mam, Florda. She acts as the offcal matrarch of the 
famly and s stll nvolved n much of the busness of the famly. She has 
taken equal care of the chldren that Bob bore to Rta and hs chldren 
born outsde the marrage. As part of her nurturng of her son’s legacy, 
hs mother has released two albums of her own musc. In 1991, she ssued 
Awake Zion on the RIOR label wth the assstance of Bob’s old bass player, 
Aston “Famly Man” Barrett. In the followng year, she ssued her second 
album, called Smilin’ Island Song.
Cedella has also wrtten several books on her son’s lfe. She authored the 
book Bob Marley: An Intimate Portrait by His Mother and another book, Bob 
Marley My Son. In addton, mother “Cddy” has also toured wdely, speak-
ng on the mportance of her famous son and sngng her own songs. Her 
tours have taken her across the Unted States, through much of Western 
Europe, nto Afrca, around Mexco, and throughout the Carbbean. More 
chapter 7
the Marley FaMily
85


--- PAGE 109 ---
86  BOB  M ARLEY
recently, she has taken to produc ng hand-crafted dolls, wh ch are sold 
though several Web stes.
rita marley
Rta Marley, born Alpharta Anderson n Cuba n on July 25, 1946, was 
the other prncpal leader of the Marley famly. After Bob’s death, Rta’s 
legal problems mounted and she lost control of the Marley famly fortune. 
However, n the aftermath of ths ntal loss, Rta was able to support 
herself and the famly and to buld a new fortune. One aspect of Rta’s 
furtherng of Bob’s legacy was the release of her own musc. In 1981 she 
released the album Who Feels It Knows It, n 1988 she released Harambe, 
and n 1988 she ssued We Must Carry On. Rta began her muscal career 
as the leader of her own band, and she returned to front woman form after 
her years sngng backup to Bob.
In the 1990s, Rta agan ssued a seres of albums. These records were 
on the Shanache mprnt. Among these were 
Beauty of God, Good Girls 
Cult, and One Draw. These were followed by Sings Bob Marley . . . and 
Friends, Play Play, Sunshine After Rain, and Gifted Fourteen Carnation, all 
ssued n the new mllennum. Rta also released a book on her lfe wth 
Bob that has the unque perspectve of a woman nteractng n a very 
male-domnated scene. The book, called No Woman, No Cry: My Life with 
Bob Marley, was co-authored wth Hette Jones.
Recently, R ta has rema ned act ve n the mus c bus ness largely 
through the actvtes of her many chldren. She s engaged n the fur -
therng and protect on of her husband’s legacy and attends annual 
worldwde brthday celebratons concerts n hs honor. Rta has also es -
tablshed the R ta Marley Foundat on to prov de much needed suppl es 
and nfrastructural mprovements to underdeveloped parts of Afrca. The 
man goal of the group s to provde safe drnkng water to the thousands 
of Afrcan people strugglng for subsstence.
In January 2005, Rta announced her ntenton to have Bob’s body 
removed from the mausoleum n Nne Mle and rebured n hs sprtual 
home n Ethopa. Ths news came as part of the month-long celebraton 
of Bob’s 60th brthday. The move was backed by Ethopan church and 
government offcals. At the tme, Rta asserted that t was part of Bob’s 
msson to return to Afrca and the movement of hs casket would fulfll 
the fallen reggae superstar’s ntentons. Rta proposed to have Bob’s body 
rebured n Shashaman, about 155 mles south of Adds Ababa. Bob had 
vsted ths Rastafaran enclave on hs frst trp to Afrca.


--- PAGE 110 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  87
Rta’s announcement was met w th strong d sagreement from many 
Jamacans. Representatves of the Bob Marley Foundat on mmedately 
refuted Rta’s clams, sayng there were no plans to move Bob. In fact, the 
news of a possble rebural created such a wdespread outcry n opposton 
that Rta was forced to retract her earler statement. Frst Rta sad that no 
decson was yet made, and she eventually moved to the poston that Bob’s 
remans would stay n Nne Mle. The uprsng about the possble move dd 
create a renewed nterest n all thngs Marley leadng up to hs 60th brth-
day celebraton, but the concern was that ths nterest was more negatve 
than postve. Regardless of possble mssteps, Rta remans the focal pont 
of the Marley fam ly. She remans qute hands on w th the management 
of the Marley legacy and has taken over the role of mother of all of Bob’s 
chldren wthout concern for Bob’s extramartal affars.
Durng hs lfe, Bob contnuously professed hs love for chldren. He 
ncluded n ths not just hs own chldren but the chldren of the world. 
Wth ths n mnd, one could see Bob’s most lastng legacy as hs 11 chl-
dren. Bob’s own thoughts on ths were captured n hs statement that 
he wanted to have as many chldren as there were shells on the beach. 
Regardless of moral codes, Bob fathered three chldren wth Rta and ac -
cepted two other chldren of hers as hs own. Bob adopted Rta’s daughter 
Sharon, whose brth father was an unnamed man wth whom Rta con -
ceved her daughter pror to her meetng Bob. Rta’s daughter Stephane 
was also unlkely to have been fathered by Bob. It has been generally ac
-
cepted that Stephane’s father was a Rasta called Ital. Regardless of who 
ther fathers were, Bob cared for these chldren as hs own.
Durng ther marrage, Bob had several often hghly publczed affars. 
Many of these affars yelded chldren who were eventually accepted, by 
Rta, nto the extended Marley famly unt. Other chldren that Bob fath-
ered were Daman, Rohan, Robbe, Karen, Julan, Ky-Man, and Makeda 
Jahnesta. Each chld had a unque poston n Bob’s lfe and several of hs 
chldren, both from hs marrage to Rta and outsde t, contnue Bob’s 
muscal legacy.
Sharon marley
Although Bob was not the genetc father of Sharon (known as Sharon 
Marley Prendergrass), he treated her as a daughter throughout hs lfe. He 
adopted her when he and Rta got marred and doted on her constantly. 
Often descrbed as Bob’s “favorte,” Sharon has spent her lfe forwardng 
many aspects of Bob’s vson. From 18 months of age onward, Bob was 
Sharon’s father, and as any good father would do, he attempted to gude


--- PAGE 111 ---
88  BOB  M ARLEY
her n her l fe’s pursuts. As she was grow ng up, the Marley household 
was always f lled w th mus c. As Bob’s fame grew, Sharon was ncreas-
ngly aware of lfe n the musc world. However, her father cautoned her 
aganst gong nto musc as a profess on as he knew f rst hand how d f-
fcult a busness t s.
Even wth her father’s advce rngng n her ears, as an adult Sharon 
has had several jobs related to the musc ndustry. She has helped to pre-
serve Bob’s muscal legacy as a member of the Marley chldren’s band, 
the Melody Makers. She s currently the drector of the Bob Marley Mu -
seum n Kngston, Jamaca, and she has pursued an actng career as part of 
the cast of the Denzel Washngton/Robert Townshend move The Mighty 
Quinn. Other aspects of Sharon’s professonal lfe nclude her work wth 
the Carbbean busness Ghetto Youths Internatonal and her work n at-
temptng to open a day care tranng center n Jamaca. The center would 
be the frst of ts knd on the sland and reflects Bob’s nterest n carng 
for chldren.
cedella
The frst chld born of Bob and Rta’s marrage was named Cedella, 
after Bob’s mother. Cedella was born n August 1967 n Kngston and her 
brth corresponded wth the release of the Walers sngle. “Nce T me.” 
As a result, she was gven the ttle of the song as a nckname. She grew up 
n a farly tradtonal manner, attendng attended publc schools. Just as 
wth Sharon, Bob wanted Cedella to become a doctor or a lawyer, but she 
followed her father’s footsteps nto musc.
Muscally, Cedella took a lead role n formng the Marley chldren’s 
group, the Melody Makers. She s known for her beautful sngng voce 
and s also a talented dancer. In addton to the Melody Makers, Cedella 
formed a splnter group called the Marley Grls. Her professonal nvolve
-
ment wth Bob’s legacy centers on her role as the CEO of Tuff Gong Inter-
natonal. In addton to her recordng, sngng, and management of Bob’s 
record label, Cedella fnds tme to be actve n rasng her own group of 
Marley chldren. Known for her tenacty, Cedella aggressvely works to 
safeguard and develop her father’s legacy.
david (Zi GGy)
Sharon and Cedella’s next younger sblng s a brother, Davd, born on 
October 17, 1968. Although Davd was hs gven name, he was almost 
mmedately ncknamed Zggy and has been known by ths name ever


--- PAGE 112 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  89
snce. Agan warned aganst followng n hs father’s muscal footsteps, 
Zggy was btten by the muscal bug as a youth. He grew up lstenng to hs 
father’s musc along wth the materal of legendary Amercan artsts such 
as Steve Wonder.
Musc ndustry nsders consder Zggy the natural her to hs father’s 
muscal throne. He shares many of hs father’s facal features and hs voce 
s smlar to Bob’s. Also, due to hs age, he was able to wtness and par -
tcpate n parts of Bob’s muscal odyssey. Zggy was n Zmbabwe wth hs 
father for the concert celebratng the freedom of that country. Further, he 
became the de facto head of the famly on hs father’s passng. As such, he 
receved Bob’s Order of Mert on behalf of hs father.
As a muscan, Zggy was the muscal head of the Melody Makers. Ths 
pont was made clear when the band began to be known as Zggy Marley 
and the Melody Makers. Snce hs father’s death, Zggy has been on an 
extended muscal odyssey of hs own. He worked wth the Melody Makers 
through the release of seven studo albums (and several greatest hts col
-
lectons) and has pursued a solo career, unlke many of the other Marley 
chldren.
The premer Marley chldren’s muscal group s the Melody Makers. 
The group conssts of Sharon, Cedella, Zggy, and Stephen. The group 
got ts formal begnnng when the members recorded a song that Bob 
had wrtten for and about them n 1979, called “Chldren Playng n the 
Streets.” However, the group had unoffcally been formed n 1981 to sng 
at Bob’s funeral. Snce ts ncepton, the Melody Makers have consstently 
put out salable reggae musc that preserves ther father’s legacy. Although 
the muscal product of the group swerves from pop offerngs to more ser
-
ous roots-soundng works, collectvely the group’s output has been a testa-
ment to ts members’ muscal hertage.
Over the course of several decades, the Melody Makers have released 
several albums. Addtonally, they have toured nternatonally and been 
part of the Reggae Sunsplash concert seres that ther father helped start. 
Ther releases began n the md-1980s wth the album Play the Game 
Right. Ther second release was 1986’s Hey World! Ths was followed by 
One Bright Day n 1988 and Conscious Party n 1989. The style of reggae 
musc that the Melody Makers were puttng out at ths tme was nspred 
by ther father’s materal, but dd not sound much lke t. However, the 
Melody Makers’ products were commercally vable and of hgh enough 
qualty that they were n demand as sngers and songwrters.
Albums from the group contnued to come out n the 1990s. Jahmekya 
was released n 1991 and was followed by Fallen Is Babylon n 1997. The 
1999 album, Spirit of Music, was heralded as a return to conscous reggae


--- PAGE 113 ---
90  BOB  M ARLEY
roots for the group. Throughout these many releases, the Melody Makers 
have contnued to forward ther father’s, and by extenson reggae musc’s, 
cause of brngng conscous musc to the masses. Interestngly, after Bob’s 
death, the prevalent type of Jamacan popular musc turned way from 
roots reggae and toward the dancehall style. Dancehall has much more n 
common wth Amercan hp-hop than t does wth the socal or poltcal 
themes n conscous reggae. Wth ther musc, the Melody Makers contn
-
ued to blaze the tral started by ther father nstead of fallng n wth the 
new style of the tme.
Wthn ths context, Zggy matured as a snger and songwrter. Takng a 
page from hs father’s book of ambton, Zggy set about the task of wrtng 
musc that could reach a global audence. As a testament to hs success, he 
has reached that audence and acheved an Amercan Top 40 sngle. To 
say that Zggy got an early start s to state the obvous. He was the natural 
front person for the Melody Makers wth hs father’s good looks and at
-
tractve voce, but he ended up frontng an nternatonally vable group 
at the tender age of 17. One mght thnk that followng n Bob’s footsteps 
made Zggy’s movement nto the musc world easy. On the contrary, hs 
father had establshed astonshngly large shoes to fll and Zggy’s youthful 
songwrtng sklls were held up n comparson to Bob’s mature work.
Early on, n order to carve out hs own nche, Zggy allowed hs musc 
to move more nto popular manstream crcles. Ths resulted n harsh 
crtcsm from the roots reggae core; however, t was speculated that the 
young Marley was smply fndng hs own voce and separatng hmself 
from the enormous pressure of hs father’s songwrtng legacy. Another 
problem n Zggy’s lfe at the tme was the marked desre of EMI (the 
Melody Makers’ record label) to push Zggy as a solo artst, nstead of the 
leader of a group of hs sblngs. Ths conflct caused the group to swtch 
to the Vrgn Records label.
The move to V rgn resulted n ther most popular materal to date. 
The songs on Conscious Party were a great success for the group. Produced 
wth the assstance of Talkng Heads band members Chrs Frantz and Tna 
Weymouth, ths release was both commercally and crtcally acclamed. 
The album clmbed to number 39 on the Amercan popular musc charts 
and affrmed that the Melody Makers were not just rdng on ther famous 
father’s coattals.
The 1989 follow-up to Conscious Party, ttled One Bright Day, was an-
other bg success for Zggy and the Melody Makers. The album clmbed 
nto the Amercan Top 20 and showed that the prevous album had not 
been a fluke. Both of these late 1980s offerngs won the group Grammy 
Awards for Best Reggae Album of the Year. The early 1990s brought


--- PAGE 114 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  91
contnued success wth the release of the Jahmekya album. The release 
sold well and made t nto the Top 20; however, t dd not have rado-
frendly sngles, unlke the prevous two albums. The follow-up album, Joy 
and Blues of 1993, contaned some dancehall style materal that featured 
Stephen. The album dd not sell well and marked the group’s departure 
from Vrgn Records and ther move to Elektra Records.
For Elektra, the group released 1995’s Free Like We Want 2 B. Wth ths, 
t seemed that Zggy and the Melody Makers had reganed some of ther 
prevous form. In 1997, 
Fallen Is Babylon won the group another Grammy 
Award and showed that Zggy’s songwrtng sklls were stll n top form. 
Through the course of these later releases, Zggy emerged from the group 
as a solost. The Melody Makers are stll a group n name, but Zggy had 
begun to work on ndvdual recordng projects.
In addton to hs solo work, Zggy was becomng a leadng poltcal 
voce. He was named a Goodwll Youth Ambassador for the Unted Na -
tons and spoke publcly on topcs of njustce, poverty, and the thrd world. 
Addtonally, he launched hs own record label, called Ghetto Youths 
Unted (Ghetto Youth Crew), whch he s usng to foster the talent of the 
next generaton of reggae artsts. Hs charty work s well known and he 
has been nvolved n Unted Resources Gvng Enlghtenment (URGE), 
whch performs communty servce n Jamaca.
In the new mllennum, Zggy contnued to emerge as a solo artst and 
leader of the next generaton of Jamacan musc. On Aprl 15, 2003, he 
released hs frst offcal solo album, ttled 
Dragonfly. The album cover de-
pcts Zggy wth dreadlocks to hs wast and a dragonfly on a yellow back-
ground. He was credted as the wrter and snger for all 11 songs ncluded 
on the release, whch was met wth a degree of success. Zggy followed ths 
up wth a second solo release n 2006, called 
Love Is My Religion.
In addton to musc, Zggy has pursued a vared career n the entertan-
ment ndustry. In 2004, he voced a Rasta jellyfsh n the move Shark Tale 
and together wth Sean Paul created a new verson of hs father’s song 
“Three Lttle Brds” for the move’s soundtrack. Zggy also sang the theme 
song for the PBS show Arthur and contnues to come nto hs own as a 
solost. As he ages, hs voce becomes more and more lke hs father’s as he 
grows nto a leadershp role n the nternatonal reggae communty.
Lke Bob, Zggy has fathered a sgnfcant group of chldren. Wth long
-
tme companon Lorrane Bogle, Zggy has three chldren, Danel (a son), 
Justce (a daughter) and Zour (a daughter). Zggy s now marred to Orly 
Aga, wth whom he has had several other chldren. Judah V ctora s 
ther daughter, born on Aprl 7, 2005, and ther son Gdeon Robert Nesta 
Marley was born on January 5, 2007. Whle contnung to pursue hs own


--- PAGE 115 ---
92  BOB  M ARLEY
career, chartable and phlanthropc endeavors, and famly nterests, Zggy 
remembers the words of hs father: “every man has to stand up for hs 
rghts.”
Stephen
The next Marley ch ld, and Bob’s second son, was Stephen,  born 
Aprl 20, 1972. Stephen was born n Wlmngton, Delaware, wh le Rta 
was lvng there wth Cedella. The youngest member of the Melody Mak-
ers, Stephen has become an accompl shed s nger, DJ, wr ter, and pro -
ducer. Hs earlest recordngs were made at age s x when he helped lay 
down the vocal tracks for “Ch ldren Play ng n the Streets.” The song 
was recorded as a charty endeavor and the proceeds from the sngle were 
donated to the Un ted Natons n support of the Internat onal Year of 
the Chld. Addtonally, Stephen danced and part cpated n Bob’s lve 
shows, spendng tme on stage. In addton to an early lfe spent on stage 
wth hs father, at age seven Stephen began learn ng the acoustc gutar.
Because of ths early exposure to musc, Stephen has been mmersed 
n the art form and has been a professonal muscan for the majorty of 
hs years. In addton to hs performng, he has been an ntegral part of 
the record label Ghetto Youths Unted. As a producer, Stephen has made 
several well-known remxes of hs father’s work and coupled these wth 
famous lvng sngers such as Lauryn Hll (one of the three members of the 
Fugees). Hs work wth Hll led to the Melody Makers performance wth 
the Fugees at the 1997 Grammy Awards Show n New York Cty.
Stephen’s producton work began n 1996 when he flled the producer 
role for tracks on albums by hs brothers Daman and Julan. Hs produc
-
ton work has also allowed Stephen to cross styles of musc extensvely. 
He has mxed reggae, hp-hop, and rhythm and blues. Work wth hp-hop 
artsts such as Krayze Bones (from Bone Thugs-N-Harmony), Eve (of the 
hp-hop set the Ruff Ryders), and Erykah Badu has ncreased hs creden
-
tals and connected hs father’s legacy to current styles of musc.
As a producer, he worked on hs brother Daman’s album Halfway Tree, 
released n 2001. The album was a huge success and scored a Grammy for 
the Best Reggae Album of the Year. Hs verson of Steve Wonder’s Bob 
Marley trbute song “Master Blaster” was of such qualty that t was placed 
on the 2005 Wonder trbute album, Conception. As a songwrter, Stephen 
has not been as productve as some of hs sblngs.
He began work on an album n 2002, but ths was delayed by hs work 
wth the Ghetto Youths Internatonal producton house. The album was 
meant to come out n 2006 under the ttle Got Music? Although the tracks


--- PAGE 116 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  93
were complete, Stephen opted not to release the album. Some speculaton 
crculated that the album was put on hold to avod conflctng wth other 
Marley famly records. Stephen s makng 2007’s 
Mind Control  hs frst 
offcal album-length release. He s currently streamng the album’s ttle 
track on h s Myspace page and hopes are h gh for a successful, long-
antcpated release.
Although n h s m d-thrtes, Stephen already boasts a nearly three-
decade-long career n musc. As such, the release of h s album has cre -
ated sgnfcant nterest. The album blends reggae, rock, rhythm and blues, 
nyabngh, flamenco, and h p-hop nto a un que and unnamed hybr d. 
As s customary n contemporary Amer can h p-hop, the Mind Control 
album features varous cameo appearances ncludng those of Ben Harper, 
Mos Def, Daman Marley, Maya Azucena and Illestr8, Spragga Benz, and 
Mr. Cheeks.
Through the course of hs career, Stephen has done wonders to en -
hance Bob’s muscal legacy n the area of ntroducng hs father’s musc to 
a whole new audence. Stephen s a fve-tme Grammy wnner n hs own 
rght and s stll at the begnnng of what promses to be a long and frutful 
career. Stephen’s defant atttude and dstaste for underhanded poltcal 
dealngs are present n hs lyrcs and he puts forward hs father’s message 
throughout. To help preserve the legacy, Stephen was part of two Amer
-
can tours n 2006. Most notable was the crtcally acclamed Bob Marley 
Roots, Rock Reggae Festval, whch also ncluded hs brother Zggy. Ths 
tour placed Stephen on stage wth one of hs father’s oldest frends and 
one-thrd of the orgnal Walers sngng tro, Bunny Waler.
As s true of most of the Marley chldren, Stephen has chldren of hs 
own. For a tme he was marred to Kerte DaCosta and together they had 
a son, Jeremah, and a daughter, Sasha. Addtonally, he had four other 
chldren from varous relatonshps. Hs other chldren are sons Joseph, 
Stephan, and Yohan, and a daughter called Summer. Stephen’s current 
relatonshp s wth fashon desgner and snger Krstna Marawsk, wth 
whom he recently had a daughter called Zpporah.
Stephanie
Another Marley daughter was Stephane, born n 1974. There are sev-
eral conflctng reports concernng her lneage. Some say that Bob was 
her father, and others report that her father was a local Rasta called Ital. 
Rta reported, n her book 
No Woman No Cry: My Life with Bob Marley,  
that Stephane’s father was probably Bob. However, at ths tme, Rta and 
Bob were not gettng along and Rta had entered nto a relatonshp wth


--- PAGE 117 ---
94  BOB  M ARLEY
a local Rasta called Tacky. Ths local Rasta called Tacky was, n fact, the 
Jamacan soccer star Owen Stewart. In the account n her book, Rta was 
very careful never to say that she and Tacky had had a sexual relatonshp; 
however, t was mpled.
Regardless of who her b ologcal father was, Stephan e was born on 
August 17, 1974, and Bob was her father to all ntents and purposes. She 
grew up n Kngston and was educated n Jamacan prmary and secondary 
schools. She moved to England and completed her A-level studes n psy-
chology and socal studes n London. Next, Stephane studed psychology 
at the Unversty of Western Ontaro, Canada. She earned her bachelor’s 
degree wth honors and durng her studes she was actve wth local chl-
dren’s groups. She pad extra attenton to chldren wth specal needs.
After un versty, Stephane returned to Jama ca and became part of 
the famly busness. She became the manag ng drector of the Bob Mar -
ley Foundaton, Bob Marley Museum, Tuff Gong Internatonal, Tuff Gong 
Recordngs, URGE,. and the R ta Marley Foundat on. Wth th s work 
Stephane also fostered her father’s legacy. Now l vng n Nassau n the 
Bahamas, Stephane s drectng the constructon of the frst Marley Resort 
and Spa. Although more attuned to the busness end of thngs, Stephane 
promoted concerts through Tuff Gong Productons and she stages the an-
nual Reggae All-Star Concert n Nassau. In addton, Stephane has four 
chldren, all boys.
The rest of the Marley chldren were fathered by Bob, but n relaton-
shps outsde hs marrage. Each chld had a dfferent mother; however, 
snce Bob’s death, Rta has become the mother fgure to most of Bob’s 
offsprng. Bob had extramartal affars wth seven women who produced 
chldren. Some of hs relatonshps were hghly publczed, such as the 
“Beauty and the Beast” unon wth Cndy Breakspeare. Other chld-
producng encounters were fleetng and poorly documented, such as those 
wth Evette Morrs (Crchton) and Janet Hunt (Dunn). The chldren that 
were produced by these unons have been equally responsble for fosterng 
ther father’s legacy and many of them have made ther own deep mpact 
on the musc world.
rohan
Bob met Janet Hunt (or possbly Dunn) n the early 1970s. Janet was 
a dancer n a club and caught Bob’s eye. Lttle was documented about 
ther encounter; however, Janet gave brth to Bob’s son Rohan as a result. 
Rohan Anthony Marley was born n May 1972, and hs mother turned 
the boy over to Bob and Rta to rase when he was four. From ths tme,


--- PAGE 118 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  95
Rohan offcally became a Marley. He went to the same school as Zggy 
and Stephen. Unlke hs brothers, however, Rohan was more nto sports 
than musc. The Marley famly had trouble keepng track of ths actve 
youth and he was sent to lve wth Bob’s mother n Mam.
Cedella adopted Rohan and he flourshed under her care. He graduated 
from Mam Palmetto Senor Hgh School n 1991 and he enrolled at the 
Unversty of Mam where he played lnebacker for the Hurrcanes foot -
ball team. Rohan then had a short stnt wth the Ottowa Rough Rders 
professonal football team n the Canadan Football League. After hs tme 
playng football, Rohan decded to settle down and refocus hs energy.
More recently, Rohan marred Lauryn Hll and began workng n the 
Marley famly busnesses. For hs part, Rohan preserves Bob’s memory 
through hs work wth the Tuff Gong Clothng Company. Rohan styles 
clothes that are meant to have unversal appeal, just lke hs father’s musc. 
In addton to hs work wth the clothng lne, Rohan spends tme wth 
hs own group of Bob’s grandchldren. He has four chldren wth Lauryn, 
sons Zon Davd, Joshua, and John, and a daughter named Selah Louse.
roBert (roBBie)
Bob’s next chld was born of hs affar wth a woman named Pat W l-
lams. Wllams was a woman from Trench Town and lttle s known of 
her. In fact, there are conflctng reports on her frst name: some say Pat, 
some say Luclle. However, the story of her short tme together wth Bob 
was documented n hs song “Mdnght Ravers.” The reports of the eve -
nng and the song tself descrbed the scene. Bob had apparently been 
standng naked n the moonlt nght at the house at 56 Hope Road. He 
was approached by Wllams at that tme and she seduced hm. The next 
day, Bob woke up and wrote the lyrcs to “Mdnght Ravers” on a Kngston 
phone book. Robert Nesta Marley II, known as Robbe, was the product 
of ths rendezvous.
Robbe, lke many of the other chldren produced by Bob’s affars, came 
under the care of Rta. Wth Rta’s and the Marley famly’s support, Rob
-
be attended the Unversty College of the West Indes, where he studed 
computer graphcs. Snce then, Robbe has been nvolved n several ac
-
tvtes. He runs a clothng store n Mam, Florda, called Vntage Marley. 
He took up motorcycle rdng and has subsequently become an accom -
plshed stunt rder. Ths led hm to a bt role n the 2003 move, 2 Fast 2 
Furious. Addtonally, he has a motorcycle rdng club called the Mam 
Warrors. The Marley famly tree contnues to grow wth Robbe’s four 
chldren: Kaya, Ekta, and twns Regal and Robert.


--- PAGE 119 ---
96  BOB  M ARLEY
karen
Bob’s tryst wth a woman named Janet Bowen led to another Marley 
famly chld. Aga n, deta ls on Janet are sketchy, but she s referred to 
as “Janet n England” n several sources. Janet gave b rth to a daugh -
ter named Karen n 1973. Janet and Karen both rema n shrouded n 
mystery, as ne ther has sought out the spotl ght. Janet l ved n Jamaca 
wth her great-grandmother n Harbor Vew, St. Andrews. Ths s where 
she grew up and went to school. Her nvolvement wth the Marley fam-
ly has been sl ght. She was a reportedly a regular v stor to the Marley 
home n K ngston, but Karen d d not fall n w th the other ch ldren. 
When Bob’s health fa led, he asked R ta to look after Karen and she 
sent Karen to school w th Stephan e. Because Karen has pursued a l fe 
outsde the glare and scrutny of the publc eye, lttle else s known about 
her present lfe.
JUlian
Lucy Pounder was a resdent of Barbados and, whle lttle s known of 
her tme wth Bob, t dd produce Julan Marley on June 4, 1975. Julan 
was born and rased n London, but often spent tme wth Rta and the 
other Marley chldren n Jamaca and Mam. Followng n ths muscal 
famly’s footsteps, Julan studed bass, drums, and keyboard from an early 
age. He also became an accomplshed songwrter as a youth. Hs frst sn-
gle, at age fve, was a verson of hs father’s song “Slave Drver,” recorded 
at the Marley famly’s Tuff Gong Studos n Kngston. Ths was just the 
frst step n a busy and frutful career.
In the 1990s, Julan asserted hs muscal strength at full potental. He 
formed hs own band, called the Uprsng band, and released the 1996 
album Lion in the Morning. Julan was credted wth wrtng or co-wrtng 
all of the songs on the album, whch receved crtcal acclam. In hs fa -
ther’s mold, Julan toured n support of the release and played nternaton-
ally as a solost backed by the Uprsng band and as a member of Ghetto 
Youths Internatonal. As a member of Ghetto Youths, he nteracted wth 
hs brothers Stephen and Daman and learned a great deal. Wth Daman, 
Julan opened for Zggy Marley and the Melody Makers on the 1995 tour 
and was a featured artst on the 1999 Lollapalooza Festval Tour (whch 
was qute a coup as ths was a rock-orented tour).
The new mllennum found Julan ready for the next challenge. Julan 
worked wth hs Marley brothers to produce the platnum-sellng 
Chant 
Down Babylon album, whch pared modern artsts wth Bob from beyond


--- PAGE 120 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  97
the grave. He was also a part of the “Master Blaster” Steve Wonder trb-
ute song wth hs brothers Stephen, Daman, and Ky-Man. Julan’s more 
recent project was the 2003 album Time and Place. The sound of the album 
was a mxture of roots reggae and lght jazz. Accordng to Julan hmself, 
the album was another step n hs songwrtng progresson begun wth 
Lion in the Morning.  Wth the conscous and poltcally charged lyrcs of 
hs father and brothers rngng n hs ears, Julan forwarded hs Rastafar -
an and often mltant messages. Also n keepng wth the Marley famly 
mold, the songs on ths release are a vared blend of reggae, funk, hp-hop, 
and rhythm and blues.
The Time and Place album was produced by Julan, Stephen, and Da -
man. Zggy and Rohan both appeared on the album, supplyng percus -
son lnes. Bob’s old Walers band compatrot, Bunny Waler, also suppled 
some percusson materal. The Uprsng band also appeared on the album. 
In the wake of the release, Julan toured to support the album and the 
Uprsng band backed hm up. Julan s outstandng among the Marley 
chldren for hs personalty, presence, and muscal talent. He apples hs 
energy trelessly to the furtherng of hs father’s muscal legacy.
ky-mani
Ky-Man Marley was a product of the affar that Bob had wth Anta 
Belnavs. Belnavs was a well-known Carbbean table tenns champon. 
Ky-Man means “adventurous traveler” and so far that s exactly what he 
has been. Belnavs’s lfe went largely undocumented, but much s known 
about her famous son. Ky-Man Marley was born n Falmouth, Jamaca, 
where he lved untl age nne. At that tme he moved to the nner cty 
of Mam, where he spent tme engaged n sports. As a youth, he began 
studyng musc, takng pano and gutar lessons, and he played trumpet n 
hs hgh school band. Although he studed musc, hs frst love was sports 
and he played hgh school football and soccer.
Growng up, Ky-Man spent summers wth hs father, Rta, and the 
other Marley chldren. In fact, n 1992, Ky-Man moved to Jamaca to 
be closer to the Marley famly. Hs frst excurson nto musc came whle 
he was stll n Mam. He began rappng and DJ-ng and actually recorded 
a sngle called “Unnecessary Badness.” On h s move back to Jama ca, 
Ky-Man dedcated hmself to musc. He worked wth Stephen, Julan, 
and Daman to produce hs own muscal product.
Early n hs muscal growth, Ky-Man released several sngles on the 
Shang Records mprnt. He dd a verson of “Judge Not” wth dancehall 
queen Patra, whch was followed by the song “Dear Dad.” Ths second


--- PAGE 121 ---
98  BOB  M ARLEY
sngle was an open letter to hs fallen father. Sentmental and thought 
provokng, “Dear Dad” was an early testament to Ky-Man’s songwrtng 
ablty. Pckng up momentum, Ky-Man teamed up wth a thrd of the 
Amercan band the Fugees when he worked wth Praswell on a cover of 
the Eddy Grant ht “Electrc Avenue.” Major nternatonal exposure came 
when Ky-Man performed at the Mdem (short for 
Marché international de 
l’édition musicale), the world’s largest musc ndustry trade far. Hs Mdem 
performance was ared lve by the Carbbean News Agency and Ky-Man 
was nstantly exposed to audence members n 36 countres.
Ky-Man’s nternatonal televson appearance created unprecedented 
nterest n the young snger. A label bddng war ensued, and Ky-Man 
sgned wth Gee Street/V2 Records. For Gee Street, he teamed wth P .M. 
Dawn on the sngle “Gotta Be Movn On Up,” whch only ncreased Ky-
Man’s already rsng stock. He further ncreased the nterest n hs musc 
wth the release of hs 1999 solo debut album, 
Ky-Mani Marley: Like Fa-
ther Like Son.  Ths was followed the next year wth The Journey, whch 
llustrated beautfully Ky-Man’s versatle style. Movng between Spansh 
gutar, rock steady, and lovers rock, the songs on the album are as eclectc 
as Ky-Man’s taste.
The next album released by Ky-Man was 
Many More Roads  n 2001 
Here the talented snger/songwrter presented materal dpped n the 
roots reggae, dancehall, and rhythm and blues styles. Throughout ths 
album, Ky-Man delvered a message of conscousness and stayed true to 
hs Rastafaran fath.
More recent projects found Ky-Man tryng hs hand n show busness. 
He played the lead role n the ht underground Jamacan move 
Shottas, 
n whch he worked opposte Wyclef Jean (of Fugees fame) and dancehall 
manstay Spragga Benz. He also starred n the move 
One Love, a roman-
tc comedy that pared hm wth Cherne Anderson. In 2004, Ky-Man 
landed another move role, playng John the Baptst n the Frank E. Flow
-
ers move Haven. Here the young Rasta played alongsde Bll Paxton and 
Orlando Bloom. Ky-Man remans enthusastc about hs role n man-
tanng Bob’s muscal fame. He has already done much to preserve the 
famly name and further work s antcpated.
damian
Cndy Breakspeare was the woman most often assocated wth Bob 
apart from Rta. Breakspeare was from a whte, upper-class background 
and was workng n Kngston n the md-1970s when she met Bob. As a 
teenager, she worked at the Kngston Sheraton and met Bob as they


--- PAGE 122 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  99
were both tenants n Blackwell’s house at 56 Hope Road. At frst, Bob 
and Breakspeare dd not nteract much. It was rumored that Bob made 
many attempts at ganng Breakspeare’s affecton, but she rebuked hm. 
Bob’s song “Watng n Van” was sad to be about these rejected ad -
vances. However, as Bob’s success ncreased, Cndy gradually warmed to 
hs attenton.
Breakspeare’s rse to fame paralleled Bob’s. A classc beauty, through 
the md-1970s Breakspeare went from Mss Jamacan Bkn to Mss Un-
verse Bkn to Mss World. She was also accused of beng a home wrecker 
due to her assocaton wth Bob. However, hstory s clear that Bob pur -
sued Breakspeare and early on she dd not know that he was marred. The 
perod durng whch the two spent the most tme was Bob’s self-mposed 
exle from Jamaca after the assassnaton attempt.
Bob’s nterest n Breakspeare was somewhat contrad ctory to the ph -
losophy of the rest of hs lfe. Breakspeare was all thngs representng Bab
-
ylon, n that she came from a wealthy whte famly and she surrounded 
herself wth ssues of vanty. As such, she was more concerned wth 
wnnng beauty contests, such as Mss Jamaca Body Beautful and Mss 
Unverse Bkn, than wth the plght of the black Jamacan underclass. 
However, Bob was not attracted to her only physcally, but also because 
of her honesty. Because of ths, Bob lavshed attenton on her that he dd 
not on lavsh any other woman. He bought her a house n the Cherry 
Gardens secton of Kngston and gave her money to start her own bus
-
ness. Unlke hs relatonshp wth anyone other than Rta, when Bob and 
Breakspeare’s sexual relatonshp ended they remaned frends for the rest 
of Bob’s lfe.
Breakespeare went on to marry jazz gutarst and plot Rupert Bent. 
They lve n the Stony Hll area of Jamaca and she remans busy. In ad
-
dton to a sngng career, through whch she met her current husband, 
she mantans the Ital craft shop that Bob gave her the captal to start. 
Addtonally, Cndy s the mother of Bob’s son Daman “Junor Gong” 
Marley. Daman was born n 1978 n Jamaca and has carved out qute a 
nche n the Jamacan musc ndustry. The Junor Gong s the youngest 
Marley chld by any mother.
Lke hs brothers and ssters, Daman got an early start n musc. He 
began performng at age 13 when he formed the Shepherds band. The 
group had local success and even performed at Reggae Bash n 1992 and 
at the 1992 nstallment of Reggae Sunsplash. Daman often performed 
around hs older brothers and ssters as he frequently served as the open
-
ng act for Melody Makers concerts. By 1994, Daman was already workng 
to establsh a solo reputaton. In 1996, he released hs solo debut album,


--- PAGE 123 ---
100  BOB  M ARLEY
Mr. Marley. Although t was a solo album, Daman’s brother Stephen 
appeared on several songs and served as the producer. The release came 
out as an offerng from the Ghetto Youths Internatonal label.
In 2001, Daman came nto hs own wth hs second solo record, Half-
way Tree. The album earned the young snger a Grammy Award for the 
Best Reggae Album of the Year and saw Daman flexng hs now powerful 
songwrtng muscles. The bggest dffculty wth the release was that t 
was largely gnored by the record-buyng publc. That all changed when 
Daman released 
Welcome to Jamrock n 2005. Ths release was afforded 
sgnfcant pre-release buzz and was mmedately popular when t ht the 
streets. The ttle track came out n remxes and alternate versons rght 
away, and the album made t nto the Top 10. The album mxed hard-
httng lyrcs about the realtes of lfe wth eclectc musc that blended 
reggae, hp-hop, rhythm and blues, and dancehall.
Agan t was a solo release, but Daman credted Stephen as the co-
producer of the album. The producton style s remnscent of roots reggae 
stalwarts Sly and Robbe. The album was agan released on the famly’s 
Tuff Gong/Ghetto Youths Internatonal label and revealed another of the 
Marley chldren comng nto ther own. In the lght of hs father’s legacy, 
Daman’s latest release mxed songs of protest wth songs of love and agan 
forwarded Bob’s musc and message.
Daman’s most popular (and as yet most commercally vable) materal 
echoed the sentments of hs father at hs most mltant. “Welcome to 
Jamrock” was a fery and outraged descrpton of the underprvleged held 
n bondage by the poltcal system n Jamaca. Ths has not escaped the 
youngest Marley’s attenton. Daman has worked long and hard to make 
hs musc resonate on the streets and he has acheved that goal wth hs 
most recent offerngs.
makeda Jahne Sta
The last of the recognzed Marley chldren was born n 1981. Makeda 
Jahnesta Marley was the product of an encounter between the reggae 
superstar and a woman named Yvette Crchton. Nothng was documented 
about ths unon beyond the notable product. The frst name of the young
-
est of Bob’s chldren was taken from the Bble and was also the Ethopan 
name for the Queen of Sheba. Her mddle name combnes the Rastafar
-
an word for God and her father’s mddle name. Makeda does not seem to 
have made a lfe n the lmelght and lttle s known about her other than 
the fact that by 1992 she became an offcal benefcary of the Marley 
estate and from that tme forward was a regular at Rta’s house.


--- PAGE 124 ---
THE  M ARLEY  F AMILY  101
recent development S
A partcularly strange twst n Bob’s lfe after death was announced n 
late 2006. Rta has planned a new Bob Marley bopc that wll cover hs 
lfe pror to hs becomng famous. Oscar Award–nomnated drector Ra -
chd Bauchareb (Dust of Life) has been tapped as the drector. However, 
the bggest pont of contenton has been Rta’s choce of Jame Foxx to 
play the young Bob. Whle Foxx receved crtcal acclam for hs portrayal 
of Ray Charles, t s unlkely that he can carry off a 16-year-old Marley. 
Due to ths dubous choce, the flm s already beng heavly crtczed and 
has only just gone nto pre-producton n early 2007.
And stll the legend lves on. Beyond hs fame, hs legacy, hs chldren, 
and hs musc, Bob’s name tself contnues to be prased and celebrated. The 
memory of the man contnues to draw nterest around the world. In fact, 
each year there are nternatonal concerts commemoratng hs brthday. 
Contrary to conventonal wsdom (that eventually Bob wll be forgotten), 
the concerts grow large and swell wth more and more attendees annually.
One partcularly nterestng example was the celebraton of Bob’s 60th 
brthday n 2005. The offcal, and largest, celebraton took place n Adds 
Ababa, Ethopa, and was accompaned by a three-day conference about 
all thngs assocated wth Bob. Lumnares who were actve n the confer
-
ence ncluded Amercan actor Danny Glover, members of the Ethopan 
government, Madame Wnne Mandela, Cedella Marley, Maya Angelou, 
Inda Ire, Zggy Marley, and Angelque Kdjo. Performers who graced the 
stage durng the celebraton ncluded Baaba Maal, Youssou N’Dour, An
-
gelque Kdjo, Tagass Kng, and Rta and Zggy Marley. The event centered 
on the conference n Ethopa, but there were smultaneous celebratons 
around the world. The Bob Marley Foundaton promoted 60th brthday 
events n the Unted States, Italy, Sweden, Germany, and South Afrca.
The 2007 Bob Marley 62nd brthday celebraton was another major 
event. For ths, Stephen, Julan, Daman, and Ky-Man staged a concert 
on February 10 called “Smle Jamaca.” The concert was staged at the 
Marley ancestral home n Nne Mle, St. Ann Parsh, Jamaca. The Mar
-
ley sons took the concert’s name from a lke performance that ther father 
gave n 1976. At that orgnal concert, Bob was spreadng the message of 
peace and now hs sons have taken up that msson. The concert was pur
-
posely set to concde wth Bob Marley week, when the largest number of 
toursts vst Jamaca. Wth ths, the joy and the message of Bob’s lfe and 
musc contnue. Hs legacy s n the capable hands of hs chldren and he 
s not forgotten. Robert Nesta Marley’s musc lves on n a varety of forms 
from Nne Mle to Kngston, from Mam to New York, from Jamaca to 
the rest of the world.


--- PAGE 125 ---
102


--- PAGE 126 ---
sele Cted dis Cography
The Best of the Wailers 1970/ Kong / Beverley’s/BLP 001
Soul Shakedown Party, Stop That Tran, Cauton, Soul Captves, Go Tell It 
on the Mountan, Can’t You See, Soon Come, Cheer Up, Back Out, Do It 
T wce
Catch a Fire 1972 (Aprl)/Marley and Blackwell/Island/ILPS 9241
Concrete Jungle, Slave Drver, 400 Years, Stop That Tran, Baby We’ve Got 
a Date, Str It Up, Knky Reggae, No More Trouble, Mdnght Ravers
Burnin’ 1973 (November)/Walers and Blackwell/Island/ILPS 9256
Get Up, Stand Up, Hallelujah Tme, I Shot the Sherff, Burnn’ and Lootn’, 
Put It On, Small Axe, Pass It On, Duppy Conqueror, One Foundaton, Rasta 
Man Chant
African Herbsman 1973/Perry/Trojan/TRLS 62
Lvely Up Yourself, Small Axe, Duppy Conqueror, Trench Town Rock, Af-
rcan Herbsman, Keep On Movng, Fussng and Fghtng, Stand Alone, All 
n One, Don’t Rock My Boat, Put It On, Sun Is Shnng, Kaya, Rdng Hgh, 
Bran Washng, 400 Years
Natty Dread 1974 (October)/Blackwell and the Walers/Island/ILPS 9281
Lvely Up Yourself, No Woman, No Cry, Them Belly Full (But We Hungry), 
Rebel Musc (Three O’Clock Road Block), So Jah Seh, Natty Dread, Bend 
Down Low, Talkn’ Blues, Revoluton
Live! Bob Marley and the Wailers 1975 (May)/Steve Smth and Blackwell/Island/
ILPS 9376
Trench Town Rock, Burnn’ and Loot n’, Them Belly Full (But We Hun
-
gry), Lvely Up Yourself, No Woman, No Cry, I Shot the Sher ff, Get Up, 
Stand Up
103


--- PAGE 127 ---
104  SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY
Rastaman Vibration 1976 (Aprl)/Marley and the Walers/ I LPS 9383
Postve Vbraton, Roots, Rock, Reggae, Johnny Was, Cry to Me, Want 
More, Crazy Baldhead, Who the Cap Ft, Nght Shft, War, Rat Race
Exodus 1977 (May)/Marley and the Walers/Island/ILPS 9498
Natural Mystc, So Much Thngs to Say, Gultness, The Heathen, Exodus, 
Jammng, Watng n Van, Turn Your Lghts Down Low, Three Lttle Brds, 
One Love/People Get Ready
Kaya 1978 (March)/ Marley and the Walers/Island/ILPS 9517
Easy Skankn’, Kaya, Is Ths Love, Sun Is Shnng, Satsfy My Soul, She’s 
Gone, Msty Mornng, Crss, Runnng Away, Tme Wll Tell
Babylon by Bus 1978 (December)/Marley and the Walers/Island/ISLD 1298
Postve Vbraton, Punky Reggae Party, Exodus, Str It Up, Rat Race, Con-
crete Jungle, Knky Reggae, Lvely Up Yourself, Rebel Musc, War/No More 
Trouble, Is Ths Love, The Heathen, Jammng
Survival 1979 (October)/Marley, Walers, and Alex Sadkn/ Island/ILPS 9542
So Much Trouble n the World, Zmbabwe, Top Rankn’, Babylon System, 
Survval, Afrca Unte, One Drop, Rde Natty Rde, Ambush n the Nght, 
Wake Up and Lve
Uprising 1980 (June)/Marley and the Walers/Island/ILPS 9596
Comng n from the Cold, Real Stuaton, Bad Card, We and Dem, Work, 
Zon Tran, Pmper’s Paradse, Could You Be Loved, Forever Lovng Jah, Re-
dempton Song
Chances Are 1981/Sms, Nash, Perkns/Cotllon/SD 5228
Reggae on Broadway, Gonna Get You, Chances Are, Soul Rebel, Dance Do 
the Reggae, Mellow Mood, Stay wth Me, (I’m) Hurtng Insde
Confrontation 1983/Blackwell and the Walers/Island/7 90085–1
Chant Down Babylon, Buffalo Solder, Jump Nyabngh, Mx Up, Mx 
Up, Gve Thanks and Prases, Blackman Redempton, Trench Town, Stff 
Necked Fools, I Know, Rastaman Lve Up
Legend: The Best of Bob Marley 1984/Island/7 90169–1
Is Ths Love, No Woman, No Cry, Could You Be Loved, Three Lttle Brds, 
Buffalo Solder, Get Up, Stand Up, Str It Up, One Love/People Get Ready, 
I Shot the Sherff, Watng n Van, Redempton Song, Satsfy My Soul, 
Exodus, Jammng
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Rebel Music  1986/varous producers/Island/ ILPS 
9843
Rebel Musc, So Much Trouble n the World, Them Belly Full (But We 
Hungry), Rat Race, War, Roots, Slave Drver, Rde Natty Rde, Crazy Bald
-
head, Get Up, Stand Up
Bob Marley and the Wailers: The Birth of a Legend  1990/varous producers/Epc/
ZGK 46769


--- PAGE 128 ---
SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY  105
Smmer Down, It Hurts to Be Alone, Lonesome Feelngs, Love and Affecton, 
I’m Stll Watng, One Love, I Am Gong Home, Wngs of a Dove, Let Hm 
Go, Who Feels It Knows It, Maga Dog, I Made a M stake, Lonesome Track, 
Nobody Knows, The Ten Commandments of Love, Donna, Do You Remem-
ber, Dancng Shoes, I Don’t Need Your Love, Do You Feel the Same Way
Talkin’ Blues 1991/Island-Tuff Gong/422–848 243
Talkn’ Blues, Burnn’ and Lootn’, Knky Reggae, Get Up, Stand Up, Slave 
Drver, Walk the Proud Land, Lvely Up Yourself, You Can’t Blame the Youth, 
Stop That Tran, Rastaman Chant, Am-A-Do (prevously unreleased)
Bob Marley: Songs of Freedom 1992/varous producers/Island-Tuff Gong/TGCBX1
CD 1: Judge Not, One Cup of Coffee, Smmer Down, I’m Stll Watng, One 
Love, Put It On, Bus Dem Shut, Mellow Mood, Bend Down Low, Hypo -
crtes, Str It Up, Nce Tme, Thank You Lord, Hammer, Cauton, Back Out, 
Soul Shakedown Party, Do It T wce, Soul Rebel, Sun Is Shnng, Don’t Rock 
My Boat, Small Axe, Duppy Conqueror, Mr. Brown
CD 2: Screwface, Lck Samba, Trench Town Rock, Craven Choke Puppy, 
Guava Jelly, Acoustc Medley, I’m Hurtng Insde, Hgh T de or Low Tde, 
Slave Drver, No More Trouble, Concrete Jungle, Get Up, Stand Up, Rasta
-
man Chant, Burnn’ and Lootn’, Iron, Lon, Zon, Lvely Up Yourself, Natty 
Dread, I Shot the Sherff
CD 3: No Woman, No Cry, Who the Cap Ft, Jah Lve, Crazy Baldhead, 
War, Johnny Was, Rat Race, Jammn’, Watng n Van, Exodus, Natural 
Mystc, Three Lttle Brds, Runnng Away, Keep On Movng, Easy Skankn’, 
Is Ths Love, Smle Jamaca, Tme Wll Tell
CD 4: Afrca Unte, One Drop, Zmbabwe, So Much Trouble, Rde Natty 
Rde, Babylon System, Comng n from the Cold, Real Stuaton, Bad Card, 
Could You Be Loved, Forever Lovng Jah, Rastaman Lve Up, Gve Thanks 
and Prase, One Love, Why Should I, Redempton Song
Bob Marley: I Shot the Sheriff 1993/lve performance/On Stage CD/12037
(Recorded at the Quet Knght Club, Chcago, June 10, 1975)
Trench Town Rock, Rebel Musc, Natty Dread, Mdnght Ravers, Slave 
Drver, Concrete Jungle, Talkn’ Blues, I Shot the Sherff
Bob Marley Interviews: So Much Things to Say 1995/RAS/varous producers/RAS 
3171
Natural Mystc, Trench Town Rock, Redempton Song, Babylon System, 
Tme W ll Tell, Natural Mystc, Revoluton, Survval, One Drop, Roots, 
Rock, Reggae, Guava Jelly, Rat Race
Bob Marley and Friends: Roots of a Legend 1997/varous producers/Trojan/
CDTAL 901
CD 1: Shocks of Mghty, part 1, Shocks of Mghty, part 2, Don’t Let the Sun 
Catch You Cryng, Upsettng Staton, Zg Zag, Run for Cover, Long Long


--- PAGE 129 ---
106  SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY
Wnter, All n One, Copasetc, One n All, More Axe, Shocks 71, The Axe 
Man, Send Me That Love, Man to Man, Ncoteen, Don’t Rock My Boat, I 
Lke It Lke Ths, Love Lght Shnng, I Gotta Keep On Movng, Movng 
(alternatve verson), Ranbow Country
CD 2: Dreamland, Dreamland (verson), Dreamland (verson 2), The Crm
-
son Prate, Arse Blackman, Rghtful Ruler, The Return of Alcapone, Maga 
Dog, Skanky Dog, Boney Dog, Downpresser, Moon Dust, Rudes Medley, 
Rude Boy (verson), Dun Valley, Brand New Second Hand, Brand New Sec
-
ond Hand (verson), Romper Room, Them a F Get a Beaten, Get a Beaten, 
Selasse Serenade, Leave My Busness
The Complete Bob Marley and the Wailers, 1967–1972, Part 1 1997/Sms/JAD/
JAD-CD-1002
CD 1: Rock to the Rock, Rockng Steady, How Many T mes, Touch Me, 
Mellow Mood, There She Goes, Soul Rebel, Put It On, Chances Are, Love, 
Bend Down Low, The World Is Changng, Nce T me, Treat You Rght, 
What Goes Around Comes Around, What Goes Around Comes Around 
(verson)
CD 2: Don’t Rock My Boat, The Lord W ll Make a Way, Chances Are, 
Selasse Is the Chapel, Tread Oh, Feel Alrght, Rhythm, Rockng Steady, 
Adam and Eve, W sdom, Ths Tran, Thank You Lord, Gve Me a T cket, 
Trouble on the Road Agan, Black Progress, Black Progress (verson), Tread 
Oh (verson)
CD 3: Sugar Sugar, Stop the Tran, Cheer Up, Soon Come, Soul Captves, 
Go Tell It on the Mountan, Can’t You See, Gve Me a T cket, Hold on to 
Ths Feelng, Mr. Chatterbox, Soul Shakedown (verson), Soon Come (ver
-
son), Mr. Chatterbox (verson), Hold on to Ths Feelng (verson)
The Complete Bob Marley and the Wailers, 1967–1972, Part II 1997/Sms/JAD/
JAD-CD-1004
CD 1: Try Me, It’s Alrght, No Sympathy, My Cup, Soul Almghty, Rebel’s 
Hop, Corner Stone, 400 Years, No Water, Reacton. Dub tracks: My Sympa
-
thy, Soul Rebel (verson), Try Me (verson), It’s Alrght (verson), No Sym-
pathy (verson), My Cup (verson), Soul Almghty (verson), Rebel’s Hop 
(verson), Corner Stone (verson), No Water (verson), No Water (verson), 
Reacton (verson), Rebel (verson)
CD 2: Keep On Movng, Put It On, Fussng and Fghtng, Memphs, Rd
-
ng Hgh, Kaya, Afrcan Herbsman, Stand Alone. Dub tracks: Bran Wash -
ng (verson), Keep On Movng (verson), Don’t Rock My Boat (verson), 
Fussng and Fghtng (verson), Put It On (verson), Duppy (verson), Mem
-
phs (verson), Rdng Hgh (verson), Kaya (verson), Afrcan Herbsman 
(verson), Stand Alone (verson), Dun Is Shnng (verson), Bran Washng 
(verson 2)


--- PAGE 130 ---
SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY  107
CD 3: Kaya, Love Lght, Second Hand, Jah Is Mghty, Run for Cover, Man to 
Man, Downpresser, Don’t Rock My Boat, More Axe, Long Long Wnter, All 
n One, Turn Me Loose. Dub tracks: Kaya (verson), Battle Axe (verson), 
Long Long W nter (verson), Second Hand (verson); Downpresser (ver
-
son), Shocks of Mghty (verson), Axe Man (verson), Ncoteen (verson)
The Complete Bob Marley and the Wailers: 1967 to 1972, part III 1999/Sms/JAD/
JAD-CD-1005
CD 1: All n One (medley of Bend Down Low/One Love/Smmer Down/
Love and Affecton), All n One (part 2: medley of Love and Affecton/
Put It On), Keep On Skankn’, Dreamland, Love Lght, Brand New Second 
Hand (false start), Brand New Second Hand, Shocks of Mghty, Keep On 
Movng (also known as I’m Gonna Keep On Movng), Keep On Movng 
(extended verson), Keep On Movng (extended verson 2), Concrete Jungle, 
Screwface, Satsfy My Soul, Send Me That Love, Comma Comma, Jungle 
Dub (dub verson of Concrete Jungle), Dracula (dub verson of Mr. Brown), 
Love Lght (dub verson), Dreamland (dub verson), Face Man (dub verson 
of Screwface), Satsfy My Soul (dub verson)
CD 2: Screwface, Redder Than Red, L vely Up Yourself, Trouble Dub, Dub 
Feelng, Satsfy My Soul, Kngston 12, Pour Down the Sunshne, Gonna Get 
You, Cry to Me, Reggae on Broadway, I’m Hurtng Insde, Oh Lord, Got to Get 
There, Dance Do the Reggae, Stay wth Me, Guava Jelly, Guava (dub verson 
of Guava Jelly), Red (dub vers on of Redder Than Red), L ve (dub verson 
of Lvely Up Yourself), Samba (dub verson of Lck Samba), Screwface (dub 
verson), Groovng Kngston (dub vers on of Trench Town Rock), Choke 
(dub verson of Craven Chock Puppy), Satsfy My Soul (dub verson)
Bob Marley and The Wailers: The Complete Soul Rebels and the Upsetter Record Shop 
1999/Lee Perry/Culture Press/CP 017
CD 1: Soul Rebels, Soul Rebels (vers on), No Water, No Water (vers on), 
Rebel Hop, Rebel Hop (verson), No Sympathy, No Sympathy (verson), It’s 
Alrght, It’s Alrght (verson), Reacton, Reacton (verson), Corner Stone, 
Corner Stone (verson), 400 Years, 400 Years (verson), Make Up, Make Up 
(verson), T ry Me, T ry Me (verson), Soul Almghty, Soul Almghty (verson)
CD 2: Concrete Jungle, Concrete Jungle (verson), Screwface, Screwface 
(verson), Love Lfe, Love Lfe (verson), Satsfy My Soul, Satsfy My Soul 
(verson), Ranbow Country, Ranbow Country (verson), Long Long W n
-
ter, Long Long Wnter (verson), Put It On, Put It On (verson), Don’t Rock 
My Boat, Don’t Rock My Boat (verson), Keep On Movn’, Keep On Movn’ 
(verson)
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Climb the Ladder 2000/Dodd/Heartbeat/11661–7751–2
Dancng Shoes, Put It On, Lonesome Track, Clmb the Ladder, Love Won’t 
Be Mne Ths Way, Dreamland, Lemon Tree, Nobody Knows, W ngs of a


--- PAGE 131 ---
108  SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY
Dove, Snner Man, Ten Commandments of Love, Sunday Mornng, I Made 
a Mstake, I Don’t Need Your Love, Donna, The Jerk, Just n Tme
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Catch a Fire (Deluxe Edition) 2001/Marley and Black-
well/UMe/314548635–2
CD 1: Concrete Jungle, Str It Up, Hgh Tde or Low Tde, Stop That Tran, 
400 Years, Baby, We’ve Got a Date, Mdnght Ravers, All Day, All Nght, 
Slave Drver, Knky Reggae, No More Trouble
CD 2: Concrete Jungle, Slave Drver, 400 Years, Stop That Tran, Baby, 
We’ve Got a Date, Str It Up, Knky Reggae, No More Trouble, Mdnght 
Ravers
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Exodus (Deluxe Edition) 2001/Marley and Blackwell/
UMe /314586408–2
CD 1: Natural Mystc, So Much Thngs to Say, Gultness, The Heathen, 
Exodus, Jammng, Watng n Van, Turn Your Lghts Down Low, Three Lt
-
tle Brds, One Love/People Get Ready
Addtonal tracks: Roots, Watng n Van (alternate verson), Jammng (long 
verson), Jammng (verson), Exodus (verson)
CD 2: The Heathen, Crazy Baldhead/Runnng Away, War/No More Trouble, 
Jammng, Exodus, Punky Reggae Party, Punky Reggae Party (verson), Keep 
On Movng, Keep On Movng (verson), Exodus
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Rastaman Vibration (Deluxe Edition) 2002/Marley and 
Blackwell/UMe /440063446–2
CD 1: Postve V braton, Roots, Rock, Reggae, Johnny Was, Cry to Me, 
Want More, Crazy Baldhead, Who the Cap Ft, Nght Shft, War, Rat Race
Addtonal tracks: Jah Lve, Concrete Jungle, Roots, Rock, Reggae (verson), 
Roots, Rock Dub, Want More, Crazy Baldhead (verson), Johnny Was
CD 2: Introduct on, Trench Town Rock, Burnn’ and Lootn’, Them Belly 
Full (But We Hungry), Rebel Mus c, I Shot the Sher ff, Want More, No 
Woman, No Cry, Lvely Up Yourself, Roots, Rock, Reggae, Rat Race, Smle 
Jamaca Sess ons (late 1976), Sm le Jama ca (part one), Sm le Jama ca 
(part two)
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Live at the Roxy 2003/Suha Gur/UMe /B0000516–02
Introducton, Trench Town Rock, Burnn’ and Lootn’, Them Belly Full (But 
We Hungry), Rebel Musc, Want More, No Woman, No Cry, Lvely Up 
Yourself, Roots, Rock, Reggae, Rat Race
Encore: Postve Vbraton, Get Up, Stand Up/No More Trouble/War
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Burnin’ (Deluxe Edition) 2004/Marley and Blackwell/
UMe /B0003359–02
CD 1: Get Up, Stand Up, Hallelujah T me, I Shot the Sherff, Burnn’ and 
Lootn’, Put It On, Small Axe, Pass It On, Duppy Conqueror, One Founda
-
ton, Rasta Man Chant


--- PAGE 132 ---
SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY  109
Bonus tracks: Rencarnated Souls, No Sympathy, The Oppressed Song, Get 
Up, Stand Up (unreleased alternate take), Get Up Stand Up (unreleased 
sngle verson)
CD 2: Duppy Conqueror, Slave Drver, Burnn’ and Lootn’, Can’t Blame the 
Youth, Stop That Tran, Mdnght Ravers, No More Trouble, Knky Reggae, 
Get Up, Stand Up, Str It Up, Put It On, Lvely Up Yourself
Africa Unite: The Singles Collection 2005/Marley and Blackwell/Island/
B0005723–02
Soul Rebels, Lvely Up Yourself, Trench Town Rock, Concrete Jungle, I Shot 
the Sherff, Get Up, Stand Up, No Woman, No Cry, Roots, Rock, Reggae, 
Exodus, Watng n Van, Jammn’, Is Ths Love, Sun Is Shnng, Could You 
Be Loved, Three Lttle Brds, Buffalo Solder, One Love/People Get Ready, 
Afrca Unte, Slogans, Stand Up/Jamrock
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Gold 2005/Marley and Blackwell/Island/B0004008–02
CD 1: Str It Up, Slave Drver, Concrete Jungle, Get Up, Stand Up, I Shot 
the Sherff, Burn’ and Lootn’, Lvely Up Yourself, Rebel Musc, Trench 
Town Rock, No Woman, No Cry, Jah Lve, Postve Vbraton, Roots, Rock 
Reggae, Crazy Baldhead, Natural Mystc, Exodus, Jammn’
CD 2: One Love/People Get Ready, Watng In Van, Punky Reggae Party, Is 
Ths Love, Sun Is Shnng, Satsfy My Soul, Knky Reggae, Medley: War/No 
More Trouble, So Much Trouble n the World, Afrca Unte, One Drop, 
Could You Be Loved, Comng n from the Cold, Redempton Song, Buffalo 
Solder, Rastaman Lve Up, Iron, Lon, Zon
One Love at Studio One: 1964–1966 2006/ Marley/ Heartbeat/CBHBEA319
CD 1: Th s Tran, S mmer Down, I Am Go ng Home, Do You Remem -
ber, Mr. Talkatve, Habts, Amen, Go Jmmy Go, Teenager n Love, I Need 
You, It Hurts to Be Alone, True Confessons, Lonesome Feelngs, There She 
Goes, Damond Baby, Playboy, Where’s the Grl for Me, Hoolgan Ska, One 
Love, Love and Affectons, Tell The Lord
CD 2: And I Love Her, Rude Boy, I’m Stll Watng, Ska Jerk, Somewhere to 
Lay My Head, Wages of Love (rehearsal), Wages of Love, I’m Gonna Put It 
On, Cry to Me, Jalhouse, Snner Man, He Who Feels It Knows It, Let Hm 
Go, When the Well Runs Dry, Can’t You See, What Am I Supposed to Do, 
Rollng Stone, Bend Down Low, Freedom Tme, Rockng Steady
Bob Marley: The Anthology 2006/varous/Golden Lane Records/1580
CD 1: Natural Mystc, Ranbow Country, I Know A Place, Concrete Jungle, 
Trench Town Rock, Sun Is Shnng, Keep On Skankng, Satsfy My Soul, 
Keep On Movng, Long Long Wnter, Don’t Rock My Boat, Dr. Brown, My 
Cup, Love Lght Shnng, Who Colt the Game
CD 2: Lvely Up Yourself, Small Axe, More Axe, Duppy Conqueror, Kaya, 
Kaya (verson), Turn Me Loose, Soul Rebel, Run for Cover, Pcture on the


--- PAGE 133 ---
110  SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY
Wall, Afrcan Herbsman, Man to Man, Jah s Mghty, Stand Alone, Send 
Me That Love
The Very Best of Bob Marley 2006/varous/Mastersong / B000FFJ7EU
CD 1: Afrcan Herbsman, Lvely Up Yourself, Fussng and Fghtng, Soul Rebel, 
Soul Shakedown, 400 Years, Sun Is Shnng, Natural Mystc, Soul Almghty, 
Kaya, Reacton, No Sympathy, Mellow Mood, T rench T own Rock, Cheer Up, 
Small Axe, Rebel’s Hop, Cauton, Ranbow Country, Can’t You See
CD 2: All n One, There She Goes, My Cup, It’s Alrght, Treat You Rght, 
Mr. Brown, Bran Washng, Stand Alone, Corner Stone, Duppy Con -
queror, Chances Are, Put It On/Don’t Rock My Boat, You Can’t Do That 
to Me, Hammer, No Water
Bob Marley Forever 2006/varous/Madacy Records/B000JMK68U
CD 1: Rebel’s Hop, Soul Almghty, Trench Town Rock, Afrcan Herbsman, 
Stand Alone, Mr. Brown, Bran Washng, 400 Years, All n One, Cauton, 
Soon Come, Go Tell It on the Mountan
CD 2: Kaya, Soul Rebel, It’s Alrght, My Cup, Mellow Mood, Touch Me, 
No Water, Soul Captves, Don’t Rock My Boat, Try Me, Ranbow Country, 
Fussn’ and Fghtn’
CD 3: How Many T mes, Memphs, Rdng Hgh, Corner Stone, Hammer, 
You Can’t Do That to Me, Chances Are, Stop the Tran, Duppy Conqueror, 
Lvely Up Yourself, Sun Is Shnng, Do It T wce
Bob Marley and the Wailers: T rilogy 2006/varous/Musc Brokers Arg/B000F2BNYK
CD 1: There She Goes, Can’t You See, Cheer Up, Back Out, Satsfy My 
Soul, Redder Than Red, Mellow Mood, Soul Shakedown Party, Mr. Brown, 
Soul Captves, Go Tell It on the Mountan, Soon Come, Do It T wce, Stop 
the Tran, Mr. Chatterbox, Power and More Power, Touch Me, Treat You 
Rght
CD 2: Try Me, It’s Alrght, No Sympathy, My Cup, Soul Almghty, 400 
Years, No Water, Reacton, Keep On Movng, Don’t Rock My Boat, Put 
It On, Rdng Hgh, Rdng Hgh, Kaya, Sun Is Shnng, Concrete Jungle, 
Screw Face, Love Lfe
CD 3: Lvely Up Yourself, Ranbow Country, Natural Mystc, Small Axe, 
Fussn’ and Fghtn’, Corner Stone, Chances Are, Cauton, Hammer, Rebels 
Hop, All n One (medley), Soul Rebel, Trench Town Rock, You Can’t Do 
That to Me, How Many T mes, Bran Washng, Duppy Conqueror, Rasta 
(nstrumental), I Shot the Sherff (nstrumental), Try Me (nstrumental)
Bob Marley: 400 Years 2006/varous/Dbk Works/B000EUMK8Q
Soul Shakedown Party, Lvely Up Yourself, Trench Town Rock, Stand 
Alone, Fussn’ and Fghtn’, Memphs, Bran Washng, Duppy Conqueror, 
Rdng Hgh, Reacton, Soul Almghty, Sun Is Shnng, Small Axe, All n 
One (medley), 400 Years, Mr. Brown


--- PAGE 134 ---
SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY  111
Bob Marley: Reggae Master 2006/varous/Immergent/B000I0N6PE
Lvely Up Yourself, Trench Town Rock, Afrcan Herbsman, Kaya, Stand 
Alone, Soul Rebel, 400 Years, It’s Alrght, No Sympathy, Rebel’s Hop, Cor-
ner Stone
Bob Marley: No Sympathy 2006/varous/Dbk Works/B000EUMK86
Kaya, Ranbow, Soul Rebel, Afrcan Herbsman, Try Me, It’s Alrght, There 
She Goes, You Can’t Do That To Me, Touch Me, Hammer, My Cup, Chances 
Are, Treat You Rght, No Water, Corner Stone
Bob Marley: Stop That Train 2006/varous/Dbk Works/B000CC4VZ6
Natural Mystc, Keep On Movng, Soul Captves, How Many T mes, Stop 
That Tran, Go Tell It on the Mountan, Cauton, Back Out, Mellow Mood, 
Rebel’s Hop, Do It T wce, Put It On, Don’t Rock My Boat, Cheer Up, Soon 
Come, Can’t You See
Bob Marley: Soul Shakedown Party 2006/varous/Ground Floor/B000FBG0JO
CD 1: Soul Shakedown Party, Small Axe, Back Out, Do It T w ce, Trench 
Town Rock, Natural Myst c, 400 Years, Mr. Brown, Soul Rebel, Ra nbow 
Country, Kaya, Keep On Mov ng, Don’t Rock My Boat, Put It On, There 
She Goes, Mellow Mood, Chances Are, Hammer, You Can’t Do That to Me
CD 2: Afrcan Herbsman, Stand Alone, Sun Is Shnng, Bran Washng, 
Lvely Up Yourself, Go Tell It on the Mountan, Duppy Conqueror, Fussn’ 
and Fghtn’, Rdng Hgh, Try Me, No Sympathy, My Cup, Corner Stone, 
No Water, Reacton, Cheer Up, Soon Come, Rebel’s Hop, Put It On, Soul 
Captves
Bob Marley: Keep On Skanking 2006/varous/Atom/B000EHTO3I
Satsfy My Soul, Don’t Rock My Boat, Kaya, 400 Years, Duppy Conqueror, 
Jah Is Mghty, Keep On Movng, Screw Face, Ths Tran, Soul Rebel, All In 
One, Go Tell It on the Mountan, Afrcan Herbsman, Hey, Happy People, 
Pcture on the Wall, Corner Stone, Soul Shakedown Party, Trench Town 
Rock, Thank You Lord, Lvely Up Yourself, Small Axe, Concrete Jungle, Put 
It On, Keep On Skankng, My Cup, Ranbow Country, Dracula, Long Long 
Wnter, Mr. Brown, Natural Mystc, I Lke It Lke Ths, Stop That Tran, 
Wsdom, Ncoteen, Man to Man, Sun Is Shnng
Bob Marley and the Wailers: Definitive Gold 2006/varous/Déjà vu Italy/
B000IMV3ZQ
Trench Town Rock, Soul Rebel, Kaya, Go Tell It on the Mountan, Try Me, 
It’s Alrght, No Sympathy, No Water, Ranbow Country, There She Goes, 
Mellow Mood, Treat You Rght, Chances Are, Hammer, Touch Me, Cauton, 
Soul Captves, Can’t You See, Reacton, 400 Years, Natural Mystc, Lvely 
Up Yourself, Soul Shakedown Party, Soon Come, Cheer Up, Back Out, Do 
It T wce, Keep On Movng, Don’t Rock My Boat, Put It On, Fussn’ and 
Fghtn’, Duppy Conqueror, Small Axe, Rdng Hgh, Afrcan Herbsman,


--- PAGE 135 ---
112  SELECTED  D ISCOGRAPHY
Stand Alone, Sun Is Shnng, Mr. Brown, Str It Up, Stop That Tran, Keep 
On Skankng, Bran Washng, Corner Stone, All n One, Man to Man, 
Wsdom, Mr. Chatterbox, One n All, Dreamland, Run for Cover, I Lke It 
Lke Ths, Turn Me Loose, Brand New Second Hand, Ths Tran, There She 
Goes, How Many Tmes, Treat You Rght, Love Lght Shnng, Rebel’s Hop, 
Satsfy My Soul, Pcture on the Wall, Shocks of Mghty, Shocks of Mghty 
(part 2), My Cup, Adam and Eve, Downpressor, Long Long W nter, Thank 
You Lord, Tell Me, Soul Almghty, Send Me That Love, Make Up, Con
-
crete Jungle, Screw Face, Love Lfe, Nce T me, Power and More Power, 
Redder Than Red, Hypocrtes, All n One/One Love, Sun Is Shnng Dub, 
No Sympathy Dub, Kaya Dub, Concrete Jungle Dub, Soul Rebels Dub, No 
Water Dub, 400 Years Dub, Don’t Rock My Boat Dub, Corner Stone Dub, 
Soul Almghty Dub, Rebel’s Hop Dub, It’s Alrght Dub, Keep On Movn’ 
Dub, Ranbow Country Dub, Satsfy My Soul Dub, Fussn’ and Fghtn’ Dub, 
Afrcan Herbsman Dub, Duppy Conqueror Dub, Dracula/Mr. Brown Dub


--- PAGE 136 ---
Bi Bliography
BookS and article S
Balford, Henry. “Marley’s Legacy Lves On, But . . .” Jamaica Observer, February 
26, 2004, n.p.
Barrett, Leonard. The Rastafarians: The Dreadlocks of Jamaica. Boston, MA: Bea-
con Press, 1988.
Barrow, Steve, and Peter Dalton. Reggae: The Rough Guide.  New York: Pengun 
Books, 1997.
Bennett, Scotty. Bob Marley. New York: Vrgn Publshng, 1997.
Booker, Cedella, and Anthony W nker. Bob Marley: An Intimate Portrait by His 
Mother. New York: Vkng, 1996.
Boot, Adran, and V van Goldman. Bob Marley—Soul Rebel—Natural Mystic. 
London: Eel Pe Publsher, 1981.
Boot, Adran, and Mchael Thomas. Jamaica: Babylon on a Thin Wire.  London: 
Thomas and Hudson, 1976.
Bordowtz, Hank, ed., Every Little Thing Gonna Be Alright: The Bob Marley Reader. 
Cambrdge, MA: Da Capo Press, 2004.
Bradley, Lloyd. “Uprsng.” Mojo, March 2005, 69– 81.
Bramwell, Osula. “ ‘Redempton Song’: Protest Reggae and Jamaca.” PhD dss., 
Unversty of Waterloo, Canada, 1984.
Burnett, Mchael. Jamaican Music. London: Oxford Unversty Press, 1982.
Campbell, Horace. Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney. 
Trenton, NJ: Afrca World Press, 1987.
Campbell, Howard. “Jammng wth Jmmy Norman.” Jamaica Observer, Novem-
ber 22, 2002.
113


--- PAGE 137 ---
114  BIBLIOGRAPHY
Campbell, Howard. “Reggae Icon Remembered.” Jamaica Gleaner, February 7, 
2005.
———. “The Walers Band: Stll Rockn’ n the Nnetes.” Reggae Report  14, 
no. 4 (Aprl 1996): 24 –25.
Cassdy, Frederc Gomes, and R. B. Le Page. Dictionary of Jamaican English.  2nd 
ed. Mona, Jamaca: Unversty of the West Indes Press, 2003.
Chevannes, Barry. Rastafari: Roots and Ideology.  New York: Syracuse Unversty 
Press, 1994.
Cooke, Mel. “Marley Museum Now Offcal Hertage Ste.” Jamaica Gleaner, Feb-
ruary 7, 2005.
Cooper, Carolyn. “Chantng Down Babylon: Bob Marley’s Song as Lterary Text.” 
Jamaica Journal 19, no. 4 (November 1986): 2– 8.
Dalrymple, Henderson. Bob Marley: Music, Myth, and the Rastas.  Sudbury, UK: 
Carb-Arawak, 1976.
Davs, Stephen. Bob Marley. New York: Doubleday, 1985.
———. Bob Marley. Reprnt, Rochester, VT: Schenkman Books, 1990.
———. Bob Marley: Conquering Lion of Reggae. London: Plexus, 1994.
Davs, Stephen, and Peter Smon. Reggae Bloodlines: In Search of the Music and 
Culture of Jamaica. New York: Da Capo Press, 1992.
———. Reggae International. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1983.
Dawes, Kwame. Bob Marley: Lyrical Genius. London, UK: Sanctuary Publshng 
Lmted, 2002.
Dolan, Sean. Bob Marley. Phladelpha: Chelsea House Publshers, 1996.
Farley, Chrstopher, Before The Legend: The Rise of Bob Marley.  New York: 
HarperCollns, 2006.
———. “How Marley Caught F re: Repackag ng the Reggae K ng as a Rock 
Star Helped Sell H s Mus c to the World.” Wall Street Journal,  Apr l 27, 
2006.
Frcke, Davd. “Blackwell Remembers.” Rolling Stone, no. 969, March 10, 2005, 78.
Furgusson, I. “ ‘So Much Thngs to Say’: The Journey of Bob Marley.” Village Voice 
27 (May 18, 1982): 39–43.
Glmore, Mkal. “The Lfe and T mes of Bob Marley: How He Changed the 
World.” Rolling Stone, no. 969, March 10, 2005, 68 –78.
Goldman, Vvan. The Book of Exodus: The Making and Meaning of Bob Marley ’s 
Album of the Century. New York: Three Rvers Press, 2006.
Gray, Obka. Radicalism and Social Change in Jamaica, 1960 –1972. Knoxvlle: 
Unversty of Tennessee Press, 1991.
Hausman, Gerald. ed. The Kebra Nagast: The Lost Bible of Rastafarian Wisdom and 
Faith from Ethiopia and Jamaica. New York: St. Martn’s Press, 1997.
Henke, James. Marley Legend: An Illustrated Life of Bob Marley.  San Francsco: 
Chroncle Books, 2006.


--- PAGE 138 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY  115
Howard, Denns. “Professor Rex Nettleford on the Creatve Power of Bob Mar -
ley.” Reggae Report 14, no. 4 (Aprl 1996): 20 –21.
Jaffe, Lee. One Love: Life with Bob Marley and the Wailers. New York: W . W . Nor-
ton, 2003.
Jensen, Rchard J. “Bob Marley’s ‘Redempton Song’: The Rhetorc of Reggae and 
Rastafar.” Journal of Popular Culture 29, no. 3 (Wnter 1995): 17–20.
Lacey, Terry. Violence and Politics in Jamaica, 1960–1970. Manchester, UK: Man-
chester Unversty Press, 1977.
Lee, Peter. “Glory to Jah: Rememberng Bob Marley.” Guitar Player  25, no. 5 
(May 1991): 82– 87.
Lpstz, George. Dangerous Crossroads. New York: Verso, 1994.
Manuel, Peter. Caribbean Currents: Caribbean Music from Rumba to Reggae. Phla-
delpha: Temple Unversty Press, 1995.
Marley, Bob. “A Conversaton wth Bob Marley.” Intervewer’s name unknown. Re-
prnted as “Bob Marley’s 1979 Intervew.” The Beat 18, no. 3 (1999): 40– 43.
Marley, Cedella, and Gerald Hausman, eds. 60 Visions: A Book of Prophesy by Bob 
Marley. Mam, FL: Tuff Gong Books, 2004.
May, Chrs. Bob Marley. London: Hamsh Publshers, 1985.
McCann, Ian. Bob Marley in His Own Words. New York: Omnbus Press, 1993.
———. The Complete Guide to the Music of Bob Marley.  New York: Omnbus 
Press, 1994.
McKenze, Clyde. “Bob Marley: For the People.” Reggae Report 14, no. 4 (Aprl 
1996): 13.
Moskowtz, Davd. Caribbean Popular Music: An Encyclopedia of Reggae, Mento, 
Ska, Rock Steady, and Dancehall. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2005.
———. The Words and Music of Bob Marley. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2007.
Mulvaney, Rebekah M., and Carlos Nelson. Rastafari and Reggae: A Dictionary 
and Source Book. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1990.
Murrell, Nathanal, ed. Chant Down Babylon: The Rastafari Reader. Phladelpha: 
Temple Unversty Press, 1998.
Natonal Lbrary of Jamaca. Marley Bibliography. Kngston, Jamaca: Natonal 
Lbrary of Jamaca, 1985.
Nettleford, Rex. Caribbean Cultural Identity: An Essay in Cultural Dynamics.  
Kngston, Jamaca: Wllam Collns and Sangster, 1970.
———. Mirror Mirror: Identity, Race, and Protest in Jamaica.  Kngston, Jamaca: 
Wllam Collns and Sangster, 1970.
Patterson, Orlando. Children of Sisyphus. London: Longman, 1964.
Perone, James. The Key of Life: The Words and Music of Stevie Wonder. Westport, 
CT: Praeger, 2006.
Potash, Chrs. Reggae, Rasta, Revolution: Jamaican Music from Ska to Dub.  New 
York: Schrmer Books, 1997.


--- PAGE 139 ---
116  BIBLIOGRAPHY
Rockwell, John. “Marley, Walers Dg Into Reggae Roots.” New York Times, June 
20, 1975, A, 25.
Rodney, Walter. The Groundings with My Brothers.  London: Bogle-L’Ouverture, 
1969.
Rosen, Crag. “Marley’s ‘Legend’ Lves on n 1984 Island Set,” Billboard 108, 
no. 47 (November 23, 1996): 13 –18.
Sherdan, Maureen. The Story behind Every Bob Marley Song: 1962–1981.  New 
York: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1999.
Snclar, Tom. “The Legend of Bob Marley.” Entertainment Weekly, no. 806, Feb-
ruary 11, 2005, 6 –10.
Smth, M. G. Culture, Race, and Class in the Commonwealth Caribbean.  Mona, 
Jamaca: Unversty of the West Indes Press, 1984.
Stephens, Roger. “Bob Marley: Rasta Warror.” In The Rastafari Reader: Chant 
Down Babylon, edted by Nathanel Murrell, W llam Spencer, and Adran 
McFarlane. Phladelpha: Temple Unversty Press, 1998.
Talamon, Bruce W . Bob Marley: Spirit Dancer. New York: W . W . Norton, 1994.
Taylor, Don. Marley and Me: The Real Bob Marley Story.  New York: Barrcade 
Books , 1995.
———. So Much Things To Say: My Life as Bob Marley ’s Manager. New York: 
Blake Publshers, 1995.
Wagner, Charles R. “Jah as Genre: The Interface of Reggae and Amercan Popu-
lar Musc.” PhD dss., Bowlng Green Unversty, 1993.
Warner, Keth Q. “Calypso, Reggae, and Rastafaransm: Authentc Carbbean 
Voces.” Popular Music and Society 12, no. 1 (Sprng 1988): 53– 62.
Whte, Garth. The Development of Jamaican Popular Music with Special Reference 
to the Music of Bob Marley.  Kngston, Jamaca: Afrcan-Carbbean Insttute 
of Jamaca, 1982.
Whte, Tmothy. Catch a Fire: The Life of Bob Marley. Rev. ed., New York: Henry 
Holt and Company, 1994.
Whtney, Malka, and Dermott Hussey. Bob Marley: Reggae King of The World. 
Kngston, Jamaca: Kngston Publshers, 1984.
Wnders, J. A. “Reggae, Rastafarans, and Revoluton: Rock Musc n the Thrd 
World.” Journal of Popular Culture 17, no. 1 (January 1983): 62.
weB SiteS
Each of these stes was consulted n the authorng of the encyclopeda. Refer-
ence dates are nconsequental, as each ste was vsted repeatedly over the perod 
of January 2004 to January 2005. All URLs have been verfed and only “offcal” 
artst and label Web stes were consulted.


--- PAGE 140 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY  117
Artsts Only Records. Reggae Artists. http://www.artstsonly.com/reggae.htm.
BBC Musc. http://www.bbc.co.uk/cg-perl/musc/muze/ndex.
Black Musc Collectors. http://www.black-musc-collectors.com/labels/uscata  
logue.htm.
Bob Marley Musc, Inc. Life of Bob Marley. http://www.bobmarley.com/lfe/.
Clarke, Donald. MusicWeb Encyclopaedia of Popular Music. http://www.muscweb.
uk.net/encyclopaeda/.
Crazy Baldhead. Artist Index. http://www.geoctes.com/SunsetStrp/Dsco/6032/
man.htm.
Davs, Stephen. Bob Marley Biography. http://www.grovemusc.com/date/artcles/
musc/2/230/23065.xml.
Gleaner Company Lmted. Jamaica Daily Gleaner. http://www.jamaca-gleaner.com.
IReggae. http://www.reggae.com/reggae1.htm.
JAD Records: Where the Legend Began. http://www.jadrecords.com/.
Jmmy Clff Musc. 
Biography. http://www.jmmyclffonlne.com.
Lee “Scratch” Perry Musc. http://www.upsetter.net/scratch/.
Peter Tosh Musc. 
The Man: His Story. http://www.ptosh.com/story.html.
Reggae Movement. Players, Singers, Spinners. http://www.reggaemovement.com/
rm1/artsts.htm.
Reggae Seen. http://www.reggaeseen.com/artsts/.
Reggae Tran. 
Artists. http://www.reggaetran.com/ste_artsts.asp.
Roots Archve. http://www.roots-archves.com.
Taj Mahal Musc. 
Biography and Discography . http://www.taj-mo-roots.com/  
dscography/bo.html.
Teacher and Mr. T. Reggae Vbes Productons. http://www.reggae-vbes.com.
T oots and the Maytals Musc. Extended Biography. http://www.tootsandthemaytals.
net/toots/tootsbographylong.aspx.
Trojan Records. Man. http://www.trojanrecords.net.
Tuff Gong Studos. Jamaca: Studo, Manufacturng, Dstrbuton, and Record 
Shop. http://www.tuffgong.com/.
Unversal Musc Group. Artist Index: Bob Marley and the Wailers. http://new.umusc.
com/Artsts.aspx?Index=1.


--- PAGE 141 ---
118


--- PAGE 142 ---
index
(Song ttles n quotes, album ttles n talcs)
“Afrca Unte,” 53, 55
Africa Unite: The Singles 
Collection, 64, 78–79
Al, Muhammad, 64
“Ambush n the Nght,” 52–53
Amsterdam, 49
Anderson, Al, 26, 28, 33, 46, 65
Anderson, Rta. 
See Marley, Rta
Anderson, Sharon, 87–88
Apollo Theater, Harlem, 54
Aswad, 41
Babylon by Bus, 49
Babylon System, 26–27, 41
“Babylon System,” 53
“Baby We’ve Got a Date,” 21
“Bad Card,” 59–60
Bad Wesse, Germany, 70–71
Barrett, Aston “Famly Man”, 18, 
21, 72, 85, 90
Barrett Brothers (rhythm secton), 
18–19, 23, 25, 29, 33–34, 60, 
68, 71
Barrett, Carlton “Carle”, 18, 21, 39
Belnavs, Anta, 29, 97
“Bend Down Low,” 22, 26
Beverley’s record label, 9
Bg Youth, 46, 55
Black Ark studo, 36
“Blackman Redempton,” 78
Blackwell, Chrstopher, 20–23, 
26, 28, 31–33, 37–  40, 48–50, 
53, 59–  60, 73, 84, 99
Booker, Cedella, 4–7, 10, 16, 35, 
56, 70–73, 80, 83, 85, 88, 92
Brathwate, Junor, 8, 12
Breakspeare, Cndy, 29, 40, 42, 
94, 98–99
Brown, Denns, 46
Brown, James, 53
“Buffalo Solder,” 49, 78
Bundrck, John “Rabbt”, 29
Burnin’, 23–24, 30, 35, 68, 80–81
“Burnn’ and Lootn’,” 23, 30, 35, 
68
Burnng Spear, 55
119


--- PAGE 143 ---
120  INDEX
Catch a Fire, 20–22, 24, 80–81
“Cauton,” 17, 88
Cayman Musc, 17
CBS, 19–20
Central Park, New York, 30, 
66–69
Chances Are, 78
“Chant Down Babylon,” 78, 96
Charles, Prnce, 63
Charles, Ray, 8, 101
“Cheer Up,” 17
CIA, 36
Clapton, Erc, 27, 80
Clff, Jmmy, 9, 55
Cole, Alan “Skll”, 19, 33–34, 
51–52, 66 – 67, 69–70, 74
“Comng n from the Cold,” 68
Commodores, the, 64, 65
“Concrete Jungle,” 19, 49
Confrontation, 56, 78
“Corner Stone,” 18
Cooke, Sam, 26
Coore, Stephen “Cat”, 38–39
“Could You Be Loved,” 59
“Crazy Baldhead,” 68, 81
“Crss,” 48
“Cry to Me,” 34
Culture, 40, 46, 54, 77
Da Costa, Glen, 25
Dekker, Desmond, 7–9
Dllnger, 46
Dodd, Clement “Coxsone”, 9–10, 
18, 61
“Do The Reggay,” 17
Downe, Tyrone, 19, 22, 25, 29, 
33–34, 39, 59, 74, 79
Drfters, the, 7, 11
“Duppy Conqueror,” 18, 22–23
Dynamc Sound studos, 19–20
Eccles, Clancy, 16
Essex House Hotel, 65
Ethopa, 13–14, 20, 33, 43, 
51–52, 66, 70, 74–75, 78, 86, 
100–101
Ethopan Orthodox Church, 66, 
70, 74–75
“Exodus,” 41
Exodus, 41–44, 47–49, 54–55, 68, 
77, 80–81
Famly Man. See Barrett, Aston
Fats Domno, 7
Federal Studos, 9
“Forever Lovng Jah,” 59
Ford, Vncent “Tartar”, 10
Fugees, the, 92, 98
Funeral, Bob Marley’s, 73–75, 89
Gabon, 57–59, 62
Garnett, Tony, 29, 31, 34–35
Garrck, Nevlle, 27, 29, 34, 
 
37, 39
Garvey, Marcus, 14, 82
Gaye, Marvn, 25
Germany, 35, 43, 64, 70, 101
“Get Up, Stand Up,” 32, 30, 35, 
55, 80
Ghetto Youths Crew, 91
Ghetto Youths Internatonal, 88, 
92, 96, 100
Ghetto Youths Unted, 91–92
Glbert, Tony “Glle”, 34
“Gve Thanks and Prases,” 78
Glasspole, Florzel, 74
Gray, Claude, 9
Grffths, Marca, 21, 37
Grounatons, 15–16
“Guava Jelly,” 27
“Gultness,” 41


--- PAGE 144 ---
INDEX  121
Hale Selasse, Emperor, 13–15, 
20, 26–27, 32, 34, 43, 47, 49, 
52, 70, 78
Harare, 62–63
Harper, Ben, 93
Harper, Dave, 29, 31
Harry J’s studo, 19–20,  
23–24, 32
“Heathen,” 41, 49, 61, 81
Hbbert, Toots, 17, 54
Hggs, Joe, 8, 23–24
Impressons, the, 7–8, 42
“I’m Stll Watng,” 11
Inner Crcle, 46
Intel-Dplo record label, 28
“I Shot the Sherff,” 23, 27, 
30–31, 35
Island Records, 17, 20, 22–26, 28, 
31, 33, 40–41, 46, 48, 59–60, 
65, 78–80, 82, 84–85
Issels, Dr. Josef, 70–72
“Is Ths Love,” 48–49, 68
Ital, 15, 19, 23, 29, 83, 99
I-Threes, 21, 25, 29, 30, 34–35, 
37, 59, 67, 74
“It Hurts to be Alone,” 22
Jackson, Mchael, 42
Jackson Fve, 28
“Jah Lve,” 32, 47
Jamacan Labour Party (JLP), 6, 
36, 45–47, 61, 49, 68, 81
“Jammng,” 41–42, 47
Japan, 51
Jobson, Dane, 28, 52, 71–72
“Johnny Was,” 34
Jones, Tom, 12
“Judge Not,” 9, 97
“Jump Nyabngh,” 78
“Kaya,” 19, 22, 48
Kaya, 44, 46–49, 53, 55
Kaya, 78
“Keep On Movng,” 22, 81
Kelso, Beverley, 8, 12
Khour, Ken, 9
“Knky Reggae,” 21, 30, 49
Knsey, Donald, 33–34, 37, 39–41
Kong, Lesle, 9–10, 17–18
KSAN rado, 24
Kurts Blow, 54
Legend, 78–81
Lndo, Earl “Wya”, 22–24, 46, 59
Live!, 31, 49
“Lvely Up Yourself,” 19, 22, 26, 
30, 35, 49
Lvngston, Nevlle (aka Bunny 
Waler), 7–9, 13, 15–17, 19–21, 
23–28, 31, 82, 93, 97
Lvngston, Pearl, 9–10, 74
“Lonesome Feelng,” 11, 22
Los Angeles, 30, 79
Lyceum Ballroom, London, 31
Madden, Davd, 25
Madson Square Garden, 54, 65
Malcolm, Cedella. See Booker, 
Cedella
Malcolm, Omerah, 4, 15
Manley, Mchael, 20, 22, 35–37, 
40, 44–47, 65, 74
Manley, Norman, 6
Marjuana, 2, 15–16, 21, 42, 47
Marley, Cedella, 88–89, 101
Marley, Ky-Man, 29, 87, 97–98, 101
Marley, Norval, 4
Marley, Rta, 6, 12–15, 19–22, 25, 
37–39, 54, 63, 66–68, 72–73, 
78, 82–89, 92–101


--- PAGE 145 ---
122  INDEX
Marley, Robbe, 22, 41, 87, 95, 100
Marley, Rohan, 22, 87, 94–95, 97
Marley, Zggy (Davd), 2, 16, 56, 
73, 79–80, 82, 88–93, 95 –97, 
101
Marshall, Bucky, 45, 62
Marvn, Junor, 40 –41, 43, 48, 
 
59, 79
Massop, Claude, 46 –46, 52
Mayfeld, Curts, 7, 42, 81
Maytals, the, 17, 54
Max’s Kansas Cty, New York, 23
McCook, Tommy, 25
McIntosh, Peter. See Tosh, Peter
“Mellow Mood,” 17
Memoral Sloan-Ketterng Cancer 
Center, 68–69
Mento, 7
Mchael, Ras, 39, 46
“Mdnght Ravers,” 21, 95
Mghty Damonds, 46
“Mx Up, Mx Up,” 78
“Mr. Brown,” 18
“Mr. Chatterbox,” 19
“Msty Mornng,” 48
Montego Bay, Jamaca, 3, 53
Morrs, Yvette, 53
Mos Def, 93
Mowatt, Judy, 21, 37
Nash, Johnny, 16–17, 19–21
Nassau, 39–40, 53, 56, 94
Natonal Heroes Park, Kngston, 
36
“Natty Dread,” 30, 47
Natty Dread, 25–30
“Natural Mystc,” 19, 41, 47, 68, 
74
Natural Mystic, the Legend Lives On: 
Bob Marley and the Wailers, 78
Nevlle, Aaron, 11
New York, 23, 30, 35, 43, 48, 54, 
61–62, 65, 67, 69, 92, 101
New Zealand, 1, 51
“Nght Shft,” 34
Nne Mle, 4–5, 75, 86–87, 101
Nkomo, Joshua, 62
“No More Trouble,” 21, 35, 49, 
63, 68, 81
Now Generaton Band, 22, 24
“No Woman, No Cry,” 26, 30, 35, 
68, 86
Nyabngh, 75, 78, 93
Old Grey Whistle Test, 23
“One Cup of Coffee,” 9
“One Drop,” 2, 53
One Drop rhythm, 1
“One Foundaton,” 23
“One Love,” 7, 22, 41–42, 47
One Love Peace Concert, 45–47, 
52
Pars, 43, 49
Parks, Arkland “Drumbago”, 10
“Pass It On,” 23
Patterson, Alvn “Secco”, 10, 23, 
59
People’s Natonal Party (PNP), 6, 
20, 36, 38, 44–47, 61, 65
Perry, Lee “Scratch”, 18–19, 22, 
32, 41, 52, 81
Phladelpha, Pennsylvana, 55
“Pmper’s Paradse,” 59
Pttsburgh, Pennsylvana, 67–68
Planno, Mortmer, 15–17
Polygram Records, 60–61, 65, 84
“Postve Vbraton,” 34–35, 47, 
49, 68
“Punky Reggae Party,” 41,  
49, 81
“Put It On,” 17, 22–23


--- PAGE 146 ---
INDEX  123
Queen (band), 69
Queen of Sheba Restaurant, 14, 
53, 83, 100
Rangln, Ernest, 10
“Rastaman Chant,” 74
“Rastaman Lve Up,” 78
“Rastaman Vbraton,” 33
Rastaman Vibration, 33–34, 41, 
80–81
“Rat Race,” 34–35, 49
“Real Stuaton,” 59
“Rebel Musc,” 26–27, 35, 49
“Redempton Song,” 59–60, 68, 79
“Reggae on Broadway,” 19
Reggae Sunsplash II, 53, 56
Red, Duke, 9
“Revoluton,” 26–27
Rche, Lonel, 65
“Rde Natty Rde,” 53
“Road Block,” 26–27, 30
Rodrguez, Rco, 10
Rockers, 41–42
Rock steady, 7, 11–12, 17, 98
Rolling Stone, 32, 77
Rollng Stones, the, 30–31, 56
“Roots Rock Reggae,” 34–35, 93
Roxy Theatre, Los Angeles, 30, 
35, 81
“Rude Boy,” 12, 18
Rude boy lfestyle, 12
“Runnng Away,” 48, 68
St. Ann’s Parsh, Jamaca, 2, 75
Salsbury (Harare), 62–63
San Francsco, Calforna, 24
“Satsfy My Soul,” 19, 48–49
Seaga, Edward, 36, 47, 73–74
“Smmer Down,” 10–11, 22
Sms, Danny, 16–17, 19–20, 60, 
64– 65, 73
“She’s Gone,” 48
Ska, 7–12
“Slave Drver,” 21, 27, 96
Slavery, 5
Sly and the Famly Stone, 24
“Small Axe,” 18, 22–23
Smle Jamaca Concert, 36–38
Smth, Cherry, 8
Smth, Huey “Pano,” 7
“So Jah She,” 26, 39
“So Much Thngs to Say,” 41
“So Much Trouble n the World,” 
53
Songs of Freedom, 78–79
Sons of Negus, 39, 46
“Soon Come,” 17
Soulettes, 12, 14
Sound system, 18
Spauldng, Anthony, 38
Sprngsteen, Bruce, 23
Stanley Theater, Pttsburgh, 
67–68
Stepney All Age School, 4–5
“Stff Necked Fools,” 78
“Str It Up,” 16, 21, 49
“Stop That Tran,” 17, 21
Stresand, Barbra, 27
Studo One, 9–12, 14–15, 18
“Sun Is Shnng,” 22, 48
Sunshne House Cancer Center, 
70–72, 86
“Survval,” 53
Survival, 53–56
Sweden, 19, 35, 43, 48, 64, 101
“Talkn’ Blues,” 26
Talkin’ Blues, 78
Taj Mahal, 27
Taylor, Don, 25, 28, 37, 58–60, 62
Teenagers, the, 8–10
Tekere, Edward, 62


--- PAGE 147 ---
124  INDEX
“Terror,” 9
“Them Belly Full,” 26, 30, 35, 68
Thrd World Band, the, 38–39, 
41, 54
Thompson, Denns, 34
“Three Lttle Brds,” 41–42, 91
“Tme Wll Tell,” 48
Top Gear, 23
Top of the Pops, 43, 48
“Top Rankn’,” 53
Tosh, Peter, 8, 10, 12, 15–16, 
19–21, 23–27, 31, 34, 46, 55, 
80, 82
Tower Theater, Phladelpha, 35
Treasure Isle studos, 9
“Trench Town,” 6, 8, 10, 33, 95
Trnty, 46
Tull, Jethro, 20
“Turn Your Lghts Down Low,” 
41–42
T welve Trbes of Israel, 16, 34, 
45–46, 61, 70, 74–75
“T wo Sevens Clash,” 40
Unques, the, 12
Uprising, 55–57, 59–60,  
64–65, 68
Upsetter Records, 18
Upsetters, 18
Waler, Bunny. See Lvngston, 
Nevlle
Walng Walers, 10–12
Wal’N Soul’M, 16–18
“Watng n Van,” 41–42, 81, 99
“Wake Up and Lve,” 53–54
“Want More,” 34–35
“War,” 34–35, 39, 47, 49, 63, 68,  
81, 95
“We and Dem,” 59
“What’s New Pussycat,” 12
“Who the Cap Ft,” 34
Wllams, Patrca, 22
Wlmngton, Delaware, 10, 14, 92
Wnwood, Steve, 20, 40
Wonder, Steve, 31, 55, 89, 92, 97
“Work,” 59–60, 68
Wrght, Betty, 58
Yesuhaq, Archbshop, 74
Zap Pow horns, 25, 39, 42
“Zmbabwe,” 54, 62
Zmbabwe (Afrca), 54, 57, 62–64, 
68, 89
Zmbabwe Afrcan Natonal 
Unon (ZANU), 62
“Zon Tran,” 59, 68
Zurch, Swtzerland, 64


--- PAGE 148 ---
About the Author
DA VID V . MOSKOWITZ s assocate professor of muscology and graduate 
coordnator n musc at the Unversty of South Dakota. He s the author of the 
Greenwood reference book Caribbean Popular Music: An Encyclopedia of Reggae, 
Mento, Ska, Rock Steady, and Dancehall and The Words and Music of Bob Marley , 
whch s part of The Praeger Snger-Songwrter Collecton.
125


--- PAGE 149 ---
126

