=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: builder of a civilization.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 390
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:03:06.272629
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
92 W3173s\ 63-22567
Scott
Booker T. Washington9 builder
of a civilization
92 IV3173S'V 63-22567
Scott
Booker T. Washington, builder
of a civilization


--- PAGE 3 ---
0001 D4W01


--- PAGE 4 ---



--- PAGE 5 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
BUILDER. OF A CIVILIZATION


--- PAGE 6 ---



--- PAGE 7 ---
Booker T. Washington
Builder of a Civilization
By
Emmett J. Scott
and
Lyman Beecher Stowe
With a Preface by Theodore Roosevelt
IllustratedfromPhotograph*
Garden City New York
Doubleday, Page & Company
1917


--- PAGE 8 ---
Copyrig
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
All rights reserved, including that of
translation intoforeign languagesf
including the Scandinavian
orrmcmr, 1916, MY T*ourtoot run88iMac*.


--- PAGE 9 ---
FOREWORD
INTHEpassing of a character so unique as Dr. BookerT.
Washington, many of us, his friends, were anxious that his
biography should be written by those best qualified to do
so* It is therefore a source ofgratification to us of his own
race to have an account of Dr. Washington's career set
forth in a form at once accurate and readable, such as will
inspire unborn generations of Negroes and others to love
and appreciate all mankind of "whatever race or color. It
is especially gratifying that this biography has been pre-
pared by the two people in all America best fitted, by
antecedents and by intimate acquaintance and association
with Dr. Washington, to undertake it. Mr* Lyman
Reecher Stowe is the grandson of Harriet Beeeher Stowe,
whose
**
Uncle Tom's Cabin** had a very direct influence on
the abolition ofslavery, and Mr, EmmettJ. Scott was Dr.
Washington's loyal and trusted secretary for eighteen
years*
ROBERT R, MOTON,
Principal Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute.
Tvskegee Institute,
August / xgi6


--- PAGE 10 ---



--- PAGE 11 ---
AUTHORS' PREFACE
THIS is not a biography in the ordinary sense. The
exhaustive aLife and Letters ofBookerT. Washington** re-
mains still to be compiled. In this more modest work we
have simply sought to present and interpret the chief
phases of the life of this man who rose from a slave boy to
be the leader of ten millions of people and to take his place
for all time amongAmerica's great men. In fact, we have
not even touched upon his childhood, early training* and
education, because we felt the story of those early strug-
gles and privations had been ultimately well told in his
own words in "Up from Slavery." This autobiography,
however, published as it was fifteen years before his death,
brings the story of his life only to the threshold of his
greatest achievements, In this book we seek to give the
full fruition ofhis life's work. Each chapter is complete in
itself. Each presents a complete, although by no means
exhaustive, picture of some phase of his life;
We take no small satisfaction in the fact that we were
personally selected by Booker Washington himself for this
task* He considered us qualified to produce what he
wanted: namely, a record of his struggles and achieve-
ments at once accurate ancl readable, put in permanent
form for the information of the public. He believed that
vii


--- PAGE 12 ---
AUTHORS
5
PREFACE
such a record could best be furnished by his confidential
associate, working in collaboration with a trained and ex-
perienced writer, sympathetically interested in the welfare
ofthe Negro race. This, then, is whatwe have tried to do
and the waywe have tried to do it.
Wecompleted the first four chapters before Mr. Wash-
ington's death, but he never read them. In fact, it was
our wish, to which he agreed, that he should not read what
we had written until its publication in book form.
EMMETT J. SCOTT,
LYMAN BEECHER STOWE,


--- PAGE 13 ---
PREFACE
IT IS not hyperbole to say that Booker T* Washington
was a great American, For twenty years before his
death he had been the most useful, as well as the most
distinguished, member of his race in the world, and one
ofthe most useful, as well as one ofthe most distinguished,
of American citizens of any race.
Eminent though his services were to the people of his
own color, the white men of our Republic were almost as
much indebted to him? both directly and indirectly.
They were indebted to him directly, because of the work
he did on behalf of industrial education for the Negro,
thus giving impetus to the work for the industrial educa-
tion of the White Man, which is, at least, as necessary;
and, moreover, every successful effort to turn the thoughts
of the natural leaders of the Negro race into the fields of
business endeavor, of agricultural effort* of every species
of success in private life, is not only to their advantage,
but to the advantage of the White Man* as tending to
remove the friction and trouble that inevitably come
throughout the South at this time in any Negro district
where the Negroes turn for their advancement primarily
to political life*
The indirect indebtedness of the White Race to Booker
IX


--- PAGE 14 ---
PREFACE
T. Washington is due to the simple fact that here in Amer-
ica we are all in the end going up or down together; and
therefore, in the long run, the man who makes a substan-
tial contribution toward uplifting any part of the com-
munity has helped to uplift all ofthe community. Wher-
ever in our land the Negro remains uneducated, and
liable to criminal suggestion, it is absolutely certain that
the whites will themselves tend to tread the paths of bar-
barism; and wherever we find the colored people as a
whole engaged in successful work to better themselves^
and respecting both themselves and others, there we shall
also find the tone of the white"community high.
The patriotic white man with an interest in the welfare
ofthis country is almost as heavily indebted to BookerT*
Washington as the colored men themselves,
If there is any lesson, more essential than any other,
for this countryto learn, it is the lesson that the enjoyment
ofrights should be madeconditional upon the performance
of duty. For one failure in the history of our country
which is due to the people not asserting their rights, there
are hundreds due to their not performing their duties.
This is just as true ofthe White Manas it is ofthe Colored
Man. But it is a lesson even more important to be taught
the Colored Man, because the Negro starts at the bottom
ofthe ladder and will never develop the strength to climb
even a single rung if he follow the lead of those who dwell
only upon their rights and not upon their duties. He has
a hard road to travel anyhow. Heis certain to be treated
with much injustice, and although he will encounter


--- PAGE 15 ---
PREFACE
among white men a numberwho wish to help him upward
and onward, he will encounter only too manywho, if they
do him no bodily harm, yet show a brutal lack of con-
sideration for him. Nevertheless his one safety lies in
steadily keeping in view that the law ofservice is the great
law of life, above all in this Republic, and that no man of
color can benefit either himself or the rest of his race,
unless he proves by his life his adherence to this law*
Such a life is not easy for the White Man> and it is very
much less easy for the Black Man; but it is even more
important for the Black Man, and for the Black Man's
people* that he should lead it.
As nearly as any man 1 have ever met, BookerT- Wash-
ington lived up to Micah*s verse, "What more doth the
Lord require oftheethan to do Justice and love Mercy and
walk humbly with thy God/
1
He did justice to every
man. He did justice to those to whom it was a hard
thing to do justice* He showed mercy; and this meant
that he showed mercy not only to the poor, and to those
beneath him, but that he showed mercy by an understand-
ing of the shortcomings of those who failed to do him
justice, and failed to do his racejustice. Healways under-
stood and acted upon the belief that the Black Mancould
not rise if he so acted as to incur the enmity and hatred of
the White Man; that if was of prime importance to the
well-being of the Black Man to earn the good will of his
white neighbor, and that the bulk of the Black Men
who dwell in the Southern States must reatlke that the
White Men who are their immediate physical neighbor!


--- PAGE 16 ---
PREFACE
are beyond all others those whose good will and respect
it is ofvital consequence that the Black Menofthe South
should secure.
Hewas never led away, as the educated Negro so often
is led away, into the pursuit of fantastic visions; into the
drawing up ofplans fit only for a world of two dimensions.
He kept his high ideals, always; but he never forgot for a
moment that he was living in an actual world of three
dimensions, in a world of unpleasant facts, where those
unpleasant facts have to be faced; and he made the best
possible out of a bad situation from which there was no
ideal best to be obtained. And he walked humbly with
his God.
To a very extraordinary degree he combined humility
and dignity; and I think that the explanation of this
extraordinary degree of success in a very difficult com-
binationwasdue to the fact that at the bottomhis humility
was really the outward expression, not of a servile attitude
toward any man, but of the spiritual fact that in very
truth he walked humbly with his God,
Nowhere was Booker T. Washington's wisdom shown
better than in the mixture of moderation and firmness
with which he took precisely the right position as to the
part the Black Man should try to take in politics. He
put the whole case in a nut-shell in the following sentences:
"In myopinion it is a fatal mistake to teach the young
black man and the young white man that the dominance
of the white race in the South rests upon any other basis
than absolute justice to the weaker man. It is a mistake
xa


--- PAGE 17 ---
PREFACE
to cultivate in the mind of any individual or group of
individuals the feeling and belief that their happiness
rests upon the misery ofsome one else, or their wealth upon
the poverty of some one else. I do not advocate that the
Negro make politics or the holding of office an important
thing in his life, I do urge, in the interests of fair play
for everybody, that a Negro who prepares himself in
property, in intelligence, and in character to cast a ballot,
and desires to do so, should have the opportunity."
In other words, while he did not believe that political
activity should play an important part among Negroes as
a whole, he did believe that in the interests of the White,
as well as in the interests of the Colored race, the upright,
honest^ intelligent Black Man or Colored Man should be
given the right to cast a ballot if he possessed the qualities
which, if possessed by a White Man, would make that
White Man a valuable addition to the suffrage-exercising
class,
No man, White or Black, was more keenly alive than
Booker T* Washington to the threat of the South, and to
the whole country, and especially to the Black Man him-
self, contained in the mass ofignorant* ptopertyless, semi-
vicious Black voters, wholly lacking in the characterwhich
alone fits a race for self-government, who nevertheless
have been given the ballot in certain Southern States*
In mymanyconversations and consultations with himit
!K, I believe, not an exaggeration to say that one-half the
time we were discussing methods for keeping out ofoffice^
and out of all political power, the ignorant* semi-criminal^
xiii


--- PAGE 18 ---
PREFACE
shiftless Black Man who, when manipulated by the able
and unscrupulous politician, Black or White, is so dreadful
a menace to our political institutions. But he felt very
strongly, and I felt no less strongly, that one of the most
efficient waysofwarring against this evil type was to show
the Negro that, if he turned his back on that type, and
fitted himself to be a self-respecting citizen, doing his
part in sustaining the commonburdens ofgood citizenship,
he would be freely accorded by his White neighbors the
privileges and rights ofgood citizenship. Surely there can
be no objection to this. Surely there can be no serious
objection thus to keep open the door of hope for the
thoroughly decent, upright, self-respecting man, no matter
what his color.
In the same way, while Booker T. Washington firmly
Believed that the attention of the Colored race should be
riveted, not on political life, but on success sought in the
fields ofhonest business endeavor, he also felt, and I agreed
with him, that it was to the interest of both races that
there should be appointments to office ofBlack Menwhose
characters and abilities were such that if they were White
Men their appointments would be hailed as being well
above the average, and creditable from every standpoint,
He also felt, and I agreed with him, that it was essential
that thjsse appointments should be made relatively most
numerous in the North for it is worse than useless to
preach virtue to others, unless the preachers themselves
practise it; which means that the Northern communities,
which pride themselves on possessing the proper attitude
xiv


--- PAGE 19 ---
PREFACE
toward the Negro, should show this attitude by their
own acts within their own borders.
I profited very much by my association with Booker T.
Washington. I owed him much along many different
lines. I valued greatly his friendship and respect; and
when he died I mourned his loss as a patriot and an
American.
THEODORE ROOSEVELT.
Sagamore Hill,
August 28, 1916.


--- PAGE 20 ---



--- PAGE 21 ---
CONTENTS
rAOB
FOREWORD BY ROBERT R. MOTON v
AUTHORS* PREFACE vii
PREFACE BY THEODORE ROOSEVELT ix
CHAPTER
I. THE MAN AND His SCHOOL IN THE MAKING . . 3
II. LEADER OF His RACE 19
III. WASHINGTON: THE EDUCATOR 57
IV. THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO 82
V. MEETING RACE PREJUDICE 107
VI. GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE 135
VII. BOOKER WASHINGTON AND THE NEGRO FARMER . 164
VIII. BOOKER WASHINGTON AND THE NEGRO BUSINESS
MAN 185
IX. BOOKER WASHINGTON AMONG His STUDENTS . . 222
X. RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS A YEAR . . 248
XI. MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION ,... 272
XII. WASHINGTON: THE MAN- * 300


--- PAGE 22 ---



--- PAGE 23 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS
Booker T. Washington . . . . Frontispiece
FACING
PACK
Tuskegee in the making. Nothing delighted Mr*
Washington more than to see his students do-
ing the actual work of erecting the Tuskegee
Institute buildings . . . . . 12
Tuskegee Institute students laying the foundation
for one of the four Emery buildings . .
14
"His influence, like that of his school, was at first
communitywide, then countywide, then State
wide, and finally nation wide" 16
A study in black. Note the tensity of expression
with which the group is following his each and
everyword ...*...,. 33
Showing someofthe teams offarmers attending the
Annual Tuskegee Negro Conference . * 58
An academic class. A problem in brick masonry 62
Mr. Washington in characteristic pose addressing
an audience . . . . . .
-136
Mr.Washington silhouetted againstthe crowd upon
one ofhis educational tours . .
136
Mr* Washington in typical pose speaking to an
audience 136
xbc


--- PAGE 24 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS
Aparty of friends who accompanied Dr. Washing-
ton on one of his educational tours . . 138
This old woman was a regular attendant at the
TuskegeeNegro Conference . . . .170
The cosmopolitan character of the Tuskegee stu-
dent body is~shown bythe fact that during the
past year students have come from the foreign
countries or colonies of foreign countries in-
dicated bythe various flags shown in this pic-
ture ...*.... 238
In 1906 the Tuskegee Institute celebrated its 25th
Anniversary. A group of well-known Ameri-
can characters attended .... 248
Some of Mr. Washington's humble friends . .
274
Soil analysis. The students are required to work
out in the laboratory the problems of the field
and the shop ....;. 274
Mr. Washington was a great believer in the sweet
potato . ...... 280
Mr. Washington had this picture especially posed
to showoffto the best advantage a part of the
Tuskegee dairy herd . . . . .
290
Mr, Washington feeding his chickens with green
stuffs raised in his own garden . .
306
Mr. Washington in his onion patch . . . 306
Mr.Washington sorting in his lettuce bed . . 306


--- PAGE 25 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
BUILDER OF A CIVILIZATION


--- PAGE 26 ---



--- PAGE 27 ---
CHAPTER ONE
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL IN THE MAKING
IT CAME about that in the year 1880, in Macon
County, Alabama, a certain ex-Confederate colonel con-
ceived the idea that if he could secure the Negro vote he
could beat his rival and win the seat he coveted in the
State Legislature. Accordingly, the colonel went to the
leading Negro m the town of Tuskegee and asked him
what he could do to secure the Negro vote, for Negroes
then voted in Alabama without restriction. This man,
Lewis Adams by name, himself an ex-slave, promptly re-
plied that what his race most wanted was education and
what they most needed was industrial education, and
that if he (the colonel) would agree to work for the pas-
sage of a bill appropriating money for the maintenance of
an industrial school for Negroes, he (Adams) would help to
get for himthe Negro vote and the election. This bargain
between an ex-slaveholder and an ex-slave was made and
faithfully observed on both sides, with the result that the
following year the Legislature of Alabama appropriated
$2,000 a year for the establishment of a normal and in-
dustrial school for Negroes in the town of Tuskegee. On
the recommendation of General Armstrong of Hampton
Institute a young colored man, Booker T. Washington* a


--- PAGE 28 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
recent graduate of and teacher at the Institute, was called
from there to take charge of this landless, buildingless,
teacherless, and studentless institution of learning.
This moveturned out to be a fatal mistake in the politi-
cal career of the colonel The appellation of "nigger
lover" kept him ever after firmly wedged in his political
grave* Thus, bythe same stroke, was the career ofan ex-
slaveholder wrecked and that of an ex-slave made. This
political blunder of a local office-seeker gave to education
one ofits great formative institutions, to the Negro race its
greatest leader, and to America one ofits greatest citizens.
One is tempted to feel that Booker T. Washington was
always popular and successful. On the contrary, for
manyyears he had to fight his wayinch byinch against the
bitterest opposition, not only ofthe whites, but of his own
race. At that time there was scarcely a Negro leader of
any prominence who was not either a politician or a
preacher. In the introduction to "Upfrom Slavery," Mr.
Walter H. Page says ofhis first experience manyyears ago
with BookerWashington:
<f
I had occasion to write to him,
and I addressed him as 'The Rev. Booker T. Washington/
In his reply there was no mention of myaddressing him as
a clergyman. But when I had occasion to write to him
again, and persisted in making him a preacher, his second
letter brought a postscript:
C
I have no claim to Rev/ I
knewmost ofthe colored menwhoat that time had become
prominent as leaders of their race, but I had not then
knownone whowasneither a politician nor a preacher; and
I had not heard ofthe head of an important colored school


--- PAGE 29 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
who was not a preacher. *A new kind of man in the
colored world/ I said to myself *a new kind of man
surely if he looks upon his task as an economic one instead
of a theological one."
And just because Booker Washington did look ''upon
his task as an economiconeinstead ofa theological one" he
was at first regarded with suspicion by most of the
preachers of his race and by some openly denounced as
irreligious and the founder of an irreligious school. Like
so manymenofgreater opportunityin all ages and places,
many of these Negro ministers confounded theology and
religion. Finding no theology about Booker Washington
or his school, they assumed there was no religion. Some
of them even went so far as to warn their congregations
from the pulpit to keep away from this Godless man and
his Godless school. To this formidable and at first almost
universal opposition from the leaders among his own
people was added the more natural opposition of the
neighboring white menwho assumed that he was "spoiling
the niggers" by education. A youth with a high collar,
loud necktie, checked suit, and patent-leather shoes,
dangling a cane, smoking a cigarette, and loitering im-
pudently on a street corner was their mental picture of an
educated Negro.
Amongthe original group ofthirty students with whom
Mr. Washington started Tuskegee Institute on an old
plantation equipped with a kitchen, a stable, and a hen-
house, was a nowelderly manwhoto-day has charge ofthe
spacious and beautiful grounds of the Institute. Hewas
5


--- PAGE 30 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
approaching middle age when he entered this original
Tuskegee class. The following is a paraphrase of his ac-
count ofthe early days ofthe school: "Afterwe
5
d been out
on the plantation three or four weeks Mr. Washington
came into the schoolroom and said: 'To-morrow we're
goingto have achoppingbee. All ofyouthat have an axe,
or can borrow one, must bring it. I will try and provide
those ofyou who cannot furnish an axe. Wewill dismiss
school early to-morrow afternoon and start for the chop-
ping bee/ Sowecameto school next daywith the axes, all
of us that could get them; we were all excited and eager
for that chopping bee, and we were all discussing what it
would be like, because we had never been to one before.
So in the afternoon Mr. Washington said it was time for
that chopping bee, so he put his axe over his shoulder and
led us to thewoods and put us to workcutting thetrees and
clearing the land. He went right in and worked harder
and faster and handled his axe better than anyofus* After
awhilewefound that a choppingbee, as he called it, was no
different from just plain cutting down trees and clearing
the land. There wasn't anything new about that we all
had had all we wanted of it. Some of the boys said they
didn't come to school to cut down trees and clear land, but
they couldn't say theywere too good for that kind ofwork
when Mr. Washington himselfwas at it harder than anyof
them. So he kept with us for some days till everybody
had his idea. Then he went off to do something more im-
portant.
"Now, in those days he used to go off every Saturday
6


--- PAGE 31 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
morning and he wouldn't come back till Mondaymorning.
He'd travel all round the country drumming up students
for the school and telling the people to send their children.
And on Sunday he'd get the preachers to let him get up in
their pulpits and tell the people about the school after they
had finished preaching. And the preachers would warn
their people against him and his school, because they said
it wasn't Methodist, and it wasn't Baptist, and it wasn't
Presbyterian, and it wasn't Episcopalian, and it wasn't
Christian. Andthey told the people to keep theirchildren
awayfromthat Godless man and his school. Butwhenhe
came along and asked to speak to the people they had to
leave him, just as everybody always did let him do just
what he wanted to do. And when they heard him, the
people, they didn't pay no attention to the preachers, they
just sent their children as fast as ever they could contrive
it.
"Now, in those days Mr. Washington didn't have a
horse, nor a mule, nor a wagon, and he wanted to cover
more country on those trips than he could afoot, so he*d
just go out in the middle of the road and when some old
black manwould come along driving his mule wagon he'd
stop him and talk with him, and tell him about the school
and what it was going to do for the black folks, and then
he'd say: *Now, Uncle, you can help by bringing your
wagon and mule round at nine o'clock Saturday morning
for me to go off round the country telling the people about
the school. Now, remember, Uncle Jake, please be here
promptly at nine/ and the old man would say,
*
Yes, boss*
7


--- PAGE 32 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
I sure will be here!' That was how he did it when he
needed anything he'd go out and put his hand on it. First,
he could put his hand on anything he wanted round the ,
town; then, he could put his hand on anything he wanted
all over the county; then he could put his hand on any-
thing hewanted all over the State; and then finally they do
tell mehe could put his hand on anything he wanted away
up to New York.
"In those days, after we came to live here on the
*
plantation/ I used to take the wheelbarrow and go round
to the office when Mr. Washington opened up the mail in
the morning, and if there was money in the mail then I
could go along to the town with the wheelbarrow and get
provisions, and if there was no money then there was no
occasion to go to town, and we'd just eat what wehad left.
Most ofthewhite storekeepers wouldn't give us credit, and
they didn't want a 'nigger school' here anyhow. Times
have changed. Now those storekeepers get a large pro-
portion of their trade here at the Institute, and if there
should be anytalk ofmoving, they'd just get up and fight
to the last to keep us here andkeep ourtrade.
"And in those days the*Negro preachers, or the most of
them, and the white folks, or the most of them, were al-
ways trying to dispute with Mr. Washington and quarrel
with him, but hejust kept his mouth shut and went ahead.
He kept pleasant and he wouldn't dispute with them, nor
argue with them, nor quarrel with them. Whenthe white
folks would come round and tell him he was
*
spoiling good
niggers by education/ he would just ask them to wait
8


--- PAGE 33 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
patiently and give him time to show them what the right
kind of education would do* And when the colored
preachers would come round and tell him he was no
Christian, and his school had no religion, he would ask
them to just wait and see if the boys and girls were any
less Christian because of the education they were get-
ting. But whoever came along and whatever happened
Mr. Washington just kept his mouth shut and went
ahead.
"After two years of school I went out and rented some
land and planted cotton, and just about time to harvest
my crop Mr. Washington sent for me one Saturday and
said:
'
I need you. I wantyou to come back and workfor
the school on the farm. I want you to start in Monday
morning/ When I told him about my cotton crop just
ready to be picked he said: 'Can't help that, we need you.
You'll have to arrange with your neighbors to harvest
your crop for you/
"
To the inquiry, "Well, did you come?" the old man re-
plied, "Ofcourse I did. WhenMr. Washington said come
I came same as everybody did what he told them. I got a
neighbor to harvest mycrop and I lost money on it, but I
cameto workthat Mondaymorningmorethan thirty years
ago, and I've been here ever since/'
Theidea of not doingwhat Mr. Washington wanted him
to do, or even arguing the matter, was evidently incon-
ceivable to this old man. He had always obeyed Mr.
Washington just as he had obeyed the laws of nature by
sleeping and eating, That is the Hnd of control which
i
9


--- PAGE 34 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
BookerWashington always exercised over his fellow-work-
ers* He accepted their implicit obedience as naturally
and simply as they gave it.
As Mr. Page also points out in the introduction to "Up
from Slavery/' however humble Mr. Washington's origin
may have been, what might be termed his intellectual
pedigree was ofthe highest and finest. He maybe called,
in fact, the spiritual grandson ofthe great Dr. Mark Hop-
kins of Williams College. Just as Samuel Armstrong was
perhaps" the most receptive of Mark Hopkins' pupils, so
Booker Washington became the most receptive pupil of
Samuel Armstrong. As says Mr. Page: "To the for-
mation ofMr. Washington's character, then, wentthe mis-
sionary zeal of New England, influenced by one of the
strongest personalities in modern education, and the wide-
reaching moral earnestness ofGeneralArmstrong himself/*
In his autobiography Mr. Washington thus describes
GeneralArmstrong's influence and the impression he made
upon him: "It has been my fortune to meet personally
many of what are called great characters, both in Europe
and America, but I do not hesitate to say that I never met
any man who, in myestimation, was the equal of General
Armstrong. Fresh from the degrading influences of the
slave plantation and the coal mines, it was a rare privilege
for me to be permitted to come into direct contact with
such a character as General Armstrong. I shall always re-
member that the first time I went into his presence he
made the impression upon me of being a perfect man; I
was made to feel that there was something about him that
10


--- PAGE 35 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
was superhuman. It was my privilege to know the
General personallyfromthe time I entered Hamptontill he
died, and the more I saw of him the greater he grewin my
estimation. One might have removed from Hampton all
the buildings, classrooms, teachers, and industries, and
given the men and womenthere the opportunity ofcoming
into daily contact with General Armstrong, and that alone
would have been a liberal education. (This recalls
President Garfield's definition ofa university when he said,
*
myidea ofa university is a logwith Mark Hopkins on one
end and a boy on the other/) The older I grow, the more
I am convinced that there is no education which one can
get from books and costly apparatus that is equal to that
which can be gotten from contact with great men and
women. Instead of studying books so constantly, how I
wish that our schools and colleges might learn to study
men and things!"
When the young man imbued with these ideas and
fresh from these influences found himself responsible for
the destinies of a studentless, teacherless, buildingless, and
landless school it is significant how he went to work to
supply these manifold deficiencies. First, he found a
place in which to open the school a dilapidated shanty
church, the A. M, E. Zion Church for Negroes, in the town
of Tuskegee. Next he went about the surrounding
countryside, found out exactly under what conditions the
people were living and what their needs were, and ad-
vertised the school among the class of people whom he
wanted to have attend it. After returning from these ex-
XI


--- PAGE 36 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
periences he said: "I saw more clearly than ever the wis-
dom of the system which General Armstrong had in-
augurated at Hampton. To take the children of such
people as I had been amongfor amonth, and each daygive
them a few hours of mere book education, I felt would be
almost a waste of time/*
Six weeks after theschool wasopened, onJuly 4, 1881, in
the shanty Methodist Church with thirty students, Miss
Olivia A. Davidson entered the school, the enrollment of
which had already grown to fifty, as assistant teacher.
She subsequently became Mrs. Washington. The school
then had students, a teacher, and a building such as it was,
but it had noland. It was succeedingin so far as teaching
these eager and knowledge hungry young people what
could be learned from books, but little more. Mr. Wash-
ington found that about 85 per cent, ofthe Negroes of the
Gulf States lived on the land and were dependent upon
agriculture for their livelihood. Hence, he reasoned that
it was ofsupreme importance to teach them howto live on
the land to the best advantage. In order to teach the
students howto live on the land the school itself must have
land. About this time an old plantation near the town of
Tuskegee came upon the market. The school had no
money. Mr. Washington had no money, and the $2,000 a
year from the State Treasury could be used only for the
payment of teachers. Accordingly Mr. Washington per-
sonallyborrowed the$250,fromapersonal friend, necessary
to secure title to the land, and moved the school from the
shanty church to the comparative comfort of four aged
12


--- PAGE 37 ---



--- PAGE 38 ---



--- PAGE 39 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
cabins formerly used as the dining-room, kitchen, stable,
and hen-house of the plantation.
And as soon as they were established in their newquar-
ters he organized the
te
choppingbee"
alreadydescribed and
cleared some of the land so that it could be used for crops.
He did not clear and plant this land to give his students
agricultural training. He did it for the purpose that all
land was originally cleared and planted to get food.
He, of course, realized that the educational content of this
work was great greater than any possible textbook ex-
ercises in the classroom. He then and there began the
long and difficult task of teaching his people that physical
work, and particularly farm work, if rightly donewas edu-
cation, and that education was work. To secure the ac-
ceptance ofthis truth by a race only recently emancipated
from over two hundred years of unrequited toil a race
that had always regarded freedom from the necessity for
work as an indication of superiority was not a hopeful
task. To them education was the antithesis ofwork. It
was the magic elixir which emancipated all those fortunate
enough to drink of it from the necessity for work.
He also began to emphasize at this time his familiar
dictum that learning to do the common things oflife in an
uncommon way was an essential part of real education.
Probably the reverse ofthis dictum, namely, learning to do
the uncommon things of life in a common way would
have more nearly corresponded to the popular conception
of education among most Negroes and manywhites.
Mr. Washington later developed a brickyard where,
*3


--- PAGE 40 ---



--- PAGE 41 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
cabins formerly used as the dining-room, kitchen, stable,
and hen-house of the plantation.
And as soon as they were established in their newquar-
ters heorganized the"
choppingbee"
alreadydescribed and
cleared some of the land so that it could be used for crops.
He did not clear and plant this land to give his students
agricultural training. He did it for the purpose that all
land was originally cleared and planted to get food.
He, of course, realized that the educational content of this
work was great greater than any possible textbook ex-
ercises in the classroom. He then and there began the
long and difficult task of teaching his people that physical
work, and particularly farm work, if rightly done was edu-
cation, and that education was work. To secure the ac-
ceptance ofthis truth by a race only recently emancipated
from over two hundred years of unrequited toil a race
that had always regarded freedom from the necessity for
work as an indication of superiority was not a hopeful
task. To them education was the antithesis of work. It
was the magic elixir which emancipated all those fortunate
enough to drink of it from the necessity for work.
He also began to emphasize at this time his familiar
dictum that learning to do the common things oflife in an
uncommon way was an essential part of real education.
Probably the reverse ofthis dictum, namely, learning to do
the uncommon things of life in a common way would
have more nearly corresponded to the popular conception
of education among most Negroes and manywhites*
Mr, Washington later developed a brickyard where,


--- PAGE 42 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
after a series offailures sufficient to convince any ordinary
man of the hopelessness of the enterprise, they finally suc-
ceeded in baking creditable bricks which were used by the
students in the construction of buildings for the school.
He did not start this brickyard for the purpose of
vocational training any more than he started the farm
for agricultural training. He started it because they
needed bricks with which to build buildings in which to
live, just as he started the farm to raise food uponwhich to
live. He saw to it, however, that the brickyard was used
as an instrument of education and was never allowed to
degenerate into a mere brickyard and nothing more, just
as he sawto it that the farm was used as a means ofeduca-
tion andwasnotallowedto degenerateinto a merefarm and
nothing more. It was even more difficult to persuade the
students that the hard, heavy, dirty workofthe brickyard
waseducation than it had been to persuadethemthat farm
work was education. Mr, Washington wasted no time in
arguing this point, however, but merelyinsisted that with-
out bricks theycould not put up proper buildings, and that
without buildings theycould not have such a school as they
must have not only for themselves but for their race.
So this originally landless, buildingless, studentless, and
teacherless school came eventually to have all four ofthese
obvious requisites, but it still lacked a fundamental re-
quirement for the effective fulfillment of its purpose. It
lacked a boarding department where the students might
learn to live. In his tours among the people Mr. Wash-
ington had found the great majority in the plantation dis*


--- PAGE 43 ---



--- PAGE 44 ---



--- PAGE 45 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
tricts living on fat pork and corn bread, andsleepingin one-
room cabins. They planted nothing but cotton, bought
their food at the nearest village or town market instead of
raising it, and lived under conditions where the funda-
mental laws of hygiene and decent social intercourse were
both unknown and impossible of application. The young
men and women from such homes must be taught how to
live in houses with more than one room, how to keep their
persons and their surroundings clean, howto sleep in a bed
between sheets, hownot onlyto raise but to prepare, serve,
and eat a healthful variety of proper food at regular and
stated intervals^ to say nothing of a trade by which to
maintain themselves both during their course and after
graduation as well as the usual book learning of the ordi-
nary school. Obviously they could not be taught these
things unless they lived day and night on the school
grounds instead of boarding about with people whose
standards of living were very little if at all higher than
those of their homes. Accordingly volunteers were called
for, and the students made an excavation under their new
brick building which was made into a basement kitchen
and dining-room. As Mr. Washington says in "Up from
Slavery," "Wehad nothing but the students and their ap-
petites with which to begin a boarding department." As
soon as this boarding department was established it be-
came possible to influence directly the lives of the students
during the entire twenty-four hours ofthe day. Fromthen
on each student was required to have and to use a tooth-
brush. Mr. Washington has since remarked that, in his


--- PAGE 46 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
opinion, thetoothbrushis themost potent single instrument
ofcivilization. Then, too, it was possible for him to begin
to enforce this injunction taken from one of his nowwell-
known Sunday night talks, "Make a study ofthe prepara-
tion of food. See to it that a certain ceremony, a certain
importance, be attached to the partaking ofthe food "
This exhortation sounds so commonplace as to be scarcely
noticed by the average reader, but just put yourself in the
place of one of these boys or girls who came from a one-
room cabin and realize what a profoundly revolutionary,
even sensational, injunction it is! To the boy or girl who
had snatched a morsel of food here, there, or anywhere
when prompted bythe gnawings of hunger, who had never
sat down to a regular meal, who had never partaken of a
meal placed upon a table with or without ceremony
imagine what it meant to such a boy or girl "to see to it
that a certain ceremony, a certain importance, be attached
to the partakingofthe food" not on special occasions but
at each one of the three meals of each day!
Finally it came about that this school which had started
with a paltry $2,000 a year, a great need, and the in-
vincible determination of one man, came to have land,
buildings, teachers, students, and even a boarding de-
partment. But in Mr. Washington's viewthere was still a
great fundamental lack in their work. They were doing
nothing directly to help those less fortunate than them-
selves those about them who could not come and enjoy
the advantages of the school. Mr. Washington held that
as soon as an individual got hold of anything as useful and
16


--- PAGE 47 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
"Mis influence, like that ofhis school, was at first community wide, then
county wide, then state wide, and finally nation wide"


--- PAGE 48 ---



--- PAGE 49 ---
THE MAN AND HIS SCHOOL
desirable as education he should take immediate means to
hand it on to the greatest possible number of those who
needed it. He had no patience with those persons who
would climb the tree ofknowledge and then pull the ladder
up after them.
Heand his teachers then beganto go out on Sundays and
give the people homelytalks on howto improve their living
conditions. They encouraged the farmers to come to the
school farm and learn how to grow a variety of crops to
supplement the cotton crop which was their sole reliance.
They relieved the distress of individual families. Mrs.
Washington gathered together in an old loft the farmers*
wives and daughters who were in the habit ofloafing about
the village ofTuskegee on Saturday afternoons and formed
them into a woman's club for the improvement of the liv-
ing conditions in their homes and communities. Mr.
Washington and his teachers wentright onto the farms and
into the homes, and into the churches and the schools, and
everywhere showed, for the most part byconcrete object-
lessons, howthey could make their farms more productive,
their homes more comfortable, their schools more useful,
and their church services more inspiring. All this was
done not with an idea of starting an extension department
or a social service department, but merely because these
people needed help, and Mr, Washington knew that both
teachers and students would help themselves in helping
them* Finally, chiefly through the efforts of Mrs. Wash-
ington, a model country school was established in the
district adjoining the Institute's property. This school is
17


--- PAGE 50 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
a farm home where the young teacher and his wife, both
graduates of Tuskegee, teach the boys and girls who come
to them each day how to live on a farm teach them by
practice and object-lesson as well as by precept. They
followthe ordinarycountry school curriculum, but that is a
small and relatively unimportant part of what this school
gives its pupils. Then, too, the teachers ofTuskegee early
started campaigns looking to the extending of the school
terms throughout Macon County and the adjoining coun-
ties from three to five months, as was customary, to nine
months.
And this work ofTuskegee beyond its own borders grew
as constantly in volume and extent as the work within its
borders, so that Tuskegee soon became the vital force
the yeast that was raising the level of life and well-being
throughout, first, the town and neighborhood ofTuskegee,
then the County of Macon, then the surrounding counties
and the State ofAlabama; and finally, in conjunction with
its mother, Hampton, and its children situated at strategic
points throughout the South, the entire Negropeople ofthe
South, and indirectly the whole nation.
And as the school grew, so grew the man whose life was
its embodiment. It is impossible to think of Booker
Washington and Tuskegee separately. Just as he typified
Tuskegee, so Tuskegee typified him. Just as he made
the school, so the school madehim. Hisinfluence, like that
of his school, was at first community wide, then county
wide, then State wide, and finally nation wide.


--- PAGE 51 ---
CHAPTER TWO
LEADER OF HIS RACE
IN 1895, fourteen years after the founding of Tuskegee
Institute, Booker T. Washington was selected to
represent his race at the opening of the Cotton States
and International Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia. On
this occasion he mounted the platform, to make the first
address which any member of his race had ever made be-
fore any representative body of Southern men and women,
as an obscure but worthyyoungcolored manwhohad com-
mended himself to a few thinking persons by building up
an excellent industrial school for his people. He came off
that platform amid scenes of almost hysterical enthusiasm
and was thenceforth proclaimed as the leader of his race,
the Moses of his people, and one of America's great men.
In this epoch-making speech Booker Washington had
presented a solution of an apparently insoluble problem.
He had offered a platform upon which, as Clark Howell
said in the Atlanta Constitution, "both races, blacks and
whites, could stand with full justice to each." In the
course of the speech he told this story: **A ship lost at sea
for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vessel. From
the mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal;
'Water, water; we die of thirst!* The answer from the
19


--- PAGE 52 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
friendly vessel at once came back: "Cast down your
bucket where you are/ Asecond time the signal,
'
Water,
water, send us water!
3
ran up from the distressed vessel,
and was answered: "Cast down your bucket where you
are/ And a third and fourth signal for water was an-
swered, 'Cast down your bucket where you are/ The
captain of the distressed vessel, at last heeding the in-
junction, cast down his bucket, and it came up full offresh,
sparkling water from the mouth of the Amazon River/*
He then appealed to his own people to "cast down their
buckets where they were" by making friends with their
white neighbors in every manly way, by training them-
selves where they were in agriculture, in mechanics, in
commerce, instead of trying to better their condition by
migration. And finally to the Southern white people he
appealed "to cast down their buckets where they were"
by using and training the Negroes whomthey knewrather
than seeking to import foreign laborers whomthey did not
know.
Whenhe reached the crux and climax ofthe speech the
delicate matter ofthe relations between the races, socially
he held up his right hand with his fingers outstretched
and said: "In all things that are purely social we can be as
separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things
essential to mutual progress/
5
At this remark the au-
dience wentwild! Ladies stood on their chairs and waved
their handkerchiefs, while menthrewuptheir hats, danced,
and catcalled. An old ante-bellum Negro, who had been
sitting crosslegged in one of the aisles, wept tears of pride
20


--- PAGE 53 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
and joy as he swayed from side to side. By this state-
ment, with what had led up to it, BookerWashington cap-
tured the allegiance of all really representative Southern
whites, and by consistently adhering to this position he, in
an ever-increasing degree, won and held their allegiance
till the end.
Frederick Douglass, the great leader of his race during
the closing days of slavery, during the War and the Re-
construction period, had died only a few months before.
Everywhere, by leading whites, as well as blacks, Wash-
ington was acclaimed asthe successor ofDouglass thenew
leader of the Negro race. One of the first colored men so
to acclaim him was EmmetJ. Scott, whowas then editing
a Negro newspaper in Houston, Texas, and little realized
that he was to become the most intimate associate of the
new leader. In an editorial Mr. Scott said of this ad-
dress: "Without resort to exaggeration, it is but simple
justice to call the address great. It was great! Great, in
that it exhibited the speaker's qualities of head and heart;
great in thathe could and did discriminately recognize con-
ditions as they affect his people, and greater still in the
absolute modesty, self-respect, and dignity with which he
presented a platform upon which, as Clark Howell, of the
Atlanta Constitution says: *both races, blacks and whites,
can stand with full justice to each.
1 "
Perhaps the most
remarkable feature of Booker Washington's leadership
was that from that time on he never deviated one hair's
breadth in word or deed from the platform laid down in
this brief address.
21


--- PAGE 54 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
It wasnot to be expected, however, that such a radically
newnote in Negro leadership could be struck without some
discord. As was perfectly natural, some more or less
prominent Negroes, whose mental processes followed the
lines of cleavage between the races engendered by the em-
bittering experiences of the Reconstruction period, looked
with suspicion upon a Negro leader who had won the ap-
probation ofthe South, ofleadingwhite citizens, press, and
public. In the days ofslavery it was a frequent custom on
large plantations to use one of the slaves as a kind of stool
pigeon to spy upon the others and report their misdeeds.
Naturally such persons werehated and despised and looked
upon as traitors to their race. Hence, it came about that
the praise of a white manwas apt to throw suspicion upon
the racial loyalty of a black man. This habit ofmind, like
all mental habits, long survived the system and circum-
stances which occasioned it. Therefore, it was inevitable
that the fact that the white press throughout the South
rang with his praises for days and weeks after the sen-
sationally enthusiastic reception of his speech at the ex-
position should not be accepted as a desirable endorsement
ofthe new leader by at least a few of his own people.
Amore or less conspicuous colored preacher summed up
this slight undertow of dissent when he said: "1 want to
paymyrespects next to acolored man. Heis a great man,,
too, but he isn't our Moses, as the white people are pleased
to call him. I allude to Booker T. Washington. He has
been with the white people so long that he has learned to
throwsop with the rest- Hemade a speech at Atlanta the


--- PAGE 55 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
other day, and the newspapers of all the large cities praised
it and called it the greatest speech ever delivered by a
colored man. When I heard that, I said: "There must be
somethingwrongwith it, or the white people would not be
praising it so/ I got the speech and read it. Then I said,
*Ah, here it is/ and I read his words, 'the colored people do
not want social equality/ (This man's interpretation of
this sentence in the speech, "The wisest among my race
understand that the agitation of questions of social
equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the en-
joyment of all the privileges that will come to us must be
the result of severe and constant struggle rather than of
artificial forcing/
5
) I tell you that is a lie. Wedo want
social equality. Why, don't you want your manhood
recognized? Then Mr. Washington said that our emanci-
pation and enfranchisement were untimely and a mistake;
that we were not ready for it. (Naturally, Mr. Washing-
ton said no such thing.) What did he say that for but to
tickle the palates of the white people? Oh, yes, he was
shrewd. He will get many hundreds of dollars for his
school by it."
Let it not be thought that this attitude represented any
large or important body of opinion among the Negroes.
The great majority both of the leaders and the rank and
file enthusiastically accepted both the new leader and his
new kind of leadership. The small minority, however,
holding the view of the preacher quoted, continued
to cause Booker Washington some annoyance, which,
although continuously lessening, persisted in some de-


--- PAGE 56 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
gree throughout his life. This numerically small and
individually unimportant element of the Negroes in
America would hardly warrant even passing mention ex-
cept that the always carping and sometimes bitter criti-
cisms of these persons are apt to confuse the well-wishers
ofthe racewhodo not understand the situation.
The Negroes holding this point of view are sometimes
pleased to refer to themselves as the Talented Tenth.
Theyare largely city dwellers who have had more or less of
what they term "higher education'' Latin, Greek,
Theology, and the like. Anumber ofthese persons make
all or a part of their living by publicly bewailing the
wrongs and injustices of their race and demanding their
redress byimmediate means. Mr. Washington's emphasis
upon the advantages ofNegroes in America and the debt
of gratitude which they owe to the whites, who have
helped themto make more progress in fifty years than any
other race ever made in a like period, is naturally very
annoyingto this type ofperson. In spite oftheir constant
abuse of him Mr. Washington some years ago agreed to
confer with the leaders of this faction to see if a program
could not be devised through which all could work to-
gether instead of at cross purposes. In spite of the fact
that the chief exponent of this group opened the first
meetingwith a bitter attack upon Mr. Washington, such a
program was adopted, to which, before the conferences
were over, all duly and amicably agreed to adhere. Some
of the more restless spirits among the leaders of the
Talented Tenth soon, however, broke their pledges, repu-
24


--- PAGE 57 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
diated the whole arrangement, and started in as before to
denounce Mr. Washington and those who thought and
acted with him.
After the Atlanta speech Mr. Washington's task was a
dual one. While the active head of his great and rapidly
growing institution, he was also the generally accepted
leader of his race. It is with his leadership of his race
that we are concerned in this chapter. His duties in this
capacity were vast and ill defined, and his responsibility
exceedingly heavy. He said, himself, that when he
first came to be talked of as the leader of his race he was
somewhat at a loss to know what was expected of him
in that capacity. His tasks in this direction, however,
werethrust upon him so thick and fast that he had not long
to remain in this state of mind. After the Atlanta speech
he was in almost daily contact with what was befalling his
people in all parts of the country and to some extent all
over the world. Through his press clipping service, sup-
plemented by myriads of letters and personal reports,
practically every event of any significance to his race came
to his notice. Wliqn he heard of rioting, lynching, or
serious trouble in any community he sent a message of
advice, encouragement, or warning to the leading Negroes
of the locality and sometimes to the whites whomhe knew
to be interested in the welfare of the Negroes. When the
trouble was sufficiently serious to warrant it he went in
person to the scene. When he heard of a Negro winning a
prize at a county fair, or being placed in some position of
unusual trust and distinction, he wrote him a letter ofcon-
25


--- PAGE 58 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
gratulation and learned the circumstances so that he might
cite the incident by way of encouragement to others.
After the riots in Atlanta, Georgia, some years ago, when
infuriated white mobs foiled in their efforts to lynch a
Negro murderer, burned, killed, and laid waste right and
left in the Negrosection ofthe town, Mr. Washington, who
was in theNorth at the time, boarded the first train for the
city, arrivedjust after the bloody scenes, gathered together
his frightened people amid the smoking ruins of their
homes, soothed, calmed, and cheered them. Hethen went
to the leading city officials, secured from them a promise of
succor for the stricken people and protection against
further attack. Next he went to the Governor of the
State, secured his sympathy and cooperation, and with
him organized a conference of leading State and city
officials and other representative men who there and then
mapped out a program tending to prevent the recurrence
ofsuch race riots a program which up to the present time
has successfully fulfilled its purpose. It is characteristic
of Mr. Washington's methods that he turned this disaster
into an ultimate blessing for the very community that was
afflicted. <
Mr. Washington was the kind of leader who kept very
close to the plain people. He knew their every-day lives,
their weaknesses, their temptations. To use a slang
phrase, he knew exactly what they "were up against
"
whether they lived in country or city. Within a com*
paratively short period before his death he addressed two
audiences as widely separated by distance and environ-*
z6


--- PAGE 59 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
ment as the farmers gathered together for the first Negro
Fair of southwestern Georgia at Albany, Georgia, and five
thousand Negro residents of New York City assembled
in the Harlem Casino. He told those Georgia farmers
how much land they owned and to what extent it was
mortgaged, how much land they leased, how much cotton
they raised, and how much of other crops they raised, or,
rather, did not raise; how many mules and hogs they
owned, and how they could with profit increase their
ownership in mules and hogs; he told them how many
drug stores, grocery stores, and banks in the State and
county were owned by Negroes; and then, switching from
the general to the particular, he described the daily life of
the ordinary, easy-going tenant farmer ofthe locality. He
pictured what he saw when he came out of his unpainted
house in the morning: that gate off the hinges, that
broken window-pane with an old coat stuck into it, that
cotton planted right up to the doors with no room left for a
garden, and no garden; and, worse than all, the uncomfort-
able knowledge of debts concealed from the hard-working
wife and mother. Thenhe pictured whatthat sameman's
place might be and should become.
It was once said of a certain eminent preacher that his
logic was on fire. It might be said of Booker Washington
that his statistics were on fire. He marshalled them in
such a way that they were dynamic and stirring instead of
static and paralyzing, as we all know them to our sorrow,
It so happened that Mr. Washingtonhadnever before been
in southwestern Georgia. After his speech one old farmer
27


--- PAGE 60 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
was heard to say as he shook his head: "I don't understan*
it! Booker T. Washington he ain't never ben here befo'?
yit he knows mo''bout dese parts an' mo''bout us denwhat
eny of us knows ourselves/' This old man did not know
that one of Mr. Washington's most painstaking and
efficient assistants, Mr. Monroe N. Work, the editor ofthe
Negro Year Book, devoted much of his time to keeping his
chief provided with this startlingly accurate information
about his people in every section of the United States.
On this occasion there were on the platform with Mr.
Washington and the officials of the fair the Mayor of
Albany and members of the City Council, while in the
audience were several hundred whites on one side of the
centre aisle and twice as many blacks on the other. And
Mr. Washington would alternately address himself to his
white and black audience. Hewould, for instance, turn to
the white men and tell them that he had never known a
particularly successful black man who could not trace his
original success to the aid or encouragement he had re-
ceived in one form or another from a white friend. He
would tell them that withouttheir assistance his race could
never have mademoreprogress in the last fifty years in this
country than anysimilar group ofpeople had ever madein
a like period of time. After he had raised the white
section of his audience to a high degree of self-congratula-
tory complaisance he would suddenly shift the tenor ofhis
remarks and ask them why they should mar this splendid
record by discriminating against the weaker race in mat-
ters of education, by destroying their confidence in the
28


--- PAGE 61 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
justice of the courts through mob violence, and by the
numerous small, mean ways in which race prejudice shows
itself and retards and discourages the upward struggle of a
weaker people. As he proceeded along these lines one
could see the self-congratulatory expression fade from the
faces of his white listeners.
He would next turn to his own people and tell them of
their phenomenal progress since emancipation and of the
great and essential part they had played in the upbuilding
ofthe South left prostrate bythe Civil War. One could
see their eager, upturned faces glow with pride and self-
satisfaction. But suddenly he would shift the tone of his
comments and tell them howsadly those ofthemwhowere
indolent and shiftless and unreliable and vicious were re-
tarding the upward struggles of the industrious and self-
respecting majority and how they were perpetuating the
prejudice against the whole race. And as he pictured this
seamy side of the situation one could see the glow of pride
gradually wilt from the myriads of swarthy upturned
faces.
Hardly less successful than his use of statistics was his
use of the much-abused funny story. He never told a
story, however good, for its own sake. He told it only
when it would most effectively drive home whatever point
he happened to be making. In this same speech he was
saying that a Negro who is lazy and unreliable and does
nothing to accumulate property or improve his earning
capacity deserves no consideration from whites or blacks
and has no right to say that the color line is drawn against
29


--- PAGE 62 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
him. Byway of Illustration he told this story:
"Ashift-
less Southern poor white asked a self-respecting old black
man for three cents with which to pay his ferry fare across
a river. The old black man replied: Tssorry not to com-
merdate yer, boss, but der fac* is dat a manwhat ain't got
three cents is jest as bad offon one side ob der ribber as der
udder.
5 "
At another point in this speech he was telling his people
not to be discouraged because their race has less to point to
than other races in the wayofpast achievements. Hesaid
that after all it was the future that was ofvital concern and
not the past, and that the future was theirs to a peculiar
degree because they were a young race. And to illustrate
their situation he told of meeting old Aunt Caroline one
eveningstriding alongwith a basket on her head. Hesaid,
"Where are you going, Aunt Caroline?" And she re-
plied: "Lor
5
bless yer, MisterWashington, I dun bin where
I's er goinV* "And so/' he concluded, "some of the
races of the earth have dun bin where dey was er goinM"
but fortunately the Negro race was not among them,
In making the point that, in spite of race prejudice, the
handicaps to which his people were subjected in the South
were after all superficial and did not interfere with their
chance to work and earn a living, he told the experience of
an old Negro who was accompanying him on one of his
Southern educational tours. At a certain city they were
obliged to wait several hours between trains, so this old
man took advantage ofthe opportunity to stroll about and
see the sights of the place. After a while he pulled out his
3o


--- PAGE 63 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
watch and found he had barely time to get back to the
station before the train was due to leave. Accordingly he
rushed to a hack stand and called out to the first driver he
came to, who happened to be a white man: "Hurry up an'
take me to the station, I's gotta get the 4:32 train!" To
which the white hack driver replied: "I ain't never drove
a nigger in my hack yit an' I ain't goin' ter begin now,
You can git a nigger driver ter take ye down!
5'
To this the old colored man replied with perfect good
nature: "All right, myfrien', we won't have no misunder-
standing or trouble; I'll tell you how we'll settle it: you
jest hop in on der back seat an' do der ridin' and I'll set in
front an' do der drivin'." In this way they reached the
station amicably and the old man caught his train. Like
this old Negro, Mr. Washington always devoted his
energies to catching the train, and it made little difference
to him whether he sat on the front or the back seat.
A few months later, to the five thousand people of his
own race in the Harlem Casino in New York City, he de-
scribed their daily lives, their problems, perplexities, and
temptations in terms as homely, as picturesque, and as
vivid as he used in talking to the Georgia farmers. He
urged them, just as he did the farmers, to stop moving
about and to settle down "to stop staying here and there
and everywhere and begin to liw somewhere." He urged
them to leave the little mechanical job ofwindowwashing,
or what not, and go into business for themselves, even if
they could only afford a fewnewspapers or peanutsto start
with. Hetold of a certain NewYork street where he had
3*


--- PAGE 64 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
found all the people on one side of a row ofpush carts were
selling something, while all the people on the other side
were buying something. Those that were selling were
white people, while those that were buying were colored
people. That, he said, was a color line they had drawn
themselves. He reminded them of the high cost of living,
and by way of example he commented upon the expense
of having to buy so many shoes. He said: "Up here you
not only have to have good, expensive shoes, but you have
to wear them all the time." And then he reminded them
how back in the country down South, before they came to
the city, they would buy a pair of shoes at Christmas and
after Christmas put them awayin the "chist" and not take
them out again until "big meeting day," and then wear
themonly in the meeting and not walking to and from the
church. And as he concluded with the words, "Under
those conditions shoes last a long time," people all over the
audience were chuckling and nudging and winking at one
another as people will whencharacteristic incidents in their
past lives are graphically recalled to them.
Then he described the almost innumerable temptations
to spend money which the city offers. Some of the store
windows are so enticing that, as he said, "the dollars al-
most jump out of your pockets as you go by on the side-
walk." "Then you menworking for rich men here in the
city smell the smoke of so many twenty-five-cent cigars
that after a while you feel as though you must smoke
twenty-five-cent cigars. You don't stop to think that
when the grandfathers of those very men first came from


--- PAGE 65 ---



--- PAGE 66 ---



--- PAGE 67 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
the country a hundred years ago they smoked two-for-five
cigars." Then he told of a family he had found living on
the tenth story of an electric-lighted, steam-heated apart-
ment housewith elevator service, and this very family only
two years before was living in a two-room cabin in the
Yazoo Valley on the Mississippi bottoms. And he com-
mented: "Now, that family's in danger. No people can
change as much and as fast as thatwithout great dangerI'
9
Next he touched on the high rents and said: "You
mothers know that sooner or later you have to take in
roomers to help paythat rent, and after awhile youtake in
Tom, Dick, or Harry, or anybodywho's got the money re-
gardless of who or what they are, and you mothers know
the danger that spells for your daughters." (At this point
he was interrupted by a chorus of "amens" from women
all over the great hall.) He continued: "Now, you take
the 'old man
5
aside an* tell him straight, you're not going
to have any more roomers hanging round your house
that he's got to hustle for a better job or go into some little
business for himself, or move out into somelittle cottage in
the country, or do somethingto get rid ofthose Tom, Dick,
and Harry roomers/'
In short, in this speech Mr, Washington showed that fee
knewjust as intimately the lives ofhis people in the flat* of
Greater New York as on the farms of southwestern
Georgia.
In spite of his grasp of details Mr. Washington never
became so immersed in them as to lose sight ofhis ultimate
goal, and conversely he never became so blinded by the
33


--- PAGE 68 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
vision of his ultimate goal as to overlook details. The
solution ofthe so-called Negro problem in America, he felt,
is to be found along these lines: As his people have more
and more opportunity for training and become better and
better trained they become more and more self-sufficient.
They are developing their own carpenters, masons, black-
smiths, farmers, merchants, and bankers as well as law-
yers, teachers, preachers, arid physicians. These trained
people naturally, for the most part, serve their own race,
and to them the members of the race naturally turn for
the service that each is equipped to render. As they
acquire wealth, education, and cultivation, the persons
possessing these advantages naturally intermingle socially
and build up a society from which the rough, ignorant, and
uncouthof their own race are as inevitably excluded as are
such persons from all polite social intercourse of whatever
people. These Negroes of education and cultivation no
more desire to force themselves into the society of the
other race than do any persons of real education and
cultivation desire to go where they are not wanted. As
the race increases in wealth and culture it becomes more
and more easy and natural for its successful members to
satisfy their social desires and ambitions in their own
.society* Already in the centres of Negro prosperity and
culture it would be almost, if not quite, as impossible for
a white man to be received into the best Negro society as
it would for a Negro to be received into the best white
society. This growing independence and self-sufficiency
in the trades, the professions, and social intercourse leads
34


--- PAGE 69 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
inevitably, as he pointed out, to a form ofnatural segrega-
tion based upon economic needs and social preferences,
and in conformity to the laws of nature, which is a very
different matter from the artificial and arbitrary segrega-
tion forced upon unwilling people by the laws of men.
Under these conditions the disputes as to whether the
best society ofthe blacks is inferior or superior to the best
society of the whites becomes as academic and futile as
would be similar contentions as to whether the best society
of Constantinople is inferior or superior to that of Boston.
While Negroes are more and more drawing apart from
the whites into their own section of the city, town, or
county they nevertheless find it a source ofstrength to live
near the whites in order that they may have the benefit of
their aid in those matters in which the older and stronger
race excels. Nor is this an entirely one-sided advantage,
as there are not a few matters in which the Negroes have
natural advantages over the whites and hence may render
them useful service. Thus the two races, socially sep-
arated but economically interdependent, may to mutual
advantage live side by side.
Some persons claim that any such plan of race adjust-
ment, while theoretically plausible and ideally desirable, is
nevertheless practically impossible. They contend that
no so radically different races have ever lived side by side
in harmonyand each aidingthe other. Howeverthat may
be, there remains the fact that such a harmonious and
mutually helpful relationship between the two races does
already exist in the town of Tuskegee, throughout Macon
35


--- PAGE 70 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
County, and in many other of the more progressive lo-
calities throughout the South to-day. And at the same
time, the lynchings and riots and other manifestations of
racial conflict are continuously if slowly growing less fre-
quent. Whatever maybe the relative strength of the two
theories, the facts are lining up in support of the Booker
Washington prophecy at the Atlanta Exposition when he
said: "In all things that are purely social we can be as
separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things
essential to mutual progress."
During the last twenty years ofhis life Mr. Washington
came more and more to be regarded as the representative
and spokesman of his race, and was invited to represent
and speak for them at such national and international
gatherings as the annual conventions of the National
Negro Business League, ofwhich he was the president and
founder; the great meeting in honor of the brotherhood of
man, held in Boston in 1897; the Presbyterian rally for
Home Missions, at which President Grover Cleveland
presided; the International Sunday-school Convention
held in Chicago in 1914; the meeting of the National
Educational Association in St. Louis in 1904; the Thanks-
giving PeaceJubilee in the ChicagoAuditorium atthe close
ofthewarwith Spainin 1898,with President McKinley and
his Cabinet in attendance; the Commencement exercises
at Harvard in 1896, when President Eliot conferred upon
him the degree of Master of Arts; the International Con-
ference on theNegro, held at Tuskegee in 1912, with repre-
sentatives present from Europe, Africa, the West Indies,
36


--- PAGE 71 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
and South America, as well as all sections of the United
States. Dartmouth College conferred his Doctorate upon
him in 1901.
At Harvard in 1896 President Eliot, with these words,
conferred upon Mr. Washington the first honorary degree
ever conferred by a great university upon an American
Negro: "Teacher, wise helper of his race; good servant of
God and country/' In his speech delivered at theAlumni
Dinner on the same day Mr. Washington brought this
message to Harvard: "If through me, an humble repre-
sentative, seven millions of my people in the South might
be permitted to send a message to Harvard Harvard that
offered up on death's altar young Shaw, and Russell, and
Lowell, and scores ofothers, that wemight have a free and
united country that message would be: 'Tell themthat
the sacrifice was not in vain. Tell them that by the way
ofthe shop, the field, the skilled hand, habits of thrift and
economy, by way of industrial school and college, we are
coming. We are crawling up, working up, yea, bursting
up. Often through oppression, unjust discrimination, and
prejudice, but through them all we are coming up, and
with proper habits, intelligence, and property, there is no
power on earth that can permanently stay our progress
!
' "
The next year at the great meeting in honor of the
brotherhood ofmanheld in MusicHall, Boston, which con-
cluded with the unveiling of the monument of Robert
Gould Shaw, Booker Washington in concluding his ad-
dress turned to the one-armed color bearer of Colonel
Shaw's regiment and said: "To you, to the scarred and
37


--- PAGE 72 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
scattered remnants of the Fifty-fourth, who with empty
sleeve and wanting leg have honored this occasion with
your presence to you, your commander is not dead.
Though Boston erected no monument, and history re-
corded no story, in you and the loyal racewhich you repre-
sent Robert Gould Shaw will have a monument which
time cannot wear away."
In his speech at the Peace Jubilee exercises after the war
with Spain, Mr. Washington said: "Whenyou have gotten
the full story of the heroic conduct of the Negro in the
Spanish-American War heard it fromthe lips ofNorthern
soldiers and Southern soldiers, from ex-abolitionist and ex-
master then decide within yourselves whether a race that
is thus willing to die for its country should not be given the
highest opportunity to live for its country." And again in
the samespeech, after rehearsing the successes ofAmerican
arms, he said: "We have succeeded in every conflict, ex-
cept the effort to conquer ourselves in the blotting out of
racial prejudices.
. . . Until we thus conquer our-
selves, I make no empty statement when I say that we
shall have, especially in the Southern part ofour country, a
cancer gnawing at the heart of the Republic that shall one
day prove as dangerous as an attack from an armywithout
or within/* Note this as the language of a man on a great
national occasion who has been accused of a time-serving
acquiescence in the injustices which his race suffers!
In his address before the National Educational Associa-
tion in St. Louis, in 1904, he made the following remarks
which are typical of points he sought to emphasize when
38


--- PAGE 73 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
addressing audiences of white people: "Let me free your
minds, if I can, from possible fear and apprehension in two
directions: the Negro in this country does not seek, as a
race, to exercise political supremacy over the white man,
nor is social intermingling with any race considered by the
Negro to be one of the essentials to his progress. You
may not know it, but my people are as proud of their
racial identity as you are of yours, and in the degree that
they become intelligent, racial pride increases. I was
never prouder ofthe fact that I amclassed as a Negrothan
I am to-day. ... I can point you to groups of my
people in nearly every part of our country that in intelli-
gence and high and unselfish purpose of their school and
church life, and in the purity and sweetness of their home
life and social intercourse, will compare favorably with the
races ofthe earth. Youcan never lift any large section of
people by continually calling attention to their weak
points. A race, like a child in school, needs encourage-
ment as well as chastisement/*
In his address before the annual session of 1914 of the
National Negro Business League at Muskogee, Oklahoma,
Mr. Washington made the following remarks which are
typical ofhis points ofchiefemphasis in addressing his own
people: "Let your success thoroughly eclipse your short-
comings. Wemustgivetheworld so muchtothinkandtalk
about that relates to our constructive work in the direction
ofprogress that peoplewill forget and overlookour failures
andshortcomings.
. . . Onebig, definite fact inthe di-
rection of achievement and construction will go farther in
39


--- PAGE 74 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
securing rights and removing prejudice than many printed
pages of defense and explanation.
. . . Let us in the
future spend less time talking about the part of the city
that we cannot live in, and more time in making that
part of the city that we can live in beautiful and attrac-
tive.
It is characteristic of the kind of criticism to which Mr.
Washington was subjected that a certain element of the
Negro press violently denounced this comment as an in-
direct endorsement of the legal segregation of Negroes.
Probably the last article written by Mr. Washington for
any publication was the one published posthumously by
the New Republic, NewYork City, December 4, 1915, en-
titled, "My View of Segregation Laws/' in which he
stated in no uncertain terms his views on the segregation
laws whichwere beingpassed in the South. In concluding
his article, he said:
"Summarizingthe matter in the large, segregation is ill-
advised because:
1. It is unjust.
2. It invites other unjust measures.
3. Itwill not be productive ofgood, because practically
every thoughtful Negro resents its injustice and doubts its
sincerity. Any race adjustment based on injustice finally
defeats itself. The Civil War is the best illustration of
what results where it is attempted to make wrong right or
seem to be right,
4. It is unnecessary.
5. It is inconsistent. TheNegro is segregated from his


--- PAGE 75 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
white neighbor, but white business men are not prevented
from doing business in Negro neighborhoods,
6. There has been no case of segregation ofNegroes in
the United States that has not widened the breach between
the two races. Wherever a form of segregation exists it
will be found that it has been administered in such a wayas
to embitter the Negro and harm more or less the moral
fibre of the white man. That the Negro does not express
this constant sense of wrong is no proof that he does not
feel it.
"It seems to me that the reasons given above, if care-
fully considered, should serve to prevent further passage
of such segregation ordinances as have been adopted in
Norfolk, Richmond, Louisville, Baltimore, and one or two
cities in South Carolina.
"Finally, as I have said in another place, as white and
black learn daily to adjust, in a spirit of justice and fair
play, these interests which are individual and racial, and
to see and feel the importance of those fundamental in-
terests which are common, so will both races grow and
prosper. In the long run, no individual and no race can
succeed which sets itself at war against the common good;
for in the gain or loss of one race all the rest have equal
claim-"
In concluding his Muskogee speech he said: "If there
are those who are inclined to be discouraged concerning
racial conditions in this country we have but to turn our
minds in the direction of the deplorable conditions in
Europe, growing largely out of racial bitterness and frio
41


--- PAGE 76 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
tion. When we contrast what has taken place there with
the peaceful manner in which black people and white
people are living together in this country, notwithstanding
now and then there are evidences of injustice and friction,
which should always be condemned, we have the greatest
cause for thanksgiving. Perhaps nowhere else in the
world can be found so many white people living side by
side with so many of dark skin in so much of peace and
harmony as in the United States."
This concluding observation was particularly character-
istic of him. Somewhere, or somehow, he always turned
to account all significant events for weal or woe from the
most trivial personal happenings to the titanic world war.
Like all great leaders, BookerWashington did the bulk of
his work quietly in his own office and not on dramatic
historic occasions before great audiences. He received
every day, for instance, a huge and varied mail which re-
quired not only industry to handle, but much judgment,
patience, and tact to dispose of wisely and adequately*
We will here mention and quote from a sheaf of letters
taken at random from his files which partially illustrate the
range of his interests and the variety of the calls which
were constantly made upon him.
A railroad official in Colorado asked his opinion on the
question of separate schools for white and black children
apropos of a movement to amend the State constitution so
as to make possible such separate schools. In his reply
Mr, Washington said: "As a rule, colored people in the
Northern States are very much opposed to any plans for
42


--- PAGE 77 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
separate schools, and I think their feelings in the matter
deserve consideration. The real objection to separate
schools, from their point ofview, is that they do not like to
feel that they are compelled to go to one school rather than
the other. It seems as if it was taking away part oftheir
freedom* This feeling is likely to be all the stronger
where the matter is made a subject of public agitation.
On the other hand, my experience is that if this matter is
left to the discretion ofthe school officials it usually settles
itself. As the colored people usually live pretty closely
together, there will naturally be schools in which colored
students are in the majority. In that case, the process of
separation takes place naturally and without the necessity
of changing the constitution. If you make it a con-
stitutional question, the colored people are going to be op-
posed to it. If you leave it simply an administrative
question, which it really is, the matter will very likely set-
tle itself."
Wenext find a courteous reply to the letter of somepoor
crank who wanted to secure his backing for a preparation
which he had concocted for taking the curl out ofNegroes'
hair. Then comes a letter to a man who wants to know
whether it is true that the Negro race is dying out. To
him Mr. Washington quoted the United States census
figures for 1910, which indicate an increase of iiyV Per
cent, in the Negro population for the decade.
Next, we come upon a letter written to a man who is
interested in an effort of the Freedman's Aid Society to
raise a half a million dollars for Negro schools in the South.
43


--- PAGE 78 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Since this letter so well describes an important phase of
Booker Washington's leadership we give it almost in full
It was written in 1913 and runs thus:
"I think the most interesting work that Tuskegee has
done in recent years is its work in rural schools in the
country surrounding the Institute. During the last five
or six years forty-seven school buildings have been erected
in Macon County by colored people themselves. At the
same time the school term has been lengthened in every
part of the county from five to eight months. _This work
has been done under the direction of a supervising teacher
working in connection with the extension department of
the Institute.
"Among other things that have been attempted to en-
courage the people to improve their schools has been a
model country school started in a community called
Rising Star, a few miles from the Institute. The school at
Rising Star is an exampleofthe rural school that Tuskegee
is seeking to promote. It consists of a five-room frame
house in which the teachers a Tuskegee graduate and his
wife not only teach, but live. All the rooms are used by
the school children. In the kitchen they are taught to
cook, in the dining-room to serve a meal, in the bedroom to
makethe beds. In the gardenthey are taught howto raise
vegetables, poultry, pigs, and cows. They recite in the
sitting-room or on the veranda, and their lessons all deal
with matters of their own every-day life, . , . In-
stead of figuring how long it will take an express train to
reach the moon if it travelled at the rate of forty miles an
44


--- PAGE 79 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
hour, the pupils figure out howmuch corn can be raised on
neighbor Smith's patch of land and how much farmer
Jones
5
pig will bring when slaughtered.
"The pupils learn neatness and cleanliness by living in a
decent home during their school hours. They carry the
lesson home, and the result is seen in cleaner and better
farmhouses. Themodel school has become the pattern on
which the farmers and their wives are improving their
homes. . . .
"
Then comes a letter from a poor woman whowants him
in the course of his travels to look up her husband who
abandoned her some years before. For purposes of identi-
fication she says: "This is the hith of him 5-6 light eyes
dark hair unwave shave and a Suprano Voice his age 58
his name Steve. . . .
" Even though Mr. Washing-
ton did not agree to spend his spare time looking for a dis-
loyal husband with a soprano voice, he sent the poor
woman a kind reply and suggested some means of tracing
her recreant spouse.
We come next upon a long letter written to a man who
wishes to quote for publication in a magazine Booker
Washington's opinion on the relation between crime and
education. In the concluding paragraphs ofhis reply Mr.
Washington says: "In nine cases out of ten the crimes
which serve to unite and give an excuse for mob violence
are committed by men who are without property, without
homes, and without education except what they have
picked up in the city slums, in prisons, or on the chain
gang. The South is spending too much money in giving
45


--- PAGE 80 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
the Negro this kind of education that makes criminals and
not enough on the kind of schools that turn out farmers,
carpenters, and blacksmiths. Other things being equal,
it is true not only in America, in the South, but throughout
the world, that there is the least crime where there is the
most education. This is true of the South and of the
Negro, just the same as it is true ofevery other race. Par-
ticularly is it true that the individuals who commit crimes
of violence and crimes that are due to lack of self-control
are individuals who are, for the most part, ignorant. The
decrease in lynching in the Southern States is an index of
the steady growth of the South in wealth, in industry, in
education, and in individual liberty."
Thencomes a letter to an individual who desires to know
what proportion of the American Negroes can read and
write now, and what proportion could at the time of the
Civil War. The reply again quotes the 1910 census to the
effect that 69.5 per cent, can now read and write as com-
pared with only 3 per cent, at the close of the war. The
letter also points out that the rate of illiteracy amon^
American Negroes is now lower than the rate for all the
peoples of Russia, Portugal, Brazil, and Venezuela, and al-
most as low as that of Spain.
There follows a sheaf of correspondence in which Mr.
Washington agreed to speak at the unveiling of a tablet in
Auburn, New York, to the. memory of "Aunt Harriet"
Tubman Davis, the black woman, squat of stature and
seamed of face, who piloted three or four hundred slaves
from the land of bondage to the land of freedom. While
46


--- PAGE 81 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
there he also agreed to speak at Auburn prison in response
to the special request of some of the prisoners.
Then we find a courteous but firmly negative reply to a
long-winded bore who writes a six-page letter urging Mr.
Washington to secure the acceptance by the Negro race of
a flag which he has designed as their racial flag.
Afterthis follows a group ofletters which passed between
him and the late Edgar Gardiner Murphy, author of "The
Pres.ent South," "The Basis of Ascendency/
5
and other
important books. In one ofthese letters Mr. Washington
agrees, as requested, to read the proofs of "The Basis of
Ascendency," and in another he thus characteristically
comments upon Mr. Murphy's fears that a pessimistic
book on the status of the Negro written by a supposed
authority (a colored man) would do wide-reaching harm:
"Of course among a certain element it will have an in-
fluence for harm, but human nature, as I observe it, is so
constructed that it does not take kindly to a description of
a failure. It is hard to get up enthusiasm in connection
with a funeral procession. No man, in myopinion, could
write a history ofthe Southern Confederacy that would be
read generally because it failed. I am not saying, of
course, that the Negro race is a failure. Mr.
writes largely from that point of view, hence there is no
rallying point for the general reader."
In replyto a Western university professorwhohad asked
his opinion of amalgamation as a solution of the race
problem he wrote: "I have never looked upon amalgama-
tion as offering a solution ofthe so-called race problem, and
47


--- PAGE 82 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
I know very few Negroes who favor it or even think of it,
for that matter. What those whom I have heard discuss
the matter do object to are laws which enable the father to
escape his responsibility, or prevent him from accepting
and exercising it, when he has children by colored women.
I think this answers your question, but since there seems
to be some misunderstanding as to how colored people feel
about this subject, I might say in explanation of what I
have already said: The Negroes in America are, as you
know, a mixed race. If that is an advantagewehave it; if
it is a disadvantage, it is still ours, and for the simple reason
that the product ofeverysort ofracial mixture between the
black man and any other race is always a Negro and never
awhite man, Indian, or anyother sort ofman.
"The Negro in America is defined by the census as a
personwhois classed as such in the communityin which he
or she resides. In other words, the Negro in this country
is not so much of a particular color or particular racial
stock as one who shares a particular condition. It is the
fact that they all share in this condition which creates a
cause of common sympathy and binds the members of the
race together in spite of all differences."
To an embarrassing question put by the society editor
of some paper Mr. Washington replied by merely telling a
funny story the application of which to the impertinent
inquiry was obvious. In another letter he summed up his
opinion of the much-mooted question of the franchise in
these two sentences: "Thereis no reason whyeveryNegro
who is not fitted to vote should not be disfranchised. At
48


--- PAGE 83 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
the same time, there is nogood reasonwhyeverywhite man
whois not fitted to vote should not also be disfranchised."
From the foregoing correspondence it will be seen that
one of Booker Washington's many roles was to act as a
kind ofplenipotentiary and interpreter between his people
and the dominant race. For this part he was peculiarly
fitted by- his thorough understanding of and sympathy for
each race.
Theodore Roosevelt, immediately after taking the oath
ofoffice as President of the United States, in Buffalo after
the death of President McKinley, wrote Mr. Washington
the following note:
[Copy]
Executive Mansion
Washington
Buffalo, N. Y.y
Sept. 14, 1901.
MY DEAR MR. WASHINGTON:
I write you at once to say that to my deep regret my
visit South must now be given up.
Whenare you comingNorth? I mustsee you as soon as
possible, I want to talk over the question of possible ap-
pointments in the South exactly on the lines of our last
conversation together.
I hope that myvisit to Tuskegee is merely deferred for a
short season.
Faithfully yours,
(Signed) THEODORE ROOSEVELT,
Booker T* Washington, Esq.,
Tuskegee, Alabama.
49


--- PAGE 84 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
This deferred visit finally took place in 1905, not long
after Colonel Roosevelt's triumphant election to the
Presidency, when he came to Tuskegee accompanied by
his secretary, William Loeb, Jr.; Federal Civil Service
Commissioner, John Mcllhenny; Collector of Revenue
for the Birmingham District, J. O. Thompson; Judge
Thomas G. Jones of Montgomery, and a fellow Rough
Rider by the name of Greeneway.
In response to the above note Mr. Washington went
to the White House and discussed with the President
"possible future appointmentsin theSouth"
alongthe lines
agreed upon between them in a conference which they had
had at a time when it hadseemed possible that Mr. Roose-
velt might be given the Republican Presidential nomina-
tion of 1900, that is, while Mr. Roosevelt was Governor of
NewYork and a tentative candidate for the nomination.
Upon his return to Tuskegee after this talk with Presi-
dent Roosevelt, Mr. Washington found that the judge-
ship for the Southern District of Alabama had just be-
come vacant through the death of the incumbent, Judge
Bruce. Here was an opportunity for the President to
put into practice in striking fashion the policy they had
discussed namely, to appoint to Federal posts in the
Southern States the best men available and to reward
and recognize conspicuous merit among Southern Demo-
crats and Southern Negroes as well as among Southern
white Republicans. Being unable at the moment to
return to Washington, he sent his secretary, Emmett
J. Scott, with the following letter:
50


--- PAGE 85 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
Tuskegee? Alabama^
October 2, 1901.
President Theodore Roosevelt, Washington, D. C.
MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I send you the following
information through my secretary, Mr. Emmett J. Scott,
whomyou can trust implicitly.
Judge Bruce, the Judge of the Middle District of
Alabama, died yesterday. There is going to be a very
hard scramble for his place. I saw ex-governor T. G.
Jones yesterday, as I promised, and he is willing to accept
the judgeship of the Middle District of Alabama. I am
more convinced now than ever that he is the proper man
for the place. He has until recently been president of
the Alabama State Bar Association. He is a Gold Demo-
crat, and is a clean, pure man in every respect. He stood
up in the Constitutional Convention and elsewhere for a
fair election law, opposed lynching, and he has been out-
spoken for the education of both races. He is head and
shoulders above any ofthe other persons who I think will
apply for the position.
Yours truly,
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON.
P. S. I do not believe in all the South you could select
a better man through whomto emphasize your idea of the
character of a man to hold office than you can do through
ex-governor Tones.
[Copy]
Mr. Scott described what occurred on his delivery of
this letter in the following report to his chief:
Washington, D. C.,
October 4, 1901.
MY DEARMR* WASHINGTON: I called to see the Presi-
dent this morning. I found him all cordiality and brim-
Si


--- PAGE 86 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
mingoverwith good will for you. That pleased memuch!
He had received the telegram and had made an appoint-
ment for me. He read your letter, inquired if I knew the
contents, and then launched into a discussion of it.
Wanted to know if Governor Jones supported Bryan in
either campaign. I told himno. Hewanted to knowhow
I knew. I told him of the letter wherein he (Governor
Jones) stated to you that he was without political am-
bition because he had opposed Bryan, etc. Well, he said
he wanted to hear from you direct as to whether he had
or not, and asked me to write you to find out. I am now
awaiting that wire so as to call again on him. As soon
as I see him again I will wire you and write you as to what
he says. He is going to appoint Governor Jones. That
was made apparent. While I was waiting to see him
Senator Chandler with the Spanish Claims Commission
called. They saw him first. I heard the talk, however,
which was mostly felicitation. Incidentally, however,
Senator Chandler said that the Commission was afraid
it would lose one of its members because of the vacancy
in Alabama, referring to Hon. W. L. Chambers, who was
present and who is a member of the Commission. The
President laughed heartily. Said the Senator always
sprung recommendations unexpectedly, and so forth and
so forth. He did not inquire as to any of the others
the applicants seemed interested only to find out about
Governor Jones.
. . , There were many correspon-
dents there at the door, but I told them I was passing
through to Buffalo, but had stopped over to invite the
President to include Tuskegee in his itinerary when he
goes South again.
. . , Will write again when I see
the President again.
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) EMMETTJ. SCOTT.


--- PAGE 87 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
As soon as he had received Dr. Washington's telegram
in reply, Mr. Scott went again to the White House and
wrote thus of his second call:
[Copy]
Washington, D. C.,
October 5, 1901.
MYDEARMR.WASHINGTON: Youhavemytelegramof
to-day. I sent it as soon as I had seen the President. I
had a three-hour wait to see him and it was tiresome, but
I "camped with them/* When admitted to the general
reception room the President met me and was cordial
and asked me to wait awhile, till he could dismiss two
delegations, then he invited me into the office, or cabinet
room, and read very carefully the telegram received from
you last night Friday night. His face was a study.
He was greatly surprised to learn that the Governor
voted for Bryan, and walked about considerably. At
last he said, "Well, I guess I'll have to appoint him, but
I am awfully sorry he voted for Bryan." He then asked
mewho Dr. Crum* is and I told him that he was a clean
representative character, and that he was favorably con-
sidered by Harrison for the Charleston postmastership,
etc. He did not know him and asked me what place
was referred to. You had not discussed it with me, but
I told him you most likely referred to the place made
vacant by the death of Webster. He then called Mr.
Cortelyou, Secretary, into the office and asked him if he
knew Crum. He said he didn't but that he had heard of
*This refers to a suggestion made by Mr. Washington in his telegram recom-
mending the appointment of Dr. W. D. Crum, a colored physician, to a South
Carolina vacancy, so that the President could thereby announce at the same
time the appointment of a first-grade Southern white Democrat and a first-
class colored man.
53


--- PAGE 88 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
him and always favorably. The President then asked
Cortelyou what place a man named B. was being con-
sidered for, and he said the place made vacant by Web-
ster's death. He then turned to me and said that he
was sorry, that he would certainly have considered the
matter if he had had your word earlier. He asked me
to tell you that if you wish Dr. Crum considered for any
other place that he will be glad to have you communicate
with him. I then asked him what I should tell you in
the Governor Jones
5
matter, and he said: "Tell Mr.
Washington without using my name that party will
most likely be appointed in fact I will appoint him
only don't make it that strong by wire." So I consider
the matter closed.
The colored brethren here are scared. They don't
know what to expect, and the word has passed, they say,
that you are the "Warwick" so far as they are concerned.
I hope to find you well in Chicago.
Sincerely yours,
(Signed) EMMETT J. SCOTT.
This precedent-breaking appointment of a Southern
Democrat by a Republican President, made primarily
on the recommendation of Booker Washington and
Grover Cleveland, was acclaimed with enthusiastic
approval by all Democrats everywhere, and in fact
there was no dissenting voice except from the office-
holding Southern Republicans who naturally resented
this encroachment upon what they regarded as their
patronage^ rights. At first appreciation was almost
universal of the efforts of the Negro leader in helping a
Republican President to make this far-reaching change in
54


--- PAGE 89 ---
LEADER OF HIS RACE
the Federal officeholding traditions of the South. Soon,
however, some Southern newspapers began to question
the wisdom of allowing a Negro to have even an advisory
voice in political matters notwithstanding his advice had
in this instance been so acceptable to the South. This
criticism grewsoinsistent thatJudgeJonesfoundhimselfin
an uncomfortable position because his appointment had
beenmade,in largepart,onthe recommendationofaNegro.
He tried to soften the situation bygiving out a statement
to the effect that his endorsement by representative white
men would probably have assured his appointment even
without the assistance of Booker Washington, Later,
however, the Judge expressed to Mr. Scott privately,
after listening with deep interest to the recital of all the
incidents connected with his appointment, his apprecia-
tion ofwhat Booker Washington had done for him.
Aside from this appointment, Booker Washington had
a voice in many others, including those of Gen. R. D,
Johnson as Receiver of Public Moneys at Birmingham,
Colonel Thomas R. Roulhac as United States District
Judge, and Judge Osceola Kyle of Alabama as United
States District Attorney in the Panama Canal Zone,
During the administrations of both Presidents Roosevelt
and Taft hardly an office of consequence was conferred
upon a Negro without first consulting Mr. Washington*
He did not strive through his influence with Presidents
Roosevelt and Taft to increase the number of Negro
appointees, but rather to raise the personnel of Negro
officeholders. During the period when his advice was
55


--- PAGE 90 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
most constantly sought at the White House, Charles
W. Anderson was appointed Collector ofInternal Revenue
for the Second District of New York City; J, C. Napier
of Nashville, Tenn.? became Register of the Treasury;
William H. Lewis of Boston was appointed successively
Assistant United States District Attorney and Assistant
Attorney-General of the United States; Robert H. Terrell
was given a Municipal Judgeship ofthe District ofColum-
bia; Whitefield McKinlay was made Collector of the Port
for the Georgetown District, District of Columbia; Dr. W.
D. Crumwas appointed Collector of Customs for the Port
ofCharleston, S. C.; RalphW.Tyler, Auditorfor the Navy
Department at Washington, D. C.; JamesA. Cobb, Special
Assistant U. S. Attorney in charge of the enforcement
of the Pure Food Law for the District of Columbia, and
Charles A. Cottrell, Collector of Internal Revenue for
the District of Hawaii at Honolulu. In all these notably
excellent appointments Mr. Washington had a voice.
In 1903, in commenting on a speech of Mr. Washing-
ton's in which he had emphasized the importance of
qualityrather than quantityin Negro appointments, Presi-
dent Roosevelt wrote him as follows:
MYDEARMR.WASHINGTON: Thatis excellent; andyou
have put epigrammaticallyjust what I am doing that is,
though I have rather reduced the quantity I have done
my best to raise the quality of the Negro appointments*
With high regard.
Sincerely yours,
THEODORE ROOSEVELT.
56


--- PAGE 91 ---
CHAPTER THREE
WASHINGTON: THE EDUCATOR
THE Tuskegee Commencement exercises dramatize edu-
cation. They enable plain men and women to visual-
ize in the concrete that vague word which means so
little to them in the abstract. More properly they
dramatize the identity between real education and
actual life. On the platform before the audience is a
miniature engine to which steam has been piped, a minia-
ture frame house in course of construction, and a piece
ofbrickwall in process oferection. Ayoungmanin jump-
ers comes onto the platform, starts the engine and blows*
the whistle, whereupon young men and women come hur-
rying from all directions, and each turns to his or her ap-
pointed task. A young carpenter completes the little
house, a young mason finishes the laying of the brick wall,
a young farmer leads forth a cow and milks her in full
view of the audience, a sturdy blacksmith shoes a horse,
and after this patient, educative animal has been shod he
is turned over to a representative of the veterinary divi-
sion to have his teeth filed. At the same time on. the op-
posite side of the platform one of the girl students is hav-
ing a dress fitted by one of her classmates who is a dress-
maker. She at length walks proudly from the platform
"
'
-"
:
'
-
:
-
-
'
.
'
-
'-.
.
'
'
.
'
.'
. '57.


--- PAGE 92 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
in her completed new gown, while the young dressmaker
looks anxiously after her to make sure that it
a
hangs right
behind." Other girls are doing washing and ironing with
the drudgery removed in accordance with advanced Tus-
kegee methods. Still others are hard at work on hats,
mats, and dresses, while boys from the tailoring depart-
ment sit crosslegged working on suits and uniforms. In
the background are arranged the finest specimens which
scientific agriculture has produced on the farm and me-
chanical skill has turned out in the shops. The pumpkin,
potatoes, corn, cotton, and other agricultural products
predominate, because agriculture is the chief industry
at Tuskegee just as it is among the Negro people of the
South,
This form of commencement exercise is one of Booker
Washington's contributions to education which has been
widely copied by schools for whites as well as blacks.
That it appeals to his own people is eloquently attested by
the people themselves who come in ever-greater numbers
as the commencement days recur. At three o'clock in
the morning ofthis great day vehicles ofevery description,
each loaded to capacity with men, women, and children,
begin to roll in in an unbroken line which sometimes ex-
tends along the road for three miles. Someofthe teachers
at times objected to turning a large area of the Insti-
tute grounds into a hitching-post station for the horses
and mules of this great multitude, but to all such objec-
tions Mr. Washington replied, "This place belongs to the
people and not to us/' Less than a third of these eight
58


--- PAGE 93 ---



--- PAGE 94 ---



--- PAGE 95 ---
THE EDUCATOR
to nine thousand people are able to crowd into the chapel
to see the actual graduation exercises, but all can see the
graduation procession as it marches through the grounds
to the chapel and all are shown through the shops and over
the farm and through the special agricultural exhibits,
and even through the offices, including that of the prin-
cipal. It is significant ofthe respect in which the people
hold the Institute, and in which they held Booker Wash-
ington, that in all these years there has never been on these
occasions a single instance of drunkenness or disorderly
conduct.
In his annual report to the trustees for 1914 Mr. Wash-
ington said of these commencement exercises: "One qfthe
problems that constantly confronts us is that of making
the school of real service to these people on this one day
when they come in such large numbers. For many of
them it is the one day in the year when they go to school,
and we ought to find a way to make the day of additional
value to them. I very much hope that in the near future
we shall find it possible to erect some kind of a large pa-
vilion which shall serve the purpose of letting these thou-
sands see somethingofourexercises andbehelpedbythem/*
The philosophy symbolized by such graduation exer-
cises as we have described may best be shown by quoting
Mr. Washington's oWn words in an article entitled,
"In-
dustrial Education and the Public Schools/
5
which was
published in the Annals of the American Academy of Polit-
ical and Social Science for September of the year 1913.
In this article Mr. Washington says: **If I were asked
59


--- PAGE 96 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
what I believe to be the greatest advance which Negro
education has made since emancipation I should say that
it has been in two directions: first, the change which has
taken place among the masses of the Negro people as to
what education really is; and, second, the change that has
taken place among the masses of the white people in the
South toward Negro education itself.
>'! can perhaps make clear what I mean by a little ex-
planation: the Negro learned in slavery to work but he
did not learn to respect labor. Onthe contrary, the Negro
was constantly taught, directly and indirectly during
slavery times, that labor was a curse. It was the curse
of Canaan, he was told, that condemned the black man to
be for all time the slave and servant of the white man.
It was the curse of Canaan that made him for all time
*a hewer ofwood and drawer of water/ The consequence
of this teaching was that, when emancipation came, the
Negro thought freedom must, in some way, mean freedom
from labor.
"The Negro had also gained in slavery some general
notions in regard to education. He observed that the
people who had education for the most part belonged to
the aristocracy, to the master class, while the people who
had little or no education were usually of the class known
as 'poor whites/ In this way education became asso-
ciated in his mind with leisure, with luxury, and freedom
from the drudgery ofworkwith the hands. . . .
"In order to make it possible to put Negro education
on a sound and rational basis it has been necessary to
60


--- PAGE 97 ---
THE EDUCATOR
change the opinion of the masses of the Negro people in
regard to education and labor. It has been necessary to
make them see that education, which did not, directly or
indirectly, connect itself with the practical daily interests
of daily life could hardly be called education* It has been
necessary to make the masses of the Negroes see and
realize the necessity and importance of applying what
they learned in school to the common and ordinary things
of life; to see that education, far from being a means of
escaping labor, is a means of raising up and dignifying
labor and thus indirectly a means of raising up and dig-
nifying the common and ordinary man. It has been
necessary to teach the masses of the people that the way
to build up a race is to begin at the bottom and not at the
top, to lift the manfurthest down, and thus raise thewhole
structure of society above him. On the other hand, it
has been necessary to demonstrate to thewhite manin the
South that education does not 'spoil* the Negro, as it has
been so often predicted that it would. It was necessary
to make him actually see that education makes the
Negro not an idler or spendthrift, but a more industrious,
thrifty, law-abiding, and useful citizen than he otherwise
would be."
The commencement exercises which we have described
are oneofthenumerousmeansevolved byBookerWashing-
ton to guide the masses of his own people, as well as the
Southern whites, to a true conception of the value and
meaningofreal education for the Negro.
The correlation between the work of farm, shop, and


--- PAGE 98 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
classroom, first applied by General Armstrong at Hamp-
ton, was developed on an even larger scale byhis one-time
student, Booker Washington. The students at Tuskegee
are divided into two groups: the day students who work
in the classroom half the week and the other half on the
farm and in the shops, and the night students who work
all day on the farm or in the shops and then attend school
at night. The day school students pay a small fee in
cash toward their expenses, while the night school
students not only pay no fee but by good and diligent
work gradually accumulate a credit at the school bank
which, when it becomes sufficiently large, enables them
to become day school students. In fact, the great major*
ity of the day students have thus fought their way in
from the night school But all students of both groups
thus receive in the course of a week a fairly even balance
between theory and practice,
In a corner of each of the shops, in which are carried
on the forty or more different trades, is a blackboard on
which are worked out the actual problems which arise in
the course of the work. After school hours one always
finds in the shops a certain number of the teachers from
the Academic Department looking up problems for their
classes for the next day. Aphysics teacher maybe found
in the blacksmithing shop digging up problems about the
tractive strength of wires and the expansion and contrac-
tion of metals under heat and cold. A teacher of chem-
istry may be found in the kitchen of the cooking school
unearthing problems relating to the chemistry of food for
62


--- PAGE 99 ---



--- PAGE 100 ---



--- PAGE 101 ---
THE EDUCATOR
her class the next day. If, on the other hand, you go into
a classroom youwill find the shop is brought into the class-
room just as the classroom has been brought into the
shop. For instance, in a certain English class the topic
assigned for papers was "a model house" instead of
"bravery" or "the increase of crime in cities/' or "the
landing ofthe Pilgrims." The boys of the class had pre-
pared papers on the architecture and construction of a
model house, while the girls* papers were devoted to its
interior decoration and furnishing. One of the girls
described a meal for six which she had actually prepared
and the six had actually consumed. The meal cost
seventy-five cents. The discussion and criticism which
followed each paper had all the zest which vitally prac-
tical and near~at-hand questions always arouse.
When the Department of Superintendence of the Na-
tional EducationalAssociation metin Atlanta, Ga., in 1904,
many of the delegates, after adjournment, visited the
Tuskegee Institute. Among these delegates was Prof.
Paul Monroe of the Department of History and Princi-
ples of Education of the Teachers* College of Columbia
University. In recording his impressions of his visit,
Professor Monroe says: "My interest in Tuskegee and a
few similar institutions is founded on the fact that here I
find illustrated the two most marked tendencies which are
being formulated in the most advanced educational
thought, but are being worked out slowly and with great
difficulty. These tendencies are: first, the endeavor to
draw the subject matter of education, or the
'
stuff
9
of
63


--- PAGE 102 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
schoolroom work, directly from the life of the pupils; and
second, to relate the outcome of education to life's activi-
ties, occupations, and dutiesofthe pupil in such awaythat
the connection is made directly and immediately between
schoolroom work and the other activities of the person
being educated. This is the ideal at Tuskegee, and, to a
much greater extent than in any other institution I know
of, the practice; so that the institution is working along
not only the lines of practical endeavor, but of the most
advanced educational thought. To such an extent is this
true that Tuskegee and Hampton are of quite as great in-
terest to the student ofeducation on account of the illumi-
nation they are giving to educational theory as they are to
those interested practically in the elevation of the Negro
people and in the solution of a serious social problem.
MayI give just one illustration of a concrete nature com-
ing under myobservation while at the school, that will in-
dicate the difference between the work of the school and
that which was typical under old conditions, or is yet
typical where the newer ideas, as so well grasped by Mr,
Washington, are not accepted? In a class in English
composition two boys, among others, had placed their
written work upon the board, one having written upon
*
Honor
*
in the most stilted language, with various
historical references which meant nothing to himself or to
his classmates the whole paragraph evidently being
drawn from some outside source; the other wrote upon
*My Trade Blacksmithing
5
and told in a simple and
direct way of his day's work, the nature of the general
64


--- PAGE 103 ---
THE EDUCATOR
course of training, and the use he expected to make of his
training when completed. No better contrast could be
found between the old ideas of formal language work,
dominated by books and cast into forms not understood or
at least not natural to the youth, and the newer ideas of
simplicity, directness, and forcefulness in presenting the
account of one's own experience. Not only was this con-
trast an illustration of the ideal of the entire education
offered at Tuskegee in opposition to that ofthe old, formal,
literary
5
education as imposed upon the colored race, but
it gave in a nutshell a concept of the neweducation. This
one experience drawn from the life of the boy and related
directly to his life's duration and circumstances was educa-
tion in the truest sense; the other was not save as Mr*
Washington made it so in its failure. . * ,"
Among the delegates was also Mr. A. L. Rafter, the
Assistant Superintendent of Schools of Boston, who in
speaking at Tuskegee said: "What Tuskegee is doing for
you we are going to take on home to the North. You are
doing what we are talking about," In general, these fore-
most educational experts of the dominant race looked to
BookerWashington and Tuskegee for leadership instead of
expecting him or his school to follow them.
Booker Washington not only practised at Tuskegee this
close relation between school life and real life and it is
being continued now that he is gone but preached it
whenever and wherever opportunity offered. Some years
ago, in addressing himselfto those ofhis ownstudentswho
expected to become teachers, hesaid onthis subject among
65


--- PAGE 104 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
other things: ". . . colored parents depend upon
seeing the results ofeducation in ways not true ofthe white
parent. It is important that the colored teacher on this
account give special attention to bringing school life into
closer touch with real life. Any education is to my mind
'high' which enables the individual to do the very best
work for the people bywhomhe is surrounded. Anyedu-
cation is 'low' which does not make for character and
effective service.
"The average teacher in the public schools is very likely
to yield to the temptation of thinking that he is educating
an individual when he is teaching him to reason out ex-
amples in arithmetic, to prove propositions in geometry,
and to recite pages ofhistory. Heconceives this to be the
end of education. Herein is the sad deficiency in many
teachers who are not able to use history, arithmetic, andge-
ometry as means to an end. They get the idea that the
student who has mastered a certain number of pages in a
textbook is educated, forgetting that textbooks are at
best but tools, and in many cases ineffective tools, for the
development of man. . . .
"The average parent cannot appreciate how many ex-
amples Johnny has worked out that day, how many
questions in history he has answered; but when he says,
c
Mother, I cannot go back to that school until all the but-
tons are sewed on mycoat,' the parent will at once become
conscious ofschool influence in the home. This will be the
best kind of advertisement. The button propaganda
tends to make the teacher a power in the community, A
66


--- PAGE 105 ---
THE EDUCATOR
few lessons in applied chemistry will not be amiss. Take
grease spots, for example. The teacher whowith tact can
teach his pupils to keep even threadbare clothes neatly
brushed and free from grease spots is extending the school
influence into the home and is adding immeasurably to the
self-respect of the home/'*
Theidea that education is a matter of personal habits of
cleanliness, industry, integrity, and right conduct while of
course not original with Booker Washington was perhaps
further developed and more effectively emphasized byhim
than by any other American education. Just as Matthew
Arnold insisted that religion was a matter of conduct
rather than forms and dogmas so Booker Washington held
that education is a matter ofcharacter and not forms. He
concluded one of his Sunday night talks to his students
with these words: "I want every Tuskegee student as he
finds his place in the surging industrial life about him to
give heed to the things which are 'honest and just and
pure and of good report/ for these things make for char-
acter, which is the only thing worth fighting for. . . /'
In another of these talks he said: "A student should not
be satisfied with himself until he has growri to the point
where, when simply sweeping a room, he can go into the
corners and crevices and remove the hidden trash which,
although it should be left, would not be seen. It is not
very hard to find people who will thoroughly clean a room
which is going to be occupied, or wash a dish which is to be
*From"Puttingthe MostInto Life," by Booker T. Washington. ThomasY.
Crowell & Co., Publishers.


--- PAGE 106 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
handled by strangers; but it is hard to find a person who
will do a thing right when the eyes of the world are not
likely to look upon what has been done. The cleaning of
rooms and the washing of dishes have much to do with
forming characters/'*
This recalls Booker Washington's own experience when
as a ragged and penniless youth he applied for admission
to Hampton and was given a room to sweep by way of an
entrance examination. Indeed, one of Booker Washing-
ton's greatest sources of strength as a teacher lay in the
fact that his own life not only illustrated the truth of his
assertions, but illustrated it in a striking and dramatic
manner. His life was, in fact, an epitome ofthe hardships,
struggles, and triumphs of the successful members of his
race from the days ofslavery to the present time. Agreat
believer in the power of example he lived a life which gave
him that power in its highest degree. Because of his in-
herent modesty and good taste he never referred to him-
self or his achievements as examples to be emulated, and
this merely further enhanced their power.
In concluding another Sundaynight talk he said : "As a
race we are inclined, I fear, to maketoo much ofthe dayof
judgment. We have the idea that in some far-off period
there is goingto be a great and final dayofjudgment, when
everyindividual will be called up, and all his bad deeds will
be read out before him and all his good deeds made known.
I believe that every dayis a dayofjudgment, that wereap
*"Sowing and Reaping/' by Booker T. Washington. L. C. Page & Co,
Boston, Publishers.
68


--- PAGE 107 ---
THE EDUCATOR
our'rewards daily, and that whenever we sin we are pun-
ished by mental and physical anxiety and by a weakened
character that separates us from God. Every day is, I
take it, a dayofjudgment, and as welearn God's laws and
growinto His likeness weshall find our reward in this world
in a life of usefulness and honor. To do this is to have
found the kingdom of God, which is the kingdom of char-
acter and righteousness and peace."*
To quote once more from these Sunday night talks, in
another he said: "There is, then, opportunity for the
colored people to enrich the material life of their adopted
country by doingwhattheir hands find to do, minor duties
though they be, so well that nobody of any race can do
them better. This is the aim that the Tuskegee student
should keep steadily before him. If he remembers that
all service, however lowly, is true service, an important
step will have been taken in the solution of what we term
'the race problem/"
As is shown by these quotations Booker Washington
used these Sunday night talks to crystalize, interpret, and
summarize the meaning and significance of the kind of
educationwhich Tuskegeegives. He, thesupremehead of
the institution, reserved to himself this supremely im-
portant task. The heads of the manifold trades are
naturally and properly concerned primarily with turning
raw boys and girls into good workmen and workwomen.
The academic teachers in the school are similarly inter-
*From "Putting the Most Into Life," by Booker T. Washington. Thomas
Y. Crowell &Co., Publishers.
69


--- PAGE 108 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
ested in helping them as students to secure a mastery of
their several subjects. The military commandants are
concerned with their ability to drill, march, carry them-
selves properly, and take proper care oftheir persons and
rooms. The physician is interested in their physical
health and the chaplain in their religious training. Im-
portant as are all these phases of Tuskegee's training and
closely as he watched each Mr. Washington realized that
they might all be well done and yet Tuskegee fail in its
supreme purpose: namely, the making of manly men and
womanly women out ofraw boys and girls. As he said in
one of the passages quoted, "character is the only thing
worthfighting for." Now,while the formingofcharacter is
the aim, andin someappreciable degree the achievement, of
everyworth-while educational institution, it is to a peculiar
degree the aim and the achievement of Tuskegee. The
ten million Negroes in the United States need trained
leaders of their own race more than they need anything
else. Whatever else they should or should not have these
leaders must have character. Since Tuskegee is the
largest ofthe educational institutions for Negroes, with the
man at its head who was commonly recognized as the
leader ofleaders in his race, naturally the heaviest responsi-
bility in the training ofthese leaders fell, and will continue
to fall, upon Tuskegee. Consequently the task at Tuske-
gee is not so much to educate so manythousands ofyoung
men and women as to train as many leaders for the Negro
people as can possibly be done and done well within a
given space of time. These Tuskegee graduates lead by
70


--- PAGE 109 ---
THE EDUCATOR
the power of example and not by agitation. One runs a
farm and achieves so much more success than his neigh-
bors, through his better methods, that they gradually
adopt these methods and with his help apply them to their
own conditions. Another teaches a country school and
does it so much better than the average country school
teacher that his or her school comes to be regarded as a
model to be emulated by the other schools of the locality.
When a Tuskegee girl marries and settles in a community
she keeps her house so much cleaner and in everywaymore
attractive than the rank and file of her neighbors that
gradually her house and her methods of housekeeping be-
come the standard for the neighborhood. There is, how-
ever, nothing ofthe "holier than thou" or the complaisant
about the true Tuskegee graduate and neither is there
anything monopolistic. Theyhave had the idea ofservice
thoroughly drilled into their consciousness -the idea that
their advantages ofeducation are, as it were, a trust which
they are to administer for the benefit ofthosewhohavenot
had such advantages.
Now such leaders as these must not only be provided if
the so-called race problem is to be solved, but they must
be provided speedily. In every community in which the
black people are ignorant and vicious and without trained
leaders among themselves they are likely at any time to
come into conflict with the dominant race, and everysuch
conflict engenders bitterness on both sides and makes just
so much more difficult the final solution of the race prob-
lem. This is why Booker Washington labored so in-
7*


--- PAGE 110 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
cessantly to increase the quantity of Tuskegee's output
as well as to maintain the quality. He brought Tus-
kegee to the point where it reached through all its courses
including its summer courses, short courses, and extension
courses, more than 4,000 people in a single year, not
counting the well-nigh innumerable hosts he counseled
with on his State educational tours. In short, Booker
Washington's task at Tuskegee was not only to turn out
good leaders for his people, but to turn them out whole-
sale and as fast as possible. Hewas, as it were, running a
race with the powers ofignorance, poverty, and vice. This
in part accounted for the sense of terrific pressure which
one felt at Tuskegee, particularly whenhe was present and
personally driving forward his great educational machine.
This also may have accounted for the seeming lack
of finesse in small matters which occasionally annoyed
critical visitors who did not understand that the great in-
stitution was racing under the spur of its indomitable
master, and that just as in any race all but essentials must
be thrown aside.
Longbefore the UniversityofWisconsin had, through its
extension courses, extended its opportunities in greater or
less degree to the citizens ofthe entire State, BookerWash-
ington, through similar means, had extended the advan-
tages ofTuskegee throughout Macon County in particular
andthe State ofAlabamaandneighboring States in general
The extension work of Tuskegee began in a small way
over twenty years ago. It preceded even the work of the
demonstration agents of the United States Department


--- PAGE 111 ---
THE EDUCATOR
of Agriculture. There was first only one man who in his
spare timewent out amongthe farming people and tried to
arouse enthusiasm for better methods of farming, better
schools, and better homes. He was followed by a com-
mittee of three members of the Tuskegee faculty, which
committee still directs the work. One of the first efforts
of this committee was to get the farmers to adopt deep
plowing. There was not a two-horse plow to be found.
There was a strong prejudice against deep plowing which
was thus expressed by a Negro preacher farmer whomone
ofthe committee tried to persuade:
"Wedon't want deep
plowing. You're fixin' for us to have no soil. Ifwe plow
deep it will all wash awayand in a yearortwowewill have
to clear new ground." Not long after this a member of
the committee with a two-horse plow was practising what
he had been preaching when awhite planterwhowaspass-
ing stopped and said: "See here, its none of mybusiness
of course, but you're newhere and I don't want to see you
fail. But if you plow your land deep like that you'll ruin
it sure. I know. I've been here.'*
After a time, however, the committee persuaded a few
colored farmers to try deep plowing on a small scale as an
experiment. One ofthe first ofthese was a poor manwho
had had the hardest kind of a struggle scraping a scant
existence out of the soil for himself and his large family.
Hewas desperate and agreed to try the new method. He
got results the first year, moved on to better land and fol-
lowed instructions. In a few years he bought 500 acres of
land,gaveeach ofhis four sons 100acres, and kept 100 acres
73


--- PAGE 112 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
for himself. Since then father and sons alike have been
prosperous andcontentedand have added to their holdings.
In short, these Negro farmers were no more eager to be
reformed and improved in their methods than are any
normal people. There is a shallow popular sentiment that
unless people are eager for enlightenment and gratefully
receive what is offered them they should be left unen-
lightened. Booker Washington never shared this senti-
ment. His agent reported that in response to their appeals
for the raising of a better grade of cattle, hogs, and fowl
the farmers replied that the stock they had was good
enough. Oneoftheir favorite comments was, "Whenyou
eat an egg what difference does it make to you whether
that egg was laid by a full-blooded fowl or a mongrel?
"
Instead of being discouraged or disgusted by this attitude
on the part of the people he merely regarded it as what
was to be expected and set about devising means to over-
come it. As always he placed his chief reliance upon the
persuasive eloquence of the concrete. He decided to send
blooded stock and properly raised products around among
the farmers so that they might compare them with their
inferior stock and products and see the difference with their
own eyes. This plan was later carried out through the
Jesup Wagon contributed by the late Morris K. Jesup of
NewYork. This wagonwas a peripatetic farmers* school.
It took a concentrated essence of Tuskegees* agricultural
department to the farmers who could not or would not
come to Tuskegee.
Thewagon was drawn bya well-bred and well-fed mule.
74


--- PAGE 113 ---
THE EDUCATOR
A good breed of cow was tied behind. Several chickens
ofgoodbreeds,well-developed ears ofcorn, stalks ofcotton,
bundles of oats and seeds, and garden products, which
ought at the time to be growing in the locality, together
witha properplow, for deep plowing,were loaded uponthe
wagon. The driver would pull up before a farmhouse,
deliver his message, and point out the strong points of his
wagonload and would finally request a strip of ground for
cultivation. This request granted he would harness the
mule to the plow, break the ground deep, make his rows,
plant his seeds, and move on to the next locality. With a
carefully planned follow-up system he would return to
each such plot for cultivation and harvest, and, most im-
portant of all, to demonstrate the truths he had sought to
impress uponthepeople bywordofmouth. Wherethe first
driver sent out was a general farmer, the second would be,
let us say, a dairyman, the third a truck gardener, and
finally a poultry raiserwould go; usually a woman, since in
the South women, for the most part, handle this phase of
farming. These agents also distribute pamphletsprepared
by the Agricultural Research Department of Tuskegee on
such subjects as school gardening, twenty-one ways to
cook cowpeas, improvement of rural schools, howto fight
insect pests, cotton growing, etc. The constant emphasis
upon practice by no means entails any neglect of theory.
Besides this work there is each Januaryfor twoweeks at
Tuskegee the regular Farmers' Short Course. Many of
the country schools adjourn for this period so that both
teachers and pupils may attend. In this course not only
7S


--- PAGE 114 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
teachers and pupils, but fathers and mothers, sons and
daughters sit side by side in the classrooms receiving
instruction in stock raising, canning, poultry raising, and
farming in all its branches. There are special courses for
the women and girls in the care of children and in house-
keeping. The following breezy announcement is taken
from the prospectus of this course for the year 1914:
"Acreationofthefarmer,bythefarmers andforthefarmer"
"It meets the crying needs of thousands of our boys
and girls, fathers and mothers.
"
It'sfreeto all noexaminationnorentrancefeeisrequired.
"It started 7 years ago with n students; the second
year we had 17, the third year we had 70, the fourth year
we had 490, and last year we had nearly 2,000. It is
the only thing of its kind for the betterment ofthe colored
farmers. It lasts for only 12 days. It comes at a time
when you would be celebrating Christmas.* In previous
years the farmers havewalked from 3 to 6 miles to attend;
many have come on horseback, in wagons, and in buggies.
You who live so that you cannot come in daily can secure
board near the school for $2.50 per week. We expect
2,000 to 2,500 to enter this year/*
And then as a further stimulus to attend there comes;
"Prizes will be given asfollows:
"Aprize of$5 will be given to the personwhomakes the
greatest progress on ail subjects taught.
*There is a custom among the colored people, inherited from the days of
slavery, which is fortunately nowdrying out, to celebrate Christmas for a period
ofa week or ten days by stopping work and giving themselves over to a round
ofsprees.


--- PAGE 115 ---
THE EDUCATOR
"Aprize of $2 will be given to the person whois the best
judge of livestock.
"A prize of $i will be given to the person who shows
the best knowledge of the use and application of manures
and fertilizers. And so on through a further list of one-
dollar prizes for all the major activities ofthe Course."
It will be noted that there is nothing stilted or academic
about this announcement.
Immediately following this Farmers' Short Course
comes the Annual Farmers* Conference which holds its
session in January of each year. To enforce the lessons
in canning, stock raising, gardening, and all the other
branches of farming, exhibits of the best products in each
activity are displayed before the audience of farmers and
their families, who number in all about 2,000. These
exhibits are madeand explained bythe farmers themselves.
The man, woman, or child who has produced the exhibit
comes to the platform and explains in his or her own way
just howit was done. In these explanations much human
nature is thrown in. An amazingly energetic and capable
woman had explained at one of these gatherings how she
had paid off the mortgage on their farm by the proceeds
fromher eggs, her kitchen garden, and her preserving in her
spare momentswhenshewasnothelpingherhusband in the
cotton field, washing and dressing her six children, or cook-
ing, mending, washing, and scrubbing for the household.
In conclusion she said:
"Now my ole man he's an
5
old-fashion farmer an* he
don* kere fur dese modern notions, an* so I don't git no
77


--- PAGE 116 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
help from him, an* that makes it hard for me 'cause it
ain't natural for der woman to lead. If I could only git
him to move I'd be happier jest ter foller him." While
these explanations are going on the farmers in the audience
are naturally saying to themselves over and over again,
"I could do that!" or "Whycouldn't I do that?"
One of Mr. Washington's chief aims was to increase the
wants of his people and at the same time increase their
ability to satisfy them. In other words, he believed in
fermenting in their minds what might be termed an effec-
tive discontent with their circumstances. With this pur-
pose in viewhe addressed to themat these conferences such
questions as the following:
"What kind of house do you live in?"
"Do you own that house?"
"What kind of schoolhouse have you?"
"Doyou send your children to school regularly?"
"How many months does your school run?"
"Do you keep your teacher in the community?"
"What kind of church have you?"
"Where does your pastor live?"
"Are your church, school, and home fences white-
washed?"
The farmers who were asked these questions would
make an inward resolve that they would do what they
could to put themselves in a position to answer the same
questions more satisfactorily another year.
Another feature ofthe workofTuskegee beyond its own
borders is that ofthe Rural School Extension Department.
78


--- PAGE 117 ---
THE EDUCATOR
Mr. Julius Rosenwald of Chicago, one of the trustees of
Tuskegee, has offered, through this department, during a
stated period of time, to add $300 to every $300 the Ne-
groes in rural communities of the South raise for the
building of a new and modern schoolhouse. Under this
plan ninety-two modern rural school buildings have al-
ready been constructed. At the close of the time set Mr.
Rosenwald will probably renew his offer for a further
period. The social by-products of this campaign, in
teaching the Negroes of these communities how to dis-
regard their denominational and other feuds in working
together for a high civic purpose of common advantage to
all, and the friendly interest in Negro education awakened
amongtheir white neighbors, have been almost ifnot quite
as important as the new schools themselves.
There is also at Tuskegee a summer school for teachers
in which last year were registered 437 teachers from fifteen
Southern and several other States. Mostoftheseteachers
elect such practical subjects as canning, basket-making,
broom-making, shuck and pine needlework or some form
of manual training, as well as the teacher-training courses.
One of these students, who was the supervisor of the
Negro schools of an entire county, when she returned from
her summer school work proceeded to vivify her dead
schools by introducing the making of wash-boards, trash
baskets, baskets made of weeping-willow, and pine needle
work in its various forms. The registration soared at
once, the indifferent Negro parents became interested,
and before long the parents of white children complained
79


--- PAGE 118 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
to the county superintendent that the colored children
were being taught more than their children.
There is at the present time being developed at Tuskegee
a unique experiment in the nature ofwhat might be called
a post-graduate school in real life for the graduates of
the agricultural department. This consists in providing
such graduates, who have no property of their own, with
a forty-acre farm, on an i,8oo-acre tract about nine miles
from Tuskegee, known as Baldwin Farms, after the late
Wm. EL Baldwin, Jr., who was one of the ablest and most
devoted supporters and advisers of Booker Washington
and Tuskegee. The land is held by the Tuskegee Farm
and Improvement Company which is conducted on a
business and not a charitable basis. The company sells
the farms at an average price of$15 an acre, and purchasers
who move directly on to the land are given ten years in
which to pay for it, with the first payment at the end of
the first year. If there is no house on the land the com-
pany will put up a $300 house so planned as to permit
the addition of rooms and improvements as rapidly as the
purchaser is able to pay for them; the cost to be added
to the initial cost of the land. When the graduate lacks
the money and equipment necessary to plant, raise, and
harvest crops, for this, too, the company will advance a
reasonable sum, taking as security a mortgage on crops
and equipment until the loan has been paid off* This
mortgage bears interest at 8 per cent, while the interest
on the mortgage on the land is not more than 6 per cent.
Through cooperative effort within this colony it is pro-*
80


--- PAGE 119 ---
THE EDUCATOR
posed to develop such organizations as cooperative dairy,
fruit growing, poultry, and live-stock associations and
thus make it possible for the members of the colony to
make not only a comfortable living but to lay by some-
thing. They will, of course, have also the great advan-
tage of the advice and guidance of the experts of the
Institute. Formerly the penniless Negro youth, who
graduated even most creditably from the agricultural
department of Tuskegee, had before him nothing better
than a greater or less number of years of monotonous
drudgery as a mere farm or plantation laborer. Now, he
may at once take up his own farm at Baldwin and begin
immediately to apply all he has learned in carving out
his ownfortune and future. Thus did BookerWashington
plan to carry the benefits of classroom instruction directly
into the actual life problems of these graduates as well as
bringing the problems of actual life into the classroom.
However much Mr. Washington may have seemed
to eliminate non-essentials in the pressure and haste of
his wholesale educational task he never neglected essen-
tials, but among essentials he included matters which
might on the surface appear to be small and trifling.
For instance, he insisted upon good table manners, and
no boy or girl could spend any considerable time at
Tuskegee without acquiring such manners. Instead of
a trivial detail he regarded good table manners as an
essential to self-respect and hence to the development of
character. In short, he was engaged not so much in
Conducting a school as educating a race.
81


--- PAGE 120 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
BOOKER WASHINGTON was occasionally accused
both by agitators in his own race and by a certain
type of Northern white men who pose as the special
champions of the "downtrodden" black man as en-
couraging a policy of submission to injustice on the
part of his people. He was, for example, charged with
tame acquiescence in the practical disfranchisement of
the Negro in a number of the Southern States* As a
matter of fact, when these disfranchising measures were
under consideration and before they were enacted, he
in each case earnestly pleaded with the legislators that
whatever restrictions in the use of the ballot they put
upon the statute books should be applied with absolute
impartiality to both races. This he urged in fairness to
the white man as well as the black man.
In an article entitled, "Is the Negro Having a Fair
Chance?" published in the Century Magazine five years
ago, Booker Washington said in illustrating the evil
consequences of discrimination in the application of ballot
regulations: "In a certain county of Virginia, where
the county board had charge of registering those who
were to be voters, a colored man, a graduate of Harvard
82


--- PAGE 121 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
University, who had long been a resident of the county,
a quiet, unassuming man, went before the board to
register. He was refused on the ground that he was not
intelligent enough to vote. Before this colored man
left the room a white man came in whowas so intoxicated
that he could scarcely tell where he lived. This white
man was registered, and by a board of intelligent white
menwhohad taken an oath to deal justly in administering
the law.
"Will any one say that there is wisdom or statesman-
ship inj>uch a policy as that? In my opinion it is a fatal
mistake to teach the young black man and the young
white man that the dominance of the white race in the
South rests upon any other basis than absolute justice
to the weaker man. It is a mistake to cultivate in the
mind of any individual or group of individuals the feeling
and belief that their happiness rests upon the misery of
some one else, or that their intelligence is measured by the
ignorance ofsome one else; or their wealth by the poverty
of some one else. I do not advocate that the Negro
make politics or the holding of office an important thing
in his life. I do urge, in the interest of fair play for
everybody, that a Negro who prepares himself in prop-
erty, in intelligence, and in character to cast a ballot,
and desires to do so, should have the opportunity/*
While Booker Washington did not believe that political
activities should play an important part among the
Negroes as a whole he did believe that the exceptional
Negro who was particularly qualified for holding public
83


--- PAGE 122 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
office should be given the opportunity just as he believed
in the higher academic education for the relatively
small minority capable of profiting by such an educa-
tion.
In concluding a letter in which he asks Booker Wash-
ington to recommend a member of his race for a Federal
office in Vicksburg, Miss., President Roosevelt said;
"The question of the political importance of the colored
man is really of no consequence. I do not care to con-
sider it, and you must not consider it. Give me the very
best colored man that you know of for the place, upon
whose integrity and capacity we can surely rely.
5 '
The man, T. V. McAlister, whom Mr. Washington
"gave" the President for this office was of such character
and reputation that the white citizens of Vicksburg actu-
ally welcomed his appointment. Certainly neither Vicks-
burg nor any other portion of Mississippi can be accused
of over-enthusiasm for conferring civil and political privi-
leges upon Negroes.
Booker Washington's habit of never losing an oppor-
tunity to advance constructively the interests of his
people is well illustrated by the following letter to Presi-
dent Roosevelt:
[Personal]
March 20, 1904.
MYDEARMR. PRESIDENT: It has occurred to me that
there are a number of ways in which the colored people
of the United States could be of service in digging the
84


--- PAGE 123 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
Panama Canal, and personally I should be glad to do
anything in mypower in getting theminterested if deemed
practicable.
First: I think they can stand the climate better or as
well as any other people from the United States.
Second: I have thought that a reasonably satisfactory
number of them might be useful as common, or skilled,
laborers.
Third: That in the Health Department our well-
trained nurses and physicians might be found help-
ful
Fourth: If the United States should assume any re-
sponsibility as to education, that many efficient colored
teachers from our industrial schools, and colleges, might
prove of great benefit. And, then, besides the presence
of these educated persons would, in my opinion, both by
character and example, aid in influencing the morality
of the darker-skinned people to be employed at the Isth-
mus. I believe that these educated colored people could
get closer to the masses than white men.
Yours truly,
BOOKER T* WASHINGTON.
To President Theodore Roosevelt, Washington, D. C.
Nothing came of this suggestion except an acknowledg-
ment and an assurance that the matter would be con-
sidered. About two years ago, however, when Doctor
Washington and Surgeon-General Gorgas met on a train
the Surgeon-General said to Mr. Washington: "The
8$'


--- PAGE 124 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
biggest man at the canal was the Negro," and he added
that when they came to the dedication of the canal at
its formal opening some Negro should have a place on
the program.
In recent years a certain section of the Republicans in
the far Southern States have tried to free themselves of
the reputation of being "nigger lovers" by vying with
their Democratic rivals in seeking to deprive Negroes of
civic and political rights. Republicans of this particular
stripe are known colloquially as the "Lily Whites." In
this connection the following correspondence is of interest.
[Copy]
-
[Personal]
White House,
Washington^ March 21, 1904.
DEARMR. WASHINGTON: Bydirection ofthe President
I send you herewith for your private information a copy
of letter from the President to Mr. , dated Febru-
ary 24, 1904. Please return it to me when you have
read it.
Yours very truly,
WM. LOEB, JR.,
Secretary to the President.
Principal Booker T. Washington, Tuskegee Normal and
Industrial Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama,
86


--- PAGE 125 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
Thiswasthe letter enclosed:
[Copy]
[Personal]
White House,
Washington, February 24, 1904.
MYDEARMR. : I take it for granted that there is
no intention of making the Louisiana delegation all white*
I think it would be a mistake for my friends to take any
such attitude in any state where there is a considerable
Negro population. I think it is a great mistake from the
standpoint ofthe whites; and in an organization composed
of men whom I have especially favored it would put me
in a false light. As you know, I feel as strongly as any
one can that there must be nothing like "Negro domi-
nation." On the other hand, I feel equally strongly that
the Republicans must consistently favor those compara-
tively few colored people who by character and intelli-
gence show themselves entitled to such favor. To put a
premium upon the possession of such qualities among the
blacks is not only to benefit them, but to benefit the
whites amongwhomtheylive. I very earnestly hope that
the Louisiana Republicans whom I have so consistently
favored will not by any action of theirs tend to put me in
a false position in such a matter as this. Withyour entire
approval, I have appointed oneor twocolored menentitled
by character and standing to go to the National Con-
vention.
Sincerely yours,
THEODORE ROOSEVELT.
In the year 1898 the success ofthe suffrage amendments
in South Carolina and Mississippi in excluding from the
87


--- PAGE 126 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
franchise more than nine-tenths oftheir Negro inhabitants
inspired an agitation in Louisiana to cut off the Negro
vote by similar means, and this agitation came to a head
in the Constitutional Convention of that year. Mr.
Washington, assisted by T. Thomas Fortune, the well-
known Negro editor, and Mr. Scott, his secretary, pre-
pared an open letter addressed to this convention which
was taken to the convention by Mr. Scott and placed in
the hands of the suffrage committee as well as the editors
of the NewOrleans Times-Democrat and the Picayune, the
leading daily papers ofthe State. Extracts from the letter
were sent out by the local representative of the Associated
Press and widely published throughout the country.
These New Orleans editors expressed to Mr. Scott their
approval ofthe letter and their substantial agreement with
its main features, and promised to publish it in full, which
they not only did, but accompanied it by editorial re-
views. This letter stated in part:
"The Negro agrees with you that it is necessary to the
salvation of the South that restriction be put upon the
ballot. . . . With the sincerest sympathy with you
in your efforts to find a way out of the difficulty, I want
to suggest that no State in the South can make a law that
will provide an opportunity or temptation for an ignorant
white manto vote and withhold the sameopportunity from
an ignorant coloted man, without injuring both men*
, . .
Any law controlling the ballot, that is not abso-
lutely just and fair to both rates, will work more perma-
nent injury to the whites than to the blacks.
88


--- PAGE 127 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
"The Negro does not object to an educational or prop-
erty test, but let the law be so clear that no one clothed
with state authority will be tempted to perjure and de-
grade himselfby putting one interpretation upon it for the
white man and another for the black man. Study the
history of the South, and you will find that where there
has been the most dishonesty in the matterofvoting, there
you will find to-day the lowest moral condition of both
races. First, there was the temptation to act wrongly
with the Negro's ballot. From this it was an easy step
to dishonesty with the white man's ballot, to the carrying
ofconcealed weapons, to the murder of a Negro, and then
to the murder of a white man and then to lynching. I
entreat you not to pass such a law as will prove an eternal
millstone about the neck ofyour children."
Later in the same appeal he said: "I beg ofyou, further,
that in the degree that you close the ballot-box against the
ignorant, that you open the schoolhouse. . . * Let
the very best educational opportunities be provided for
both races: and add to this the enactment of an election
law that shall be incapable of unjust discrimination, at the
same time providing that in proportion as the ignorant
secure education, property, and character, they will be
given the right of citizenship. Any other-course will take
from one half your citizens interest in the State, and hope
and ambition to become intelligent producers and tax-
payers to become useful and virtuous citizens. Any
other course will tie the white citizens of Louisiana to a
body of death/'
89


--- PAGE 128 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
The New Orleans Times-Democrat, in its editorial ac-
companying the publication of this letter, said: "We have
seen the corrupting influence in our politics and our elec-
tions of making fraud an element of our suffrage system.
We are certainly not going to get away from fraud by
encouraging it, or making it a part of the suffrage system
we place in our new constitution." The same editorial
further states that impartiality in the use of the ballot
can be given Negro and white man not only "with the
utmost safety/' but "it would have a beneficial effect
upon the politics of the State/* In fact, the press of both
North and South, both of the whites and the blacks, pub-
lished this letter with practically unanimous editorial
endorsement, but in spite of all this the leaders of the con-
vention remained obdurate, the immediate object was
lost, and Louisiana followed the example of Mississippi
and South Carolina. No one realized, however, better
than Booker Washington that the effort was by no means
in vain. Owing to the general awakening of intelligent
public opinion the convention leaders were forced into
the position of driving through the discriminatory amend-
mentnot only in the face ofthe condemnation ofthe better
element throughout the country but even with the dis-
approval of the better and leading citizens of their own
State,
Shortly afterward members of the Georgia Legislature,
seeking political preferment for themselves through the
familiar means of anti-Negro agitation, introduced a bill
which aimed to discriminate against the Negroes of
90


--- PAGE 129 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
Georgia by legislative enactment just as the Negroes of
Louisiana had been discriminated against by a constitu-
tional amendment. This time Mr. Washington went
personally to Atlanta and appealed directly to a number
of the members of the Legislature and to the editors of
the leading papers in opposition to this bill. In an inter-
view published in the Atlanta Constitution at the time he
said:
"I cannot think that there is any large number ofwhite
people in the South who are so ignorant or so poor that
they cannot get education and property enough to enable
them to stand the test by the side of the Negro in these
respects. I do not believe that these white people* want
it continually advertised to the world that some special
law must be passed by which they will seem to be given
an unfair advantage over the Negro by reason of their
ignorance or their poverty. It is unfair to blame the
Negro for not preparing himself for citizenship by acquir-
ing intelligence, and then when he does get education and
property, to pass a law that can be so operated as to pre-
vent him from being a citizen, even though he may be a
large taxpayer. The Southern white people have reached
the point where they can afford to be just and generous;
where there will be nothing to hide and nothing to explain.
It is an easy matter, requiring little thought, generosity or
statesmanship to push a weak man down when he is
struggling to get up. Any one can do that. Greatness,
generosity, statesmanship are shown in stimulating, en-
couraging every individual in the body politic to make of
91


--- PAGE 130 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
himself the most useful, intelligent, and patriotic citizen
possible. Take from the Negro all incentive to make him-
self and his children useful property-holding citizens, and
can any one blame him for becoming a beast capable of
committing any crime?"
This time the immediate object was attained. The
Atlanta Constitution and other leading Georgia papers
indorsed Booker Washington's appeal and the Legislature
voted down its anti-Negro members. Be it said to the
credit ofthe Georgia Legislature that it has resisted several
similar attempts to discriminate against the Negro citi-
zens of the State, and it was not till 1908, ten years after
the Louisiana law was passed, that Georgia finally passed
a law disfranchising Negro voters.
Booker Washington has been accused of not protesting
against the lynching of Negroes. In the article published
in the Century Magazine in 1912, from which we have
previously quoted, he said on this subject: "When he was
Governor of Alabama, I heard Governor Jelks say in a
public speech that he knew of five cases during his admin-
istration of innocent colored people having been lynched.
If that many innocent people were known to the governor
to have been lynched, it is safe to say that there were
other innocent persons lynched whom the governor did
not know about. What is true of Alabama in this respect
is true of other states* In short, it is safe to say that a
large proportion of the colored persons lynched are inno-
cent* , . . Not a few cases have occurred where?
white people have blackened their faces and committed
92


--- PAGE 131 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
a crime, knowing that some Negro would be suspected
and mobbed for it. In other cases it is known that where
Negroes have committed crimes, innocent men have been
lynched and the guilty ones have escaped and gone on
committing more crimes.
"Within the last twelvemonthsthere have been seventy-
one cases of lynching, nearly all of colored people* Only
seventeen were charged with the crime of rape. Perhaps
they are wrong to do so, but colored people do not feel
that innocence offers them security against lynching.
They do feel, however, that the lynching habit tends to
give greater securityto the criminal, white or black/*
Mr. Washington often pointed out how the lynching
of blacks leads inevitably to the lynching of whites and
howthe lynching ofguilty persons ofeither race inevitably
leads to the lynchingofinnocent persons ofboth races.
Let it not be supposed that Booker Washington con-
fined his condemnation of lynching to the comparatively
safe cover of the pages of an eminently respectable North-
ern magazine. Someyears agowhen hewas on a speaking
trip in the State of Florida two depraved Negroes in Jack-
sonville committed an atrocious murder. The crime
aroused such intense race feeling that Mr. Washington's
friends foresaw the likelihood of a lynching and, fearing
for his safety, urged him to cancel his engagements in
Jacksonville, where he was due to speak before white as
well as black audiences within a few days. This he re-
fused to do and insisted that because there was special
racial friction it was especially necessary that he should
93


--- PAGE 132 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
keep his engagements in the city. While he was driving
to the hall where he was to address a white audience the
automobile of one of his Negro escorts was stopped by a
crowd of excited white men who angrily demanded that
Booker Washington be handed over to them. When
they found he was not in the car they allowed it to pass
on without molesting the Negro occupant, who enjoyed
to an unusual degree the confidence and respect of both
races in the city. What they would have done had they
found Booker Washington one may only conjecture. At
about the same time the Negro murderers were captured.
The howls of the infuriated mob on its way to the jail to
lynch the accused murderers could be heard in the distance
from the hall where Mr. Washington spoke. Without
referring in any way to the event which was taking place
at the time Mr. Washington, to the alarm of his friends,
launched into a fervid denunciation oflynching and ended
with an earnest and eloquent appeal for better feeling
between the races. Instead of his words breaking up the
meeting in a storm of anger and rioting, this audience
composed of Southern whites and colored people vigor-
ously applauded his sentiments. Undoubtedly they were
applauding not so much the views expressed as the cour-
age shown in expressing them at that place and under
those circumstances.
A somewhat similar experience occurred on a recent
speaking tour which he and a party were making through
the State of Louisiana. He was accompanied by a com-
pany of Negro leaders, including Major Moton of Hamp-
94


--- PAGE 133 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
ton, who has since become his successor as Principal of
Tuskegee Institute. They were in a portion of the State
notorious for its lynchings of Negroes. No one who has
ever seen Major Moton, or knows anything about him,
would think of accusing him of timidity or cowardice.
But when they went before a white audience in this par-
ticular district he urged Mr. Washington as a matter of
common prudence to "soft pedal
" what he had to say
about lynching. Just as in Jacksonville Mr. Washington
did just the opposite, and made his denunciation particu-
larly emphatic, and just as in Jacksonville there was the
same applause and apparent approval of his views.
Booker Washington also protested that in the matter of
public education his people are not given a square deal in
parts of the South, particularly in the country districts.
Hecontinually emphasized the relation between education
and crime. Other things being equal the more and the
better the education provided the less the number and
seriousness of the crimes committed. Also he pointed out
that the neglect ofNegro school facilities injures the white
citizens almost if not quite as much as the Negroes them-
selves. And conversely that good school facilities for the
colored children benefit the whites almost as much as the
Negroes. He also insisted that quite aside from all moral
and ethical considerations Negro education pays in dollars
and cents. As illustrating the relation between Negro
education and crime or rather lack ofNegro education and
crime he related this incident in an article entitled, "Black
and White in the South"
published in the Outlook ofMarch
95


--- PAGE 134 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
14, 1914: "Afew weeks ago three of the most prominent
white men in Mississippi were shot and killed by two
colored boys. Investigation brought to light that the two
boys were rough and crude, that they had never been to
school, hence that they were densely ignorant. While no
one had taught these boys the use of books, some one had
taught them, as mere children, the use of cocaine and
whiskey. In a mad fit, when their minds and bodies were
filled with cheap whiskey and cocaine, these two ignorant
boys created a 'reign of murder/ in the course of which,
three white men, four colored men, and one colored woman
met death. As soon as the shooting was over a crazed
mob shot the two boys full ofbullet-holes and then burned
their bodies in the public streets.
"Now this is the kind of thing, more or less varied in
form, that takes place too often in our country. Why?
The answer is simple: it is dense ignorance on the part of
the Negro and indifference arising out of a lack of knowl-
edge of conditions on the part of the white people."
He then pointed out that the last enumeration in
Mississippi, where this crime was committed, indicated
that 64 per cent, ofthe colored children had had no school-
ing during the past year. That in Charleston County,
South Carolina, another backward State in Negro educa-
tion, there was expended on the public education of each
white child $20*2; for the colored child 3.12; in Abbe-
ville County $11.17 for the white, 69 cents for the colored
child* This 69 cents per capita expense was incurred by
maintaining a one-room school for two and one-half
96


--- PAGE 135 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
months, with a teacher paid at the rate of $15 a month,
In another county the Negro school was in session but one
month out of the twelve. Throughout the State, outside
the cities and large towns, the school term for the colored
children is from two to four months. Thus 200,000
colored children in South Carolina are given only three or
four months ofschooling a year.
"Underthese conditions
it would require twenty-eight years for a child to complete
the eight grades of the public school. . . . But South
Carolina is by no means the only State that has these
breeding spots for ignorance, crime, and filth which the
nation will sooner or later have to reckon with/*
In the article in the Century Magazine from which
quotations have already been made Mr. Washington
cites this statement made by W. N. Sheats, former
Superintendent of Education for the State of Florida, in
explanation ofan analysis ofthe sources ofthe school fund
of the State: "A glance at the foregoing statistics in-
dicates that the section of the State designated as
'
Middle
Florida
5
is considerably behind ail the rest in all stages of
educational progress. The usual plea is that this is due
to the intolerable burden of Negro education, and a gen-
eral discouragement and inactivity is ascribed to this
cause. The following figures are given to show that the
education of the Negroes of Middle Florida does not cost
the white people of that section one cent. Without dis-
cussing the American principle that it is the duty of all
property to educate every citizen as a means of protection
to the State, and with no reference to what taxes that
97


--- PAGE 136 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
citizen maypay, it is the purpose ofthis paragraph to show
that the backwardness of education of the white people is
in no degree due to the presence ofthe Negro, but that the
presenceofthe Negrohas been actually contributing to the
sustenance ofthe white schools."
Mr. Sheats then shows that the cost ofthe Negro schools
was $19,467, while the Negroes contributed to the school
fund in direct taxes, together with their proper proportion
ofthe indirect taxes, $23,984. Heconcludes: "Ifthis is a
fair calculation the schools for the Negroes are not only.no
burden on the white citizens, but $4>525 for Negro schools
contributed from other sources was in some way diverted
to the white schools."
Mr. Charles L. Coon, Superintendent of Schools at Wil-
son, N. C., is quoted as demonstrating that had there been
expended upon the Negro schools the Negro's proportion-
ate share of the receipts from indirect taxes, as well as the
direct taxes paid by them, $18,077 more in a given year
would have been expended on colored schools in Virginia,
$26,539 more in North Carolina, and $141,682 more in
Georgia* These figures would seem to show that in these
States at least the Negro schools are not only no burden
upon the white taxpayers but that the colored people do
not get back in school facilities the equivalent of all they
themselves contribute in taxes.
In the matter of passenger transportation facilities
Booker Washington protested that injustice is done his
people by most ofthe railroads ofthe South, not in provid-
ing separate accommodations for blacks and whites, but in
98


--- PAGE 137 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
furnishing theNegroeswith inferior accommodationswhile
charging them the same rates. This injustice causes,
he believes, more resentment and bitterness among his
people than all the other injustices to which they are sub-
jected combined. The Negro or "Jim Crow" compart-
ment is usually half of the baggage car which is usually
inadequate for the traffic, badly lighted, badly ventilated,
and dirty. Thenewsdealer ofthetrain uses this coach and
increases the congestion by spreading his wares over sev-
eral seats. White menfrequently enter this compartment
to buypapers and almost alwayssmoke in it, thusrequiring
the colored women to ride in what is virtually a smoker.
Asidt from these matters the Negroes rarely have through
cars and no sleeping, parlor, or buffet cars, and frequently
no means of securing food on long journeys since many if
not most of the station restaurants refuse to serve them.
In the Century article Mr. Washington thus quoted the
experience of a sensible and conservative Negro friend of
his from Austin, Texas a man of education and good
reputation among both races in his native city: "At one
time/
7
he said, in describing some of his travelling ex-
periences, "I got off at a station almost starved. I begged
the keeperofthe restaurantto sell mealunchin apaperand
hand it out of the window. He refused, and I had to
travel a hundred miles farther before I could get a sand-
wich. At another time I went to a station to purchase my
ticket. I was there thirty minutes before the ticket office
was opened. When it did finally open I at once appeared
at the window. While the ticket agent served the white
99


--- PAGE 138 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
people at one window., I remained waiting at the other
until the train pulled out. I was compelled to jump
aboard the train without my ticket and wire back to get
my trunk expressed. Considering the temper of the
people, the separate coach law may be the wisest plan for
the South, but the statementthat the two races have equal
accommodations is all bosh. I paythe same money, but I
cannot have a chair or a lavatory, and rarely a through
can I must crawl out at all times of night, and in all
kinds of weather, in order to catch another dirty
'
Jim
Crow* coach to make my connections. I do not ask to
ride with white people. I do ask for equal accommoda-
tions for the same money."
BookerWashingtonwas ofcourseobliged totravel in the
South almost constantlyand to agreat extent at night. He
nearly always travelled on a Pullman car, and so when not
an interstate passenger usually
**
violated
5 *
the law of
whatever State he happened to be passing through. The
conductors, brakemen, and other trainmen, as a rule,
treated himwith great respect and consideration and often-
times offered him a compartment in place of'the berth
which he had purchased.
Pullman cars in the South are not as a rule opento mem-
bers of the Negro race. It is only under more or less
unusual conditions that a black man is able to secure Pull-
man accommodations. Dr. Washington, however, was
generally treated with marked consideration whenever he
applied for Pullman car reservations. Hewa$ sometimes
criticised, not onlybymembersofhis own race, but bythe
100


--- PAGE 139 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
unthinkingof the white racewhoaccused himofthus seek-
ing "social equality" with the white passengers.
The work he was compelled to do, however, in con-
stantly travelling from place to place, and dictating letters
while travelling, made it necessary that he conserve his
strength as much as possible. He never believed that he
was defying Southern traditions in seeking the comfort
essential to his work.
Upon one occasion Dr. Washington went to Houston,
Texas, and was invited by the Secretary of the Cotton
Exchange, in the name of the Exchange, to speak to the
members of the leading business organizations of Houston,
upon the floor ofthe Cotton Exchange Bank. Hewas in-
troduced by the secretary, who desired to give Dr. Wash-
ington the opportunity to put before representative
Southernwhite menthe thoughts and ideas ofa representa-
tive colored man as to how the two races might live to-
gether in the South on terms ofmutual helpfulness. Such
was the impression he made upon the whites that when
Dr. Washington's secretary applied for Pullman accom-
modations for him, returning East, theywere not only un-
grudgingly but even eagerly granted. In those days it
wasunheard offor a colored manto travel as a passenger in
a Pullman car in Texas.
The injustices mentioned and all others connected with
railway passenger service for Negroes Booker Washington
sought in characteristic fashion to mitigate by instituting,
throughthe agencyofthe NationalNegro Business League,
what are known as Railroad Days. On these days each
101


--- PAGE 140 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
year colored patrons ofrailroads lay before the responsible
officials the respects in which they believe they are un-
fairly treated and request certain definite changes. Al-
though started only a few years ago these Railroad Days
have already accomplished a numberofthe improvements
desired in various localities.
As an aid to the committees appointed in the various
communities Mr. Washington sent out a letter addressed
to these committees which was published in the Negro
papers. This letter advised that all protests on Railroad
Days give: first, "a statement of present conditions/*
second, "a statement of conditions desired." There fol-
lowed asampledetailed statement ofthe present conditions
about which there is usually cause for complaint accom-
panied by a similar statement of the conditions desired.
It was then suggested that these specific recommenda-
tions be followed by these general requests:
*c
i. The same class and quality of accommodations for
colored passengers as are provided for the most favored
class oftravellers.
"2. Such regulations as will protect colored passengers
from the rudeness and insults of employees ofthe railroad.
"3. Some definite authority to whom these matters
may be referred, where friction arises, and who will, in
good faith, investigate and adjust them/*
The letter concluded with this advice:
"All those who are going to act on the suggestions to
make a united effort to bring about better railroad and
other travelling facilities should not omit to remind our
102


--- PAGE 141 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
people that they have a duty to perform as well as the
railroads.
ft
First, our people should try to keep themselves clean
and presentable when travelling, and they should do their
duty in trying to keep waiting-rooms and railroad coaches
clean.
"Second, it should be borne in mind that little or noth-
ing will be accomplished by merely talking about white
people who are in charge of railroads, etc. The only way
to get any results is to go to the people and talk to them
and not about them."
Compare this definite, reasonable, and effective form of
protest with the bitter, vague, and futile outcry against
the "Jim Crow" car which is frequently heard.
Booker Washington sent a marked copy of the Century
Magazine containing the article, "Is the Negro Having a
Fair Chance?" to the head of every railroad in the South
calling attention to the portion relating to unfair treat-
ment in passenger service for his people. In response he
received letters which in almost every case were friendly
and in many cases showed an active desire to cooperate
in the improvement of the conditions complained of.
Mr. Washington published extracts from these letters in
the Negro press prior to his Railroad Dayproposal in order
to show that the railroad officials were for the most part
at least willing to give a respectful hearing to the com-
plaints of their Negro patrons if properly approached.
President Stevens of the Chesapeake & Ohio Railway
Companywrote that he had had one hundred copies ofthe
103


--- PAGE 142 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
article distributed among the officials and employees of
his road* Mr. J. M. Parker, Receiver and General Mana-
ger ofthe Arkansas, Louisiana &Gulf Railway Company,
wrote: "I have your favor with enclosure ... I
shall take pleasure in reading this article, and from glanc-
ing through it I am inclined to think that the statement
that the Negro is not getting a square deal in the way of
transportation facilities is well founded/' Mr. William
J. Black, Passenger of the Atchison, Topeka & Sante Fe
Railway System, wrote in part: "You will, no doubt, be
pleased to learn that the Santa Fe has already provided
equipment for colored travel in conformity with the plan
outlined in your article/* From all or most of the South-
ern railways came letters of the general tenor of those
quoted, and thus was the way prepared for the successful
inauguration ofthe Railroad Days.
Constantly as he labored for the rights of his people he
never sought to obtain for them any special privileges.
Unlike most leaders of groups, classes, or races of people
he never sought anyexclusive or special advantages for his
followers. He did not want the Negro to receive any
favors by reason ofhis race any more than he wanted him
to be discriminated against OH that account. He wanted
all human beings, Negroes amongthe rest, to receive their
deserts as individuals regardless oftheir race, color, religion,
sex, or any other consideration which has nothing to do
with the individual's merits. One of his favorite figures
was that "one cannot hold another in a ditch without
himself staying in the ditch/* There is not a single right
104


--- PAGE 143 ---
THE RIGHTS OF THE NEGRO
for which he contended for his people which if won would
not directly or indirectly benefit all other people. Were
they in all the States admitted to the franchise on equal
terms with white citizens what Mr. Washington termed
the "encouragement of vice and ignorance among white
citizens" would cease.
Were the lynching of Negroes stopped the lynching of
white men would also cease. Both the innocent black
man and the innocent white manwould feel a greater sense
ofsecurity while the guilty black man as well as the guilty
white man would be less secure. Were the Negroes given
their full share of public education the whites would gain
not only more reliable and intelligent Negro labor, but
would be largely freed so far as Negroes are concerned
from the menace of the crimes of violence which are com-
mitted almost exclusively by ignorant persons. Finally,
were Negro travellers given equal accommodations and
treatment for equal rates on all the Southern railways the
volume of Negro travel would more rapidly increase, thus
increasing the prosperity of the railways and their share-
holders which would in turn promote the prosperity of the
entire South.
True to his policy of always placing the emphasis upon
those things which are encouraging instead of upon those
things which are discouraging, Mr. Washington concluded
the already much-quoted article,
"Is the Negro Having a
Fair Chance? with these observations: "
Notwithstanding
all the defects in our systemofdealing with him, the Negro
in this country owns more property, lives in better houses,
105


--- PAGE 144 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
is in a larger measure encouraged in business, wears better
clothes, eats better food, has more schoolhouses and
churches, and more teachers and ministers, than any
similar group ofNegroes anywhere in the world."
106


--- PAGE 145 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
ALTHOUGH intensely human and consumingly Inter-
ested in humanity both in the mass and as individ-
uals, whether of his own race or any other Booker
Washington thought and acted to an uncommon degree
on the impersonal plane. This characteristic was per-
haps most strikingly illustrated in his attitude toward
race prejudice. When, many years ago, he had charge
of the Indian students at Hampton, and had occasion to
travel with them, he found they were free to occupy in the
hotels any rooms they could pay for, whereas he must
either go without or take a room in the servants* quarters.
He regarded these experiences as interesting illustrations
ofthe illogical nature ofrace prejudice. Theoccupants of
these hotels did not resent mingling with members of a
backward race whose skin happened to be red, but they
did object to mingling on the same terms with members of
another backward race whose skin happened to be black.
It apparently never entered his head to regard this dis-
crimination with bitterness or as a personal rebuff. One
could not, however, make a greater mistakethan to assume
from this impersonal attitude that he condoned race prej-
udice, or in any sense stood as an apologist for it* To
107


--- PAGE 146 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
dispel anysuch idea one has only to recall his speech at the
Peace Jubilee in Chicago after the Spanish War, from
which we have already quoted, and in which he character-
ized racial prejudice as "a cancer gnawing at the heart of
the Republic, that shall one day prove as dangerous as an
attack from an armywithout or within/*
Very early in his career Washington worked out for
himself a perfectly definite line of conduct in the matter of
social mingling with white people. In the South he scru-
pulously observed the local customs and avoided offending
the prejudices of the Southerners in so far as was possible
without unduly handicapping his work- For instance, irf
his constant travelling throughout the South he not only
violated their customs, but oftentimes their laws, in using
sleeping cars, but this he was obliged to do because he
could spare neither the time to travel by day nor the
strength and energy to sit up all night. This particular
Southern prejudice and the laws predicated upon it he was
henceforced to violate, buthe did so as a physical necessity
to theaccomplishment ofhis workand not in anysense as a
defiance of custom or law. While in the South he ob-
served Southern customs and bowedto Southernprejudices,
but he declined to be bound by such customs, laws, and
prejudices when in other parts of this country or the
world. Except in the South he allowed himselfwhatever
degree of social intercourse with the whites seemed best
calculated to accomplish his immediate object and his ulti-
mate aims. He never accepted purely social invitations
fromwhite persons. He always claimed^that hecould best
108


--- PAGE 147 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
satisfy his social desires among his own people. He be-
lieved that the question of so-called "social equality" be-
tween the races was too academic and meaningless to be
worthy ofserious discussion.
Probably he never made a more well-considered or il-
luminating statement of his personal attitude toward
social intercourse with the dominant race than in a letter
to the late Edgar Gardiner Murphy, a Southerner "of
light and leading/
7
author of "The Present South/' "The
Basis of Ascendancy/' and other notable books on the
Delations between the races. Mr. Murphy, as a South-
erner, became alarmed at the attacks upon Booker Wash-
ington by certain Southern newspapers and public men
because of his appearance at so-called social functions
in the North. Mr. Murphy, rightly regarding the reten-
tion of the favorable opinion of representative Southern
whites as essential to the success of Washington's work,
very naturally feared any course of action which seemed
to threaten the continuance of that favorable opinion.
In response to a letter in which Mr, Murphy expressed
these fears and asked for an opportunity to discuss the
situation with him Mr. Washington replied as follows:
[Personal^
MY DEAR SIR: I have received your kind letter, for
which I thank you very much. I was very much disap-
pointed that I did not have an opportunity ofmeetingyou,
as I had planned the other day, so as not to be so hurried
in talking with you as I usually am. I shall be very glad,
however, the very first time I can find another spare hour
109


--- PAGE 148 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
when in New York (Mr. Murphy was then living in New
York City) to have you talk with me fully and frankly
about the matters that are in your mind-
However we may differ in our view regarding certain
matters, there is no man in the country whose frankness,
earnestness, and sincere disinterestedness I respect more
than yours, andwhatever yousay always has great weight
with me.
Your letter emphasizes the tremendous difficulty of
the work at the South. In most cases, and in most coun-
tries where a large section of the people are down, and
are to be helped up, those attempting to do the work
have before them a straight, simple problem of elevating
the unfortunate people without the entanglement of racial
prejudice to be grappled with. I think I do not exag-
gerate when I say that perhaps a third or half of the
thought and energy of those engaged in the elevation of
the colored people is given in the direction of trying to do
the thing or not doing the thing which would enhance
racial prejudice. This feature of the situation I believe
very few people at the North or at the South appreciate.
What is true of the Negro educator is true in a smaller
degree of the white educator at the South. I am con-
stantly trying, as best I can, to study the situation as
it is right here on the ground, and I may be mistaken,
but aside from the wild and demagogical talk on the part
of a few I am unable to discover much or any change in
the attitude of the best white people toward the best
colored people. So far as my own individual experience
and observation are concerned, I am treated about the
same as I h^ve always been. I was in Athens, Georgia,
a few days ago, to deliver an address before the colored
people at the State Fair, and the meeting was attended
by the best class of whites and the best class of


--- PAGE 149 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
colored people, who seemed to be pleased over what I
said.
Mr.Blank,aSouthernCongressman,just nowis making a
good deal of noise, butyouwill recall that Mr. Blank spoke
just as bitterly against me before Mr. Roosevelt became
President as he has since. I donot want to permit myself
to be misled, butI repeat that I cannot see or feel that any
great alienation has taken place between the two classes
of people that you refer to.
For the sake ofargumentI wantto grant for the moment
a thing which I have never done before, even in a private
letter, and which is very distasteful to me, and that is,
that I am the leader of the colored people. Do you think
it will ever be possible for one man to be set up as the
leader of ten millions of people, meaning a population
nearly twice as large as that of the Dominion of Canada
and nearly equal to that of the Republic of Mexico, with-
out the actions of that individual being carefully watched
and commented upon, and what he does being exaggerated
either in one direction or the other? Again, if I am the
leader and therefore the mouthpiece for ten millions of
colored people, is it possible for such a leader to avoid
coming into contact with the representatives of the ruling
classes of white people upon many occasions; and is it
not to be expected that when questions that are racial
and national and international in their character are to
be discussed, that such a representative of the Negro
race would be sought out both by individuals and by
conventions? If, as you kindly suggest, I am the leader,
I hardly see how such notoriety and prominence as will
naturally come can be wholly or in any large degree
avoided.
Judging by some of the criticisms that have appeared
recently, mainly from the class of people to whom I have
in


--- PAGE 150 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
referred, it seems to me that some of the white people at
the South are making an attempt to control my actions
when I am in the North and in Europe. Heretofore,
no man has been more careful to regard the feelings of
the Southern people in actions and words than I have
been, and this policy I shall continue to pursue, but I
have never attempted to hide or to minimize the fact
that when I am out of the South I do not conform to
the same customs and rules that I do in the South. I
say I have not attempted to hide it because everything
that I have done in this respect was published four years
ago in my book, "Up from Slavery/' which has been
read widely throughout the South, and I did not hear a
word of adverse criticism passed upon what I had done.
For fifteen""years I have been doing at the North just
what I have been doing during the past year. I have
never attended a purely social function given by white
people anywhere in the country. Nearly every week I
receive invitations to weddings of rich people, but these
I always refuse. Mrs. Washington almost never accom-
panies me on any occasion where there can be the least
sign of purely social intercourse. Whenever I meet
white people in the North at their offices, in their parlors,
or at their dinner tables, or at banquets, it is with me
purely a matter of business, either in the interest of our
institution or in the interest of my race; no other thought
ever enters my mind. For me to say now, after fifteen
years of creating interest in my race and in this institu-
tion in that manner, that I must stop, would simply mean
that I must cease to get money in a large measure for
this institution. In meeting the people in this way I
amsimply doing what the head of practically every school,
black and white, in the South is constantly doing. For
purelysocial pleasure I have alwaysfound all myambitions
112


--- PAGE 151 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
satisfied among my own people, and you will find that In
proportion as the colored race becomes educated and
prosperous, in the same proportion is this true of all
colored people.
I said a minute ago that I had tried to be careful in
regard to the feelings of the Southern people. It has
been urged upon me time and time again to employ a
number of white teachers at this institution. I have
not done so and do not intend to do so, largely for the
reason that they would be constantly mingling with
each other at the table. For thirty years and more, in
every one of our Southern States, white and colored people
havesat downtothetablethree times a daynearlythrough-
out the year, and I have heard very little criticism passed
upon them. This kind of thing, however, at Tuskegee
I have always tried to avoid so far as our regular teaching
force is concerned. But I repeat, if I begin to yield in the
performance of my duty when out of the South in one
respect, I do not know where the end will be. It is very
difficult for you, or any other person who is not in my
place, to understand the difficulty and embarrassment
that I am confronted with. You have no idea how many
invitations of various kinds I am constantly refusing or
trying to get away from because I want to avoid em-
barrassing situations. For example, over a year ago Mr.
S invited me to go to Stockbridge, Massachusetts,
near Lenox, to deliver an address on General Armstrong's
life and work. When I reached Stockbridge an hour or
so before the time of delivering the address, I found
that Mr. S , who had invited me, had also invited
five or six other gentlemen to meet me at luncheon. The
luncheon I knew nothing about until I reached the town.
Under such circumstances I am at a loss to know how
I could have avoided accepting the invitation, A few
113


--- PAGE 152 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
days afterward I filled a long-standing Invitation to lecture
at Amherst College. I reached the town a few hours
before dinner and found that a number of people, includ-
ing several college presidents, had been invited to meet
me at dinner. Taking still another case: over a year ago
I promised a colored club in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
that I would be their guest at a banquet in October, The
banquet was held on the third of the month, and when I
reached Cambridge I found that in addition to the mem-
bers of the colored club, the Mayor of the city and a
number of Harvard professors, including President Eliot,
had been invited; and I could go on and state case after
case. Ofcourse, if I wanted to make a martyr of myself
and draw especial attention to me and to the institution,
I could easily do so by simply writing whenever I receive
an invitation to a dinner or banquet that I could not
accept on account ofthe color of myskin.
Six years ago at the Peace Jubilee in Chicago, where I
spoke at a meeting at which President McKinley was
present, I took both luncheon and dinner in the same
dining-room with President McKinley and was the guest
of the same club that he was a guest of. There were
Southern men present, and the fact that I was present
and spoke was widely heralded throughout the South, and
so far as I knownot a word ofadverse commentwas made.
For nearly fifteen years the addresses which I have been
constantly making at dinners and banquets in the North
have been published throughout the South, and no ad-
verse comment has been made regarding my presence on
these occasions.
Practically all of the invitations to functions that are
of even a semi-social character are urged upon me by
Northern people, and very often after I have refused to
accept invitations pressure is brought to bear on special
114


--- PAGE 153 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
friends of mine in order to get me to accept. Notwith-
standing all this, where I accept one invitation I refuse
ten; in fact, you have no idea how many invitations to
dinner I refuse while I am in the North. I not only do
so for the reason that I do not care to excite undue criti-
cism, but for the further reason that if I were to accept
any large proportion ofsuch invitations I would have little
time left for my legitimate work. In many cases the
invitations come from people who do not give money
but simply want to secure a notoriety or satisfy curios-
ity.
I have stated the case as I see it, and with a view of
having you think over these matters by the time that
we meet.
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON.
There were two particularly notable occasions upon
which Mr. Washington unwittingly stirred the prejudices
of the South. The first was when in 1901 he dined with
President Roosevelt and his family at the White House;
the second, when four years later he dined with Mr. John
Wanamaker and his daughter at a hotel in Saratoga,
NewYork.
The truth of his dining at the White House, of which
so many imaginary versions have been given, was this:
having received so many expressions of approval from all
sections of the country on his appointment of ex-Governor
Jones to a Federal judgeship in Alabama, which appoint-
ment was made, as described in a previous chapter, on
the recommendation of Booker Washington and Grover
Cleveland, President Roosevelt asked him to come to the
115


--- PAGE 154 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
White House and discuss with him some further appoint-
ments and other matters ofmutualinterest.
On arriving in Washington he went to the home of his
friend, Whitefield McKinlay, a colored man with whom
he usually stopped when in the Capital Thenext morn-
Ing he went to the White House by appointment for an
interview with the President; , Since they did not have
time to finish their discussion, the President, in accordance
with the course he had often followed with others under
similar circumstances, invited Washington to come to din-
ner so that they might finish their discussion in the even-
ing without loss of time.
In response to this oral invitation he went to the White
House at the appointed time, dined with the President
and his family and two other guests, and after dinner
discussed with the President chiefly the character of iii-
dividual colored office holders or applicants for office and,
as says Colonel Roosevelt, "the desirability in specific
cases, notably in all offices having to do with the adminis-
tration of justice, of getting high-minded and fearless
white men into office menwhomwe could be sure would
affirmatively protect the law-abidingNegro's right to life,
liberty, and property just exactly as they protected the
rights of law-abiding white men/' Also they discussed
the public service of the South so far as the represent-
atives of the Federal Administration were concerned the
subject uponwhich President Roosevelt hadwished to con-
sult him. The next day the bare fact that he had dined
with the President was obscurely announced by the Wash-
116


--- PAGE 155 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
ington papers as a routine item of White House news.
Some days later, however, an enterprising correspondent
for a Southern paper lifted this unpretentious item from
oblivion and sent it to his paper to be blazoned forth
in a front-page headline. For days and weeks thereafter
the Southern press fairly shrieked with the news of this
quiet dinner. The very papers which had most loudly
praised the President for his appointment of a Southern
Democrat to a Federal judgeship now execrated him for
inviting to dine with him the man upon whose recom-
mendation he had made this appointment.
Mr. Washington was also roundly abused for his "pre-
sumption" in daring to dine at the White House* This
was a little illogical in view of the well-known fact that an
invitation to the White House is a summons rather than
an invitation in the ordinary sense. Neither President
Roosevelt nor Mr. Washington issued any statements by
way of explanation or apology. While it was, of course,
farthest from the wishes ofeither to offend the sensibilities
of the South, neither one the many statements to the
contrary, notwithstanding ever indicated subsequently
any regret or admitted that the incident was a mistake.
During the furore over this incident both the President
and Mr. Washington received many threats against their
lives. The President had the Secret Service to protect
him, while Mr. Washington had no such reliance. His co-
workers surrounded him with such precautions as they
could, and his secretary accumulated during this period
enough threatening letters to fill a desk drawer. It was
117


--- PAGE 156 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
not discovered until some years after tliat one of these
threats had been followed by the visit to Tuskegee of a
hired assassin. Astrange Negro was hurt in jumping off
the train before it reached the Tuskegee Institute station.
There being no hospital for Negroes in the town of
Tuskegee he was taken to the hospital of the Institute,
where he was cared for and nursed for several weeks before
he was able to leave. Mr. Washington was absent in
the North during all of this time. Many months later
this Negro confessed that he had come to Tuskegee in
the pay of a group of white men in Louisiana for the pur-
pose of assassinating Booker Washington. He said that
he became so ashamed of himself while being cared for
by the doctors and nurses employed by the very man he
had come to murder that he left as soon as he was able to
do so instead of waiting to carry out his purpose on the
return ofhis victim, as he had originally planned to do.
Booker Washington, with all his philosophy and ca-
pacity for rising above the personal, was probably more
deeply pained by this affair than any other in his whole
career. His pain was, however, almost solely on Mr.
Roosevelt's account. He felt keenly hurt and chagrined
that Mr. Roosevelt, whom he so intensely admired, and
who was doing so much, not only for his own race but for
the whole South as he believed, should suffer all this abuse
and even vilification on his account. President Roosevelt
evidently realized something of how he felt, for in a letter
to him written at this time he added this postscript: "By
the way,don't worry aboutme; it will all comeright intime,
118


--- PAGE 157 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
and if I have helped by ever so little *the ascent of man' I
ammore than satisfied."
Probably no single public event ever gave Booker
Washington greater pleasure than Colonel Roosevelt's
triumphant election to the Presidency in 1904. The day
after the election he wrote the President the following
letter:
[Personal]
Tuskegee Institute', Alabama,
November 10, 1904.
MYDEARMR. PRESIDENT: I cannotfind words in which
to express my feeling regarding the tremendous outcome
of Tuesday's election. I know that you feel the sacred
and almost divine confidence imposed* In my opinion,
no human being in America since Washington, perhaps,
has been so honored and vindicated. The result shows
that the great heart ofthe American people beats true and
is in the direction of fair play for all, regardless of race or
color. Nothing has ever occurred which has given me
more faith in all races or shows more plainly that they
will respond to high ideals when properly appealed to.
I know that you will not misunderstand mewhen I say
I share somewhat the feeling of triumph and added re-
sponsibility that must animate your soul at the present
time because of the personal abuse heaped upon you on
account of myself. The great victory and vindication
does not make me feel boastful or vainglorious, but, on
the other hand, very humble, and gives me more faith in
humanity and makes me more determined to work harder
in the interest of all our people of both races regardless of
race or color. I shall urge our people everywhere to mani-
fest their gratitude by showing a spirit of meekness and
119


--- PAGE 158 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
added usefulness. The election shows to what a great
height you have already lifted the character of American
citizenship. Before you leave the White House I am
sure that the whole South will understand you and love
you.
Godkeep you and bless you.
Yours most sincerely,
[Signed] BOOKERT. WASHINGTON.
To President Theodore Roosevelt, White House, Washington.
President Roosevelt expressed great appreciation of
this letter and said that Mr. Washington had taken the
election in just the wayhe would have wished .him to take
it.
About two years later Mr. Washington wrote President
Roosevelt another letter which throws light upon the rela-
tions between the two men as well as upon the illogicality
ofracial prejudice:
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama,
June 19, 1906.
MYDEARMR. PRESIDENT: It will interest you to know
that the Cox family, over whom such a disturbance was
made in connection with the Indianola, Miss., post-office,
have started a bank in that same town which direct and
reliable information convinces meis in a prosperous condi-
tion. The bank has the confidence of both races. It is a
curious circumstance thatwhile objection was madeto this
black family being at the head of the post-office no objec-
tion is made to this black man being president of a bank
in the sametown.
A letter just received from a reliable banker in Miss-
issippi contains the followingsentences:
120


--- PAGE 159 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
"Now, with reference to Mr. W.W. Cox, of Indianola,
Miss., I beg to advise that no man of color is as highly
regarded and respected by the white people of his town
and county as he. It is true that he organized and is
cashier ofthe Delta Penny Savings Bank, domiciled there.
I visited Indianola during the spring of 1905 and was very
muchsurprised to note the esteem in which hewas held by
the bankers and business men (white) of that place. He
is a good, clean man and above the average in intelligence,
and knows howto handle the typical Southern white man.
In the last statement furnished by his bank to the State
Auditor, his bank showed total resources of $46,000. He
owns and lives in one of the best resident houses in In-
dianola, regardless of race, and located in a part of the
town where other colored men seem to be not desired.
The whites adjacent to him seem to be his friends. He
has a large plantation near the town, worth $35,000
or $40,000. He is a director in Mr. Pettiford's bank
at Birmingham, Ala., and I think is vice-president of
the same. He also owns stock in the bank of Mound
Bayou/*
Yoursvery truly,
[Signed] BOOKER T WASHINGTON.
To President Theodore Roosevelt, Washington, D. C
In August, 1905, Booker Washington spoke one Sunday
morning before a large audience in Saratoga Springs,
N. Y. After his address Mr. John Wanamaker and his
daughter were among those who came forward to greet
him. They also invited him to dine with them at the
United States Hotel that afternoon. Mr. Wanamaker
had been particularly interested in Booker Washington


--- PAGE 160 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
and his work for many years. Mr. Washington accepted
this invitation without the least thought of reawakening
the clamor caused by the Roosevelt dinner. The dinner
itself passed offquietly, pleasantly, and without particular
event. It was not until he took up the papers at his little
hotel in NewYorkthe next morning that he found that he
had again stirred up a hornet*s nest similar to that of four
years before. The denunciation was if anything more
violent; for, as many of his assailants said, he should have
profited by the protests of four years before. In an edi-
torial entitled,
"Booker Washington's Saratoga Perform-
ance" a Southern newspaper said: "Since the fateful day
when Booker T. Washington sat down to the dinner table
in the White Housewith President Roosevelt he has done
many things to hurt the cause of which he is regarded as
the foremost man. . . . Leaving out of the question
the lack of delicacy and self-respect manifested by Wana-
maker and his family, blame must rest upon Washington,
because he knows how deep and impassable is the gulf
between whites and blacks in the South when the social
situation is involved. He deliberately flaunts all this in
the face of the Southern people among whom he is living
and among whom his work has to be carried on. He
could have given no harder knock to his institution than
he gave when he marched into that Saratoga dinner room
with awhitewomanand herfather."
These sentiments were expressed editorially by another
Southern paper: "Wanamaker is unworthy to shine the
shoes of Booker Washington. He is not in Washington's
122


--- PAGE 161 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
class. Ifthe truly smart set ofSaratoga was shocked that
Booker should have been caught in this man's company
and as his guest we are not surprised. But still Booker
Washington could not eat dinner with the most ordinary
white man in this section. He wouldn't dare intimate
that he sought such social recognition amongwhites here";
and in conclusion this editorial said: "The South only
pities the daughter that she should have allowed herself
to be used by a father whose sensibilities and ideas of the
proprieties are so dulled by his asinine qualities that he
could not see the harm in it."
This vituperation of Mr. Wanarnaker, and the scoring
him for his part in the affair even more than Washington,
recalls an incident which Mr, Washington himself relates
in his book entitled, "My Larger Education," When he
was making a trip through Florida, a few weeks after his
dinner with President Roosevelt, at a little station near
Gainesville, "A white man got aboard the train," he
says, "whose dress and manner indicated that he was
from the class of small farmers in that part of the coun-
try. He shook hands with me very cordially, and said:
'I am mighty glad to see you. I have heard about
you and I have been wanting to meet you for a long
while/
"I was naturally pleased at this cordial reception, but
I was surprised when, after looking meover, he remarked:
*
Say, you are a great man. You are the greatest man in
this country/
**I protested mildly, but he insisted, shaking his head


--- PAGE 162 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
and repeating,
'
Yes, sir, the greatest man in this country/
Finally I asked him what he had against President Roose-
velt, telling him at the same time that, in my opinion,
the President of the United States was the greatest man
in the country.
"'Huh! Roosevelt?' he replied, with considerable em-
phasis in his voice, *I used to think that Roosevelt was a
great man until he ate dinner with you. That settled
him for me/"
Mr. Washington goes on to say: "This remark of a
Florida farmer is but one of the many experiences which
have taught me something of the curious nature of this
thing that we call prejudice social prejudice, race preju-
dice, and all the rest. I have come to the conclusion that
these prejudices are something that it does not pay to dis-
turb. It is best to 'let sleeping dogs lie/ All sections
of the United States, like all other parts of the world,
have their own peculiar customs and prejudices. For
that reason it is the part of commonsense to respect them.
When one goes to European countries, or into the Far
West, or into India or China, he meets certain customs
and certain prejudices which he is bound to respect and,
to a certain extent, comply with. The same holds good
regarding conditions in the North and in the South. In
the South it is not the custom for colored and white people
to be entertained at the same hotel; it is not the custom
for black and white children to attend the same school.
In most parts ofthe North a different custom prevails. I
haveneverstopped to question or quarrel withthe customs
124


--- PAGE 163 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
of the people in the part of the country in which I found
myself/
5
And so he acted in the case of the Wanamaker dinner.
He accepted Mr. Wanamaker's invitation because he was
in the North and his host was a Northerner. In so doing
he felt that he was not violating any generally accepted
custom or universally entertained prejudice of the part of
the country in which he found himself. Had the in-
conceivable occurred, and had a Southerner invited himto
dine in the South, under conditions in all other respects
identical, he would not have accepted. He would not
have beenwilling to incurthe resentmentofthe South even
had his host been willing to defy local prejudices by in-
viting him. On the other hand> he felt that the attitude
ofthose whowould seek to control him in matters ofsocial
custom when he was not in the South or among Southern-
ers was unfair and unreasonable.
Anincident which occurred'while he was stopping at the
English Hotel in Indianapolis in 1903 furnished copy for
the more or less sensational press of the country. This
hotel does not as a rule accept Negroes as guests, but Mr,
Washington was always a welcome visitor there just as he
was at many other hotels whpre less-favored members of
his race were excluded. Henever patronized this hotel or
anyother for the purpose of assertinghis rights, but merely
to obtain the comforts and the seclusion so essential to a
manwho always worked up to the limits of even his great
strength and usually a little beyond such limits. It is, in-
deed, quite possible that he might have lived longer had he
125


--- PAGE 164 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
been free to stop at hotels in the South instead of under-
going the constant wear and tear of being entertained in
the private homes ofthe all-too-kind hosts ofhis own race.
All public men and lecturers, in a large way of business,
learn early in their careers that they must decline practi-
cally all proffers of private hospitality if they are to pre-
serve their health.
Onthis occasion thewhite chambermaid assigned to care
for the room he occupied refused to perform her duties so
far as his roomwas concerned onthe ground, as she stated,
that she
ff
would not clean up after a nigger/* For this re-
fusal to do herwork the management discharged her. The
Springfield Republican of that date thus describes what
followed: "A hotel at Houston, Texas, immediately
offered her a place there, which she accepted, but as mat-
ters are now going she is more likely to retire from the
business as a grand lady living on an independent income.
Her name is upon all tongues in the Southland, and the
newspapers print long and complimentary accounts of her
life and the one great deed that has made her famous.
Citizens and communities vie with each other in con-
tributing money. . . . Captain John W. Johnson
of Sheffield, Ala., is organizing a general subscription
fund from that and neighboring towns. A meeting at
Houston, Texas, raised $500 for her in the name of a
*
self-
respecting girl.' The Houston Chronicle is conducting
another popular subscription. Contributions are coming
into it from all parts of Texas. Citizens of New Orleans
have raised $1,000. About twoscore Southern towns and
126


--- PAGE 165 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
a dozen cities so far figure in thecontributions. Themove-
ment extends to Indianapolis, where a gold watch has been
contributed/* The hysterical lauding of this "heroine
55
was subsequently wet blanketed by the discovery that she
had cared for Mr. Washington's room for the first day or
two of his stay without protest, and by the further dis-
covery that her second or third husband had recently ob-
tained a divorce from her.
It is only fair to add that many of the leading citizens
of the South strongly deprecated the sensational mag-
nifying of this trivial incident by a certain section of the
Southern press. Mr. Washington declined to make
any comment for publication during or after this petty
tumult.
In spite ofthe three events described, and others ofa like
nature that might be mentioned, no Negro was ever so
liked, respected, admired, and eulogized by the Southern
whites as Booker Washington. The day following his
great speech before the Cotton States Exposition in Atlanta
in 1895 when he went out upon the streets of the city he
was so besieged by white citizens from the highest to
the lowest, who wanted to shake his hand and congrat\>~
late him, that he was fairly driven in self-defense to remain
indoors. Not manyyears after that it had become a com-
monplace for him to be an honored guest on important
public occasions throughout the South. On occasions too
numerous even to note in passing he was welcomed, and
introduced to great audiences, by Southern Governors,
Mayors, and other high officials, as well as by eminent
127


--- PAGE 166 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
private citizens. Such recognition came partly as a
spontaneous tribute to the great work he was doing and
partly because of his constantly reiterated assurance that
the Negro was not seeking either political domination over
the white man or social intercourse with him. He
reasoned that the more Southern whites he could convince
that his people were not seeking what is known as social
equality or political dominance, the less race friction there
would be.
It has already been mentioned that at the opening ofthe
first Negro agricultural fair in Albany, Georgia, in the fall
of 1914, the Mayor ofthe city and several members of the
City Council sat on the platform during the exercises and
listened to his speech with most spontaneous and obvious
approval In this part of Georgia the Negroes outnum-
berthewhites by at least six to one. The afternoon ofthe
same day the Mayor invited Booker Washington and his
party to come to the city hall and confer with himself, the
other city officials, and a group of prominent private citi-
zens on the relations between the races in that city and
locality. At this conference there was a friendly, easy
interchange of ideas interspersed with jokes and laughter,
but all the time Mr. Washington was leading them step by
step to see that by giving the Negroes proper educational
opportunities they were helping themselves as well as
the Negroes. Mr. Stowe, who was
1
present at this con-
ference, noticed to his surprise that some of the arguments
advanced by Dr. Washington, which seemed to him to be
almostworn-out truisms, although freshly and strongly ex-
138


--- PAGE 167 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
pressed, were seized upon by his auditors as new and
original ideas. When he made this observation to
Mr. Washington after the meeting he said that several
other Northerners had under similar circumstances made
the same observation and then he added: "I only wish
that it were possible for meto spend several months ofeach
year talking with just such groups of representative
Southern men. They are always responsive, eager to
understand what we are driving at, and sympatheticwhen
they do understand. The necessity for raising money has
forced us to devote the bulk of our time to educating the
Northern public to the needs of the situation to the
neglect of our Southern white neighbors right here about
us."
It was an interesting illustration ofthe illogical workings
of race.prejudice that this man to whom the city fathers
from the Mayor down gave up practically their entire day
this man to whomthe city hall was thrown open and at
whose feet sat the leading citizens as well as the officials of
the city, could not have found shelter in anyhotelin town.
This man whomthe officials and other leading citizens de-
lighted to honor arrived at night on a Pullman sleeping car
in violation of the law of the State; and, after all possible
honor had been paid him, save allowing him to enter a
hotel, departed-the next night by a Pullman sleeper in
violation of the law!
This constant "law-breaker" was welcomed and in-
troduced to audiences by Governor Blanchard of Louisi-
ana at Shreveport, La.; by Governor Candler at Atlanta,
129


--- PAGE 168 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Ga.; by Governor Donaghey at Little Rock, Ark.; by
Governor McCorkle ofWest Virginia, and successively by
Governors Jelks and O'Neil of his own State of Alabama.
Still other Southern Governors spoke from the same plat-
form with him at congresses, conventions, and meetings of
various descriptions.
Nextto South Carolina and Georgia, perhaps no State in
the Union has shown as much hostility to the progress of
the Negro as Mississippi- In 1908, in response to the
urgent appeals of Charles Banks, the Negro banker and
dominating force ofthe Negro town ofMound Bayou, Mr,
Washington agreed to make a tour through Mississippi
such as he had made three years before through Arkansas
and what were then Oklahoma and Indian Territories,
At Jackson, Miss., the management ofthe State FairAsso-
ciation offered the local committee of Negroes the great
Liberal Arts Building for Mr. Washington's address. In
the audience were not less than five thousand persons,
among them several hundred white citizens. Among the
whites who sat on the platform were Governor Noel>
Lieutenant-Governor Manship, Bishop Charles B, Gal~
loway of the Methodist Episcopal Church South, Mr.
Milsaps, the richest citizen of the State; the postmaster of
Jackson, the United States Marshal, Hon. Edgar S. Wil-
son, and a considerable number of other prominent white
citizens.
At Natchez, a few nights later, the audience literally
filled every available space in the Grand Opera House and
overflowed into the adjoining streets. This audience was
130


--- PAGE 169 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
in many respects the most remarkable that the city had
ever seen. The entire orchestra was given over to the
white citizens of Natchez and Adams County, and still
there was not room to accommodate them, for they were
packed in the rear and stood three and four deep in the
aisles. The colored people were crowded into the balcony
and the galleries. When Booker Washington arose to
speak, he was greeted by a perfect whirlwind of applause
and cheering. He was visibly affected by the reception
given him by whites as well as blacks.
When he finished speaking a large delegation headed by
the Mayorofthe city madetheir wayto the platform, wel-
comed him to the city, thanked him for his address, and
stated that his influence for good in the city and county
could not be estimated.
Mr. J. T. Harahan, ofthe Illinois Central Railroad, pro-
vided the Pullman tourist car in which Mr. Washington
and his party toured the State. It was estimated that
from sixty to eighty thousand people saw and heard him
during his seven days* trip. On the conclusion ofthe tour
one paper said, "Nomore popular man ever came into the
State, white or black, and no man ever spoke to larger
audiences than he did. He is the only speaker who ever
filled the Jackson, Miss., Coliseum/*
Only six months before his death Booker Washington
made a similar tour through Louisiana. Louisiana has al-
ways been reputed to bein the samecategory as Mississippi
in opposing Negro progress. To some of his audiences
Mr. Washington said that he and his party of twenty-five


--- PAGE 170 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
colored menhad felt before theystarted very muchlike the
little girl who was about to go on a trip to Louisiana with
her parents. The night before they started she said her
prayer as usual:
"Now I lay me down to sleep
I pray the Lord my soul to keep.
If I should die before I wake,
I pray the Lord my soul to take"
With a deep sigh she then added, "Good-bye, Lord, for two
weeks. We are going down to Louisiana*"
In introducing Mr. Washington to a great audience in
NewOrleans, madeup ofboth races, MayorBerhmansaid,
turning to Booker Washington:
"The work you are doing for the uplift of your people
means untold good to the great State of Louisiana and to
the whole country. Nowhere has your race greater
opportunities than in Louisiana. If the people of the
Negro race will follow your teachings, they will help
materially to bring about a condition that will mean much
for Louisiana, the South, and the nation. "
At Shreveport former Governor N. C. Blanchard, in
introducing Dr. Washingtonto an audience of over 10,000
white and colored citizens, said: "I am glad to see this
goodly attendance of white people, representative white
people at that, for his Honor, the Mayor, Is here, and with
him are members and officials ofthe city government and
132


--- PAGE 171 ---
MEETING RACE PREJUDICE
other prominent citizens ofour community. Theyare here
to give encouragement to Mr. Washington, to hold up his
hands, for they know that he is leading his people along
right lines lines tending to promote better feeling and
better understanding between the two races. . . .
"Our country needs to have white and black people,
sober, honest, frugal, and thrifty. BookerT. Washington
stands for these things. He advises and counsels and
leads toward these goals. Hear him and heed his
words.'*
At the invitation of Superintendent Gwinn the colored
school children of New Orleans were given a half-holiday
to hear Dr, Washington. He addressed them in an arena
seating more than five thousand people, which was given
for the occasion by its white owner.
To one of these Louisiana audiences Mr. Washington
said: "Both races in the South suffer at the hands of
public opinion by reason of the fact that the outside
world hears of our difficulties, of crimes, mobs, and lynch-
ings, but it does not hear ofor knowabout the evidences of
racial friendship and good-will which exist in the majority
of communities in Louisiana and other Southern States
where black and white people live together in such large
numbers. Lynchings are widely reported by telegraph.
The quiet, effective work of devoted white people in the
South for Negro uplift is not generally or widely reported.
The best white citizenship must take charge of the mob
and not have the mob take charge of civilization. There
is enough wisdom, patience, forbearance, and common
133


--- PAGE 172 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
sense in the South for white people and black people to live
together in peace for all time/*
In short3 Booker Washington met race prejudice just as
he did all other difficulties, as an obstacle to be sur-
mounted rather than as an injustice to be railed at and de-
nounced regardless of the consequences.


--- PAGE 173 ---
CHAPTER SIX
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
ONE secret of Booker Washington's leadership was that
he always had his ear to the ground and his feet on
the ground. Some one has said that
ee
a practical ideal-
ist is a manwho keeps his feet on the ground even though
his head is in the clouds/' Booker Washington was
that kind of an idealist. He kept In constant and inti-
mate touch with the masses of his people, particularly
with those on the soil. Like the giant in the fable who
doubled his strength every time he touched the ground,
Booker Washington seemed to renew his strength every
time he came in contact with the plain people of his race,
particularly the farmers. No matter how pressed and
driven by multifarious affairs, he could always find time
for a rambling talk, apparently quite at random, with an
old, uneducated, ante-bellum blackfarmer. Sometimes he
would halt the entire business of a national convention in
order to hear the comment of some simple but shrewd old
character. He had a profound respect for the wisdom of
simple people who lived at close grips with the realities of
life.
At the 1914 meeting of the National Negro Business
League at Muskogee, Okla., a Mr. Jake , who had
135


--- PAGE 174 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
started as an ignorant orphan boy, delighted Mr. Wash-
ington's heart when he testified : "When I first started out
I lived in a chicken house, 12 x 14 feet; now I own a ten-
room residence, comfortably furnished, and in a settle-
ment where we have a good school, a good church, and
plenty of amusement, including ten children."
After the laughter and applause had subsided Mr.
Washington asked: "Do you think there is the same kind
of an opening out here in Oklahoma for other and younger
men of our race to do as you have done and to succeed
equally as well?"
To which Mr* Jake replied:
te
. . . I think I have
succeeded with little or no education, and it stands to
reason that some of the graduates from these industrial
and agricultural schools ought to be able to do better than
I have done."
Which was, of course, just the answer Mr. Washington
hoped he would make.
Mr. Washington's instinct for keeping close to the plain
people was perhaps best illustrated by his tours through
the far Southern States for the improvement of the living
conditions of his people, the tours to which allusion has
several times been made. His insistence upon cleanliness,
neatness, and paint became so well known that his ap-
proach to a community frequently caused frantic cleaning
up of yards, mending of gates, and painting of houses.
These sudden converts to paint sometimes found out from
which side the great man was to approach their house and
painted only that sid,e and the front.
136


--- PAGE 175 ---



--- PAGE 176 ---



--- PAGE 177 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
When he spoke to his people on these trips he had the
faculty of becoming one of them. He described their
daily lives in their ownlanguage. Hetold them howmuch
land they owned, how much of It was mortgaged, how
much and what they raised, and in fact every vital eco-
nomic and social fact about their lives and the conditions
about them. He praised them for what was creditable,
censured and bantered them for what was bad, and told
themwhat conditions should be and howthey could make
them so.
He made these tours through Mississippi,, Tennessee,
North Carolina, South Carolina, Texas, Florida, Louisi-
ana, and portions of Alabama and Georgia.
Besides these State tours he would, whenever he could
take the time, shoot out into the country surrounding
Tuskegee Institute to encourage and promotethe efforts of
his neighbors of his ownrace. InJuly, 1911, accompanied
by some guests and members of his faculty, he made such
a visit to Mt. Olive, a village on the east of Tuskegee*
The party was first taken to the village church where they
found a teeming congregation to greet them, Here Mr*
Washington was introduced by the principal of the
"Washington School
3*
who said that since Mr. Washing-
ton's visit eighteen months ago the colored people had
purchased forty-one lots, built several new houses, white-
washedor painted the old ones, andincreased their gardens
to such an extent that few, if any, had still to buy their
vegetables.
Mr, Washington opened his talk by saying: "It is an
137


--- PAGE 178 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Inspiration simply to drive through and see your pleasant
houses surrounded by flowers and gardens and all that goes
to make life happy." He then appealed to the women
to make their homes as attractive on the inside as the
gardens had made them on the outside. He told them
the best receipt for keeping the men and the children at
home and out of mischief was to make the homes so at-
tractive that they would not want to go away. Then, as
always, before he closed he put in his warnings and in-
junctions to the derelict: "Paint your houses; if you can't
paint them, whitewash them. Put the men to work in
their spare hours repairing fences, gates, and windows.
Get together in your church, as you have in your school-
work, settle on a pastor and get him to live in your com-
munity. Pay him in order that he may live here and
become a part ofyour community."
On another such trip through the southwestern part of
Macon County, the county in which Tuskegee is located,
he was once accompanied byJudge Robert H. Terrell, the
NegroJudge ofthe District of Columbia; the Hon. White-
field McKinlay, the Negro Collector of Customs for the
District of Columbia; George L. Knox, owner and editor
ofthe Indianapolis Freeman, a Negro newspaper; W. T. B.
Williams, agent for the Anna T. Jeanes Fund and the
Slater Board; Dr. Thomas Jesse Jones ofthe United States
Census Bureau, and Lord Eustace Percy, one ofthe Secre-
taries of the British Embassy at Washington.
One can well imagine with what pride the simple black
farmers of Macon County displayed their products and
138


--- PAGE 179 ---
-
fl-i
s-
SJ
SisO QJ -M
^.^
;
IllOr ^ &
'- M J-~,
O rt
g
t*.
5 ^


--- PAGE 180 ---



--- PAGE 181 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
their live stock to these distinguished representatives of
both races headed by their own great neighbor and leader.
At Mt. Andrew, one of the communities visited, the
Farmers
5
Improvement Club had prepared an exhibit
consisting of the best specimens of vegetables, fruits, and
meats raised in the community. A report stated that
the Negro people of the town owned over two hundred
head of live stock and had over thirty houses which were
either whitewashed or painted. When called upon for
remarks, Mr. Washington expressed himself as greatly
encouraged by what he had seen and said in conclusions
"Here in Macon County you have good land that will
grow abundant crops. You have also a good citizenship,
and hence there is every opportunity for you to makeyour
community a heaven upon earth."
Booker Washington was always emphasizing the ne-
cessity of better conditions right here and now instead of
in a distant future or in heaven. He was constantly
combatingthe tendency in his people atendencycommon
to all people but naturally particularly strong in those
having a heritage of slavery to substitute the anticipated
bliss of a future life for effective efforts to improve the
conditions of this present life. He was always telling
them to put their energies into societies for the preserva-
tion of health and improvement of living conditions, in-
stead ofinto thetoo numerous and popularsick benefit and
death benefit organizations.
At the next stop of the party Mr. Washington was
introduced to the assembled townspeople by a graduate


--- PAGE 182 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
ofTuskegeeInstitute, whowasone oftheir leading citizens
and most successful farmers. In this talk he urged the
people to get more land and keep it and to grow something
besides cotton. He said they should not lean upon others
and should not go to town on Saturdays to "draw upon"
the merchants, but should stay at home and "draw every-
day from their own soil corn, peas, beans, and hogs/*
He urged the men to give their wives more time to work
around the house and to raise vegetables. (This, of
course, instead of requiring them to workin the fields with
the men as is so common.) He urged especially that
they take their wives into their confidence and make them
their partners as well as their companions. He assured
them that if they took their wives into partnership they
would accumulate more and get along better in everyway.
There was no advice given by him more constantly or
insistently in speaking to the plain people of his race>
whether in country or city? than this injunction to the
men to take their wives into their confidence and make
them their partners. He recognized that the home was
the basis ofall progress and civilization for his race, as well
as all other races, and that thewife andmotheris primarily
the conservator of the home.
One of the stops ofthe trip was at a little hamlet called
Damascus. Here, in characteristic fashion, he told the
people how much richer they were in soil and all natural
advantages than were the inhabitants of the original Da-
mascus in the Holy Land. He then argued that having
these great natural advantages, much was to be expected
140


--- PAGE 183 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
ofthem,etc. Likeall great preachers,teachers, and leaders
ofmen he seized upon the names, incidents, and conditions
immediately about him and from them drew lessons of
fundamental import and universal application*
The efforts of the Negro farmers on these trips to get a
word of approval from their great leader were often pa-
thetic. One old manhad a good breed ofpigs ofwhich he
was particularly proud. He contrived to befound feeding
them beside the road just as the great man and his party
were passing. The simple ruse succeeded. Mr. Wash-
ington and his companions stopped and every one admired
the proud and excited old man's pigs. And then after the
pigs had been duly admired, he led them to a rough plank
table upon which he had displayed in tremulous anticipa-
tion of this dramatic moment a huge pumpkin, some per-
fectly developed ears of corn, and a lusty cabbage. After
these objects had also been admired the old man decoyed
the party into the little whitewashed cottage where his
wife had her hour of triumph in displaying her jars of
preserves, pickles, cans ofvegetables, dried fruits, andsyrup
together with quilts and other needlework all carefully
arranged for this hoped-for inspection.
The basic teaching of all these tours was: "Make your
own little heaven right here and now. Do it by putting
business methods into your farming, by growing things in
your garden the year around, by building and keeping
attractive and comfortable homesfor your children so they
will stay at home and not go to the cities, bykeeping your
bodies and your surroundings clean, by staying in one


--- PAGE 184 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
place, by getting a good teacher and a good preacher, by
building a good school and church, by letting your wife be
your partner in all you do, by keeping out of debt, by
cultivating friendly relations with your neighbors both
white and black/
5
Mr. Washington was constantly bringing up in the
Tuskegee faculty meetings cases of distress among the
colored people of the county, which he had personally dis-
covered whileoff hunting or riding, and planning ways and
means to relieve them. Apparently it never occurred to
himthat technically, at least, the fate ofthese poorpersons
was not his affair nor that of his school. At one such
meeting he told of having come upon while hunting a
tumbledown cabin in the woods, within it a half-para-
lyzed old Negro obviously unable to care for his simple
wants. Mr. Washington had stopped, built a fire in his
stove, and otherwise made him comfortable temporarily,
but some provision for the old man's care must be made at
once. One of the teachers knew about the old man and
stated that he had such an ugly temper that he had driven
off his wife, son, and daughterwho had until recently lived
with him and taken care of him. The young teacher
seemed to feel that the old man had brought his troubles
upon his own head and so deserved little sympathy. Mr.
Washington would not for a moment agree to this. He
replied that if the old fellow was so unfortunate as to have
a bad temper as well as his physical infirmities that was no
reason why he should be allowed to suffer privation. He
delegated one of the teachers to look up the old man's
142


--- PAGE 185 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
family at once and see if they could be prevailed upon to
support him and to report at the next meeting what had
been arranged. In the meantime he would send some
one out to the cabin daily to take him food and attend to
his wants.
At another faculty meeting he brought up the plight
of an old woman who was about to be evicted from her
little shack on the outskirts of the town because of her
inability to pay the nominal rent which she was charged.
He arranged to have her rent paid out of a sum of money
which he always had included in the school budget for the
relief of such cases. In such ways he was constantly im-
pressing upon his associates the idea that was ever a main-
spring of his own life namely, that it was always and
everywhere the duty of the more fortunate to help the less
fortunate.
While hewas sometimes severe with his moreprosperous
and better educated associates he was always considerate
and thoughtful ofthe ignorant, the old, and theweak. He
was never too busy to delight the heart of a white-haired
old man who had been the original cook of the school by
listening to his stories about the early days, or to discuss
with another old man his experiences in the Civil War*
He would never betray the least impatience in listening
to these old men tell him the same story for the five hun-
dredth time. Although the real usefulness of both these
old fellows had long passed he never showed thembyword
or deed that he did not regard them as useful and valuable
members of his staff.
H3


--- PAGE 186 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Another old character to whom he invariably showed
kindness and patience was a crack-brained old itinerant
preacher who kept up an endless stream of unintelligible
pious jargon. This old fellow would harangue the air for
hours at a time right outside the Principal's busy office,
but he would never allow him to be stopped or sent away
and always sent or gave him a small contribution at the
conclusion of his tirades, if indeed they could be said to
have any conclusion.
Booker Washington had a weakness for the picturesque
ne'er-do-wells of his race. One such old fellow, who lived
near Tuskegee and who had always displayed great in-
genuity in extracting money from him, one day, when he
was driving down the main street of Tuskegee behind a
pair of fast and spirited horses, rushed out into the street
and stopped him as though he had a matter ofthe greatest
urgency to impart to him. When Mr. Washington had
with difficulty reined in his horses and asked him what
he wanted the old man said breathlessly, "Fse got a
tirkey for yo
?
Thanksgiving"
"Howmuch does it weigh?" inquired Mr. Washington.
fc
Twelve to fifteen pounV
After thanking the old man warmly, Mr. Washington
started to drive on when the old fellow added, "I jest
wants to borrow a dollar for to fatten yo' turkey for
you!"
With a laugh Mr. Washington handed the old man the
dollar and drove on. Henever could be made to feel that
by these spontaneous generosities he was encouraging
144


--- PAGE 187 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
thriftlessness and mendicancy. Hewas incorrigible in his
unscientific open-handedness with the poor, begging older
membersofhis race.
AtthetimeoftheTuskegeeteachers' annual picnic, usu-
ally held in May,many of these old colored people would
attend uninvited and armed with huge empty baskets.
Mr. Washington always greeted them like honored guests
and allowed them to carry off provisions enough to feed
large families for days. He would also introduce them
to the officers and teachers ofthe school and to anyinvited
guests who might be present.
Old man Harry Varner was the night watchman of the
school in its early days and a man upon whomMr. Wash-
ington very muchdepended. Helived in a cabin opposite
the school grounds. After hearing many talks about the
importance of living in a real house instead of a one or
two room cabin, old Uncle Harry finally decided that he
must have a real house. Accordingly he came to his em-
ployer, told him his feeling in the matter, and laid before
him his meagre savings, which he had determined to spend
for a real house. Mr. Washington went with himto select
the lot and added enough out of his own pocket to the
scant savings to enable the old man to buy a cow and a pig
ajid a garden plot as well as the house. From then on for
weeks he and old Uncle Harry would have long and mys-
terious conferences over the planning of that little four-
room cottage. It is doubtful if Dr. Washington ever
devoted more time or thought to planning any ofthe great
buildings of the Institute, No potentate was ever half as
HS


--- PAGE 188 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
proud ofhis palace as Uncle Harryofhis four-room cottage
when it was finally finished and painted and stood forth
in all its glory to be admired of all men. And Booker
Washington was scarcely less proud of it than Uncle
Harry.
With Uncle Harry Varner, Old Man Brannum, the
original cook of the school to whomreference has already
been made, and Lewis Adams of the town of Tuskegee,
whom Mr. Washington mentions in "Up from Slavery'*
as one of his chief advisers, all unlettered-before-the-war
Negroes, his relationship was always particularly intimate.
These three old men enjoyed the confidence of the white
people of the town of Tuskegee to an unusual extent and
often acted as ambassadors of good-will between the head
of the school and his white neighbors when from time to
time the latter showed a disposition to look askance at
the rapidly growing institution on the hill beyond the
town.
Another intimate friend of Mr. Washington's was
Charles L, Diggs, known affectionately on the school
grounds as "Old Man Diggs/' The old man had been
body servant to a Union officer in the Civil War and after
the war had been carried to Boston, where he became the
butler in a fashionable Back Bay family. When Mr.
Washington first visited Boston, as an humble and obscure
young Negro school teacher pleading for his struggling
school, he met Diggs, and Diggs succeeded in interesting
his employers in the sincere and earnest young Negro
teacher. When years afterward the Institute had grown
146


--- PAGE 189 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
to the dignity of needing stewards, Mr. Washington em-
ployed his old friend as steward of the Teachers* Home.
In all the years thereafter hardly a day passed when Mr.
Washington was at the school without his having some
kind of powwow with Old Man Diggs regarding some
matter affecting the interests ofthe school.
Tothe despair of his family Booker Washington seemed
to go out of his way to find forlorn old people whom he
could befriend. He sent provisions weekly to an humble
old black couple from whom he had bought a tract of
land for the school. Hedid the same for old AuntHarriet
and her deaf, dumb, and lame son, except that to them he
provided fuel as well. On any particularly cold day he
would send one or more students over to Aunt Harriet's
to find out if she and her poor helpless son were comfort-
able. Also every Sunday afternoon, to the joy of this
pathetic couple, a particularly appetizing Sunday dinner
unfailingly made its appearance. And these were only
a few ofthe pensioners and semi-pensioners whom Booker
Washington accumulated as he went about his kindly
way.
One means of keeping in touch with the masses of his
people which he never neglected was through attending
the annual National Negro Baptist Conventions. At
these great gatherings he came in touch with the religious
leaders of two million Negroes. Notwithstanding the
fact that he practically collapfeed at the annual meeting of
the National Negro Business League held in Boston in
August, 1915, and had to be nursed for some weeks fol-
147


--- PAGE 190 ---
BOOKER Tr WASHINGTON
lowing before he was even strong enough to return to
Tuskegee, he insisted in spite of the admonitions of phy^
sicians and the pleadings offriends, family, and colleagues,
in keeping his engagement to speak before this great con-
vention in Chicago in September. To all protests he re-
plied, "It would do me more harm to stay away than to
go." With these words, and rallying the rapidly waning
dregs of his once great strength he went and made an
address which ranks with the most powerful he ever deliv-
ered to his people. A threatened split in the Baptist
denomination in part accounted for his insistence upon
attending this convention. Inthis address, delivered only
two months before he died of sheer exhaustion, and the
last he made before any great body of his own people, he
said in part:
*c
My only excuse for accepting your invitation to ap-
pear before you in these annual gatherings is that I am
deeply interested in all that this National Baptist Con-
vention stands for. It is in my opinion the largest and
most representative body of colored people anywhere in
the world. ... I believe most profoundly in the
work of this convention because it represents the common
masses of all pur people, those who are the foundation of
our success as a race. I believe in you because you do not
pretend to represent the classes but the masses of our
people, I am here, too, because the Baptist Church
among our people throughout the country is affording
them an opportunityto get lessons in self-government in a
degree that is true offewother organizations.
148


--- PAGE 191 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
"You who control this great convention have before
you a great opportunity and along with this opportunity
a tremendous responsibility. It is given to you, as to all
men, to pursue one of two courses, and that is, to be big
leaders or little leaders. You can construct or you can
destroy. Thetime is nowat handwhenin each individual
church organization and each district association and each
State convention and in this great national convention, the
little man must givewayand let the big, broad, generous
man take his place. Nothing is ever gained in business,
in education, or in religious work bybeing little, narrow, or
jealous in oursympathies and activities."
Two days later, after he had left the convention and re-
turned home, Mr. Washington received word that the
convention had split, contending leaders holding out for
whatthey termed principles. Immediately on the receipt
of this report he dispatched the following telegram to the
leaders ofthe twoopposingfactions:
I earnestly beg and urge that each convention remain
in session until all differences are composed. In the
event this cannot be done I hope each convention will
empower a small committee or authorize some one to
appoint committees that may have power in settling pres-
ent difficulties so that next year there maybe but one con-
vention. It is easier now to bring about reconciliation
than it will be later. It will be a calamity to the Baptist
Church and to our race for the present split to continue.
It will soon spread to all the Baptist churches in all the
States. I would urge that each side manifest a broad
149


--- PAGE 192 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
liberal spirit and be willing to sacrifice something for the
good ofthe cause. Millions ofour humblepeoplethrough-
out the country are depending upon our leaders to settle
their difficulties in a Christian spirit and they should not
be disappointed. If I may be used at any time in any
way my services are at your command. Have sent a
similar telegram to Dr. .
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON.
Unhappily he did not have the satisfaction of bringing
the two factions together before he died, but until the last
he continued his efforts in this direction.
Largely because of his intimate knowledge of the plain
people Booker Washington appeale,d to the great of the
earth. In his books, "Up from Slavery," "The Story of
My Life and Work," and "My Larger Education," he
tells of taking tea with Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle,
of his association with Presidents McKinley, Roosevelt,
and Taft, of his introduction to Prince Henry of Prussia,
of his dining with the King and Queen of Denmark, and
of his long friendships with William H. Baldwin, Jr.,
Robert C. Ogden, Henry H. Rogers, John D. Rockefeller,
and Andrew Carnegie. He was of value and interest
to such people largely because of his closeness to his own
people. His power to interest such people was largely
because he was so close to the rank and file of his own
people.
After the death of Henry H. Rogers, Mr. Washington
said of him in an interview published at the time in the
NewYork Evening Post: "The more experiences I have of


--- PAGE 193 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
the world, the more I am convinced that the only proper
and the only safe wayto judge anyone is at first hand and
by your actual experience. It seems to me that, outside
of the immediate members of my family, I knew the late
Henry H. Rogers during the last fifteen years as well as I
could know any one. Of all the men that I have ever
known intimately, no matter what their station in life,
Mr. Rogers always impressed meas being amongthe kind-
est and gentlest. That was the impression he made upon
me the first time I ever met him, and during the fifteen
years that I knew himthat impression was deepened every
time I met him/* (And this was Booker Washington's
impression of the second greatest figure in the building
up of the huge, world-powerful corporation whose meth-
ods during its period of rapid expansion had at that time
been only recently described in McCluris Magazine by
Ida M. Tarbell.) "I am sure that the members of his
family will forgive me for telling, now that he has laid
down his great work and gone to rest, some things about
him which I feel that the public should know but which
he always forbade meto mentionwhile he lived.
"The first time I ever met Mr. Rogers was in this
manner: about fifteen years ago a large meeting was held
in Madison Square Garden concert hall, to obtain funds
for the Tuskegee Institute. Mr. Rogers attended the
meeting, but came so late that, as the auditorium was
crowded, he could not get a seat. He stood in the
back part of the hall, however, and listened to the
speaking.


--- PAGE 194 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
"Thenext morning I received a telegram from him ask-
ing me to call at his office. When I entered he remarked
that he had been present at the meetingthe night previous,
and expected the *hat to be passed/ but as that was not
done he wanted to 'chip in' something. Thereupon he
handed me ten one-thousand-dollar bills for the Tuskegee
Institute. In doing this^ he imposed only one condition,
that the gift should be mentioned to no one. Later on,
however, when I told him that I did not care to take so
large a sumof moneywithout some one knowingit, he con-
sented that I tell one or two of our Trustees about the
source of the gift. I cannot now recall the number df
times that he has helped us, but in doing so he always in-
sisted that his name be never used. He seemed to enjoy
making gifts in currency/*
In an article published in McCluris Magazine in May,
1902, Rear-Admiral Robley D. Evans thus describes the
occasion on which he presented Booker Washington to
Prince Henry of Prussia: "The first request made by
Prince Henry, after being received in NewYork, was that
I should arrange to give him some of the old Southern
melodies, if possible, sung by Negroes; that he was pas-
sionately fond of them, and had been all his life not the
ragtime songs, but the old Negro melodies. Several times
during his trip I endeavored to carry out his wishes, with
more or less success; but finally, at the Waldorf-Astoria,
the Hampton singers presented themselves in one of the
reception rooms andgave him a recital ofIndian andNegro
melodies. He was charmed. And while I was talking to
152


--- PAGE 195 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
him, just after a Sioux Indian had sung a lullaby; he sud-
denly turned and said: *Isn
?
t that Booker T. Washington
over there?* I recognized Washington and replied that it
was, and he said:
'
Evans, would you mind presenting him
to me? I knowhowsomeofyour people feel about Wash-
ington, but I have always had great sympathy with the
African race, and I want to meet the man I regard as the
leader ofthat race/ So I went at once to Washington and
told him that the Prince wished him to be presented, and
took him, myself, and presented him to the Prince.
BookerWashington sat down and talked with him for fully
ten minutes, and it was a most interesting conversation,
one of the most interesting I ever heard in my life. The
ease with which Washington conducted himself was very
striking, and I only accounted for it afterward when I re-
membered that he had dined with the Queen of England
twoorthree times, so that this wasnot anewthing for him.
Indeed, BookerWashington's mannerwas easier than that
of almost any other man I saw meet the Prince in this
country. The Prince afterward referred to President
Roosevelt's action in regard to Booker Washington, and
applauded it very highly."
In 1911 Mr. Washington visited Denmarkwith the par-
ticular purpose of observing the world-famed agricultural
methods of that country. WhileIn Copenhagen he was
presented to the King and Queen. This experience he de-
scribed on his return to this country in an article published
in the NewYork Age, the well-known Negro paper, in De-
cember of the same year. The portion of the article de-
153


--- PAGE 196 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
scribing his meeting with the King and Queen reads as fol-
lows:
"Soon after I entered, the Chamberlain went in and
presently returned to tell me the King would be ready to
see mein about five minutes. At the end of the five min-
utes exactly the doorwasopened and I found myselfin the
King's chamber. I had expected to see a gorgeously
fitted apartment, something to compare with what I had
seen elsewhere in the palace. Imagine mysurprise when I
found practically nothing in the room except the King,
himself. Therewas not a chair, a sofa, or, so far as I can
recall, a single thing in the way of furniture nothing ex-
cept the King and his sword. I was surprised again, con-
sidering the formality bywhich he was surrounded, by the
familiar and kindly mannerin which the King received me,
and by his excellent English. Both of us remained stand-
ing during the whole interview, which must have lasted
twenty minutes. I say we remained standing, because,
even had etiquette permitted it we could not have done
anything else because there was nothing in the room for
either of us to sit upon,
"I had been warned by the American Minister and Mr,
Cavling, however, as to what might be the result of this
interview. Among other things in regard to which I had
been carefully instructed by the American Minister was I
must never turn myback upon the King, that I must not
lead off in any conversation, that I must let the King sug-
gest the subjects to be discussed, and not take the initiative
in raising any question for discussion, I tried to follow
Minister Egan's instructions in this regard as well as I
could, but I fear I was not wholly successful.
"1 had not been talkingwith the King manyminutes be-


--- PAGE 197 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
fore I found that he wasperfectly familiarwith the work of
theTuskegeeschool, thathehad read muchthat I hadwrit-
ten, andwaswell acquainted with all thatI wastrying to do
for the Negroes in the South. Hereferred to the fact that
Denmarkwas interested in the colored people in their own
colonyin the Danish West Indies, and that both he and the
Queenwere anxious that something be done for the colored
people in the Danish possessions similar to what we were
doing at Tuskegee, He added that he hoped at sometime
I would find it possible to visit the Danish West Indian
Islands.
"As I have said, I had been warned as to what might be
the result of this visit to the King and that I had best be
careful how I made my plans for the evening. As the
interview was closing, the King took me by the hand and
said, 'The Queen would be pleased to have you dine
at the palace to-night/ at the same time naming the
hour,
"The Minister had told me that this was his way of
commanding persons to dine, and that an invitation given
must be obeyed. Ofcourse I was delighted to accept the
invitation, though I feared it would wreck my plans for
seeing the country people. The Kingwas so kind and put
me so at my ease in his presence that I fear I forgot Min-
ister Eagan's warningnot to turn mybackupon him, and I
must confess that I got out ofthe room in about the same
way I usually go out of the room when I have had an
audience with President Taft.
"Leaving the King and the palace, I found out on the
street quite a group ofnewspaper people, mostofthem rep-
resenting American papers, who were very anxious to
know, in the usual American fashion, just what took place
during the interview, how long I was with the King, what
we talked about, and what not. They were especially
155


--- PAGE 198 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
anxious to know if I had been invited to the palace for
dinner."
Andfurtheronhe thus describes the dinner:
"The dinner was not at the palace where I was received
in the morning, but at the summerpalace several miles out
of Copenhagen. When I reached the hotel from the
country it soon dawned upon me that I was in great
danger of being late. To keep a King and Queen and
their guests waitingon one for dinnerwould ofcourse be an
outrageous offense. I dressed as hastily as I was able, but
just as I was putting on the finishing touches to my cos-
tume mywhite tie bursted. I was in a predicament from
which for a moment I saw no means of rescuing myself.
I did not havetime to get another tie, and ofcourse I could
notwearthe blackone. As well as I could, however, I put
the white tie about my neck, fastened it with a pin, and
earnestly prayed that it might remain in decent position
until the dinner was over. Nevertheless, I trembled all
through the dinner for fear that my tie might go back on
me.
"I succeeded in reaching the summer palace about ten
minutes before the time to go into the dining-room. Here
again I was met by the King's Chamberlain by whom I
was conveyed through a series of rooms and, finally, into
the presence of the King, who, after some conversation,
led mewhere the Queenwas standing and presented meto
her. TheQueenreceived megraciously and even cordially.
She spoke English perfectly, and seemed perfectly familiar
with mywork. I had, however, a sneaking idea that Min-
ister Eganwasresponsible for a good deal ofthe familiarity
which both the King andQueen seemed to exhibit regard-
ing Tuskegee.


--- PAGE 199 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
"As I entered the reception-room there were about
twenty or twenty-five people whowere to be entertained at
dinner. I will not attempt to describe the elegance, not to
say splendor, of everything in connection with the dinner.
As I ate food for the first time in mylife out ofgold dishes,
I could notbut recall the timewhen as a slave boyI ate my
syrup from a tin plate.
"I think I got through the dinner pretty well by follow-
ing my usual custom, namely, ofwatching other people to
see just what they did and what they did not do. There
was one place, however, where I confess I made a failure.
It is customary at the King's table, as is true at other
functions in many portions of Europe, I understand, to
drink a silent toast to the King. This was so new and
strange to me that I decided that, since I did not
understand the custom, the best thing was to frankly
confess my ignorance. I reassured myself with the re-,
flection that people will easier pardon ignorance than
pretense.
"At a certain point during the dinner each guest is ex-
pected, it seems, to get the eye of the King and then rise
and drink to the health of the King. When he rises he
makes a bow to the King and the King returns the bow.
Nothing is said by either the King or the guest, I think
practically all the invited guests except myself went
through this performance. It seemed to me a very fitting
way of expressing respect for the King, as the head of a
nation and as a man, and now that I know something
about it, I think if I had another chance I could do myself
credit in that regard."
Duringthe dinner I had the privilege ofmeeting a very
interesting old gentleman, now some eighty years of age,
the uncle of the King, Prince , who spoke good
English. I had a very interesting conversation with him,
157


--- PAGE 200 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
and since returning to America I have had some corres-
pondence with him.
"As I have already said, the Queen Mother of England
wasat this time in Copenhagen, and as I afterward learned,
her sister, the Queen Motherof Russia, was also there. As
both of these were in mourning on account of the recent
death of King Edward, they did not appear at this dinner,
I was reminded of their presence, however, when as I was
leaving the King's palace after myinterview in the morn-
ing, one of the marshals presented me with two auto-
graph books, with the request that I inscribe my name in
them. One ofthe books, as I afterward learned, belonged
to the Queen Mother of England; the other belonged to
the Queen Mother of Russia*
A mere catalogue of the principal organizations which
BookerT. Washington founded for the purpose of helping
his people to help themselves tells a story of constructive
achievement moreimpressive than any amountof abstract
eulogy.
The following is a list of such organizations given in
chronological order with a fewwords of description for the
purpose ofidentifying each:
In 1884 hefounded theTeachers' Institute, consisting of
summer courses, conferences, and exhibits having as their
main purpose the extension ofthe advantages ofTuskegee
Institute to the country school teachers ofthe surrounding
country. The work of this Institute is described in the
chapter: "Washington, the Educator."
In 1891 he established the Annual Tuskegee Negro Con-
ference, He decided that the school should not only help
158


--- PAGE 201 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
directly its ownstudents, butshould reach out and help the
students' parents and the older people generally in the
country districts ofthe State. He started by inviting the
farmers and their wives in the immediate locality to spend
a day at the school for the frank discussion of their ma-
terial and spiritual condition to the end that the school
might learn howit could best help themto help themselves.
Fromthis simple beginning the Conference has grown until
it now consists of delegates from every Southern State, be-
sides hundreds of teachers and principals of Negro schools,
Northern men and women, publicists and philanthropists,
newspaper and magazine writers, Southern white men and
Southern white women, all interested in helping the simple
black folk in their strivings to "quit libin
5
in de ashes," as
one of them fervently expressed it. At one of these con-
ferences an old preacher from a country district concluded
an earnest prayer for the deliverance ofhis people from the
bondage of ignorance with this startling sentence: "And
now, O Lord, put dy foot down in our hearts and lif us
up!"
The year following Mr. Washington established a hos-
pital in Greenwood village, the hamlet adjoining the In-
stitute grounds wherelive mostoftheteachers, officers, and
employees. It was at first hardly more than a dispensary,
but when the Institute acquired a Resident Physician two
small buildings were set aside as hospitals for men and
women, respectively. Later a five-thousand-dollar build-
ing was given which served as the hospital until, in 1913,
Mrs. Elizabeth A. Mason, of Boston, presented Tuskegee
159


--- PAGE 202 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
with a fifty-thousand-dollar splendidly equipped modern
hospital, in memory of her grandfather, John A. Andrew,
the War Governor of Massachusetts. While these hos-
pitals, from the first humble dispensary to the fine hospital
of to-day, were of course primarily for the Institute they
were In true Tuskegee fashion thrown open to all who
needed them. And since the town of Tuskegee has no
hospital they have always been freely used by outside
colored people. Mr. Washington, himself, on his riding
and huntingtrips would from time to time find sick people
whom he would have brought to the hospital for care.
The next year, 1893, he started the Minister's Night
School This is conducted by the Phelps Hall Bible
Training School of the Institute. Here country ministers
with large families and small means are given night
courses in all the subjects likely to be of service to them
from "Biblical criticism'
5
to the "planting and cultivating
of crops,"
The year following Mrs. Washington began the Tuske-
gee Town Mothers' Meetings. Both she and Mr. Wash-
ington had long been distressed at seeing the women and
young girls loafing about the streets of the town ofTuske-
gee when they came to town with their husbands and
fathers on Saturday afternoons. Now, instead of loafing
about the streets these women attend the Mothers' Meet-
ings where Mrs. Washington and the various women
teachers give them practical talks on all manner of house-
keeping and family-raising problems from the making of
preserves to proper parental care.
160


--- PAGE 203 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
In 1895 the Building and Loan Association was estab-
lished. The Institute's chief accountant is its president,
and the Institute's treasurer its secretary and treasurer.
This Association has enabled many scores of people to
secure their own homes whowithout its aid couldnot have
done so.
Thenext year the TownNight School was started. This
school has as its purpose giving instruction to the boys and
girls who have positions in the town which make it im-
possible for them to attend the Institute, and to the ser-
vants in the white families. This school has becomeone of
the best and strongest forces in the life of the community.
As an outgrowth of it came later the Town Library and
Reading Room, for which Mr. Washington personally
provided the room. There is nowin this school a cooking
class for girls and several industrial classes for boys. At
the same time Mr. Washington established a Partners
7
In-
stitute which is described in the chapter "Washington and
the Negro Farmer."
In 1898 he started a County Fair to spur the ambition of
the Negro farmers of the county. This Negro County
Fair under his guidance grew and flourished from year to
year. The whites maintained a separate County Fair.
Finally the two fairs were combined, and now one of the
mostflourishing County Fairs in all the South is conducted,
both races supportingit bymakingexhibits, and sharing in
the success and profits of the enterprise, as well as in its
general management.
In 1900 he organized the National Negro Business
161


--- PAGE 204 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
League, as described in the chapter, "Washington and the
Negro Business Man."
Two years later he established the Greenwood Village
Improvement Association for the little community which
has grown up around the school. Taxes are collected from
the property holders as well as the renters for the upkeep
ofthe roads, bridges, and fences, and a park in the centreof
the village, which was introduced in emulation of the
typical New England village. Just as in New England,
also, this central park, or "green/
5
is surrounded byanum-
ber of churches. An elective Board of Control presides
over this village, settles disputes, and keeps the community
in good repair morally and spiritually, as well as physically.
On the Monday immediately following the close of a regu-
lar school term a town meeting is held at which reports are
read and discussed covering every phase of the life of the
community. Mr. Washington particularly enjoyed pre-
siding at these meetings because they demonstrated what
the people of his race could accomplish under a favorable
and stimulating environment. He always contrived to
have the meetings followed by simple refreshments and a
social hour.
In 1904 hestarted the Rural School Improvement Cam-
paign andthe Farmers* Short Course at the Institute, both
of which are described in the chapter, "Washington, the
Educator/* In the same year he started a systematic
effort to improve the conditions in the jails and the chain
gangs and for the rehabilitation of released prisoners.
The next year he founded a weekly farm paper, a cir-
162


--- PAGE 205 ---
GETTING CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE
culating library, and a Ministers' Institute. The year
after, 1906, the Jesup Agricultural Wagon the agri-
cultural school on wheels, which is described in the chap-
ter, "Washington, the Educator" was started. In 1907
the farmers' cooperative demonstration work, which has
also been mentioned, was inaugurated. In 1910 the rural
improvement speaking tours began. And finally, in 1914,
he established "Baldwin Farms," the farming community
for the graduates of the agricultural department of Tus-
kegee, which also has been previously described.
These, then, are some of the tangible means which
Booker Washington developed during a period of thirty
years for keeping in touch with his people and for keeping
his people in touch with one another and with all the
things which go to make up wholesome and useful living.
163


--- PAGE 206 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
BOOKER WASHINGTON AND THE NEGRO
FARMER
BOOKERT. WASHINGTONwas a great believer in the
experience meeting, and the Tuskegee Negro Conference,
which he started in 1891, is nothing more nor less than an
agricultural experience meeting. Heplaced his faith in the
persuasive powerofexample inthecontagion ofsuccessful
achievement. Heoncesaid:
**
Onefarmbought, onehouse
built, onehomesweetly and intelligentlykept, onemanwho
is the largest taxpayer or has the largest bank account, one
school or church maintained, one factory running success-
fully, one truck garden profitably cultivated, one patient
cured by a Negro doctor, one sermon well preached, one
office well filled, one life cleanly lived these will tell more
in our favor than all the abstract eloquence that can be
summoned to plead our cause. Our pathway must be up
through the soil, up through swamps, up through forests,
up through the streams, the rocks, up through commerce,
education, and religion/*
Nothing delighted Mr. Washington more than the suc-
cessful Negro farmers who had started in life without
money, friends, influence, or education with literally
nothing but their hands. At one of the Tuskegee confer-
164


--- PAGE 207 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
ences not many years ago his keen eyes spotted such a
man in the audience and he called to him in his straight
from the shoulder manner: "Get up and tell us what you
have been doing as a farmer."
A tall, finely built, elderly man, looking almost like a
Nubian giant, arose in his place, his face wreathed in
smiles, and showing his white teeth as he spoke; "Doctor,
I done 'tended one o' yore conferences here 'bout ten year
ago. I heard you say dat a man ain't wurth nuthin* as
a man or a citizen 'less he owns his home, 'least one mule,
and has a bank account, an' so I made up my mind dat
I warn't wuth nuthin', an' so I went home an' talked de
whole matter over wid de oF woman. Wedecided dat we
would make a start, an' now I's proud to tell you dat Fs
not only got a bank account, but Fs got two bank ac-
counts, an' heah's de bank books (proudly holding on
high two grimy bank books); I also own two hun'ed acres
of land an' all de land is paid for. I also own two mules,
an' bofe dem mules is paid for. I also own some other
property, an' de ole woman an' me an' de chilluns lives in
a good house an' de house is paid for. All dis come 'bout
from mycomin' to dis heah conference."
Another old fellow, when called upon to tell what he
had accomplished, dexterously evaded the direct inquiry
for some minutes, and when Mr. Washington finally suc-
ceeded in pinning him down, said: "All Fs got to say,
Doctah Washington, is dat dis heah conference dun woke
me up an' I'll be back heah next year wid a report gist
like dese oder fellers."
165


--- PAGE 208 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Mr. Washington was a great believer in his favorite
animal, the pig, as a mortgage lifter and general aid to
prosperity.' At one of the conferences, after he had paid
a particularly warm eulogy to the economic importance
of the pig, an old woman got up and said: "Mr. Wash-
ington, you is got befo* you now Sister Nelson of Talla-
poosa County, Alabama. All I has I owes to dis confer-
ence and one little puppydog/
5
Mr. Washington challenged: "How's that?"
The old woman continued: "I got a little pig from dat
little puppy dog an* I got my prosperity from dat pig!"
Mr, Washington and the whole company in amazement
hung upon the old woman's words as she continued: "It
was dis way: Dat little puppy dog when she growed up
had some little puppies herself. One day one o* myfren's
come by an* as* me for one o' dem puppies. I toF him
*No/ I would not gib him dat puppy, but dat he had a
little pig an* I would 'change a puppy for a pig. I had
heard you tell ober heah so much 'bout hogs an' pigs dat
I thought dis was a good chance to get started. He give
me de pig an* I give him de puppy. In de course o' time
dat little pig dun bring me in some mo' pigs. I sol* some
an* kep* some. I had to feed de pig, so I had begunsavin',
I den begun to find out dat I could git on wid less den I
had ben gettin' on wid, an' so I kep* on savin' an' kep* on
raisin' pigs 'til I was able to supply most o* myneighbors
wid pigs, an* den I got me a cow, an den I begun to supply
myneighbors wid milk, an* den I started mea little garden.
Den I sol' myneighbors greens an' onions, an* so I went
166


--- PAGE 209 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
on fum time to time 'til I dun paid for de lot an' de house
in which I lib, an* I keeps my pigs about me an' keeps
my garden goin*, an* dat's whyI says all I is I owes to dat
little puppy dog an
3
to dis heah conference/
5
At these conferences the most elementary subjects are
discussed. Booker Washington would tell and have told
to thesefarmers matterswhich onewouldnaturally assume
any farmers, however ignorant, must already know. He
never tried to deceive himself as to the woful ignorance
of the Negro masses, and still he was never discouraged,
but always said ignorance was not a hopeless handicap
because it could be overcome by education. While he
frankly although sadly acknowledged the lamentable ig-
norance of the rank and file of his race, particularly those
onthesoil and dependentforeducationupontheshort-term,
ill-equipped, and poorly taught rural Negro school, he as
stoutly denied and constantly disproved the assertion that
these ignorant masses were not capable of profiting by
education. Heearnestly strove and signally succeeded in
attracting to these great annual agricultural conferences
the most pathetically ignorant of the Negro farmers as
well as theleadingscientific agriculturists ofthe race. But
he always insisted that the meetings be conducted for the
benefit of the ignorant and not in the interests of the
learned.
He would, for instance, tell the attendants at the con-
ferences what to plant and when to plant it, and what live
stock to keep and howto keep it. Hewould have printed
and distributed, among them a "Farmer's Calendar"
167


--- PAGE 210 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
which gave the months in which the various standard
vegetables should be planted and what crops should be
used in rotation. He constantly insisted that the Experi-
ment Station at Tuskegee Institute, supported by the
State ofAlabama, should not be used for scientific experi-
ments of interest only to experts, but should deal with
the fundamental problems with which the Negro farmers
of Alabama were daily confronted. The titles of some of
the Experiment Station Bulletins selected at random sug-
gest the homely and practical nature of the information
disseminated. Half a dozen of them read as follows:
"Possibilities of the Sweet Potato in Macon County,
Alabama," "How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways^of
Preparing It for Human Consumption/' "How to Raise
Pigs with Little Money/' "When, What, and How to
Can and Preserve Fruits and Vegetables in the Home/'
"Some Possibilities of the Cowpea in Macon County,
Alabama/' "ANewand Prolific Variety ofCotton/' And
all ofthese bulletins, so many ofwhich deal with the prob-
lems of the home, are written by an old bachelor of pure
African descent, without a drop of white blood, who in
himself refutes two popular fallacies; the one that bache-
lors cannot be skilled in domestic affairs, and the other,
that pure-blooded Africans cannot achieve intellectual
distinction. This man is George W. Carver, who is not
only the most eminent agricultural scientist of his race in
this country, but one of the most eminent of any race.
His work is so well known in scientific circles in his field
throughout the world that when leading European scien-
168


--- PAGE 211 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
tists visit this country, particularly the Southern States,
they not infrequently go out of their way to look him up.
They are usually very much surprised to find their eminent
fellow-scientist a black man.
The last of these conferences over which Booker Wash-
ington presided was held at Tuskegee, January 20 and
21,1915. Awoman,the wife ofa Negrofarmer, was testi-
fying when she said: "Our menfolks is foun* out dat they
can't eat cotton." As the outburst of laughter which
greeted this remark died down, Mr. Washington said in
his incisive way; "What do you mean?" The woman re-
plied: "I mean dat we womenfolks been tellin* our men-
folks all de time dat theyshould raise moto eat."
She then displayed specimens of canned fruits and told
how she had put up enough of them to supply her family
until summer. She t^old of having sold thirty-six turkeys
and of selling two and three dozen eggs each week, with
plenty left over for her family* She said that she and
her husband had raised and sold hogs, and still had for
their own use more than enough pork to last them until
the next hog-killing time.
"Howoften doyoueat chicken?
" askedDr. Washington.
"We can eat chicken every day if we want it," she
replied.
When she had finished Mr. Washington explained that
all this had been done on 178 acres of the poorest land in
Macon County.
In his opening address at this conference Mr* Wash-
ington denounced "petty thieving, pistol-toting, crap-
169


--- PAGE 212 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
shooting, the patronizing of
*
blind tigers/ and unneces-
sary lawsuits" as some of the weights and encumbrances
which are keeping the Negro from running well the race
whichIs set before him.
These are some of the basic questions which Booker
Washington placed before the conference for discussion:
"How and why am I so hard hit by the present hard
times?"
"What amI doing to meet present conditions?"
"HowmayI, after all, get some real benefit frompresent
difficulties?"
The most spectacular feature of the exercises was the
parade. It extended for almost a mile and included a
score or more of floats, hundreds of men and women in
appropriate costumes, and dozens of horses, mules, and
otherlive stock. .
There were a large number of colored preachers in
attendance who showed that they had adopted the Wash-
ington slogan of trying to make a heaven on earth and
whose testimony showed that they were now giving as
much time to soil salvation as to soul salvation. One
of them told of a flourishing Pig Club which he had organ-
ized among his parishioners after reading Mr. Washing-
ton's open letter, "Pigs and Education; Pigs and Debts,"
the circulating ofwhich will be later described.
After the awarding of prizes for the best floats the
declarations of the conference were read by Major R. R.
Moton of Hampton Institute, who then little realized
that before the year was out he was to be chosen to suc-
170


--- PAGE 213 ---
This old woman was a regular attendant at theTuskegee Negro Con-
ference and idolizingly watched Mr. Washington during the whole four
hours that he would preside over one of the Conference sessions


--- PAGE 214 ---



--- PAGE 215 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
ceed the leader of his race as the Principal of Tuskegee
Institute.
The following were the especially significant paragraphs
ofthese declarations:
"It is found that for every dollar's worth of cotton we
grow, we raise only forty-nine cents* worth of all other
crops. An investigation has shown that there are 20,000
farms ofNegroes on which there are no cattle of any kind;
270,000 on which there are no hogs; 200,000 on which no
poultry is raised; 140,000 on which no corn is grown; on
750,000 farms of Negroes no oats are grown; on 550,000
farms no sweet potatoes are grown, and on 200,000 farms
of Negroes there are no gardens of any sort. These hun-
dreds of thousands of farms without cattle, grain, or gar-
dens are for the most part operated by tenants. In their
behalf, the Tuskegee Negro Conference respectfully re-
quests of the planters, bankers, and other representatives
of the financial interests of the South that more oppor-
tunities be given Negro tenants on plantations to grow
crops other than cotton."
After the regular conference the usual Conference of
Workerswasheld. This conference is composed of people
such as heads of schools and colleges, preachers, teachers,
and persons generallyholding responsible positions of lead-
ership in their respective communities. These leaders
discuss the larger community problems in distinction
fromindividual problems. Atthis gathering, for instance,
the principal of the County High School at Cottage
Grove, Ala., explained howthrough diversified farmingthe
171


--- PAGE 216 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
parents of his students had been able to live while holding
their cotton for higher prices.
Some of the principals of schools told how they had
accepted cotton as payment of tuition for some of their
students. Others had taken in payment barrels of syrup,
sacks of corn, and hogs. All the schools reported cutting
expenses, by reduction of their dietary, the salaries of
teachers, or some other forms of retrenchment, meaning
sacrifice for students or teachers, or both, that the work of
education might continue and weather the hard times.
In concluding the conference Booker Washington ex-
plained the terms of the recently enacted Smith Lever
Act for Federal aid in the extension of agricultural educa-
tion throughout the rural districts of the country. Thiis
ended the twentieth session of the great Tuskegee Negro
Conference and the last session presided over by the
Founderofthe Conference. It was most appropriate that
this, his last conference, should have so unanimously and
effectively applied one of the leading tenets of Booker
Washington's teaching namely, the winning of lasting
profit from the experiences of adversity.
As well as these annual Farmers' Conferences there are
held at Tuskegee monthly meetings for the farmers from
the locality where they display their products, tell of their
successes and failures, and compare notes on their experi-
ences all under the expert leadership, guidance, and advice
ofthe staff ofthe agricultural department ofthe Institute.
Every month, or oftener, there is an agricultural exhibit in
which the best products of the various crops, such as pota-
172


--- PAGE 217 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
toes, corn, and cotton are displayed, and the methods used
in their productionexplained byfigures andgraphic charts.
As early as 1895 BookerWashington started a campaign
to get his people to raise more pigs. This campaign he
revived at intervals, and for the last time in the fall of
1914, when the whole country and particularly the South
was suffering from the first acute depression caused by the
European War. In the Southern States this depression
was, of course, especially acute because the European
market for cotton was for the time being cut off. As one
of the means to aid his people in this trying time he sent
the following letter to the entire press of the South of
both races:
"PIGS AND EDUCATION; PIGS AND DEBTS'*
To the Editor:
Our race is in constant search of means with which to
provide better homes, schools, colleges, and churches, and
with which to pay debts. This is especially true during
the hard financial conditions obtaining on account of the
European War. All of this cannot be done at once, but
great progress can be made by a good strong pull together
in a simple, direct manner. How?
There are 1,400,000 colored families wholive on farms or
in villages, or small towns. Ofthis number, at the present
time, 700,000 have no pigs. I want to ask that each
family raise at least one pig this fall. Where one or more
pigs are already owned, I want to ask that each family
raise one additional pig this falL
As soon as possible, I want to ask that this plan be fol-
lowed by the organization of a Pig Club in every com-
173


--- PAGE 218 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
rnunity where one does not already exist. I want
^
to
ask that the matter be taken up at once through families,
schools, churches, and societies, Farmers
3
Institutes, Busi-
ness Leagues, etc.
The average pig is valued at about $5. If each family
adds only one pig, in a few months at the present price for
hogs, $10 would be added to the wealth ofthe owner, and
$14,000,000 to the wealth of the colored people. If each
family adds two pigs, it would have in a few months $20
more wealth, and 28,000,000 would be added with
which to promote the welfare of the race during the
money stringency created by the European War.
Letus not put it off, but organize Pig Clubs everywhere.
Give each boy and girl an opportunity to own and grow
at least one pig.
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON,
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama.
This letter was not only printed by most of the white
papers as well as all ofthe Negro papers, but it waswidely
endorsed editorially in the white as well as the black press.
Many of the newspapers for whites urged that the white
farmers also follow the suggestion. The granges and
farmers
5
institutes of both races took up the appeal and
urged it upon their members. There can be no doubt that
through the publication ofthis one brief letter, sent out at
just the right psychological moment, Booker Washington
materially aided the Southern farmers of both races to
tide over a serious crisis and materially increased the
economicwealth ofthe entire South. Ashewell knew, the
people were desperate and panicky and hence ready to
174


--- PAGE 219 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
follow almost any lead. In any ordinary state of the
public mind such a letter could have produced nothing
like such an influence. This well illustrated Booker
Washington's accurate knowledge of and feeling for the
psychology of the public which enabled him almost with**
out exception to speak or remain silent at the right
times.
Booker Washington was not only interested in black
farmers but white farmers. He always emphasized the
responsibility of the farmer as the builder of the founda-
tions of society. He was constantly inviting the white
farmers of the surrounding country to visit the school and
see what was being done on the school farms and by the
Experiment Station. And the white farmers availed
themselves freely of this opportunity and profited by it.
The schooFs veterinarian is probably the only one in the
county, and this division was established very largely for
the purpose of bringing the school and the community
both white and black into closer relation. In dealing
with farmers, even moreperhaps thanwith other classes of
people, Washington would appeal to their pride and even
to their vanity. He was fond of telling them that they
were the salt of the earth. One of his favorite stories
was about the farmer who keeps his best potatoes for him-
self and his family and sends the speckled ones to town;
keeps his tender young chickens and sends the old tough
ones to town; keeps his rich milk and sends his skimmed
milk to town. While there may never have been quite
such a farmer the story had its element of truth, and
175


--- PAGE 220 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
helped to make the farmer appreciate his good fortune
and his importance in the scheme of things.
In 1910, when the last Federal Census was taken, 503
Negro farm owners in Macon County, Booker Washing-
ton's home county, owned 61,689 acres, or an average of
more than one hundred and twenty-two and one-half
acres of land per man. This is probably the largest
amount of land owned by the Negroes of any county in
the United States. Certainly this was true at that time.
The better class of Negro farmers has greatly increased
during the past thirty years until at present from 90 to
95 per cent, of the 3,800 Negro farmers in the county
operate their own farms either as cash tenants or owners.
Theincrease in the numberofNegroes owningor operating
farms has been an important factor in securing a better
quality and variety of food. They have diversified their
crops and raised a larger amountoftheirownfood supplies,
particularly meat and vegetables, and they have produced
more milk, butter, and eggs. It will be seen that Booker
Washington's voice when he reiterated over and over
again, "The man who owns the land will own much else
besides," did not fall upon deaf ears.
When Booker Washington came to Macon County and
founded Tuskegee Institute, in 1881, the soil wasworn out,
and cotton, the chief crop, was selling for an almost con-
stantly lowering price. Although there were few counties
with a lower yield ofcotton per acre, one-quarter of a bale,
over 42 per cent, of the tilled land of the county was
devoted exclusively to this crop. Very little machinery


--- PAGE 221 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
was used in the farming, the antique scooter plow and
hoe being the main reliance. The soil was rarely tilled
morethan three or four inches deep. Therewas, in fact, a
superstition among whites as well as blacks that deep
plowingwas injurious to the soil. Two-horse teams were
seldom used. Sub-soiling, fall plowing, fallowing, and
rotation of crops were little known and less practised.
The county was producing per capita per year only about
five pounds of butter, four dozen eggs, and less than three
chickens.
The Negroes were with few exceptions shiftless and
improvident plantation laborers and renters. Of the
almost 13,000 Negroes in the county not more than fifty
or sixty owned land. They lived almost exclusively in
one-room cabins. Sometimesin addition to the immediate
family there were relatives and friends living and sleeping
in this one room. The common diet ofthese Negroes was
fat pork, corn bread, and molasses. Manymeals consisted
ofcorn bread mixed with salt water. This, then, was the
raw material with which Booker Washington had to work
and from which has been developed, largely through his
influence, one ofthe most prosperous agricultural counties
in the South a county which has been heralded in the
press as feeding itself because of the great abundance and
variety ofits products. In 1910 the per capita production
for the countywas: 40 gallons ofmilk, 1 1 poundsofbutter,
7 dozen eggs, and 5 chickens. It must, of course, do more
than this before it will actually feed itself.
Mr, Washington was constantly drumming it into the
177


--- PAGE 222 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
consciousness of the Negro farmer that as long as he
remained ignorant and improvident he was sure to be ex-
ploited and imposed upon. He used to illustrate this by
the story of the ignorant Negro who after paying a white
manfifty cents a week for six months on a five-dollar loan
cheerfully remarked: "Dat Mr. sho is one fine
gen'lman, cause he never has ast me fo* one cent ob dat
principal" It may be surmised that this type of money
lender is not enthusiastic over Negro education.
It is significant of the importance which Booker Wash-
ington attached to agriculture that the first great Federal
official whom he invited to visit the school was the Na-
tional Secretary of Agriculture. In 1897 he got the Hon,
James Wilson, Secretary of Agriculture in President
McKinley's Cabinet, to visit Tuskegee and attend the
dedication ofthe schooFs first agricultural building.
Secretary Wilson arrived at night accompanied by
Dr. J. L. M. Curry, a Southerner, a leader of the educa-
tional thought of the South, and the secretary of the
John K Slater Fund Board. The students lined up on
either side of the main thoroughfare through the school
grounds with back of them a great gathering of the farm-
ers from the surrounding territory and many from a dis-
tance. Each one of this great throng was given a pine
torch and all these torches were simultaneously lighted
as SecretaryWilsonentered theschoolgrounds. TheSecre-
tary and Doctor Curry, preceded by the Institute Band,
rode between these two great masses of cheering people
and flaming torches.


--- PAGE 223 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
The next day the dedication exercises were held on a
specially constructed platform piled high with the finest
specimens of every product known to that section of the
South. On this platform, with the Secretary and Doctor
Curry, were the State Commissioner of Agriculture and
several other high State officials and many other promi-
nent white citizens. This was the formal launching of
the Agricultural Department of the school. George W.
Carver, the full-blooded African and eminent agricultural
scientist, of whom mention has already been made, had
recently been placed in charge of this department. He
had come from the Agricultural Department of Iowa
State College, of which Secretary Wilson had been the
head.
The annual budget of this department alone is now
nearly fifty thousand dollars a year, and more than a
thousand acres ofland are cultivated underthe supervision
of the agricultural staff. The modest building which
Secretary Wilson helped to dedicate has long since been
outgrown and the department is now housed in a large,
impressive brick building known as the Millbank Agri-
cultural Building.
Under the provisions of the Smith-Lever Act, passed
by Congress in 1914 for the purpose of aiding the States
in Agricultural Extension Work, Booker Washington
secured for Tuskegee a portion of the funds allotted to
the State ofAlabamafor such work. Withthe aid ofthese
funds Agricultural Extension Schools have been organized.
These schools are conducted in cooperation with the
*79


--- PAGE 224 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Agricultural Department of the Alabama Polytechnic
Institute and the farm demonstration work ofthe United
States Department of Agriculture. They are really a
two days' Short Course in Agriculture carried out to the
farmers on their own farms. These schools have the
advantage over the Short Course given to the farmers on
the Institute grounds in that they have the farmers' prob-
lems right before them, to be diagnosed and remedies
applied at once. Through such schools farm instruction
is-being carried to the Negroes ofevery Black Belt County
of Alabama.
T. M. Campbell of the Tuskegee Institute, the District
Agent in charge of these Extension Schools for the Negro
Farmers of Alabama, reports that among the subjects
taught the men are home gardening, seed selection, repair
of farm tools, the growing of legumes as soil builders and
cover crops, best methods of fighting the boll-weevil,
poultry raising, hog raising, corn raising, and pasture mak-
ing. The women are instructed in sewing, cooking, wash-
ing and ironing, serving meals, making beds, and methods
for destroying household pests and for the preservation
of health. At all the meetings the names and addresses
of those present are taken for the purpose of following
them up by correspondence from the district agent's
office, so that the benefits of the instruction shall not be
lost from one year to another. The slogan for these
Alabama schools is: "Alabama Must Feed Herself."
Practically all the black farmers have shown a pathetic
eagerness to learn and the white farmers and the white
180


--- PAGE 225 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
demonstration agents everywhere have heartily cooper-
ated. Churches, schoolhouses, and courthouses have been
placed at the district agent's disposal for the Extension
School session. One of the most hopeful features of the
experiment has been the great interest in this new and
better farming aroused among the boys and girls an
interest which the ordinary rural school sadly fails even
in attempting to arouse. All told throughout the State
3,872 colored people attended these schools the first year*
The sessions were usually opened by a prayer offered by
one of the rural preachers. In one such prayer the
preacher said among other things: "0Lord, have mercy
on dis removable school; mayit purmernate dis whole Ian*
an' country!" At another meeting, after the workers
had finished a session, some of the leading colored farmers
werecalled on to speak. One ofthem opened his remarks
with the words: "I ain't no speaker, but I jes wan* a tell
you how much I done been steamilated by dis my only
two days in school!**
Areport ofone ofthese schools held recently at Monroe-
ville, Ala., reads: "Only subjects with which the rural
people are directly concerned are introduced and stressed
by the instructors, such as pasture making, necessary
equipment for a one and two horse farm, care of farm
tools, crop rotation, hog raising, care of the cow, seed
selection, diversified farming, how to make homemade
furniture, fighting the fly, and child welfare.
"The home economics teacher attracted the attention
of all the colored farmers and also the white visitors by
181


--- PAGE 226 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
constructing out of dry goods boxes an attractive and
substantial dresser and washstand, completing the same
before the audience, even to the staining, varnishing,
hanging the mirrors and attaching the draperies." One
paper, in estimating the value of these Movable Agri-
cultural Schools said: "Given ten years ofgood practical
agricultural instruction of the kind that was imparted
to the Negro farmers, their wives and children, for the
past three weeks in Wilcox, Perry, and Lowndes counties,
there is no reason why every Negro farmer in the State
should not only help "Alabama feed herself/ but so in-
crease the yield of its marketable products that the State
will be able to export millions ofdollars' worth offood and
foodstuffs each year/*
These Extension Schools are advertised by posters just
like a country circus, except that the language is less
grandiloquent. On the following page is a typical an-
nouncementpresentedin heavyblacktypeonyellowpaper.
Thus did Booker Washington in the very year of his
death, with the aid of the National Government, launch
the last of his many means for helping the people whose
welfare lay ever nearest his heart the Negro farmers.
These Extension Schools are literally "going out 'into the
by-ways and hedges*" carrying to those who most need it
Booker Washington's gospel of better farming.
Oneofthe great secrets ofMr. Washington's success was
his unerring instinct for putting first things first. In
nothing that he did was this trait better illustrated than
in the unceasing emphasis which he placed upon the fun-
182


--- PAGE 227 ---
THE NEGRO FARMER
Co-operative Extension Work in Agriculture and Home Economics
STATE OF ALABAMA
FARMERS ATTENTION!
AN EXTENSION SCHOOL .
AGRICULTURE AND HOME ECONOMICS
COLORED FARMERS, BOYS, GIRLS, AND WOMEN
WILL BE HELP IN PERB.Y COUNTY AT
MARION, FEBRUARY $-9
MORNING STAR COMMUNITY, FEBRUARY 11-12
COME AND BRING YOUR FAMILY!
THE PROGRAM OF THE SCHOOL WILL EMBRACE THE FOLLOW-
ING SUBJECTS AND MANY OTHERS.
FOR MEN AND BOYS
Diversified Farming for the South, "A Rayof Hopeto the Manwith the Hoe.**
How to Make the Cotton Farm Fertile Every Farmer Must Feed Himself.
Care and Treatment of Live Stock " To Thee, my Master, I offer my prayer;
feed me, water and care for me, and when the day's work is done, provide me
with shelter." From the Horses* Prayer.
Cotton Growing under Boll Weevil Conditions Looks like Billie Boll Weevil
is here to stay.
Waste caused by weeds, stumps and skips.
Corn Seed testing.
Dairying and Its Possibilities in Alabama.
Sweet Potatoes How to grow and save them.
FOR WOMEN AND GIRLS
"Home Made Home." A Home should be more than a place in which to tat
and sleep.
The Health ofthe Family Much responsibility rests on the Mother.
Child Welfare Every 4th Negro baby dies before it is One Year Old. Fifty
per cent of the diseases ofNegro children under One Year can be prevented.
The Care of the Girls and Boys on the Farm Make them your partners in the
business of Home Making .
Demonstrationin Cookery Toofewofourwomenandgirls knowhowto cook.
A FREE PICTURE SHOW WILL BE GIVEN ONE NIGHT AT
EVERY MEETING PLACE
This Extention School is being held underthe auspices ofthe Extension Service
ofthe United States Department of Agriculture and the Alabama Polytechnic
Institute. The subjects will be discussed by experts from the Tuskegee Nor-
mal and Industrial Institute.
T. M. CAMPBELL, District Demonstration Agent,
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama.
183


--- PAGE 228 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
damental importance of agriculture. He never forgot
that over 80per cent, ofhis peopledrewtheirlivingdirectly
from the soil. Henever ceased to impress upon the busi-
ness and professional men of his race that their success
was dependent upon the success of the farmers; and upon
the farmers that unless they succeeded the business and
professional men could not succeed. In short, he made
Tuskegee first and foremost an agricultural school be-
cause the Negro race is first and foremost an agricultural
race.
184


--- PAGE 229 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
BOOKER WASHINGTON AND THE NEGRO
BUSINESS MAN
IN 1900 Booker Washington founded the National Negro
Business League. Hewas president ofthis leaguefromits
foundation until his death.
During the winter of 1900, after reviewing the situation
at length with his friend T. Thomas Fortune, the nestor of
Negrojournalism, and at that time the dominant influence
in the New York Age, who was spending the winter at
Tuskegee, with Mr. Scott andothers of his friends, he came
to the conclusion that the time had come to bring the
business men and women of his race together in a great
national organization, with local branches throughout the
country* He decided that such an organization might be
a powerful agency in creating the race consciousness and
race pride for which he was ever striving. All the then-
existing organizations, other than the sick and death bene-
fit societies and the purelysocial organizations, had as their
main purpose the assertion of the civil and political rights
of the Negro. There was no organization calculated to
focus the attention of the Negroes on what theywere do-
ing and could do for themselves in distinction from what
was being done for them and to them. All the existing
185


--- PAGE 230 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
associations kid their chief emphasis upon the rights of
the Negro rather than his duties. Mr. Washington held
that without in any degree sacrificing their just demands
for civil andpolitical rights amorewholesomeandconstruc-
tive attitude could be developed by stressing the duties
and the opportunities of the race. He believed it would
be helpful to emphasize in an organized way what they
had done and could do in the wayofbusiness achievement
in spite of race prejudice rather than what they had not
done and could not do because of racial discrimination.
He believed they needed to have brought home to them
not howmanyofthem had been held down, but howmany
of them had come up and surmounted obstacles and diffi-
culties. He believed that they should have it impressed
upon them that the application of business methods would
bring rewards to a black man just as to a white man.
The first meeting of the National Negro Business
League was held in Boston, August 23 and 24, 1900.
After these sessions Booker Washington made the follow-
ing statement ofthe purpose in calling the meeting and the
results obtained:
"As I have travelled through the country from time to
time I have been constantly surprised to note the number
of colored men and women, often in small towns and re-
mote districts, whoare engaged in various lines ofbusiness.
In many cases the business was very humble, but never-
theless it was sufficient to indicate the opportunities ofthe
race in this direction. Myobservation in this regard led
me to believe that the time had come for the bringing to-
186


--- PAGE 231 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
gather ofthe leading and most successful colored men and
women throughout the country who are engaged In busi-
ness. After consultation with men and women in various
parts ofthe country it was determined to call a meeting in
the city of Boston to organize the NationalNegro Business
League. This meeting was held during the 23d and 24th
of August, and it was generally believed that it was one of
the most successful and helpful meetings that has ever
been held among our people. The meeting was called
with twoobjects in view: first, to bringthe menandwomen
engaged in business together, in order that they might get
acquainted with each other and get information and in-
spiration from each other; secondly, to form plans for an
annual meeting and the organization of local business
leagues that should extend throughout the country. Both
of these objects, I think, have been admirably accom-
plished. I think there has never been a time in the history
of the race when all feel so much encouraged in relation
to their business opportunities as now. The promoters of
this organization appreciate very keenly that the race
cannot depend upon mere material growth alone for its
ultimate success, but they do feel that material prosperity
will greatly hasten their recognition in other directions/'
The spirit and purpose of this first national convention
ofNegro business men may be gathered by this quotation
from the speech ofJ. H. Lewis, a merchant tailor, and per-
haps the most successful business man of the race at the
time: "But what hope has the Negro to succeed in busi-
ness?" said Mr. Lewis. "Ifyou can make a better article
187


--- PAGE 232 ---
BOOKER T, WASHINGTON
than anybody else, and sell it cheaper than anybody else,
you can command the markets of the world. Produce
something that somebody else wants, whether it be a shoe
string or a savings bank, and the purchaser or patron will
not trouble himself to ask who the seller is. This same
great economic law runs through every line of industry,
whether it be farming, manufacturing, mercantile or
professional pursuits. Recognize this fundamental law
of trade; add to it tact, good manners, a resolute will, a
tireless capacity for hard work, and you will succeed in
business. I have found in my own experience of thirty
years in business that success and its conditions lie around
us, regardless of race or color. I believe that it is possible
for any manwiththe proper stuffin himto make a success
in business wherever he may be. The best and only capi-
tal necessary to beginwith is simplyhonesty, industry, and
common sense."
The BostonHeraldofAugust24, 1900, said ofthis gather-
ing: "The national convention of colored business men
began its sessions in this city yesterday in a businesslike
and hopeful manner. This is not a political gathering. It
is not a race gathering in the sense ofone met to air senti-
mental grievances that spring from race oppositions.
. . . President Washington believes that the security
and progress ofthe colored people in this land depend upon
their development of a moral worth commanding respect
and an industrial capacity that will make them both use-
ful and independent. H apprehends that these qualities
cannot be bestowed as a gift of benevolence, but must be
188


--- PAGE 233 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
acquired by individual energy and struggle.
*
As I have
noted/ hesays, 'the condition ofour people in nearly every
part ofour country, I have always been encouraged by the
fact that almost without exception, whether in the North
or in the South, wherever I have seen a black manwhowas
succeeding in his business, who was a taxpayer, and who
possessed intelligence and high character, that individual
wastreated with the highest respect bythe members ofthe
white race. In proportion as we can multiply those ex-
amples, North and South, will our problem be solved/
That is the great lesson that the members of the colored
race have to learn. It will aid in extending this knowl-
edge for those colored business men who have attained a
measurable degree of success in life to meet for mutual
encouragement and helpfulness."
Just fifteen years later, in August, 1915, Booker Wash-
ington presided over the last session of the league held
during his lifetime. This meeting also was held in Boston.
There attended it seven hundred delegates from thirty
different States. Mr. Washington in his annual address as
president summed up what had been accomplished by the
race during the fifteen-year interval and projected what
they should strive for in the future. Healso took occasion
publicly to thank his foremost colleagues in developing the
work ofthe league, particularly Mr. Scott, the secretary of
the league. Undoubtedlyhe fully realized that it was his
farewell meeting. He practically collapsed before the
sessions were over. In less thanthree monthshewasdead.
Among other things he said in this speech: "Since the
189


--- PAGE 234 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
league met in Boston fifteen years ago, great changes have
taken place among our people in property-getting and
in the promotion of industrial and business enterprises.
These changes have taken place not solely because of the
work ofthe league, but this and similar organizations have
had much to do with bringing about this progress. Let
me be more specific.
. . . The value of the Negro's
farm property alone is 1,142,000,000. From 1900 to
1910, the Negro's farm property increased 128 per cent.
In 1863 we had as a race 2,000 small business enterprises
of one kind and another. At the present time, the Negro
owns and operates about 43,000 concerns, with an annual
turnover of about one billion dollars. Within fifty years
we have made enough progress in business to warrant the
operation ofover fifty banks. With all I have said, we are
still a poorrace, as compared with manyothers; but I have
given these figures to indicate the direction in which we are
travelling/*
Later he said: "A landless race is like a ship without a
rudder. Emphasizing again our opportunities, especially
as connected with the soil, we nowhave, for example, 122
poultry raisers; the number should be increased to 1,500.
We now have 200 dairymen; the number should be in-
creased to 2,000.
. . . We now own and operate 75
bakeries; the number can be increased to 500, From 32
brickmakers the numbercan be increased to 3,000. From
200 sawmills we can increase the number to 1,000."
And so he continued giving the present achievement and
future goal for many more industries. After giving these
190


--- PAGE 235 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
estimates he said: "With our race, as it has been and al-
ways will be with all races, without economic and business
foundation, it is hardly possible to have educational and
religious growth or political freedom.
"We can learn some mighty serious lessons just now
from conditions in Liberia and Hayti. For years, both in
Liberia and Hayti, literary education and politics have
been emphasized, but while doing this the people have
failed to apply themselves to the development of the soil,
mines, and forests. The result is that, from an economic
point ofview, those two republics have become dependent
upon other nations and races. In both republics the con-
trol of finances is in the hands of other nations, this being
true notwithstanding the fact that the two countries have
natural resources greater than other countries similar in
size. . . . Mere abstract, unused education means
little for a race or individual. An ounce of application is
worth a ton of abstraction. Wemust not be afraid to pay
the price of success in business the price of sleepless
nights, the price of toil when others rest, the price ofplan-
ning to-day for to-morrow, this year for next year. If
some one else endures the hardships, does thethinking, and
pays the salaries, some one else will reap the harvest and
enjoy the reward/
5
Just before his closing words he said: "No matter how
poor you are, how black you are, or how obscure your
present work and position, I want each one to remember
that there is a chance for him, and the more difficulties
he has to overcome the greater will be his success."
191


--- PAGE 236 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Perhaps the most significant speech at this conference,
next to that of BookerT. Washington, was that ofWilliam
Henry Lewis who is probably the foremost lawyer of the
Negro race in America. Mr. Lewis is a graduate of Har-
vard where he distinguished himself on the football field
as well as in the classroom. After graduation from the
Harvard Law School he served with distinction in the
Massachusetts Legislature, wasappointed'Assistant United
States District Attorney for the Boston district by Presi-
dent Roosevelt, and became Assistant Attorney-General
ofthe United States under President Taft.
In opening his speech Mr. Lewis said: "I do not know
why my fellow-citizens have chosen me for this honor,
except to heap coals of fire upon myhead. Fifteen years
ago I was not with you. I was one of the critics, one of
the scoffers, one ofthose who asked,
'
Whatis it all about?
'
*What does it amount to?
3
You have lived to confute
myjudgment, and shamemysneers, and I amnowmaking
generous acknowledgment of my error. I claim no merit
in doing this, except that I can look backward as far as
your great leader can look forward. Booker Washington
has always been from fifteen to twenty years ahead of any
other leader of his race. . . . While most of us were
agonizing over the Negro's relation to the State and his
political fortunes, Booker Washington saw that there was
a great economic empire that needed to be conquered.
He saw an emancipated race chained to the soil by the
Mortgage Crop System, and other devices, and he said,
'You must own your own land, you must own your own
192


--- PAGE 237 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
farms
5
and forthwith there was a second emancipation.
He saw the industrial trades and skilled labor pass from
our race into other hands. He said, 'The hands as well
as the heads must be educated/ and forthwith the educa-
tional system of America was revolutionized. He saw
the money earned by the hard toil of black men passing
into other men's pockets. He said, 'The only way to
save this money is to go into business sell as well as
buy/ He saw that if the colored race was to become
economically self-sufficient, it must engage in every form
of human activity. Himself a successful business man as
shown by Tuskegee's , millions, he has led his race to
economicfreedom/
* ^
Later Mr. Lewis said: "Just as in Boston three-quarters
of a century ago began the movement for Emancipation
from Slavery, so fifteen years ago appropriately began
the movement for our economical independence. . .
In 1900 there was one league with 50 members, and a few
businesses represented. To-day I am told there are 600
leagues, nearly 40,000 members, who represent every
branch and variety of business, trade and finance. When
one realizes that business rules the world, the possibility
of such an organization seems almost unlimited in its
powerto help the race along other lines ofprogress/*
Such a tribute from one of the most rarely and gen-
uinely talented members of "The Talented Tenth" was
indeed a triumph for Booker T. Washington and his
policies. In fact, it may fairly be said that this event
marked the end of the honest opposition from this element


--- PAGE 238 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
of the Negro race the end of the honest opposition of a
group or section of the race in distinction from the of
course inevitable opposition ofindividuals here and there.
Oneof the features ofthis 1915 meeting was a summary
ofthe economic progress ofthe race since the organization
ofthe league fifteen years before. This summary brought
out the following facts:
In 1900, when the National Negro Business League
was organized, there were about 20,000 Negro business
enterprises; nowthere are 45,000.
In 1900 there were two Negro banks; now there are
Si-
In 1900 Negroes were running 250 drug stores; nowthey
have 695.
In 1900 there were 450 undertaking businesses operated
byNegroes;nowthere are about 1,000.
In 1900 there were 149 Negro merchants engaged in
wholesale businesses; nowthere are 240.
In 1900 there were 10,000 Negro retail merchants; now
there are 25,000.
In the fifteen years since the National Negro Business
League was organized, farm property owned by Negroes
has made a remarkable increase. From 1900 to 1910, the
value of domestic animals owned by Negro farmers in-
creased from $85,216,337 to $177,273,785, or 107 per cent.;
poultry from $3,788,792 to $5,113,756, or 36 per cent.;
implementsandmachineryfrom$i8,586,225to$36,86i,4i8,
or 98 per cent.; land and buildings from $69,636,420 to
$273,501,665, or 293 per cent. In ten years the total
194


--- PAGE 239 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
value of farm property owned by Negroes increased from
$177,404,688 to $492,892,218, or 177 per cent.
It Is significant of the standing and catholicity of this
convention that the Governor of Massachusetts, Hon.
David F. Walsh, and Dr. John E. White, a leading white
Southern clergyman, both spoke at the opening meeting
at Symphony Hall.
The National League is made up of more than 600 local
leagues which influence in a direct and practical way al-
most every community In the United States with any con-
siderable number of Negro inhabitants. These local
leagues are all chartered, guided, and supervised by the
national organization and with them all the Secretary, Mr.
Scott, keeps in touch. From time to time he Issues
pamphlets setting forth methods oforganization, activities
that can be undertaken, and subjects that maybediscussed
under the head of "Some things that it is possible for a
local league to do to be of service to the town or city in
whichIt is located" are the following:
"(i) To keep a list of the young men and women who
are Intelligent, trained, and qualified to fill responsible
places as clerks, accountants, salesmen, janitors, porters,
etc.; in this way a league can do much in getting suitable
occupations for as many as are competent, especially so in
Northern States.
"(2) In protecting the community against fraudulent
schemes, as false stock companies, that are gotten up
solely for the purpose of defrauding colored people.
"(3) In fostering an interest in civic affairs, such as
I9S


--- PAGE 240 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
sanitation, clean yards, cultivating pride in making at-
tractive in appearance the home districts of our people,
and in other ways showing an interest in everything that
maymake up a better community life."
In the same pamphlet under the head of "Suggested
Subjects for Discussion" comes the following list:
1. Howto unify the colored people in the business in-
terests ofthe community.
2. What the professional men, ministers, teachers,
doctors, lawyers, etc., can do to assist the business men
and women.
3. What the business men can do to assist the profes-
sional men.
4. Patronizing Negro business enterprises.
5. What new business can be established in the com-
munity.
6. Howcanthe business enterprises already established
be improved?
7. Howto secure additional countrytrade.
8. If a bank does not exist, can one be established and
supported?
9. If a millinery establishment does not exist, can one
be established and supported, etc. ?
10. If a shoe store or gents' furnishing store does not
exist, can one be established and supported?
11. If a drug-store does not exist, can one be estab-
lished and supported?
In another such pamphlet monthly meetings between
the grocers andthe clubwomen are suggested. Such meet-
196


--- PAGE 241 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
ings would have as their object the fixing of uniform and
mutually satisfactory prices and service. It is also recom-
mended that Negro insurance agents constitute them-
selves unofficial health inspectors for their sections of the
town. In this capacity they would report to the public
health committee of the local league all instances of
badly ventilated homes or schools, mosquito-breeding
spots, accumulations of rubbish and filth, or any other
conditions menacing the health of the colored citizens.
The suggestion is made that where possible reading-rooms
and bureaus of information be opened in connection with
the offices of Negro newspapers and that such rooms
place the colored papers from all sections of the country
at the disposal of the patrons after the editor has finished
with them. That several small shopkeepers club together
and employone expert bookkeeper is another idea offered.
It is also proposed that small retailers get together for the
purpose of purchasing jointly such commodities as can be
advantageously secured in this manner. It is finally
urged that a committee be appointed each year to makea
social survey ofthe Negro population. This study would
show what progress had been made during the year in
all lines of endeavor and at the same time furnish a direc-
tory of all the business and social activities of the Negroes
of the community. It is pointed out that the sale of
advertising space in its pages would alone more than pay
for such a directory.
It will be noted that these business leagues, like all
other organizations founded or moulded by Booker Wash-
197


--- PAGE 242 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
ington, do not stick to their lasts in any narrow sense.
Mr. Washington never lost sight of the fact that the fun-
damental concern of all human beings was living, and that
farming, business, education, recreation, or what not, were
only important in so far as they made the whole of life
better worth living. The means employed never obscured
his vision of the aim sought as is so frequently and un-
happily the case with lesser men.
Just as at the agricultural conferences, so at these
business gatherings, BookerWashington used the methods
employed by the revivalist at the experience meeting.
By so doing he accomplished the double purpose of en-
couraging the successful by the tribute of public recogni-
tion and spurring on the less successful and the unsuc-
cessful to go and do likewise. Also by means of men and
women telling their fellows in open meeting how they
achieved their success the race is, as it were, revealed to
itself. It was, for instance, through a meeting of the
National Negro Business League that it came to light
that the man who raises the most potatoes in the United
States, and who is commonly known as the Potato King
of the West, is a Negro J. G. Groves of Edwardsville,
Kan. Groves' story at one of the annual meetings at-
tracted so much attention that an account of his life
later appeared in an illustrated special article in the
American Magazine. It was also discovered through a
league meeting that Scott Bond, another colored man,
was probably the most successful farmer in the State of
Arkansas. After he had told his story at the meeting
198


--- PAGE 243 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
of the National League held in New York in 1910 he was
pursued by cameramen and interviewers for days and
weeks and his story was spread all over the United States.
At the Chicago meeting of 1912 Watt Terry, a modest
and even shrinking colored man of Brockton* Mass.,
unfolded a remarkable story of success in spite of the
hardest and must untoward circumstances. So unbe-
lievable seemed this man's story that the Executive Com-
mittee took up with him personally the facts of his re-
cital, and later the Secretary of the League, in response
to a demand, had to vouch for his statements in open
meeting. To clinch the matter still further Mr. Wash-
ington wrote to the Secretary of the Young Men's Chris-
tian Association in Brockton, who replied that Terry's
story had, if anything, been understated rather than
overstated. BookerWashingtonhimselftoldWattTerry's
story in the pages of the Independent for March 27, 1913,
Here it is :
"
. . . Mr. Terry is a modest-appearing
young man about thirty years of age. When he landed
at Brockton some twelve years ago he had, according to
his own story, a capital of just twelve cents. He found
work at first as a coachman. After a time he obtained
what he thought was a better position as janitor in the
Young Men's Christian Association Building. Some of
the members of the association succeeded in getting him a
position as a railway porter.
"*Somehow or other/ said Terry, *I did not care for
that sort of work, and after a few months gave it up. I
made up mymind that I would ratherworkat a trade, and
199


--- PAGE 244 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
tried to get work in one of the shoe factories in Brockton.
As I did not know the trade and there was a good deal of
competition for the places open to apprentices it looked
rather hopeless at first. Finally, I got the foreman to
say he would give me a chance, provided I was willing
to work for two weeks without pay. I accepted that offer
and made up my mind to make the most of those two
weeks/
"At the end of the two weeks Terry had done so well
that he was given a position in which he earned $7 a week.
By sticking close to his job and making the most of his
opportunities he was gradually promoted until he earned
first 10, then $1$, $18, and finally $25 a week.
"'I had some difficulties at first/ said Terry. 'The
other men did not like me at first and showed it. How-
ever, I stuck to the job, kept on smiling, and it was
not long before I was on just as good terms with the men
in the shop as I cared to be. As I did not have much
opportunity to spend mymoney, I found it easier to save/
"When Terry reached the point where he was earning
$25 a week his wife was earning $9 as matron in the
Brockton railway station, and they both saved their
money. Meanwhile Terry had begun to buy and sell
real estate in a small way. One day he sold a house and
lot upon which he cleared as commission $100.
"'That seemed to settle the question of my future/
said Mr. Terry. 'I decided to go into the real estate
business/
"He added that at the present time his gross income
200


--- PAGE 245 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
from his houses was between $6,000 and $7,000 per month-
Altogether, including several store buildings and two
apartment houses containing fifty-four suites of rooms,
Mr. Terry owns 222 buildings in Brockton. One of
these buildings is leased by the United States Govern-
ment for the use of the post-office; another is rented for a
public library and reading-room by the city.
"I should not, perhaps, have dared to make this state-
ment if I had not confirmed the truth of Mr. Terry's
statement by independent inquiry. In a recent letter
from Secretary White, of the Brockton Young Men*s
Christian Association, he says: 'Some weeks ago I wrote
you relative to our mutual friend (Watt Terry's) busi-
ness, but now I want to enclose a clipping from the tax
list which you will see is positive evidence that the time
the taxes wererecorded he wascarryingwell on to $300,000
and I know that his purchase of $120,000 occurred since
that time. It is certainly a most wonderful development
within a few years/
"I ought to add that during all the time that Mr.
Terry has been in Brockton he has been connected with
the Young Men's Christian Association, and not long ago
he contributed $1,000 toward the support of that insti-
tution,
"Many persons will, perhaps, feel that money which is
acquired in this rapid way is likely to do the person who
obtains it as much harm as it does good. I confess that
it seems to me that the same amount of money acquired
more slowly would mean more to the man who gained it.
201


--- PAGE 246 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
On the whole, however, the Negro race has not reached
the point where it has been troubled by the number of
its millionaires. And if getting slowly and laboriously
is a good discipline, the Negro has almost a surplus of that
kind of blessing. I ought to add, also, in justice to Mr.
Terry, that from all I can learn, his rapid rise has neither
injured his character nor destroyed his good sense. I
suspect that the effort to keep all those houses rented and
the effort to pay interest on his mortgages has had a
tendency to make him humble.
55
Although WattTerry's success is, ofcourse, phenomenal
he is only one of the many notably successful Negro busi-
ness men who have told their stories at meetings of
the National Negro Business League. Neither is Mr.
Terry the only Negro who has made a big success in real
estate. At the meeting of the league already described,
held in Boston in 1915, Mr. Washington introduced Philip
A. Payton, Jr., of New York City; E: C. Brown, of Phil-
adelphia, Pa.; and Watt Terry, of Brockton, Mass.; as
the three largest real estate operators of the Negro race.
Philip A. Payton, Jr., was the pioneer in opening the
Harlem district in New York City to settlement by
Negroes, who had formerly been excluded from all decent
portions of the city and obliged to live on San Juan Hill
and in othersections ofunsavoryreputation. E. C. Brown
made money in real estate in Newport News and Norfolk,
Va., and headed movements for the establishment of
Negro banks in both ofthese cities. Afterward he moved
to Philadelphia, where he has opened a bank, and also
202


--- PAGE 247 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
conducts a real estate business on Broad Street the
only Negro, it is said, who conducts a large business enter-
prise on this important thoroughfare. At the same meet-
ing it was brought out that a Negro by the name of
Phillip J. Allston was chemist for the Potter Chemical
Company, having risen from bottle-washer to that re-
sponsible post. The story of J. S. Trower, caterer, of
Philadelphia, showed that he was frequently engaged for
the most important functions in the city and had been
regularly employedbythe Cramps Company,shipbuilders,
to take charge of the catering in connection with the
ceremonies accompanying the launching of new ships for
the Navy. Mrs. Bell Davis of Indianapolis, Ind.? has
become equally successful as a caterer. When the Na-
tional Negro Business League met in Indianapolis it was
she who served the annual banquet. Booker Washington
took the greatest satisfaction in disclosing her achieve-
ments to the Negro people who had previously known
little or nothing about her. He thus introduced her
at a meeting of the League, "Mrs. Bell Davis, a widow,
the celebrated caterer of Indianapolis, Ind., who has
served banquets and receptions in honor of Presidents
and Vice-Presidents of the United States, who owns a
stock of Haviland china, linen, and silverware valued at
thousands of dollars, all unencumbered, furnishes another
illustration of what heights can be attained in the com-
mercial world by strenuous effort and making use of
every little opportunity which presents itself, Mrs,
Davis* humble beginnings, hardships encountered, and
203


--- PAGE 248 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
success achieved would make three chapters of a most
interesting biography."
Among the men spoken of by Booker Washington at
the Philadelphia meeting of the Business League was
Heman E. Perry, the founder of the first and only old
line legal reserve life insurance company operated by and
for Negroes, In his efforts to raise the $100,000 initial
capital required by the law of his State Georgia Mr.
Perry had tramped all over the United States at least-
three times. Finally, having tried every conceivable
source without securing the required amount, he returned
to all the subscribers of capital stock the money they
had paid in plus 4 per cent, interest. This action so
inspired the confidence of the subscribers that almost
without exception they not only returned the money, but
subscribed for additional stock with the result that the
initial capital stock was oversubscribed. When examined
by the State Insurance Department three years after it
opened business this company was found to have a gross
income of almost $77,000 and admitted assets of almost
$160,000. Each subsequent examination by the State
Department has showed a healthy growth, low mortality,
good judgment in the selection ofrisks, promptpaymentof
claims,carefulmanagement,andasoundfinancialcondition.
By means of this company, known as the Standard Life
Insurance Company, life insurance may be had by any
Negro under the same conditions, with the same degree of
security, and at the same rates as a white man.
Among the other notably successful Negro business
204


--- PAGE 249 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
men who have told their stories at meetings of the league
are the following: Victor H. Tulane, of Montgomery,
Ala., whose story of small beginnings and present success
stirred his fellows at a meeting ofthe league. Mr. Tulane
entered the grocery business twenty-five years ago, a
business that any ambitious man of his race may enter,
requiring small capital but unlimited patience and close
attention to business. He now owns considerable prop-
erty, and is a factor in all matters that concern his race
in Montgomery, being regarded by white and colored
citizens alike as Montgomery's first colored citizen. Mr.
Tulanesays: "Twenty-fiveyears ago I was a renter;to-day
I am landlord of not a few tenants. Twenty-five years
ago my stock represented less than a hundred dollars; at
the present time it ^alues several thousands. Twenty-
five years ago I had but one helper a small boy; to-day
I employ on an average ofseven assistants the year round,
excluding my wife and self. Twenty-five years ago I
bought lard in five-pound quantities; to-day I purchase
by the barrel. Twenty-five years ago I bought salt in
ten-cent quantities; at present I buy it in ton lots.
Twenty-three years ago I was unable to secure credit to
the amount of three dollars, but since tliat period the very
house that then refused me has credited me at one time
with several hundred times this amount, and to-day it is
not, howmuch do you owe? but, howmuchdo youwant?
Twenty years ago my business barely required the service
of one horse and wagon; at present it demands the use of
.several Twenty years ago I did an annual business of
205


--- PAGE 250 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
something less than a thousand dollars; during several
years since that time the value of my business has ex-
ceeded $40,000 per year." It is Mr. Tulane's boast that
he has not been denied credit during his business career
excepttheone"time mentioned above, and thathehasnever
been threatened or sued in connection with the collection
ofa debt.
Another man's story that came out at the meeting of
the National Negro Business League is the story ofCharles
H. Anderson, a wholesale and retail fish and oyster dealer.
Heconducts a fish, oyster, and game business in Jackson-
ville, Fla., which supplies the largest hotels and many
of Jacksonville's richest white families. He is also inter-
ested in a fish and oyster packing business on the Florida
coast, and is the cashier of the colored bank at Jackson-
ville. A speaker at the league meeting held in the John
Wanamaker store, Philadelphia, in August, 1913, referred
to Mr, Anderson as follows: "The first time I saw this
gentleman was fourteen years ago, when he was standing
up behind a white sheet that had a round hole cut in it,
bravely negotiating his head and face as a target; he was
working for a man who was running one of those games
known as: *Every-time-you-hit-the-nigger
?
s-head-you-get-
a-fine-cigarf (Uproarious laughter.) There I found him
fourteen years ago, posing as a target, and for the magnifi-
cent sum of five cents anybody could have secured the
privilege of throwing three balls at his face. (Prolonged
laughter and applause as Mr. Anderson stepped forward
and was introduced to Hon. John Wanamaker, who
206


--- PAGE 251 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
warmly shook his hand.) To-day this young man is one
of the most competent and one of the most prosperous
business men of our race, regardless of section, North,
South, East, or West. (Hearty applause.) Recently he
was offered $18,000 for one piece of property which he
owns in Jacksonville, Fla., and if he would sell out to
me to-day all of his real estate and other holdings and
equities, I would be willing to give him my check for
$75,000."
Others are: Edward C. Berry ofAthens, Ohio, whoowns
and operates a family hotel in which he does a business of
$25,000 to $35,000 a year; J. Walter Hodge of Indian-
apolis, Ind., who, inspired by the recitals at the Business
League meetings, gave up his job as a Pullman car porter,
after he had saved some money, and is nowthe owner of a
large real estate business; Thomas H. Hayes who, starting
as a day laborer for the Southern Railway, now controls
probably the largest undertaking establishment in Mem-
phis, Tenn.
Perhaps the most remarkable story of business success
ever told before a meeting of the league was that of J.
H. Blodgett of Jacksonville, Fla. Mr. Blodgett told his
story at the sessions of the league held in Philadelphia
in 1913 at the Academy of Music. By request he in part
repeated it at the meeting held in the Wanamaker Store
the following day. Mr. Blodgett is an ex-slave. He has
had no education whatever except what he has picked up
in his long and successful struggle with life's sternest reali-
ties. We will give his story in his own language. Bear
207


--- PAGE 252 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
in mind that this is the language, as taken down verbatim
by a stenographer at the time, of a totally unschooled
ex-slave. He said: "Now I want to say I went to Jack-
sonville nineteen years ago with the magnificent sum of a
dollar and ten cents in my pocket. (Laughter.) I also
had an extra suit of underclothing in a paper bag; that
was all the baggage I had as a boarder. (Laughter.) I
was also arrested as a tramp for having on a straw hat in
the winter time. (Hearty laughter.) And I say all this
especially to youyoungmenwho are present here to-night,
for so many of our young men seem to think that they
can't start or succeed in business unless somebody shoves
them offthe bankinto thewaterofopportunity and makes
them swim for themselves; I simply want to say this to
you young men, I .started with 1.10 and one extra suit
of underclothing in a paper bag (laughter) and to-day
I pay more taxes than any Negro in Florida. (Prolonged
applause.) I have had all sorts ofstruggles and difficulties
to contend with, but you can't get away from it if
you get anything in this United States of America now,
you have got to work for it. (Hearty applause.) The
white people all over this country have 'weaned the
Negro/ (Laughter and applause.) Dr. Washington has
been going all over this country boasting about what you
could do and what our race has done, and the white man
is just quietly and gently and in every way telling us:
*Go thou and do what Dr. Washington said you could
do/ (Prolonged laughter and applause.)
"When I began, I commenced working for a railroad
208


--- PAGE 253 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
company; I had a splendid job washing cars for a dollar
and five cents a day; I got $8.40 from the railroad every
eight days. After working for a month and a half I
saved enough money to send back and bring my wife
from Charleston, South Carolina, to Jacksonville. Both
of us went to work; we opened a little boarding-house;
she ran that, and when my$1.05 a day enabled meto save
as much as one hundred dollars, I quit that job and began
to hustle for myself. I told the white man I was working
under: 'You don't know that a Negro with $100 in cash
is a rare thing among mypeople. Fmgoing to strike out
and see what I can do by myself/ I made up my mind
that if all of the big Negroes that I had heard of, read
about, and talked with, if they could get honor and recog-
nition by having brains, money, and ability, there was
nothing the matter with me and my poor little wife to
prevent us from getting up, too; so I went to work and de-
termined to work day and night, if need be, to get some
money, and other things necessary to succeed in life. I
wanted money because I had seen and suffered so many
humiliations put on the man who does not have money.
(Applause.)
"The first time I saw this distinguished gentleman
(pointing to Dr. Booker T. Washington) I was laying
brick in Jacksonville, Fla., at $1.25 a day, and he drove
by in companywith Mr. James W. Johnson, Mr. J. Rosa-
mond Johnson, and another gentleman. I had always
loved the big men of my race; even as a little boy I de-
lighted to hear of what they had achieved, and when I
209


--- PAGE 254 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
heard that the great Booker T. Washington was in
town, I quit myjob for that day, went to the place where
he spoke, walked up close, andwashopingsomebodywould
do me the honor of introducing me. But I found the
gentlemen who had him in charge were introducing him
to nobody but the big Negroes, and the big Negroes were
shaking hands with him and completely monopolizing
BookerT. Washington. (Prolonged laughter.) I did not
like to be rude and therefore did not push through the
crowd and, shake hands with him anyway, as I felt like
doing. I was nothing but a poor brick-layer, nobody
would introduce me, but I heard his grand speech, was
richly benefited and inspired by all he said, and when I
went away I made a solemn vow to myself* I said: If
God be with me, I mean to so work and conduct myself
so that some day I shall deserve to shake hands with
Booker T. Washington/ (Hearty applause.) Now let
me tell you the sequel of the story. Away down in Flor-
ida, in my humble home in Jacksonville, there is a room
named
'
Booker T. Washington/ (Applause.) I have
set apart and dedicated a portion of my home in honor of
this distinguished gentleman and leader of our race.
(Applause.) He is the first human being on earth I have
ever permitted to sleep in it, and his good wife is the first
woman and second person I have ever permitted to sleep
in that room. (Prolonged laughter and applause.) We
love him in the South, both Negro and white man!
(Hearty applause.) Booker T. Washington's name is a
monument of strength because he is teaching the Negro
210


--- PAGE 255 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
to use his hands and head in order to be useful in the com-
munity and to achieve success. (Applause.)
"I have been sick this summer and just got back from
Saratoga (prolonged applause) of course all men who
get rich go to Saratoga. (Laughter and applause.) While
there I met some folks, and in the course of my remarks
I had occasion to remind them that Dr. Booker T. Wash-
ington, while an earnest advocate ofindustrial training, is
not an enemy or opposed to higher education. There
was a man from the British West Indies who began to
speakonthesubjectoftheNegro;hebeganto orate around,
began to tell how the Negro must expect to rise in the
world; oh! he made a magnificent speech going to show
that there was nothing in the world like higher education
for the Negro; he even said that the Negro race would
never amount to anything and get its rights until every
one of us had secured a college education. (Laughter.)
Why, you ought to have been there and heard him orate;
he took us all through Greek, Roman, ancient, and medi-
eval history; across the Alps and all around the Egyptian
pyramids (hearty laughter) and even cited the Druids
of old to testify to the grandeur and necessity of higher
education for the Negro. After he got through orating I
said to him:
'
Brother, I was downto a meeting ofNegroes
in the State of Florida at the State Business League,
and I saw sitting on one bench eleven (u) Negro men
whose combined wealth would amount to more than one
million dollars, and not one ofthem ever saw the inside of
a college.* (Prolonged applause, mingled with laughter.)
211


--- PAGE 256 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
And I said to him further than that: 'If any of you gen-
tlemen who claim to be educated in the British West
Indies, and all you gentlemen who hail from Beloit Col-
lege (wherever it is) if you can fool any one of those
eleven Negroes out ofone dime, I will give you ten dollars!*
(Laughter and applause.) Yes, sir, without much edu-
cation these men own their own homes and dozens of
homes in which other people live; they are self-sustaining
and independent, and can write their names to checks
away up in the thousands of dollars; they live in neat,
comfortable, well-appointed homes and enjoy the respect
and esteem of their neighbors black as well as white.
'Now, sir/ I turned to him and asked him, 'will you kindly
tell mewhat is your occupation in life and what you have
been able to accomplish with all this higher education
you have been talking about?* I found out that he was a
waiter in the United States Hotel. (Laughter.) I said
to him further: 'My brother, I don't claim to be an edu-
cated man, but live in a villa of myown; I own consider-
able real estate, and my dear little wife rides around in
our own $5,500 Packard automobile, all paid for/ (Pro-
longed applause and laughter.)
"I am somewhat of a carpenter and builder; I went
to work, bought some ground while it was cheap and at a
time when everything in Jacksonville was at low tide;
there were plenty of sick Yankees whose investments
had depreciated and I invested what money I had in
some land. I would build a house, then sell it; buy more
land, build another house and sell that; after a while I


--- PAGE 257 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
was able to build three houses and sell two, build two and
sell one and so on (applause) until pretty soon I found
myselfin the real estate business, buying land and build-
ing and selling houses. In this way I have gone on build-
ing my own houses until now I have plenty to support
myself and that dear little red-headed woman who has a
seat somewhere in this beautiful audience. (Laughter
and applause.) She doesn't have to keep a boarding-
house any more; she is on the retired list. (Laughter and
applause.) We have made enough to keep from doing
that."
At this point Dr, Washington asked, "How many
houses do you own?
"
Mr. Blodgett replied: "I have been selling houses
pretty rapidly during the last few years, but I have built
and right here I want to say that while my subject is
*
Building and Contracting
7
1 have never built a house for
anybody but myself. I build my own property* I have
built since the fire we had in Jacksonville in 1902 two
hundred and eight houses
r
of my own. (Prolonged ap-
plause.) I have sold a good many of them. When I
realized that I was beginning to get old and not in such
good physical condition as I used to be, I was afraid I
might get afflicted with tuberculosis, or appendicitis,
or some of these other high-sounding diseases the doctors
now talk about (laughter) and so I thought it best to
convert some of my estate into another form that could
be more easily handled by mybetter halfwhen I had gone
to inhabit my mansion in the skies. (Laughter.) So I
213


--- PAGE 258 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
have begun to sell off some of myproperty and get out of
debt. I now have one hundred and twenty-one houses,
the rents from which amount to a little over twenty-five
hundred dollars a month. (Prolonged applause.) I
have invested my money in recent years in what I call
'grip-sack' securities, so that if there should be any little
unpleasantness among the races, I can go to my safe
and grab that grip-sack. (Prolonged laughter and ap-
plause.) You see if there should ever be any friction or
trouble, I can grab my grip-sack, jump into a powerful
machine, and come up here around Philadelphia, 'The
City of Brotherly Love* or over here in Canada, and
I can sit down at my leisure and read in the papers what
they are doing down there. (Prolonged laughter.)
"Dr. Washington has been in my home in Jackson-
ville; I have nowhad the honor of not only shaking hands
with him, but of having him as myspecial guest. I know
I am going to make one break here now, Fmgoing to say
something that my little modest wife may not like me to
say, but I hope she will excuse just this one time (laugh-
ter) for everybody knows that I ain't very bright any-
how not really responsible. (Prolonged laughter.) I
want to say this, not in a boasting way I live in the best
home of any Negro in this country I have so far seen.
(Hearty applause.) I live in a home we call it
*
Blodgett
Villa'; wehave flowers and lawns and vines and shrubbery,
a nice greenhouse and all those things that go to make up
for higher civilization. I surrounded myself with all
these things to show that the Negro has the same taste>
214


--- PAGE 259 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
the same yearning for higher civilization that the white
man has whenever he has the money to afford it. (Ap-
plause.) You know they have been saying all these years
that the Negro is coarse and vicious, that he is kin to the
monkey (laughter) and thatwedonot appreciate those
things that make for higher civilization such as flowers,
hothouses, neatly kept houses and lawns, automobiles,
and such things, so I went and got them. (Applause.)
When you step inside of Mrs. Blodgett's home there you
will find art and music and literature, and if you can find
anything in there that does not tend toward the higher
civilization, you have mypromise and consent to throw it
outdoors. (Laughter and applause.) . . .
**I remember when I was a drayman on the streets of
Jacksonville; I was a great big man, even heavier than
I amnow: I wore a pair ofmagnificent feet appropriate to
mysize, and when I drove along everybody whistled and
called me
c
Old Big One/ Since that time I have gradu-
ated from a drayman to what the program calls me; a
*
Builder and Contractor/ and when they see me now
riding through the streets of Jacksonville in my $5,500
Packard automobile, if one of those Negroes should call
me *Old Big One/ I would put him in jail. (Laughter
and applause.) I am interested in business with white
men, and I tell you when a Negro gets to the point where
he makes cash deposits in a white man's bank say $5,000
this week, $2,000 next week, and so on, they will begin
to discover you, honor and respect you. If you deposit
$2,000 this week, the bank president will know about


--- PAGE 260 ---
'BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
it, and when it gets to the place that you have got in the
bank $25,0005 why this man even (pointing to an ebony
black man in the audience) will have become a bright
mulatto!"
Perhaps the most unique and impressive session of the
National Negro Business League was that held at the
invitation of John Wanamaker in his great department
store in Philadelphia in 1913. One of the most interest-
ing talks at this meeting was that of Charles Banks of
Mound Bayou, Miss. Mr. Banks has been referred
to in an earlier chapter. He has often been called the
J. Pierpont Morgan c>f his race. He said in part: "I
Eve in the little town of Mound Bayou, Miss., that was
founded by Isaiah T. Montgomery, an ex-slave of Jeffer-
son Davis, the President of the Southern Confederacy.
Mr. Montgomery, the ex-slave in question, is present at
this meeting. We live in what is called the
'
Black Belt
of Mississippi* and our plantations embrace some of the
richest and most fertile land that can be found in the
entire
'
Delta/ In some parts of the
e
Delta* the Negro
population outnumbers the white population in a ratio of
five to one. In the town in which I live (Mound Bayou)
we outnumber the white population in a ratio of five to
nothing* (Laughter and applause.)
"Instead of whining and lamenting our lot, and be-
moaning the racial prejudice which exists in our section of
the country, we are taking advantage of some of the
opposition and the tendency to segregate us and we are
trying to show, through the leadership of this ex-slave of
216


--- PAGE 261 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
Jefferson Davis, that it is possible for us to build up a
Negro community, a town owned and controlled by
Negroes right there under his direct supervision. And as
a result, on the Yazoo and Mound Bayou Branch of the
Yazoo Central Railroad, we have one ofthe best-governed
and most prosperous towns on the whole line. We have
something like thirty to forty thousand acres of land in
that rich and fertile country owned and controlled ex-
clusively by Negro men and women. We have there
the little town of Mound Bayou, which it is our privilege
to represent, and so far as Its management or government
is concerned, we have control of everything. There we
have a Negro Depot Agent, a Negro Express Agent, a
Negro Postmaster, a Negro Mayor, a Board of Negro
Aldermen and City Councilmen, and every other official
of the city administration is a full-fledged Negro. In
that town I am the banker, and I pass for a Negro."
(Laughter and applause followed this sally, as the speaker
is the blackest offull-blooded Africans.)
In concluding his address of welcome on this occasion
Mr. Wanamaker said: "I do hope that meetings like this
will comeoften and be held in everylarge city in the North.
In exhibiting to the world the successful business men
and women of your race, your league is doing exactly
what every good merchant legitimately does, that is
you are showing your goods. (Laughter.) And you are
delivering the goods. (Prolonged applause.) Your league
is making an 'Annual Report' as it were; it is making
a
*
Yearly Inventory
7
ofwhat your race has on hand, and
217


--- PAGE 262 ---
BOOKER T WASHINGTON
though this large hall has been the scene of many delight-
ful occasions (mainly connected with this business) your
coming here to-day is the first meeting of its kind.
(Applause.) I believe that this meeting ought to be put
down as historical, and should serve as a set-off in strik-
ing contrast to the stoning of William Lloyd Garrison,
in the streets of Philadelphia, scarcely more than fifty
years ago. (Prolonged applause.) This meeting will
simply help to balance your account. (Applause.) The
world is moving on, and it is a glorious thing to-day to
find that, instead of stepping backward contrary to the
predictions ofsome you are making such splendid strides
forward under the fine leadership of Dr. Booker T. Wash-
ington (applause) as evidenced in this Business League
Convention.
"In closing I want not only to pay just tribute to what
you have achieved in music, in education, and religious
life, but I think it fitting, on this occasion, and I have
planned to show you a fine painting from the brush of the
greatest artist of your race the son of Bishop Tanner.
I have seen his handiwork in some of the art galleries of
the first rank in Europe. For the most part his paintings
are religious in conception, and the peculiar beauty of
them is that they deal with the heart, even as they are fine
expressions of art. (Applause.) Before you leave I have
planned to show you several other pictures of real merit
that members ofyourrace have produced. (Applause.)
"And oh when I consider all these things, and when
I gazed upon this vast and beautiful audience a few
218


--- PAGE 263 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
minutes ago, as youwere singing so fervently our national
anthem, 'America,* as I looked over the sea of earnest,
Intelligent faces, I wondered how on earth we could sing
that song for a hundred years or more I wondered howit
was possible to keep a race like yours enslaved while,
for years and years, the people of this nation sang that
last line of that song, 'Let freedom ring!!!*" (Prolonged
applause,tumultuouscheering, and the waving ofcountless
handkerchiefs as Mr. Wanamaker resumed his seat.)
Aside from having the successful colored men and
women tell one another and their less-successful fellows
how they had achieved their success at these sessions of
the league, Booker Washington also arranged to have one
or more prominent white men speak. His reason for
this, aside from the obvious one of helping to foster
friendly feeling between the races, was, it may safely be
hazarded, to impress upon his people that white people
succeed by the possession and the application of the same
qualities which bring success to colored people. At the
Chicago meeting of the league in 1912 Julius Rosenwald
spoke Julius Rosenwald, the Jewish philanthropist who
has done and is doing so much to help the Negro. It was
he who offered $25,000 to any city in the United States
which would raise $75,000 for a Young Men's Christian
Association Building for colored men. It is he also who
is helping Tuskegee in the building of rural schoolhouses
as was explained in the third chapter. He is one of
Tuskegee's trustees.
Thelate Robert C. Ogden,the NewYorkmanagerofthe
219


--- PAGE 264 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Wanamaker business, addressed the convention of 1905
In New York. He was a man whom Booker Washington
delighted to hold up to his people as an example ofwhat a
man could accomplish through his own unaided efforts.
He had begun his business career at a salary of $5 aweek,
and from that as his starting-point he had risen to be the
New York head of the greatest department store business
in the country. He was for twenty-five years President
of the Board of Trustees of Hampton, a member of the
Tuskegee Board, and the originator and host ofthe annual
educational pilgrimages which gave leading Northerners
a first hand and intelligent insight into the dire need of
education for the masses of the people both white and
black throughout the South. Much of the educational
activity in the South to-day may be traced to the early
Ogden educational pilgrimages.
Theodore Roosevelt spoke at the NewYork meeting in
1910. He had just returned from Africa. He said later
that nothing connected with his homecoming had touched
him so deeply as the ovation given himbythese, his fellow-
citizens ofAfrican descent* Amongother white menwho
have spoken before the league are Henry Clews,^ the
banker; Dr. H. B. Frissell, the Principal of Hampton
Institute, and Dr. J. H. Dillard, president of the Anna T.
Jeanes Foundation of Negro Rural Schools.
One of Mr. Washington's many methods for inspiring
his people to strive for business efficiency and success was
to excite their imaginations byholding up before themthe
achievements of such men as John Wanamaker, Robert^
220


--- PAGE 265 ---
THE NEGRO BUSINESS MAN
C. Ogden, William EL Baldwin, Jr., Henry H. Rogers,
Julius Rosenwald, the Rockefellers, and Andrew Carnegie.
Out of the National Negro Business League have de-
veloped the following organizations which are affiliated
with it:
The National Negro Funeral Directors
7
Association,
The National Negro Press Association,
The National Negro BarAssociation,
The National Negro Retail Merchants' Association,
The National Association of Negro Insurance Men.
Booker Washington was able to speak with assurance
and authority to the business men of his race because he
practised whathe preached. Thebusiness methodswhich
he employed in conducting the business, in distinction
from the educational affairs, of Tuskegee Institute, com-
pare favorably with those of the best-managed industrial
corporations. He may even have appeared tp be over-
insistent upon business accuracy, system, and efficiency, so
anxious was he to belie the popular notion that Negroes
must of necessity, because they are Negroes, be slipshod
and unsystematic. In refutation of this familiar accusa-
tion he built up an institution almost as large as Harvard
University which runs like clockwork without a single
white man or woman having any part in its actual ad-
ministration. Tuskegee itself is the most notable example
ofits founder's method of argument. No person knowing
the facts about Tuskegee can ever again honestly say that
Negroes are always and necessarily slipshod and unsyste-
matic in their business methods.
221


--- PAGE 266 ---
CHAPTER NINE
BOOKER WASHINGTON AMONG HIS
STUDENTS
IN SPITE of his absorption in guiding the destinies of
his race Booker Washington never lost interest in in-
dividuals however humble or in their individual affairs
however small. This was strikingly shown in his rela-
tions to his students. He never wearied in his efforts to
help in the solution of the life problems of the hundreds
of raw boys and girls who each year flocked to Tuskegee
and to Booker Washington with little but hope and am-
bition upon -which to build their careers. With many of
these newcomers he not infrequently had his initial talk
before they knewwho he was. This was made easy by his
simple and unassuming manner, which was the exact op-
posite to what these unsophisticated youths expected in a
great man. Oneofthe graduates ofTuskegee in the book,
**
Tuskegee and Its People," thus describes his first meeting
with BookerWashington. His experiencewas almost iden-
ticalwiththat ofmanyanotherentering student. Hesays:
"Myfirst glimpse ofMr. Washington was had in the de-
pot at Montgomery, Ala., where a friend and I, on our
wayto Tuskegee, had changed cars for the Tuskegee train.
Twogentlemen came into the waiting-room where wewere
222


--- PAGE 267 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
seated, one a man ofsplendid appearance and address, the
other a most ordinary appearing individual, we thought.
The latter, addressing us, inquired our destination. Upon
being told that we were going to Tuskegee, he remarked
that he had heard that Tuskegee was a very hard place
a place where students were given too much to do, and
where the food was very simple and coarse. He was
afraid we would not stay there three months. We as-
sured himthat wewere not afraid ofhard work, and meant
to finish the course of study at Tuskegee at all hazards.
He then left us. Very soon after the gentleman who had
so favorably impressed us, and whomwe afterward found
to be the treasurer of the Tuskegee Institute, Mr. Warren
Logan, came back and told us our interlocutor was none
other than the Principal of the school to which we were
going."
Booker Washington was always keenly interested to get
at the reasons which had impelled the new students to
come, and they would naturally state these reasons more
freely to a friendly unknown person than they would to
the Principal of the school. As previously mentioned,
Booker Washington always kept his ear to the ground.
These raw boys and girls brought himfresh and frank mes-
sages as to howthe people were thinking and feeling about
Tuskegee and those things for which it stands.
Some time after Mr. Washington's death the students of
the Senior Class were asked to write brief themes de-
scribing their first impressions of him. In one of these
themes the boy writer says, "His general attitude did not
223


--- PAGE 268 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
bear out myidea ofhowa great manshould appear. I ex-
pected to see him with a diamond ring and riding in an
automobile on a pleasure trip, which most great men do.
He was quiet, not overdressed, nor yet self-conscious of
the position he held andthe influence hewielded amongthe
people. He seemed to me a man of great thoughts, yet
not realizing his greatness." Another boy writes: "One
ofmyfirst questions after arriving at Tuskegee, September
9, 1912, and registering as a student was to ask, where is
Mr. Washington? I was told that he hardly ever stayed
herebutwasoften in the North. Twoweeks later hecame,
and my first opportunity to see him was one day^on the
street. I wasso enthusedoverhimthat I wentto myroom
and wrote a letter home trying to describe him.
"The following Sunday night he lectured in the Chapel.
His title was, 'Have a Place to Put Everything and Put
Everything in That Place/ In his talk he said: 'There
are manypeople who have no system about their work nor
home. Often you visit persons* homes and every member
ofthe familyis looking for the broom. The same is true of
a match when the time comes to light the lamp.'
"That talk was the most impressive one that I ever
heard before or since. From that talk I have reaped more
benefit than any other. It was the talk that I took in and
began practising. I first started in my room having a
place to put everything and putting everything in that
place. After getting myroom systematized I then began
putting this talk in practise at my work, etc. . . .**
Thenext quotation is from the paper of a native African
224


--- PAGE 269 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
boy. Hesays: "Myfirst impression, or, at least, the first
time I heard the nameofBookerT.Washington,was about
theyear 1902, I wasthen ayoungboy,just arrived in one
of the Native Training Institutions existing in South
Africa. These schools train young native boys primarily
to become teachers in their communities. As a native
African I had just acquired the elementary use of the
English language, when the following incident took place:
One, a native teacher from the upper part of the country,
was announced and that he was to give a lecture to the
'Boys
5
Saturday Evening Society/
"The meeting assembled, and I at once heard that the
lecture was about a boy Booker T. Washington who
obtained an education through his struggles. ... I
did not hear or understand more. But it is strange to say
thatthis namewaspinnedinthebottomofmyheart. . . .
"It was during the coronation of King George V of
England that I saw this name. I had now finished that
school and was teaching. It was printed in a native
paper that Booker T. Washington, an American Negro,
made an excellent speech. I cannot, however, say the
exact words of the editor, which were in greatest praise of
that man, nor do I recall the circumstances under which
Mr. Washington had spoken.
"When I wanted to come to school in this country I
made up mymind to find the school as I found later he
was principal of one where this manwas leader; and so I
came to Tuskegee Institute. I found the editor had well
described the man's character and disposition/
5
225


--- PAGE 270 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Still another boy writes: "I first saw Dr. Washington
at the Appalachian Exposition held at Knoxville, Tenn.5
in 1912. It was Negro Day and there were thousands of
Negroes out to hear Dr. Washington speak. ... At
times he would make the people laugh and then again he
would have a few crying. When I saw the tears in the
eyes of his listeners, I looked at Dr. Washington and
thought ofhimwith awebecause hewas so highly honored.
I thoughtofhimwith admiration because he could speakso
well, and I thought of him with pride because he was a
Negro. . . . His speech made me feel as if there were
really a few Negro men and women in the world who were
making a mark, and that there was a chance for more/'
BookerWashington's interest in the lives ofhis students,
as in all things else, showed his combination of breadth of
view and attention to what less-thorough persons would
have considered trivial details. When, for instance, in
1913 Tuskegee was visited by one of the very infrequent
snowstorms whichoccurso far South, he himselfwentfrom
building to building to see that they were properly heated
and to many of the rooms, particularly of the poorer
students, to make sure that they .had sufficient bed-
clothes* During the last three winters of his life he had a
confidential agent make an early morning tour of all the
dormitories to makesure that theywere so heated that the
students might dress in comfort on getting up in the
morning.
Also when the weather was unusually cold he would
make sure that the boys who drove the teams that hauled
226


--- PAGE 271 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
wood and other supplies were provided with gloves and
warm clothing. One cold night he sent for Mr. Palmer,
the Registrar ofthe school, and said to him: "I wish you
would seek out the poor worthy students and see that it is
made possible for them to secure proper shoes and warm
clothing. Some of the most deserving of them will often
actually suffer before they will ask for assistance. Well
look out for the expense some way." He was, in fact, as
insistent that the students should have comforts as he was
that they should not have luxuries.
His attention to details and the comfort ofthe students
was well illustrated in the close watch he kept over the
dining-rooms and kitchenswhich heinspected everydayhe
was on the grounds. Tomkins dining-hall is the largest
building on the Institute grounds and is one of the largest
dining-halls in America. It can seat over two thousand
persons at one time. Adjoining this hall is a spacious
dining-room for the teachers as well as extensive kitchens
and a bakery. Underneath it is a great assembly hall
which seats twenty-five hundred. Mr. Washingtonwould
usually appear before breakfast to assure himself at first
hand thatthe stewards, matrons, and cookswere givingthe
students warm,nourishing, and appetizing food uponwhich
to begin the day's work on the farm and in the shops and
classrooms. Nothing made him more indignant than to
find the coffee served lukewarm and the cereal watery or
the eggs stale. For such derelictions the guilty party was
promptly located and admonition or discharge followed
speedily. Probablyin nothingwas his instinct for putting
227


--- PAGE 272 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
first things first better shown than in his insistence upon
proper food, properly prepared and served for both stu-
dents and teachers.
Heonce said to his students, as previously quoted, "See
to it that a certain ceremony, a certain importance, be at-
tached to the partaking of food, etc. . . ." To carry
out this idea each table in this great hall has a centre-
piece of ferns, mosses, or flowers gathered from the woods
by the student selected by his or her companions to deco-
rate the table for that week. Boys and girls sit together
at the tables* On Sundays and holidays first and second
prizes are given for the tables most artistically decorated.
Frequently these prizes take the form of some coveted
delicacy in the way of food. Each day when at the In-
stitute Mr. Washington would walk through the dining-
hall during the noon meal and criticise these centrepieces,
and things generally. He would point out that a certain
decoration was too gaudy and profuse and had in it in-
harmonious colors. He would then remove the unneces-
sary parts and the discordant colors and point to the im-
proved effect. Hewould next stop at a tablewith nothing
in the way of decoration except a few scrawny flowers
stuck carelessly into a vase. Picking up the meagre dis-
play he would say, "The boy or girl who did this is guilty
ofsomethingfarworsethan bad taste, andthatis laziness!
"
At the next table he would have a word of praise for the
simple and artistic effect which they had produced with a
centrepiece of wood mosses and red berries. These com-
mentswould be interspersed with an occasional admonition
228


--- PAGE 273 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
to this boyor that girl for a slovenly mannerofeating, oran
inquiry of a newcomer as to where he had come from and
whether he thought he was going to be happy in his new
surroundings. Anoft-repeated cause ofmerrimentwas his
habit of stopping in the middle of the hall, calling for at-
tention, and then asking the students if they were getting
enough of various articles which he would name, such as
sweet potatoes, corn, and blackberries. Cutting red tape
was one of his special delights. Sometimes he would dis-
cover, for instance, that certain vegetables were not being
served because the steward had objected to the price
charged bythe Farm Department. Hewould immediately
order these vegetables served and tell the protesting stew-
ard that he could fight it out with the Farm Department
while the students were enjoying the vegetables. From
the dining-room he would finally disappear into the
kitchens in his never-ceasing campaign for cleanliness.
Over and over again would he repeat to students, teachers,
and employees alike that the public would excuse them for
what they lacked in the wayofbuildings, equipment, and
even knowledge, but they wouldneverbeexcused for shift-
lessness, filth, litter, or disorder.
Oneoftheopportunities which he mosthighly prized and
one of his most effective means of influencing the whole
body of students was through his Sunday evening talks in
the Chapel. Over two thousand students, teachers,
teachers* families, and townspeople would crowd into the
Chapel to hear these talks. They were stenographically
reported and published in the school paper. In this way
229


--- PAGE 274 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
he influenced not only the undergraduates, but a large
number of graduates and others who subscribed to the
paper largely for the purpose of following these talks. We
here quote from a previously unpublished (except in the
school paper) collection ofthese talks, delivered during the
school term of 1913-14, under the title of "What Parents
Would Like to Hear Concerning Students While at
School/" The first talk was called, "For Old and New
Students/' In it he said in part: "I suspect that each
one ofyour parents would like to knowthat you are learn-
ing to read your Bible; not only to read it because you
have to, but to read it every day in the year because you
have learned to love the Bible; because you have learned
day by day to make its teachings a part of you. . . .
Each one of you, in beginning your school year, should
have a Bible, and you should make that Bible a part of
your school life, a part ofyour very nature, and always, no
matterhowbusy the day maybe, no matterhowmanymis-
takes, no matter how many failures you make in other di-
rections, do not fail to find a few minutes to study or read
your Bible.
"The greatest people in the world, those who are most
learned; those who bear the burdens and responsibilities of
the world, are persons who are not ashamed to let the
world know not only that they believe in the Bible, but
that they read it."
And this was the advice of a man who never preached
what he did not practise and whoonly a few years be-
fore had been denounced by many of the preachers of
230


--- PAGE 275 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
his own race as a Godless man, building up a Godless
school!
A little further on he said: "In many cases you have
come from homes where there was no regular time for get-
ting up in the morning, no regular time for eating your
meals, and no regular time for going to bed,
"Now the basis of civilization is system, order, regu-
larity. Arace or an individual which has no fixed habits,
no fixed place ofabode, no time for going to bed, for getting
up in the morning, for going to work; no arrangement,
order? or system in all the ordinary business oflife, such a
race and such an individual are lacking in self-control,
lacking in some ofthe fundamentals ofcivilization, . . .
"If you take advantage of all these opportunities, if
your minds are so disposed that you can welcome and
make the most of these advantages, these habits of order
and system will soon be so fixed, so ingrained, so thor-
oughly a part of you that you will no longer tolerate dis-
order anywhere, that you will not be willing to endure
the old slovenly habits which so many of you brought
with you when you came here/*
And later, in speaking of the haphazard, slipshod, ir-
regular meal, he said: "Instead of bringing the family
together it has put them wider apart. Ahouse in which
the family table is a mere lunch-counter is not and cannot
be a home."
Andjust before concluding this talk he said: "Nowwhat
is true of this school is true of the world at large. This
is a little world of itself. It is a small sample of civiliza-
231


--- PAGE 276 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
tion, an experiment station, so to speak, in which we are
trying to prepare you to live in a manner a little more
orderly, a little more efficient, and a little more civilized
than you have lived heretofore. If you are not able to
live and succeed here, you will not be able to live and
succeed in the world outside. If we do not want you
here, if we cannot get on with you here, it will mean that
the world outside will not want you, will not be able to
get on with you/
5
Probably no educator ever kept more constantly before
his own mind and before the minds of his students and
teachers that the purpose of education is preparation for
right living than did Booker Washington. Everything
that did not make for this end he eliminated, regardless
of customs and traditions, everything which did make
for this end. he included, equally regardless of customs
and traditions.
In a talk called, "HonorThy Father and ThyMother/'
the second of this series, he made this rather touching
statement: "Many of your parents are poor. Not only
that, but many of them are ignorant, at least, so far as
books are concerned. Notwithstanding all this, in every
case they have done something for you* It may have
been, in many cases I knowthat it has been, a very little,
but out of their poverty and out of their ignorance they
have done something. They have made it possible, in
the majority of cases, for you to come here, and no matter
how poor they are, no matter how ignorant they are, their
ambition is largely centred in you/'
332


--- PAGE 277 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
This is one of the many statements which show that
Booker Washington had no illusions as to the ignorance
and poverty ofthe rank and file ofhis people, and yet with
this full knowledge and realization he never became dis-
couraged.
In another of these talks, on "The Importance of Sim-
plicity/' he said: "In many cases young men in cities
do not own anything in the world except what they are
carrying around on their backs. They have a few collars
and a few cuffs, some bright-colored socks and neckties,
and that is all; nothing would be left of the man if you
were to bury these things. Afew collars and cuffs, neck-
ties, and a few pieces of cheap jewelry that is all there is
of such men/'
Later in the same talk he said: "Short, simple, direct
sentences indicate education, indicate culture, indicate
common sense. Some people think the way for them to
show their education is by using big words, elaborate sen-
tences, and by discussing subjects which nobodyon earth
can understand.
"Whenever you hear a man using words or talking on
a subject that you can't understand, you can be very
sure that the man does not understand himself what he is
trying to talk about. If a man is talking about any sub-
ject, literary or what not, of which he is really master,
he will be so direct, so simple, so perfectly clear and in-
telligible in the discussion of that subject that the most
humble person can understand what he is saying/'
In a talk on "Being Polite/' he said: "It is often dif-


--- PAGE 278 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
ficult, I might better say, it is always difficult, for persons
to have genuine politeness in their hearts when they live
in a country that is inhabited by different races. Here
in the South, and throughout this country, for that
matter, we come into contact with persons of another
race, persons of another color. It takes some effort, some
training, and often some determination to say, in dealing
with a person of another race, of another color, I will be
polite; I will be kind; I will be considerate/*
In a talk on "Being Economical/' he said: "You will
help yourselfand help this school if youwill say to yourself
constantly: *This is my home; this property does not
belong exclusively to the Trustees, but it is mine; I am a
trustee, every student is a trustee of this institution.
How can I make every dollar go as far as possible? How
can I help cut down expenses here?'" And later on, "I
want you to get into the ha^it of saying: "This institution
belongs to me, belongs to my race; every dollar that is
spent here is spent for mybenefit and for the benefit ofmy
race; every cent that is wasted here is my loss and the
loss of all the generations that come after me/"
In a talk on "The Use of Time," he said: "You hear
people speaking sometimes about 'killing time/ No
civilized manshould be allowed to kill time any more than
he should be allowed to destroy any of the other natural
resources. When you find a man engaged in
*
killing time*
you will find a man who is disobeying one of the most
fundamental laws of civilization. A man who habit-
ually devotes himself to 'killing time* is a dangerous
234


--- PAGE 279 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
citizen and the law against vagrancy is aimed against
him.
In a talk on "Being All Right, But/' he said: "You
frequently hear it said of certain persons in one connection
or another that 'they are all right, except/ or 'they are
all right, but/ You are thinking, perhaps, of employing
some one for this or that important service and among
others the question is asked: 'What kind of disposition
has this one or that one?
5
Very often you receive an
answer something like this: 'They are all right, but
*
That 'but* carries with it a lot of things. There are too
many people in the world who are 'all right, but/ We
want to get rid of just as many of these 'buts* as we
can." And in concluding the same talk he said: "Think
big thoughts, think about big questions, read big books,
and, most of all, get into contact with the big people of
your acquaintance and get out from under the control
of the little people of your acquaintance. If you will do
this, gradually you will find yourself better fitted for life;
you will find yourself happier and better fitted to render
service. . . ."
In a talk on "The Power of Persistence/' he said: "Al-
ways keep your eye on the student who seems to be dull,
who is slow in his studies, who has to repeat his class, but
who keeps plodding along doggedly, determinedly, until he
has finished the course of study.
"Keep your eye on that student after he has gone out
into the world. He has learned to endure, he has learned
to stick to his job in season and out of season. . . /'


--- PAGE 280 ---
BOOKER T, WASHINGTON
In a talk on "Standing Still/' he said: "People say of
us that, as a race, we are not capable of going very far,
not capable of making steady, persistent progress. We
go a little way and there we stop, stand still, and stagnate.
* . , Now one of the things which this school aims
to do for you and through you is to change, as far as
possible, the reputation of our people in so far as they are
regarded as unprogressive, lacking in initiative and in
ability to go forward unwaveringly."
The concluding talk of this series, and perhaps the
strongest ofthemall, wasentitled, "ThouShaltNotSteal/'
In it he said: "I believe if you could get down into the
deep, dark corners of your own hearts, and if you could
get deep down into the hearts of your parents, you could
find there, in both cases, a misgiving, a sense of danger,
never clearly expressed but always present, a fear that
some time, somewhere, trouble was in store for you and
for them.
"This is so far true, in some cases ofwhich I know, that
if parents should some day learn that their children were
in trouble they would not be" surprised, because they have
expected it, looked forward to it, and feared it; because
they have known and suspected all along that you had
never thoroughly learned to control yourself when deal-
ing with other people's property. . . ."
Later on he added: "This disposition to pilfer was, to
a large extent, a part of the history of slavery. It was
rare when colored people who belonged to a white family
where they served as cooks, butlers, or in some other form
236


--- PAGE 281 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
of household service, did not feel that everything belong-
ing to the white family belonged equally to them. Thus,
when freedom came, it was difficult to get the colored
cook to feel that she was a mere employee, that in the
wages she received by the week or month she was being
paid for her services for cooking. It was very hard to
get her away from the customs and practises of slavery,
especially when receiving very small wages.
"In manycases boys and girls have seen or have known
that their mothers kept up this practice of pilfering from
persons for whom they cooked. They have seen it going
on day after day and year after year in th^ir own homes
and have observed that employers seem to expect it, wink
at it, at any rate, put up with it. While they know, as
their parents know, that it is wrong, they have neverthe-
less come to feel that it is one of the ways in which black
folk and white folk get on together; one of the indirect
ways, in other words, in which black people have learned
to recompense themselves for disadvantages which they
suffer in other directions/
5
In conclusion he said: "Each one of you can do some-
thing toward solving the race problem, for example, by
making, each for himself, a reputation for honesty in the
community in which you live. Ifin the part ofthe coun-
try where you now live members of our race have a rep-
utation for carelessness, looseness in regard to the owner-
ship of property, you can help to solve the race problem,
and make life here in the South more comfortable for
every other member of the race if you will win for your-


--- PAGE 282 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
self a reputation for downright honesty and integrity in
all your dealings with your neighbors, whether they be
white or black."
Mr. Washington once said, "In all my teaching I have
watched carefully the influence of the toothbrush, and
I amconvinced that there are few single agencies of civili-
zation that are more far-reaching." He made periodic
tours of the students' rooms to find out what students if
any were without toothbrushes. The possession and
use of a toothbrush is one of the entrance requirements
for Tuskegee. In this connection he used to tell with a
chuckle the reply ofthe girl who in answer to his question
as to whose toothbrush he found on the washstand said,
"That is ours," referring to her roommate and herself.
In his tours of inspection of the students' rooms he
would also inquire how many nightgowns they owned.
He insisted that every student should have at least two
nightgowns. He was constantly impressing upon the
students that decent, respectable people do not sleep in
the garments in which they work during the day. In
fact, he preached the gospel of the nightgown and the
toothbrush as insistently as he did the gospel of work
and simplicity.
He constantly insisted that the welfare of the students
should be at all times the dominant consideration in the
conduct of the institution. When the teachers would
sometimes complain that their welfare was not sufficiently
considered he would remind them that the Institute was
being conducted for the benefit of the students and that
238


--- PAGE 283 ---



--- PAGE 284 ---



--- PAGE 285 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
teachers were not required except for the benefit of the
students. That the students should be happy was al-
most a mania with him. He was constantly sending
for officers and teachers to inquire as to whether the
students seemed happy.
Tothe delight of the students he would occasionally call
a mass-meeting where he would call upon them one by
one to get up and tell him of anything that was wrong, of
anything that was keeping them from being as happy as
he wanted them to be. It was understood that every-
thing that a student said in such a meeting would be re-
garded as a confidence and that nothing that he said
would be used against him. The teachers sometimes pro-
tested against the unbridled criticism which Mr. Wash-
ington permitted in these meetings. He, however, con-
tinued them without modification, and while many of
the students' complaints were grossly exaggerated their
statements nevertheless led to reforms in some important
particulars. The meetings undoubtedly added greatly to
the contentment and happiness ofthe student body.
He was always trying to protect the poorer students
against the danger of being embarrassed or humiliated
by the more fortunate ones. In this connection he was
constantly resisting the importunities of students and
teachers who wanted to charge admission fees to this or
that game or entertainment. When the occasion really
demanded and justified an admission fee he would make
secret arrangements with the management to have the
poorer students admitted at his personal expense.
239


--- PAGE 286 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
His willingness to hear the students' grievances was a
characteristic not always appreciated by the officers and
teachers. He was a firm believer in the right of petition
either for a group or an individual. Nomatterhowpressed
and driven he was with business no student or group of
students, and no teacher or group of teachers, was too
humble or obscure in the school's life to win a personal
hearing. He would without hesitation reopen and pains-
takingly review a case, already decided by the Executive
Council, if he thought there was the slightest chance that
an injustice had been done. He insisted upon giving the
accused not only "a square deal/* but the benefit ofevery
doubt. Onthe other hand, when there was no reasonable
doubt of guilt no one could be more stern and unrelenting
than he in meting outjustice.
Mr. Washington always encouraged and helped every
ambitious student who came to Tuskegee to develop his
capacities to the utmost no matter whether they were
large or small. Years ago a student, William Sidney
Pittman, showed a particular aptitude for carpentry and
draftsmanship. After working his waythrough Tuskegee
hewas very anxious to take a course in architecture. Mr.
Washington arranged to have the Institute advance him
the moneyfor a three years' course at the Drexel Institute
of Philadelphia, on the understanding that he would re-
turn to Tuskegee as a teacher after his graduation and
from his earnings pay back.to the school all that had been
advanced for his training at Drexel. Pittman's record
at Drexel waswholly satisfactory. He returned to Tuske-
240


--- PAGE 287 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
gee and repaid his loan in accordance with the agreement.
He has since won the competitive award for the design of
the Negro Building at the Jamestown Exposition, has
built a large number of public and semi-public buildings
throughout the South, including the Carnegie Library at
Houston, Texas; a Pythian Temple at Dallas, Texas>
where he lives, for the Negro members of the Knights of
Pythias; the Collis P. Huntingdon Memorial Building at
Tuskegee, and a number of Young Men's Christian Asso-
ciation buildings for colored men. In 1907 he married
Mr. Washington's only daughter, Portia Marshall Wash-
ington, after her graduation from Bradford Academy,
Massachusetts. He is now generally regarded as the
foremost architect ofhis race.
Somewhat later Mr. Washington succeeded in securing
some scholarships which enabled promising Tuskegee
graduates to take two years of post-graduate work in
teaching methods at the Teachers' College of Columbia
University. These scholarships were given by John
Crosby Brown, V. Everett Macy, andJohn D. Rockefeller*
Jr. In each case these students were required to return
to Tuskegee as teachers for two years the same time as
their course at Columbia. Dean Russell ofthe Teachers*
College has testified to the earnestness and high character
ofthese Tuskegee graduates.
Asmeasured bytheTuskegee standard ofsuccess, which
is service to others, perhaps the most successful of all
Tuskegee's graduates is William H. Holtzclaw, tlie Prin-
cipal of the Utica Normal and Industrial Institute of
241


--- PAGE 288 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Mississippi. There is no school that has better emulated
the best there is in Tuskegee Institute, and there is no
graduate of Tuskegee that has followed more faithfully
and effectively in Booker Washington's footsteps. Holtz-
claw has told his own story in an admirably written and
most Interesting book entitled, "The Black Man's Bur-
den/' Starting in 1903 with a capital of seventy-five
cents, no land and no buildings in a little one-room,
ramshackle log cabin, which he did not own and in which
he and his wife lived as well as taught, Holtzclaw now has
an annual enrollment of nearly five hundred students
and a faculty of thirty teachers. The school through its
varied forms of extension work influences yearly about
thirty thousand people. It owns seventeen hundred acres
of land and conducts twenty different industries aside
from its academic work. The buildings and property
are valued at one hundred and sixty thousand dollars.
It has also its own electric light plant and water-works and
an endowment of over thirty-two thousand dollars. In
concluding his book Mr. Holtzclaw says: "I see more
clearly than ever before the great task that is before me,
and I propose to continue the struggle. It is an appalling
task: a State with more than a million Negroes to be edu-
cated, with half a million children of school age, 35
per cent, of whom at the present time attend no school
at all (only 36 per cent, in average attendance), a
State whose dual school system makes it impossible
to furnish more than a mere pittance for the education of
each child yet these children must be educated, must be
242


--- PAGE 289 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
unfettered, set free. That freedom for which Christian
nien and women, North and South, have worked and
prayed so long must be realized in the lives of these young
people. This, then, is mytask, the war that I must wage;
and I propose to stay on the firing-line and fight the good
fight offaith/'
Another Tuskegee graduate in whom Mr. Washington
was especially interested is Isaac Fisher. Fisher has
been awarded the following prizes for his writings:
"What We've Learned About the Rum Question,"
$500;
"German and American Methods of Regulating
Trusts," $400 (in order to write this paper Mr. Fisher
had to acquire a reading knowledge of German which he
did alone and unaided in a few months' time; "Ten ofthe
Best Reasons Why People Should Live in Missouri/*
$100; "A Plan to Give the South a System of Highways
Suited to Its Needs, $100; "TheMost Practicable Method
of Beginning a Tariff Reduction/* honorable mention.
(Upon the request of the chief examiner of the United
States Tariff Board this essay was sent to that body for
its use.) Besides these, Mr. Fisher has taken several
minorprizes for compositions onvarious subjects.
It would be difficult to say, however, whether Booker
Washington showed greater interest in the most brilliant
or the most backward students. Certain it is that the
most backward students won his special attention and
encouragement.
In the early days of the school there was a student by
the name of Jailous Perdue whom Mr. Washington con-


--- PAGE 290 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
stantly encouraged and In whom he never lost faith in
spite of his almost total failure to master his classroom
work. Monroe N. Work, the statistician of the Institute
and the editor of "The Negro Year Book/
7
under the title
"TheManWhoFailed/' has thus told Perdue's story:
"Back in the days when the cooking for students at
Tuskegee was done out of doors in pots and the principal
entrance requirement was a "desire to make something
of himself a young man, Jailous Perdue, came to Tuske-
gee to get an education. He was financially poor and
intellectually dull Examinations he could not pass.
After struggling along for several years and accumulating
a lot ofexamination failures, he decided to quit school, go
out to work and help educate his sisters. Although he
had failed in his literary subjects, he had nevertheless got
an education in how to use his hands. He had learned
to be a carpenter. Out in the world he went and began
to work at his trade. As soon as he had earned a little
money he placed three of his sisters in school at Tuskegee,
and with the help of his brother Augustus, who had
graduated some time before, supported two of them there
for three years and one for four years.
"In the meantime he had succeeded at his trade and
gone into business for himself at Montgomery, Ala,, as
a contractor and builder. Here also he was successful
and did thousands of dollars* worth of work. No job
was too small nor too large for him to make a bid on.
If he did not have a contract of his own he was not above
working for some other contractor, and as a result he was
244


--- PAGE 291 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
always busy. He has superintended the construction of
some of the largest buildings in Montgomery. Among
the buildings the erection of which he has superintended
are the Exchange Hotel, at a cost of $150,000; the First
Baptist Church, at a cost of $175,000; the First National
Bank Building, at a'cost of $350,000; and the Bell Build-
ing, at a cost of $450,000. Perdue also assisted as fore-
manor assistant foremanin erecting manyoftheimportant
buildings at Tuskegee Institute, such as the Principal's
house, the chapel, the library, Rockefeller Hall, the
Academic Building, and the Millbank Agricultural Build-
ing.
"It is hardly necessary to say that Mr. Perdue has ac-
cumulated property or that he owns a good home in Mont-
gomery, for in these progressive days every black man in
the South with any foresight is investing some part of his
earnings in property. The most interesting and some-
what remarkable thing about the career of Perdue and
the greatest measure of his success is that twenty-three
years after he had left Tuskegee a literary failure he was
asked to come back and become a member of the faculty
as an instructor in carpentry. Thus it was that the man
who failed succeeded and returned to the scene of his
failure a success. Perdue was constantly encouraged by
Mr. Washington. He came under the type of those who
were not brilliant, but who were always in his opinion
worthyofhelp and encouragement/'
Washington A. Tate was even duller in books than
Perdue. During his early years at Tuskegee he seemed
345


--- PAGE 292 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
unable to grasp the most rudimentary information. His
native dullness was made unpleasant and aggressive by a
combative disposition. Hewas constantlytryingto prove
to his exasperated teachers that he knew what he did not
know. He was almost twenty-five years of age when he
reached the Institute and entered the lowest primary
grade. He had the greatest difficulty in passing any
examinations and never succeeded in passing all that were
required. Motions were constantly made and passed
in faculty meetings to drop Tate, and were as constantly
vetoed by Mr, Washington on the plea of giving him one
more chance. Finally when Tate's .time to graduate
came the teachers in a body protested against giving him
a diploma. Mr. Washington argued that a man who had
made all the sacrifices Tate had made at his age to stay
in school, a man who had worked early and late in fair
weather and foul for the school, a man who had stuck to
his task in the face of repeated failures and discourage-
ments, had in him something better than the mere ability
to pass examinations. Through Mr. Washington's inter-
cession for him Tate got his diploma. The next day Mr.
Washington had him employed to take charge of the
school's piggery. Because of his hard, conscientious,
and effective work in this capacity he was afterward
recommended to the United States Department of Agri-
culture at Washington as the proper man to take charge
of the United States demonstration work in Macon
County, Ala. Tate proved to be one of the Govern-
ment's most successful demonstration agents. He is
246


--- PAGE 293 ---
AMONG HIS STUDENTS
now farming successfully on his own account in an ad-
joining county.
Booker Washington, as previously pointed out, saw
very much more clearly than most educators that educa-
tion's only purpose and sole justification lies in prepara-
tion for right living. Amanwho has passed all mannerof
examinations maynot be prepared tolive rightly and hence
may not justly claim to be educated. A man who has
failed to pass examinations may be prepared for right
living and hence may justly be called an educated man.
Inotherwords, BookerWashington realized that education
was primarily a matter of the development of character
and only secondarily a matter of the acquisition of in-
formation.
247


--- PAGE 294 ---
CHAPTER TEN
RAISING HUNDREpS OF THOUSANDS A YEAR
DURING recent years the expenses of Tuskegee Insti-
tute have run to between $250,000 and $300,000 a year.
Ofthis sumBooker Washington had to raise over $100,000
annually aside from the large sums constantly demanded
for new equipment such as the great central heating and
power plant which was installed in 1915 at a cost of more
than $245,000.
At the ceremonies commemorating the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the founding of Tuskegee Institute Presi-
dent Charles W. Eliot of Harvard was one ofthe speakers.
He said that one of his "first impressions of Tuskegee
Institute/* after just a glimpse, was "that the oldest and
now largest American Institution of learning was more
than 200 years arriving at the possession of much less
land, fewer buildings, and a smaller quick capital than
Tuskegee had come to possess in twenty-five years.
"That's just a fact/* he said, "Harvard University was
not as rich after living two hundred years among the
people of Massachusetts as Tuskegee is to-day, after
having lived twenty-five years among the people of Ala-
bama. And that's the first impression that I have re-
ceived here.
248


--- PAGE 295 ---



--- PAGE 296 ---



--- PAGE 297 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
"This evening I have received another impression from
your Principal. He said that the great need of Tuskegee,
to-day, was a considerable sum of money, which could be
used at the discretion ofthe Trustees, to fill gaps, to make
improvements, and to enlarge and strengthen the different
branches of the institution. Now I should not find it
possible to state in more precise terms the present needs
of Harvard University. The needs of these two institu-
tions, situated, to be sure, in very different communities,
and founded on very different dates, are precisely the
same." This comparison is the more striking when we
realize that President Eliot had at the time been at the
head of Harvard University for thirty years, five years
longer than Tuskegee had been in existence President
Eliot ofwhomit was said, "Whenhe goes to rich menthey
just throw up their hands and say,
'
Don't shoot! How
much do youwant?*
"
The magnitude of Booker Washington's financial task
is indicated in his last annual report which he made to his
Trustees in 1915. Hereported:
"As of May 3ist, we have received from all sources for
current expenses $268,825.17; for buildings and improve-
ments, $28,919.47; for endowment, $28,102.09; from
undesignated legacies, $53,858.10, making the total
receipts for the purposes named for the year $379,704.83.
"The gifts to the Endowment Fund for the year
amounting to $28,102.09 now make the Fund stand at
$1,970,214.17.
"The budget recommended for your consideration for
249


--- PAGE 298 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
the newyear calls for an expenditure for current expenses,
repairs, renewals, and equipment of$291,567.92. . . .
"
Later in the report he said: "Notwithstanding the de-
pressed financial condition of a large part of the country,
I feel it would be a great mistake for us in any degree to
slacken our efforts to keep the school before the public
or to get funds. I believe, as Dr. H. B. Frissell, Principal
of the Hampton Institute, has often expressed it, that a
large part of the mission of both Hampton and Tuskegee
is to keep the cause ofNegro education before the country,
and that the benefits coming from such efforts of publicity
do not confinethemselves alone to HamptonandTuskegee,
but benefit all the schools in the South. With this end
in view, I very much hope that the Trustees may see their
way clear to encourage and help us as far as possible in
holding a number of large public meetings during the
coming year/' These were brave words for a dying man.
Five months later he died of sheer exhaustion shortly
after addressing one of these "large public meetings/*
They also show the breadth of his conception of his task.
You will note that he points out that such publicity as
he urges, "benefits all the schools in the South" not
merely the schools for Negroes, but "all the schools/*
It never occurred to him to limit his sense of responsibility
to his own school nor even to the schools for his own race.
As previously mentioned he would sometimes devote an
entire public address to an appeal for more and better
schools forthe poorwhites ofthe South.
Booker Washington's money-raising efforts consumed
250


--- PAGE 299 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
two-thirds of his time and perhaps even more of his
strength and energy. He planned these money-raising
campaigns just as carefully as a good general plans a
military campaign. His last big money-raising campaign
was conducted during June, 1915. He and the Trustees
of the Institute had been engaged for two or three years
in the effort to raise the money to complete the cost of
the central power and heating plant, but nearly $100,000
of the $245,000 needed had not been raised. This burden
bore heavily upon him. At last, with the approval of
the Trustees, he decided to make one last herculean effort
not only to raise this hugesum, but in addition, the money
necessary to end the school year free of debt. For this
purpose he formulated a plan of campaign by which five
representatives ofthe school should cover the chiefcentres
of population throughout the Northern and Middle West-
ern States. This was the outline of the territorial assign-
ments of the collectors:
Mr. Chislom: NewHampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts
important centre Boston.
Mr. Wood: Rhode Island, New York east of Syracuse,
and Binghamton, Connecticut important centre New
York City.
Mr. Thomas: New York, west of Syracuse and Bing-
hamton, Pennsylvania important centre Philadelphia.
Mr- Stevenson: Illinois, Wisconsin important centre
Chicago.
Mr. Powell: Michigan, Ohio important centres De-
troit and Cleveland.
251


--- PAGE 300 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Each representative carried letters of introduction to
leading men and women in the various centres through-
out his territory. All these letters were personally signed
by Mr. Washington. At the close of each day each
collector telegraphed Mr. Washington at Tuskegee giving
the amount of subscriptions and pledges he had secured
that day. The next morning Mr. Washington wired each
collector, stating the total amount of gifts and pledges
secured by all five collectors. When the Trustees met
in New York City, on the last Thursday of June, 1915,
all but four or five thousand dollars of the over $245,000
had been raised.
The Trustees themselves made up the difference by
increasing by this amount their own subscriptions. Thus
was successfully concluded the last great and difficult
task which Booker Washington was to be permitted to
perform.
Of the hundreds ofinvitations to speak here, there, and
everywhere which kept pouring in upon him certain ones
he definitely accepted because of the money-raising oppor-
tunities either direct or indirect which they offered; others
of less promise he tentatively accepted to fall back upon
in case the more desirable ones for any reason miscarried.
Chautauqua engagements he considered only where they
provided an opportunity for direct appeal for contri-
butions for the work, or at least the chance to distribute
printed matter. Chautauqua bureaus offering him as
much as half the gate receipts above $500 in addition to a
guarantee of $300 a night he turned down out of hand if
252


--- PAGE 301 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
they did not include one or both of these opportunities.
No matter how much money they offered he would never
accept such propositions unless they carried with them
some opportunity to make a direct appeal for his work.
It was sometimes suggested to him that he might receive
these fees personally and then turn them over to the
school. This he declined to do because he was unwilling
to give even the appearance of capitalizing his reputation
and oratorical gifts for his personal enrichment. Booker
Washington was not one of those simple-hearted in-
dividuals who are guided solely by what they deem in-
herently right. He always strove to avoid the appear-
ance ofevil as well as the evil itself; and, with oneunhappy
exception, he always succeeded* He fully realized that
his conduct was under constant scrutiny by enemies
in both races eager to find some pretext to drag him down.
So circumspect was he in his behavior that once only
between the time he became a national character in 1895
.until his death twenty years later did his critics succeed
in distorting any deed of his into the semblance of mis-
conduct. The very nature of the charge in this one in-
stance was sufficient refutation for any person acquainted
in even the slightest degree with the man's life, work,
or character.
4
The press as well as the platform he constantly used
to keep his work before the public for money-raising pur-
poses. He had as good a "nose for a story" as the best of
reporters, and every story that came his way was sure to
find its way into print. No matter how driven with
253


--- PAGE 302 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
pressing matters nor how tired he never denied himself to
"the newspaper boys/' He believed that the more
prominence, the more "limelight," he could secure the
better, provided he used it for the promotion of his work.
Thus he presented the apparent anomaly of being at the
same time one ofthe most modest and unassuming ofmen
and also one of the greatest advertisers of his day.
As well as the general press of both races he constantly
used the school press for money-raising purposes. The
school paper which circulates among donors and pros-
pective donors as well as among the students, teachers,
and graduates carries in each issue brief statements of
some immediate and pressing needs and the money re-
quired to satisfy them. These needs are set forth in the
following manner:
"WHAT $1,700 WILL DO"
"For a long while an important part of our extension
work and publicity work has been greatly hindered and
hampered because of the lack of a new and up-to-date
printing press.
"One thousand and seven hundred dollars will supply
us with this long-felt need and greatly add to the value
and influence of our work/
1
"WHAT $3,000 WILL DO"
"One of our very greatest and most practical needs is a
well but simply equipped Canning Factory. Three
thousand dollars would help us to properly equip the
Canning Factory we already have at Tuskegee. The
factory will help not only in preserving large quantities
254


--- PAGE 303 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
of vegetables, fruits, berries, etc., during the summer,
but at the same time could be used as a means ofteaching
large numbers of our girls a useful industry, and, more
than that, the products could be used to sustain the in-
stitution during the winter months.
"We could not only use everything that might be put
up in cans here at the school in feeding the students and
teachers, but there is an increasing demand among the
merchants of the South, in the large cities, for anything
we can produce on the school grounds.
"We very much wish that some friend might see his
way clear to give $3,000 with which to properly equip
this factory."
The need for a new laundry building with equipment,
a foundry, and a veterinary hospital were similarly pre-
sented. The funds to meet each of these needs were re-
ceived as a result of these appeals, and a new list of needs
is now being advertised.
In concluding his annual report each year Mr. Wash-
ington would summarize the immediate needs of the
institution. In his last report he thus stated them:
1. $50 a year for annual scholarships for tuition for
one student, the student himself providing for his own
board and other personal expenses in labor and cash.
2. $1,200 for permanent scholarships.
3. Money for operating expenses in any amounts,
however small.
4. $2,000 each for four teachers' cottages.
5. $40,000 for a building for religious purposes.
6. $16,000 to complete the Boys' Trades Building.
7. $50,000 for a Boys* Dormitory.


--- PAGE 304 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
8. $$o,ooo for a Girls' Dormitory,
9, An addition to our Endowment Fund of at least
#3,000,000.
A few months later, as he lay dying in a New York
hospital, the following letter was received for him at
Tuskegee. It was at once forwarded and passed him on
his last journey to his home in the South. He never saw
it. Thedonor, a Northern friend who withholds his name,
has renewed the offer to the Trustees and they have ac-
cepted it.
November 8, 1915.
Dr. Booker T. Washington, Tuskegee Institute, Alabama.
DEAR MR. WASHINGTON: I have read your annual
report and also your treasurer's report, and make you the
following proposition: If you will raise enough money to
pay all of your debts up to May I, 1916, and add two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars to your endowment
fund, I will give you the sum of two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for your building fund, to be used in
building the items such as Nos. 4, 6, 7, 8, and the "
Barnes,
etc./* mentioned under the head of "Special Needs," and
for objects of similar character. The above does not
include item No. 5, "Building for religious purposes/*
as I am not interested in that sort of work. I shall be
glad to knowwhether this proposition interests you.
Yours very truly,
Theinterest ofthis giver was first aroused byhis reading
**Up from Slavery" when it appeared in book form in
1901, As soon as he had read the book he sent Drf Wash-


--- PAGE 305 ---
"RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
ington a check for $10,000 for his work which he has re-
newed each year since until he made the above offer.
"Up from Slavery" has brought more money to Tuskegee
than all the other books, articles, speeches, and circulars
written by Mr, Washington himself and the many others
who have written or spoken about him and his work.
Among its larger immediate results, aside from awaken-
ing the interest of the anonymous giver already men-
tioned, was its similar effect upon the late H. H. Rogers,
Vice-President and active head at the time ofthe Standard
Oil Company, and upon Andrew Carnegie. Mr. Rogers
became so much interested that he not only gave large
sums for the general needs of Tuskegee but eventually
financed a large part of the rural school extension work,
which has been described in earlier chapters, and which
is now so important a part of the schooPs activities.
Under Booker Washington's inspiration and guidance,
too, Mr. Rogers later combined railroad building with
race building. In building his Virginia railroad he under-
took awide-reachingworkin agricultural education among
the Negro farmers living within carting distance of his
road. Booker Washington had demonstrated to his
satisfaction that by increasing at the same time their
wants and their ability to gratify their wants he would be
building up business for his railroad.
Shortly after the publication in 1901 of "Up from
Slavery," Frank N. Doubleday, of Doubleday, Page &
Co., the publishers of the book, in playing golf with Mr.
Carnegie mentioned Booker Washington and told him
25?


--- PAGE 306 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
something of his life. Mr. Carnegie was interested and
wanted to know more. Mr. Doubleday gave him a copy
of **Up from Slavery," After reading the book he im-
mediately got into communication with the author, told
him ofhis interest in his life andwork, and of his desire to
help him. The result was that Mr. Carnegie agreed to
pay for the construction and equipment of a library to
be* built by the students. Booker Washington, his
Executive Council, and the school's architect, spent hours
and hours of time in scrutinizing every detail to bring the
cost down to the smallest possible figure consistent with
an adequate result. The final cost to Mr. Carnegie
was only $15,000. Mr. Carnegie was amazed that so
large, convenient, and dignified a building could be built
at so small a cost. Over and over again both to
Mr. Washington and to friends of the school he ex-
pressed his surprise and pleasure at the result obtained
by this relatively small expenditure. After that there
was no doubt he would do more for the school. It was
simply a question of how much more and what form it
would take. In 1903 the following letter was received by
the late William H. Baldwin, Jr., in his capacity as presi-
dent ofthe Tuskegee Board ofTrustees.
Andrew Carnegie
2 East gist Street, New York
New Yorky April 17, 1910.
MYDEARMR. BALDWIN: I haveinstructed Mr. Franks,
Secretary, to deliver to you as Trustee of Tuskegee


--- PAGE 307 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
$600,000 of 5 per cent. U. S. Steel Companybonds to com-
plete the Endowment Fund as per circular.
One condition only the revenue of one hundred and
fifty thousand of these bonds is to be subject to Booker
Washington's order to be used by him first for his wants
and those of his family during his life or the life of his
widow if anysurplus is left he can use it for Tuskegee. I
wish that great and good man to be free from pecuniary
cares that he may devote himselfwholly to his great Mis-
sion.
To me he seems one of the foremost of living men be-
cause his work is unique. The Modern Moses, who leads
his race and lifts it through Education to even better and
higher things than a land overflowing with milk and honey
History is to know two Washingtons, one white, the
other black, both Fathers of their people. I am satisfied
that the serious race question of the South is to be solved
wisely only by following Booker Washington's policy
whichheseems to havebeen specially born a slave among
slaves to establish, and even in his own day, greatly to
advance.
So glad to be able to assist this good work in which you
and others are engaged.
Yours truly,
(Signed) ANDREW CARNEGIE.
To Mr. Wm. H. Baldwin, Jr., New York City, N. Y.
This great gift delighted Booker Washington not only
for what it meant directly to his work, but because it so
strikingly illustrated a truth which he had long and in-
sistently impressed upon his staff and his students:
namely, that if every dollar contributed were made to do


--- PAGE 308 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
the work of two, more dollars would be forthcoming from
the same source.
The two events upon which Booker Washington's pop-
ular fame chiefly rests are his speech before the Cotton
States Exposition in Atlanta, Ga., in 1895, and the pub-
lication of "Up from Slavery" five years later. Since
"Up from Slavery
"
played so great a part in aiding its
author to secure funds for his work it seems appropriate
to give here some account ofhowit cameto bewritten, how
it was written, and how it was received*
In the year 1900 the editors of the Outlook decided to il-
lustrate in the concrete the opportunities of America by
getting some of the Americans of greatest achievement to
tell how they had risen by their own efforts from the very
depths ofuntoward circumstances. For this purpose they
selected Jacob A Riis and Booker T. Washington* After
much hesitancy on his part and urgency on theirs Booker
Washington finally agreed to write the story ofhis life for
serial publication in the Outlook. His hesitancy was due
merelyto the fact that he could not believe that the events
of his life would be of any interest to the public. So con-
vinced was he in this beliefthat he had the greatest diffi-
culty in starting to write even after he had agreed to do so.
Finally, after a particularly urgent letter from the editors,
he stole somehours from his absorbing and exacting duties
at Tuskegee to write the first chapter. After these efforts
had been typewritten by his stenographer they produced
only three and one-half pages an amount of copy dis-
couragingly inadequate for the first installment. He
260


--- PAGE 309 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
mailed the material, however, with a line of apology for its
inadequacy and promising to send more the next day. On
receipt of this scant initial copy the editors wrote him a
letter of congratulation and approval which greatly en-
couraged him, in spite of his heavy and unrelenting ad-
ministrative duties, to push ahead with new courage.
Notwithstanding, however, the best intentions on the part
ofthe writer and the most patiently insistent reminders on
the part of the editors there were many and wide gaps in
the supposedly consecutive series of chapters before the
story was finally finished. Much of the story he dragged
from his tired brain, and jotted down on odds and ends of
paper on trains, while waiting in railway stations, in hotels,
and in ten and fifteen minute intervals snatched from over-
burdened days in his office. The fact that it was a
physical impossibility to give adequate time and attention
to so important a piece of work distressed him and made
him feel even more apologetic about the product.
Theenthusiastic reception ofhis story bythe editors and
later by the public was accordingly particularly surprising
and gratifying to him. After its serial publication he was
soon almost overwhelmed with congratulatory letters and
laudatory reviews. Julian Ralph in the New York Mail
and Express wrote in part:
"It does not matterifthe reader feels a prejudice against
the Negro, or if he be a Negrophile, or if he has never
cared onewayor the other whetherthe Negro does or does
not exist." Whatever be his feelings, 'Up from Slavery
5
is
as remarkable as the most important book ever written by
z6i


--- PAGE 310 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
an American. That book is 'Uncle Tom's Cabin/
Booker Washington's story is its echo and its antithesis.
*
Uncle Tom's Cabin' was the wail of a fettered, hope-for-
saken race. 'Up from Slavery' is the triumphant cry of
the same race, led by its Moses upon a trail which leads to
an intelligent use of the freedom that came to it as an al-
most direct result of Mrs. Stowe's revolutionary novel
'Up from Slavery' and
f
Uncle Tom's Cabin' are insepa-
rably linked in the history of our relations with our dark-
skinned fellow-citizen. One book begins precisely where
the other left off."
William Dean Howells in the North American Review
said of it:
"
* . . What strikes you first and last is
his constant common sense. He has lived heroic poetry,
and he can, therefore, afford to talk simple prose.
. . -
The mild might of his adroit, his subtle statesmanship (in
the highest sense it is not less than statesmanship, and in-
volves a more Philippine problem in our midst), is the only
agency to which it can yield.
. . ."
Amongthe congratulatoryletters cameone fromAthens,
Greece, signed "Bob Burdette, Mrs. Burdette, and the
children" which greatly amused and delighted Mr. Wash-
ington. It reads, paraphrasing the passage in the book
wherehe tells ofthe insistent strangerwhounerringly seeks
him out when he tries to get a little quiet and rest on a
train, "'Is not this Booker T. Washington? Wewish to
introduce ourselves/ You see, you can't escape it. We
read that sentence, and shouted with delight over it, in
Damascus. I was going to write
*
far-away Damascus*
262


--- PAGE 311 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
but no place is far awaynow. Damascusis very nearto
Tuskegee, in fact, only six or seven thousand years older,
and not more than fifty thousand years behind* It must
have had a good start, too, for Abrahamwentthere or sent
there to get that wise and tactful
*
steward of his house/
Eliezir. But Damascus has always remained in the same
place, whereas Tuskegee has been marching on by leaps
and bounds. But you are a busy man we have heard
that, even in this land. And I can see you reading this
letter five lines at a time. Nouse sitting nextthe window,
piling your hand-baggage up in the seat, and pulling your
hat over your eyes, is there? No, for we come along just
the same, sit on the arm ofthe seat, touch yourelbow, and
'Is not this Booker T. Washington?* We have been
travelling for a year. The Outlook has followed us week
byweek. Andweekbyweekwehave reached out to clasp
your hand, and have knelt to thank God for the story of
your life for its inspiration, its hopefulness, its trust, its
fidelity to duty and purpose. Such a wonderful story,
told in the elegance of simplicity that only a great heart
can feel and write. We paused again and again to say
'God bless him/ And now we send you our hand clasp
and message
*
God bless himand all ofhis,* There, now!
You may pile up your baggage a little higher pull your
hat down over your eyes a little farther and pretend to
sleep a little harder. We will leave you. But not in
peace. More likely in pieces. For I see other people,
crowding in from the other car, with their glittering eyes
gimleted upon you."
263


--- PAGE 312 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Barret Wendell, Professor of English at Harvard Uni-
versity, wrote him: "Will you allow me to express the
pleasure which your book,
c
Up from Slavery/ has given
me? For about twenty years a teacher of English, and
mostly of English composition, I have become perhaps a
judge as to matters of style. Certainly I have grown less
and less patient of all writing which is not simple and
efficient; and moreand moreto believe in a style which does
its work with a simple, manly distinctness. It is hard
to rememberwhen a book, casually taken up, has proved,
in this respect, so satisfactory as yours. Nostyle could be
more simple, more unobtrusive; yet few styles which I
know seem to me more laden as distinguished from
overburdened with meaning.
"<
On almost any of your
pages you say as much again as most men would say in
the space; yet you say it as simply and easily that one
has no effort in reading. One is simply surprised at the
quiet power which can so make words do their work."
Thus was received the simple narrative of his life up to
this time as hastilywritten down in odd moments snatched
from his already overcrowded days. In this country
alone more than 110,000 copies of the book have since
been sold. It has been translated into French, Spanish,
German, Hindustani, and Braille.
Booker Washington's philosophy as to money raising
after a generation of constant and successful experience
was summed up in this statement which he made in "Up
from Slavery": "My experience in getting money for
Tuskegee has taught me to have no patience with those
264


--- PAGE 313 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
people who are always condemning the rich because they
are rich, because they do not give more to objects of
charity* In the first place, those who are guilty of such
sweeping criticisms do not know how many people would
be made poor, and how much suffering would result, if
wealthy people were to part all at once with any large
proportion of their wealth in a way to disorganize and
cripple great business enterprises. Then very few people
have any idea ofthe large number of applications for help
that rich people are constantly being flooded with. I
know wealthy people who receive as many as twenty calls
a day for help. More than once, when I have gone into
offices ofrich men, I have found half a dozen persons wait-
ing to see them, and all come for the same purpose, that
of securing money. And all these calls in person, to say
nothing of the applications received through the mails.
Very few people have any idea of the amount of money
given away by persons who never permit their names to
be known. I have often heard persons condemned for
not giving away money, who, to myown knowledge, were
giving away thousands of dollars every year so quietly
that the world knew nothing about it. ... Although
it has been myprivilege to be the mediumthrough which a
good many hundred thousand dollars have been received
for the work at Tuskegee, I have always avoided what the
world calls
'
begging/ My experience and observation
have convinced me that persistent asking outright for
money from the rich does not, as a rule, secure help. I
have usually proceeded on the principle that persons who
265


--- PAGE 314 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
possess sense enough to earn money have sense enough to
know how to give it away, and that the mere making
known of the facts regarding the work of the graduates
has been more effective than outright begging. I think
that the presentation of facts, on a high, dignified plane,
is all thebeggingthat most rich people care for."
Although this favorable estimate of the money-giving
rich was based upon many years of successful experience
it must not be supposed that Booker Washington did not
have his share of rebuffs and discouragements. In fact,
scarcely a day went by that he did not receive some such
disheartening rebuff as the following note from a manwho
had for several years contributed a small sum each year to
Tuskegee Institute:
, May 10, 1913.
Mr. WarrenLogan, Treasurer; Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee,
Ala.
DEAR SIR: I enclose my check for ten dollars m reply
to President Washington's appeal ofthe 6th inst.
I do not understand why such an appeal should be
necessary after the large gifts byMr. Kennedyand others.
The Indians have received much less than the Negroes in
money and care, yet they beg less, and are more ready to
imitate the whites in being self-reliant. All over the
North I find the Negroes despised by the whites for their
laziness and diaposition to be dependent.
Very truly,
Mr, Washington'spatient, circumstantial, and construc-
tively informative reply is characteristic of his method of
266


--- PAGE 315 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
rejoinder. It also illustrates his habit of placing his re-
liance on facts and not on adjectives, and ofso marshalling
his facts that they fought his battles for him. He replied
thus:
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama,
May 26, 1913.
MYDEARSIR: OurTreasurer has shown meyour letter
of May loth, in which you inquire as to why it should be
necessary for Tuskegee to appeal to the public for addi-
tional funds, also stating that the Indians receive much
less than Negroes in money and care.
Under the circumstances, I thought you would not ob-
ject to my making the following report to you, covering
the inquiries suggested in your letter.
The Indians from a financial standpoint are better off
than any other race or class of people in this country.
The 265,863 Indians in the United States own 72,535,862
acres of land, which is 273 acres for each Indian man,
woman, and child. If all the land in the country were
apportioned among the inhabitants there would be 20
acres per person. The value of property and funds
belonging to Indians is $678,564,253, or $2,554 per capita,
or about $i0,000 per family. The Negroes, but lately
emancipated, are by contrast poor and are struggling to
rise.
The Indians are carefully looked after by the United
States Government. In addition to the elaborately or-
ganized Indian Bureau at Washington, there are six
thousand (6,000) persons in the Indian field service, to
especially look after and supervise them. There is one
director, supervisor, orteacherforeach44Indians.
Some of the things that the Government does for the
Indians are:


--- PAGE 316 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
(1) Look after the health of the Indians; for this pur-
pose there are in the field one Medical Supervisor, 100
regular and 60 contract physicians, 54 nurses, and 88 fivjld
matrons.
(2) Supervise their farming and stock raising. For
the 24,489 Indians engaged in farming there are two gen-
eral supervisors, 48 expert farmers, that is, men^with ex-
perience and scientific knowledge, and 210 men in subor-
dinate farming positions.
Over $7,000,000 have been spent in irrigating lands for
Indians. Congress in 1911 appropriated $1,300,000 for
this purpose. Forthe 890,000Negrofarmers in the South,
the United States Government maintains 34 Agricultural
Demonstration Agents.
For the supervision of the 44,985 Indians engaged in
stock raising, the Government maintains 22 superintend-
ents oflive stock. Forthe 700,000Negro farmers engaged
in live stock raising there is only one Government expert
working especially amongthem.
(3) A system of schools is maintained by the Govern-
ment for Indian children. For this purpose there are
223 day schools, 79 reservation boarding schools, and 35
boarding schools away from reservations. In these
schools in 1911 there were 24,500 pupils. For the sup-
port of these schools the United States Government for
1912 appropriated #3,757,495- To assist in teaching the
1,700,000 Negro children in the South there was received
in 1911 from the United States Government #245,518.
In general the Indians are not taxed for any purpose.
On the other hand, the Negroes are taxed the same as
other persons and in this way contribute a considerable
amount for their own education and the education of the
whites. In this connection, I call your attention to the
enclosed pamphlet
"Public Taxation and Negro Schools/*
268


--- PAGE 317 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
I enclose herewith copy of my Last Annual Report,
giving information as to the various activities of the
Institution.
Yours verytruly,
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON.
On October 25, 1915? a few weeks before he died, Mr.
Washington delivered an address before the delegates to
the National Council of Congregational Churches, in
NewHaven, Conn., in which he well illustrated his belief
already quoted, "that a large part of the mission of both
Hampton and Tuskegee is to keep the cause of Negro
education before the country." Hesaid in part:
"There is sometimes much talk about the inferiority
of the Negro. In practice, however, the idea appears
to be that he is a sort ofsuper-man. He is expected with
about one-fifth or one-tenth of what the whites receive
for their education to make as much progress as they are
making. Taking the Southern States as a whole, about
$10.23 per capita is spent in educating the average white
boy or girl, and the sum of $2.82 per capita in educating
the average black child.
"In order to furnish the Negro with educational facili-
ties so that the 2,000,000 children ofschool age nowout of
school and the 1,000,000 who are unable to read or write
can have the proper chance in life it will be necessary
to increase the $9,000,000 now "being expended annually
for Negro public school education in the South to about
$25,000,000 or$30,000,000 annually/*
And in conclusion he said: "At the present rate, it is
269


--- PAGE 318 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
taking not a few days or a few years, but a century or
more to get Negro education on a plane at all similar to
that on which the education of the whites now is. To
bring Negro education up where it ought to be will take
the combined and increased efforts of all the agencies now
engaged in this work. TheNorth, the South, the religious
associations, the educational boards, white people and
black people, all will have to cooperate in a great effort
for this common end."
These were the last words he ever spoke at a great
public meeting. They show his acute realization of the
immensity of the task to which he literally gave his life,
and his dread lest what had been accomplished be over-
estimated with a consequent slackening ofeffort.
A very cordial friendship existed between Mr. Wash-
ington and his Trustees. Every man amongthemwas his
selection and joined the Board on his invitation. In the
year 1912 they manifested their friendship and interest
in the most practical of ways by volunteering to raise a
guarantee fund of $50,000 a year for five years to help
bridge the ever-widening gap between the income of the
school and its unavoidably mounting expenses. To do
this, aside from contributing handsomely themselves,
almost all went out and "begged
5'
of their friends. Mr.
Julius Rosenwald of Chicago, for instance, after making
his own liberal personal contribution, and soliciting funds
among his Chicago friends, left his great and absorbing
interests at a busy time of the year to go to New York
and devote a week's time to "
begging
"
money for Tus-
270


--- PAGE 319 ---
RAISING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
kegee among his friends and acquaintances. Messrs.
Low, Willcox, Trumbull, Mason, and others also per-
sonally solicited funds. Many men have gotten million-
aires to give large sums of money, but how many men
have ever gotten millionaires both to give large sums
and personally to solicit large sums for a purely unselfish
purpose?
In his final report Booker Washington said of this
guarantee fund: "It is not possible to describe in words
what a relief and help this $50,000 guarantee fund has
proven during the four years it has been in existence,
. . * We shall have to begin now to consider some
method of replacing these donations. The relief which
has come to us because of this guarantee fund has been
marked and far reaching."
The same qualities which enabled Booker Washington
to get close to the plain people helped him to win the
confidence of the great givers. Through his money-
raising efforts he constantly added to his great stock of
knowledge of human nature. Also the same qualities
of heart and mind which enabled him to rise superior to
the obstacles of race prejudice helped him to bear without
discouragement or bitterness the many rebuffs of the
money raiser. One cannot help speculating, however,
on the loss to Tuskegee, to the Negro race, and to the
general welfare, entailed by the necessity of his devoting
two-thirds ofhis time, strength, and resourcefulness merely
to the raising of money.
271


--- PAGE 320 ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
M_ANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
BOOKER WASHINGTON'S chief characteristic as an
administrator "was his faculty for attention to minute
details -without losing sight of his large purposes and
ultimate ends. His grasp of every detail seems more
remarkable when one realizes the dimensions of his
administrative task. Besides leading his race in Amer-
ica, and to some extent throughout the -world, and raising
between one hundred thousand and two hundred thou-
sand dollars each year, he administered an institution
whose property and endowment are valued at almost
four million dollars. Although the original property of
the school was only a hundred acres of land with three
small buildings, it now owns twenty-four hundred acres,
with one hundred and eleven buildings, large and small,
in its immediate vicinity. In addition to these twenty-
four hundred acres ofland the school nowowns also about
twenty thousand acres, being the unsold balance of a
grant of twenty-five thousand acres of mineral land, made
by the Federal Government as an endowment to the
Institute in 1899.
The organization of the Institute ramifies throughout
the entire county in which it is located. It has a resident


--- PAGE 321 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
student population of between fifteen hundred and two
thousand boys and girls, with a teaching force of about
two hundred men and women. It enrolls in its courses
throughout the year from thirty-five hundred to four
thousand persons. The receipts of its post office exceed
those of the entire postal service of the Negro Republic of
Liberia in Africa. In a given year the revenues ofLiberia
were$301,238 and theexpenditures $314,000. In the same
year the receipts from all sources of Tuskegee Institute
were $321,864.87 and its expenditures $341,141.58.
Booker Washington so organized this great institution
that it ran smoothly and without apparent loss of mo-
mentum for the nine months out of the twelve, during the
greater part of which he was obliged to be absent raising
the funds with which to keep it going. The Institute is in
continuous session throughout the twelve months of the
year. During the summer months a summer school for
teachers is conducted in place of the academic depart-
ment. For the purposes of this summer school all or
most of the trades and industries are kept in operation.
The school is organized on this basis. There is, first,
a Board of Trustees which holds the property in trust and
advises the principal as to general policies, etc., and aids
him in the raising of funds; second, the principal, who has
sole charge of all administrative matters; third, an execu-
tive council, composed of the heads of departments,
with the principal as its chairman. The following officers
serve as members of this executive council: Principal,
treasurer, secretary, general superintendent of indus-
273


--- PAGE 322 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
tries, director mechanical industries, director department
of research and Experiment Station, commandant,
business agent, chief accountant, director agricultural
department, registrar, medical director, dean women's
department, director women's industries, chaplain, direc-
tor extension department, superintendent buildings and
grounds, dean Phelps Hall Bible Training School, director
academic department.
The position of general superintendent of industries is
held by John H. Washington, brother of Booker T. Wash-
ington. Mrs. Booker T. Washington fills the position of
directorwomen'sindustries.
After this executive council comes the faculty made
up of the leading teachers who have charge of the instruc-
tion in the various divisions ofthe agricultural, industrial,
and academic departments. This faculty Mr. Washing-
ton in turn subdivided into a series ofstanding and special
committees having particular charge of certain phases of
the work such as repairs, cleanliness, etc. The committee
on cleanliness would, for instance, be expected to see that
the boarding department was insisting upon the proper
use of knives and forks and napkins was serving the
food hot and in proper dishes, and that the kitchens were
at all times ready for inspection and models of cleanliness.
In the same way he constantly appointed committees
to go into the academic classes and see that they were
correlating their work with the trade work. The tend-
ency to backslide is especially strong in an institution
which, like Tuskegee, is working out original problems.
274


--- PAGE 323 ---
Some of Mr. Washington's humble friends (See page 136)
Soil analysis. The students are required to work out in the laboratory
the problems of the field and the shop


--- PAGE 324 ---



--- PAGE 325 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
It is fatally easy for the teachers in both academic and
industrial classes to slip awayfromthe correlative method,
for which the institution stands, back to the traditional
routine. The correlative method requires constant
thought. As Mr. Washington well knew, the average
person only thinks under constant prodding. Hence,
the committees to do the prodding! It is so much easier
to take one's problems from the text-books than to dig
them up in the shops or on the farm as to be practically
irresistible unless one is being watched. Then, in the
shops it requires a constant effort to work the theory in
with the practice. If the instructors in the trades tended
to become mere unthinking mechanics a vigilant com-
mitteewas at hand to keep themtrue to their better lights.
And if the committees themselves ever became slack, the
all-seeing eye of the principal soon detected it and they
in turn were "jacked up." Mr. Washington himself had
a way of leisurely strolling about day or night into shop,
classroom, or laboratory with a stenographer at his elbow.
If he thus came upon a recitation in which no illustrative
material was used, that teacher would receive within the
next few hours a note such as this:
December 8, 1914.
]y[R> : After a visit to your class yesterday, I
want to make this suggestion that you get into close
contact with some of the teachers here like Mrs. Jones of
the Children's House, and Mrs. Ferguson, Head of the
Division of Education, and Mr. Whiting of the Division
of Mathematics, who understand our methods ofteaching
and try to learn our methods.
275


--- PAGE 326 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Your work yesterday was very far from satisfactory,
not based upon a single human experience or human activity.
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON, Principal.
Three days before he had sent the following note to
the head ofthe academic department:
Mr. Lee> Director of the Academic Department :
I was very glad to see the wideawake class conducted
by Mr. Smith this morning. His methods are certainly
good-
On asking questions of the individual members of the
class, I found that about half of the class did not know
just what was to be found out from the measurements,
If Mr. Smith will go to the new Laundry Building, in
case he has not done so, he will find an opportunity to
teach the same lessons in connection with a real building.
I hope you will make this suggestion to him. Nothing
takes the place of reality wherever we can get something
real,
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON, Principal
Previous to this he had written Mr, Lee the following
letter relative to the general problem of the teaching
efficiency in his department:
November 24, 1914.
Mr. Ltt, Director Academic Department:
When you return, I want to urge that you give careful
but serious attention to the following suggestions:
First, I am convinced that we must arrange to give
more systematic and constant attention to the individual
teachers in your department in the way ofseeing that they
276


--- PAGE 327 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
follow your wishes and policy regarding the dovetailing
ofthe academic work into the industrial work.
I am quite convinced that the matter is taken up in
rather a spasmodic way; that is, so long as you are on
hand and can give the matter personal attention, it is
followed, but when you cease to give personal attention
to it or are away, matters go back to the old rut, or nearly
so.
In some way we must all get together and help you to
organize your department so that this will not be true.
There are two elements of weakness in the academic
work: First, I very much fear that we take into it every
year too many green teachers, who know nothing about
your methods. This pulls the whole tone ofthe academic
work down before you can train them into your methods.
I am quite sure that though you might not get teachers
who have had so much book training, that it would be
worth your considering to employ a larger number of
Hampton graduates or Tuskegee graduates, who have
had in a measure the methods which you believe in in-
stilled into them.
In my opinion, the time has come when you must con-
sider seriously the getting rid of, or shifting, some of your
older teachers. You have teachers in your department
who have been here a good many years, and experience
proves that they do not adapt themselves readily and
systematically to your methods. I think it would be
far better for the school to find employment for them
outside of the Academic Department, or to let them
take some clerical workin your department, than for them
to occupy positions of importance and influence, which
they are not filling satisfactorily and where they have an
influence in hurting the character ofthe whole teaching.
All these matters I hope youwill considervery carefully.
277


--- PAGE 328 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
I amsure that the time has come when definite and serious
action is needed.
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON, Principal.
First and last on these apparently aimless strolls -with a
stenographer he visited not only the classrooms and
shops but every corner ofthe great institution. Hewould
return to his office with a notebook full of memoranda of
matters to be followed up or changed, and of people to
be commended or censured for their efficient or inefficient
handling of this, that, or the other piece of work. Once
after writing a series of letters calling attention to ragged
tablecloths, unclean napkins, and uncleanliness in other
forms in kitchens, bakery, and dining-rooms without the
desired result, he personally took charge of the situation,
organized a squad of workers, put things in proper condi-
tion, and then insisted that they be kept in such condition.
His passion to utilize every fraction of time to its maxi-
mum advantage led him even to smuggle a stenographer
into the formal annual exercises of the Bible Training
School so that he might during the exercises clandestinely
dictate notes for the head of the Bible school as to those
features in which the program was weak, failed "to get
across/
5
did not hold the interest of the people, seemed to
be over their heads, or whatever might be his diagnosis of
the difficulty* He was not interested in the program for
and of itself, but was keenly interested in its effect upon
the people. If it interested and helped them, it was a
good program; if it did not, it was a poor program and no
378


--- PAGE 329 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
amount oflearning or technical perfection could redeem it*
He sometimes reduced his more scholarly teachers to the
verge of despair by his insistence that there should be
nothingon the program at any exercise to which the public
was invited which the every-daymanandwomancould not
understand and appreciate.
In opening the chapter we mentioned Booker Washing-
ton's faculty for giving attention to apparently trivial de-
tails without losing sight ofhis large policies and purposes.
This was part of his habit of taking nothing for granted.
He never assumed that people would do or had done what
they should do or should have done any more than he
assumed theywouldnot or had not donewhattheyshould.
He neither trusted nor distrusted them. He kept himself
constantly informed. Every person employed by the in-
stitution from the most important departmentheads down
to the menwhoremoved ashes and garbagewere underthe
stimulating apprehension that his eye might be upon them
at any moment. He harassed his subordinates by contin-
ually asking themif this or that matter had been attended
to. He would sometimes ask three different people to do
the same thing. This resulted in wasted effort on some-
body*s part, but it always accomplished the result, which
was all that interested him. Hetook nothing for granted
himself and he insisted that his subordinates take nothing
for granted. He was a task master and a "driver" but
he taxed himself more heavily and drove himself harder
than he did any one else. Like other strong men, he had
the weaknesses of his strength, and probably his most
279


--- PAGE 330 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
serious weakness was driving himself and his subordinates
beyond his and their strength.
His eye was daily upon every part of the great machine
which he had built up through an exhaustive system of
daily reports. These reports were placed on his desk each
morning when at the Institute and mailed to him each
morning when away. They showed him the number of
students in the hospital with the name, diagnosis, and
progress of each case. From the poultry yard came re-
ports giving the numberofeggs in the incubators, the num-
ber hatched since the day before, the number of chickens
which had died, the number of eggs and chickens sold, etc.
Similarly daily reports came from the swine herd, the
dairy herd, and all the other groups of live stock.
Hereceived also each morning a report from the savings
department giving the number of new depositors, the
amounts of money deposited and withdrawn, and the con-
dition ofthe bank at the close ofthe previous day. There
was, too, a list ofthe requisitions approved bythe Business
Committee the previous day giving articles, prices, divi-
sions, or departments in which each was to be used and to-
tals for different classes of requisitions,
The Boarding Department head would report just what
had been served the students at the three meals ofthe day
before. In running over these menus he would give a con-
temptuous snort if he came upon any instance of what he
called "feeding the students out of the barrel/' By this
he meant buying food which could as well or better have
been raised on the Institute farms. He objected to this
280


--- PAGE 331 ---



--- PAGE 332 ---



--- PAGE 333 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
practice not only because it was more expensive, but be-
cause it eliminated the work of raising, preparing, and
serving the foods which he regarded as a valuable ex-
ercise in civilization. He also insisted that everything
raised on the farms should in one way or another be used
by the students. Besides serving to the students every
variety of Southern vegetable from the Institute's exten-
sive truck gardens, he always insisted that their own corn
be ground into meal and that they make their own pre-
serves out of their own peaches, blackberries, and other
fruits. In other words, he made the community feed it-
selfjust as far as possible. And this he did quite as much
because of the knowledge of the processes of right living
which it imparted as for the money which it saved.
The Treasurer also submitted a daily report of contri-
butions and other receipts of the previous day with the
name and address of each contributor. Mr. Washington
arranged to receive and look over these daily reports even
when travelling. Hence, in a sense, he was never absent.
Only very rarely and under most unusual circumstances
did he cut this means of daily contact with the multifold
activities of the institution.
Although a task master, a driver, and a relentless critic,
he was just in his dealings with his subordinates and his
students, very appreciative of kindness or thoughtfulness,
and generous in his approbation oftasks well done. Three
of the younger children of officers of the school, while out
walking with one of their teachers, discovered a fire in the
woodsnearthe Institute one day. Afternotifyingthemen
281


--- PAGE 334 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
working nearby3 the children hurried home and wrote Mr.
Washington a letter telling him about the fire. They had
heard him warn people against the danger of forest fires
and of the great harm they did. This letter the three
children excitedly took to the Principal's homethemselves,
as it was on Sunday. Hewas not in, but the first letter he
dictated on arriving at his office the next morningwas this:
March 24,
MissBeatrice Taylor, MissLouiseLogan, MissLenora Scott;
I have received your kind and thoughtful letter of
yesterday regarding the forest fire and amvery grateful to
you for the information which it contains. It is very kind
and thoughtful ofyouto write me. I shall pass yourletter
to Mr. Bridgeforth, the Head ofthe Department, and ask
him to look after the matter.
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON, Principal.
In the fall of the same year he addressed this letter of
appreciation to Mr* Bridgeforth, director of the Agricul-
tural Department, mentioned in the note of the children:
Principal's Office,
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama
October 4, JpJJ*.
Mr. G* JR. Bridgeforth, Director ofAgricultural Department:
I have been spending a considerable portion of each day
in inspecting the farm, and I want to congratulate you and
all of your assistants on account of the fine sweet potato
crop which has been produced. It is certainly the finest
crop produced in the history of the school.
282


--- PAGE 335 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
You deserve equal commendation, especially in view of
the season you have had to contend with, in connection
with the fine hay crop, the pea crop, and the peanut crop.
I wish you would let the members of your force know
how I feel regarding their work.
I believe if the farm goes on under present conditions,
that at the end of the year it will very much please the
Trustees to note the results accomplished especially so
far as the Budget is concerned.
[Signed] BOOKER T. WASHINGTON, Principal.
His quick mind and his keen sense ofhumorwould some-
times lead him to make fun in a kindly way of his slower
colleagues. The members of the Executive Council and
the Faculty sometimes felt he treated them rather too
much as if he were the teacher and they the pupils. His
frequent humorous sallies and stories exasperated some of
the moreserious-minded membersofhis staffverymuch as
Lincoln's sallies and stories exasperated some ofthe mem-
bers of his Cabinet, particularly Secretary Stanton. This
sense ofhumorwas undoubtedly with Booker Washington
as with Abraham Lincoln one of the great safety valves
without which he could not have carried his heavy burden
as long as he did.
Among other things he always insisted that the human
element be put into the workofthe institution and kept in
it. Hewould reprimand a subordinate just as sharply for
failure to be human as for a specific neglect of duty. He
was particularly insistent that all letters to the parents of
the students should be intimate and friendly rather than
283


--- PAGE 336 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
formal and stereotyped. He believed that nothing would
more quickly or more surely kill the effectiveness of the
school than the application of cut-and-dried theories and
formulasto the handlingofthestudents and their problems.
Henever lost sight ofthe fact that the most perfect educa-
tional machinebecomes worthless if the soul goes out of it.
Onhis return from trips he would write a personal letter
about their boy or girl to each parent whom he had met
while away. After he had addressed a meeting and was
shaking hands with those whocame forward to meet him a
man would say, as one once did, with embarrassed pride,
"I 'spec you know my boy he's down to your school.
He's.a tall, black boy an' wears a derby hat." When Mr.
Washington got back to Tuskegee he sent for "the tall,
black boy"with the derby hat and wrote his proud father
all about him.
On his return from journeys he would write individual
letters not only to the parents ofstudents and to his hosts
and hostesses, but to each and every person who had tried
in any wayto contribute to the pleasure and success of his
trip. On returning from the State educational tours
which we have described he would write personal letters of
thanks and appreciation not only to every member of the
general committee on arrangements which had managed
his tour throughout the State, but also to every memberof
the local committees for the various towns and cities which
hevisited. Hewould also write such a letter to theGover-
nor or Mayor or whatever public official or prominent
citizen had introduced .him. Usually on these tours
284


--- PAGE 337 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
school children, or a group ofwomen representing a local
colored women's club, would present him with flowers*
Hewould in such cases insist that the nameofeach child or
each womanin the groupbesecured sothat he mighton his
return write to each one a personal letter of thanks.
Many such letters are now among the treasured posses-
sions of humble Negro homes throughout the country.
Recognizing that Tuskegee's chiefclaim to support from
the public must be found in the achievements of her grad-
uates he built up the Division of Records and Research to
keep in constant touchwiththegraduates and gatherinfor-
mation about them and their work. By this means he
could find out in detail at a moment's notice what most of
the graduateswere doing and in terms ofstatistics what all
weredoing. Eighteentotwentyofthemare buildingupor
conducting schools on the model of Tuskegee Institute in
parts ofthe Southwheretheyare mostneeded. Withthese
he naturally soughtto keep in particularly close touch.
With funds provided for the purpose by one ofthe Tus-
kfcgee Trustees, committees of Tuskegee officers and
teachers are sent from time to time to visit these schools
established by Tuskegee graduates. They act as friendly
inspectors and advisers. The following is the plan of re-
port drafted for the guidance ofthese committees:
OBSERVATIONS
I. Physical.
(a) Cleanliness ofpremises.
(b) Keeping up repairs,
285


--- PAGE 338 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
2. Teaching.
(a) Methodsofinstruction.
(b) Books used, etc., that is, are they upto date.
(c) Towhat extent correlation is being carried out.
(d) Visiting teachers might give some definite dem-
onstrations in methods, etc.
(e) Special meetings with the faculty should be held.
3. Financial.
(a) To what extent does the school keep up with its
accounts so that its receipts and expenditures
can be easily ascertained?
4. Communitywork.
(a) Extension activities carried on by the school.
(b) Theefficiency ofthese activities.
5. Attendance.
(a) Numberofstudents enrolled on date ofvisit.
(b) Numberin attendance on date ofvisit,
(c) What efforts are being made to get the students
to enter at the beginning ofthe term and remain
throughout the year?
SUGGESTIONS
I* Before concluding its visit the committee should
make, to proper persons in the school, suggestions con-
cerning the improving ofthe teaching and of other things
as maybenecessary.
2. Ifcommitteemakesa secondvisit, see towhatextent
the suggestions ofthe previous visit have been carried out*
REPORT
After each visit a written report by the committee
covering all of the above shall be sent to Principal Wash-
ington.
286


--- PAGE 339 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
To all the graduates of the Institute Mr. Washington
sent a circular letter on the first of each year in which
frequently he told them of the progress that had been
made by the school during the year in improvements,
number ofstudents enrolled, etc., and asked them in turn
to answer a list of questions about their life and work, or
sometimes in such letters he merely wished them success
and gave them some practical advice. The 1913 letter
which follows is an exampleofthe latter:
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama^
January I, 1913.
Dear Mr. (or Miss) Blank:
I take this opportunity to send you greetings, to inquire
how you are getting along, and to express the hope that
in every way you are prospering. If, however, you are
having discouragements, I trust that you are meeting
them bravely. If you have difficulties, or are laboring
under disadvantages, use them as stepping-stones to
success.
I again call your attention to the importance ofkeeping
in touch with the Institute. Keeping your address on
file with us and sending a report of your work will assist
in doing this. I enclose herewith a blank for that pur-
pose. Visits to the school should also be made from time
to time. You should begin to prepare now to be here
during the coming commencement exercises in May in
order that you may see what is being done at the institu-
tion and to meet your former classmates. Already the
officers of the General Alumni Association have begun
preparations for your welcome.
I urge upon you the importance of keeping up the habit
287


--- PAGE 340 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
of study and of reading good books and papers. The ac-
companying circular on "Howto Buy Books'* gives val-
uable suggestions about how to secure the best books
cheaply. I take this occasion to inform you that already
we are making preparations for our 1913 Summer School.
It is hoped that every graduate whois teaching will attend
this or some other good summerschool.
I trust that whereveryou are located youwill do all that
you can for community uplift. Be active in church and
Sunday-school work, help to improve the public schools,
assist in bettering health conditions, help the people to
secure property, to buy homes and to improve them. In
doing all these things, you will be carrying out the Tuske-
gee idea.
Very truly yours,
[Signed] BOOKERT. WASHINGTON, Principal
The questions were slightly varied from year to year.
The following were those sent out with the 1915 letter
the last to bear the signature ofthe Institute's founder.
Please favor me by answering these questions and returning the
blankas soon as you receive it.
1. Yourfull namewhenatTuskegee?
2. WhatyearwereyougraduatedfromTuskegee?
3. Your present homeaddress?
4. If you are not at home, your temporary address for the winter
of1915-1916?
5 Ifyouhavemarried, yourwife's namebefore marriage? .
Wasshe evera studentatTuskegee? ,
Is sheliving?
6. Your present occupation? If in educational work, give your
position in theschool
7. Howlonghaveyoufollowed it?
288


--- PAGE 341 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
8. What are your average wages or earnings per day, week, or
month? , .
9. Whatotheroccupation haveyou?
10. Averagewagesperday,week, ormonthatthis occupation? .
11. Kind and amountofpropertyowned?
12. Tell us something of the work you are doing this year. (We
will also be pleased to receive testimonials from white and
colored persons concerningyourwork)
13. Weespecially wish to get in touch this yearwith as manyofour
former students as possible. Please give present addresses
andoccupations ofall ofthesethatyoucan
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON, Principal.
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama.
As previously mentioned the relationship between Mr.
Washington and his Trustees was at all times particularly
friendly and harmonious. While they were always di-
rectors who directed instead of mere figureheads, they
nevertheless were broad enough and wise enough to give
the Principal a very free reign. Preeminent among the
able and devoted Trustees of Tuskegee.was the late Wil-
liam H. Baldwin, Jr. In order to commemorate his life
and work the William H. Baldwin, Jr., Memorial Fund of
$150,000 was raised by a committee of distinguished men,
with Oswald Garrison Villard of the New York Evening
Post as chairman, amongwhomwere Theodore Roosevelt,
Grover Cleveland, and Charles W. Eliot, and placed at
the disposal of the Tuskegee Trustees. A bronze memo-
rial tablet in memoryofMr. Baldwinwas at the sametime
placed on the Institute grounds. At the ceremony at
which this tablet was unveiled and this fund presented to
the Trustees, Mr. Washington said in part, in speaking of
289


--- PAGE 342 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
his relations with Mr. Baldwin and Mr. Baldwin's rela-
tions to Tuskegee:
"Only those who are close to the business structure of
the institution could really understand what the coming
into our work of a man like William H. Baldwin meant
to all of us. In the first place, it meant the bringing into
our work a certain degree oforder, a certain system, so far
as the business side of the institution was concerned, that
hadnot hitherto existed* Then the comingofhiminto our
institution meant the bringing of new faith, meant the
bringing of new friends, I shall never forget my first
impression. I shall never forget my first experience in
meeting Mr. Baldwin. At that time he was the General
Manager and one of the Vice-Presidents of the Southern
Railway, located then in its headquarters in the city of
Washington. I remember that, a number of days pre-
vious, I had gone to the city of Boston and had asked his
father if he would not give me a line ofintroduction to his
son, about whom I had already heard in Washington.
Mr. Baldwin's father readily gave me a line of introduc-
tion and I went in a fewdays after that and sought out Mr.
Baldwin in his Washington office and he looked through
this letter ofintroduction, read it carefully, then he looked
me over, up and down, and I asked him if he would not
become a trustee of this institution. After looking me
over, looking me up and down for a few seconds or a few
minutes longer, he said, 'No, I cannot become a trustee;
I will not say I will become a trustee because when I give
my word to become a trustee it must mean something/
290


--- PAGE 343 ---



--- PAGE 344 ---



--- PAGE 345 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
He said, *I will study the institution at Tuskegee, I will
go there and look it over and after I have found out what
your methods are, what you are driving at if your meth-
ods and objects commend themselves to me, then I will
consent to become a trustee/ And I remember how well
some of the older teachers and perhaps some of the
older students will recall that upon one day, when we
were least expecting it, he stopped his private car off here
at Chehaw and appeared here upon our grounds, and
some of us will recall how he went into every department
of the institution, how he went into the classrooms, how
he went through the shops, how he went through the
farm, how he went through the dining-room; I remem-
ber how he went to each table, and took pieces of bread
from the table and broke them and examined the bread to
see howwell it was cooked, and even tasted some of it as
he went into the kitchen. He wanted to be sure how we
were doing things here at Tuskegee. Then after he had
made this visit of examination for himself, after he had
studied our financial condition, then after a number of
months had passed by, he consented to permit us to use
his name as one of our Trustees, and from the beginning
to the end we never had such a trustee. He was one
who devoted himself night and day,winter and summer, in
season and out ofseason, to theinterests ofthis institution.
Now, having spoken this word, you can understand the
thoughts and the feelings of some of us on this occasion
as we think of the services ofthis great and good man.
"It is one ofthe privileges of people who are not always
291


--- PAGE 346 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
classed among the popular people of earth to have strong
friends for the reason that nobody but a strong man will
endure the public criticism that so often comes to one who
is the friend of a weak or unpopular race. This, in the
words of another, is one ofthe advantages enjoyed some-
times bya disadvantaged race/*
Naturally no account of Booker Washington's adminis-
tration of the great institution which he built would be
complete without some mention of Mrs. Washington's
part in herhusband'swork. Aside from her duties as wife,
mother, and home maker duties which any ordinary
woman would find quite exacting enough to absorb all her
time, thought, and strength particularly in view of the
fact that a wide hospitality is part of the role Mrs.
Washington, as director of women'sindustries, is one of
the half-dozen leading executives of the institution. In
addition to her many and varied family and official duties
at the Institute Mrs. Washington has always been a
leader in social service and club work amongthe womenof
her race throughout the country, and has besides all this
come to be a kind ofmother confessor, advisor, and guide
to hundreds ofyoung men and women. Wewill conclude
this chapter by quoting in large part an article written
by Mr* Scott and published some years ago in the Ladies'
HomeJournal, which describes how and when Mrs. Wash-
ington entered her husband's life and work and the part
she played in his affairs:
"Even before the war closed there came to the South
on the heels of the army of emancipation an army of
292


--- PAGE 347 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
school teachers. They came to perfect with the spelling-
book and the reader the workthat the soldiers had begun
with the sword. It was during this period in the little
straggling village of Macon, Miss., that a little girl,
called then Margaret Murray, but who is known now as
Mrs. Booker T. Washington, was born. When she grew
old enough to count she found herself one of a family of
ten and, like nearly all children of Negro parentage, at
that time, very poor.
"In the grand army of teachers who went South in
1864 and 1865 were many Quakers. Prevented by the
tenets of their religion from entering the army as soldiers
these people were the more eager to do the not less dif-
ficult and often dangerous work of teachers among the
freedmen after the war was over.
"One of the first memories of her childhood is of her
father's death. It was when she was seven years old.
The next day she went to the Quaker school teachers, a
brother and sister, Sanders by name, and never went
back home to live.
"Thus at seven she became the arbiter of her own fate.
The incident is interesting in showing thus early a certain
individuality and independence of character which she
has exhibited all through her life. In the breaking or
loosening of the family relations after the death of her
father she determined to bestow herself upon her Quaker
neighbors. The secret of it, of course, was that the child
was possessed even then with a passion for knowledge
which has never since deserted her. Rarely does a day
393


--- PAGE 348 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
pass that Mrs. Washington amid the cares of her house-
hold, of the school, and of the many philanthropic and
social enterprises in which she takes a leading part, does
not devote half or three-quarters of an hour to downright
study.
"And so it was that Margaret Murray became at seven
a permanent part of the Quaker household, and became
to all intents and purposes, so far as her habits ofthought
and religious attitude are concerned, herself a Quaker.
"'And in those early days/ says Mrs. Washington,
laughing,
(
I learned easily and quickly. It was only
after I grew up that I began to grow dull. I used to sit
up late at night and get up early in the morning to study
my lessons. I was not always a good child, I am sorry
to say, and sometimes I would hide away under the house
in order to read and study/ . . .
"When Margaret Murray was fourteen years old the
good Quakerteacher said one day, 'Margaret, would thee
like to teach?' That very day the little girl borrowed a
longskirt and went downtown to the office ofJudge Ames,
and took her examination. It was not a severe examina-
tion. Judge Ames had known Margaret all her life and
he had known her father, and in those days white people
were more lenient with Negro teachers than they are now.
They did not expect so much of them. And so, the next
day, Margaret Murray stepped into the schoolroom
where she had been the day before a pupil and became a
teacher. . . .
"Then Margaret heard of the school at Nashville
294


--- PAGE 349 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
Fisk University and she went there. She had a little
money when she started to school, and with that and
what she was able to earn at the school and by teaching
during vacations she managed to work her way as what
was termed rather contemptuously in those days a
'half-rater/ It was not the fashion at that time> in spite
of the poverty of the colored people, for students to work
their way through school.
"In those days very little had been heard at Fisk of
Tuskegee, of Hampton, or of Booker T* Washington.
Students who expected to be teachers were looking for-
ward to going to Texas. Texas has always been more
favorable to Negro education than other Southern States
and has alwaysgotthebest ofNegro publicschoolteachers.
"But upon graduation day, June, 1889, Booker T*
Washington was at Fisk, and he sat opposite Margaret
Murray at table. About that time it was arranged that
she should go to Texas, but, without knowing just how it
came about, she decided to go to Tuskegee and become
what was then called the Lady Principal of the school.
Mrs. Washington has been at Tuskegee ever since.
"Mrs. Washington's duties as the wife of the Principal
of the Tuskegee Institute are many and various. She
has charge of all the industries for girls. She gives much
time to the extension work of the school, which includes
the
'
Mothers* meetings* in the town of Tuskegee and
the
'
plantation settlement
5
nearby* Her most char-
acteristic trait, however, is a boundless sympathy which
has made her a sort of Mother Confessor to students and
295


--- PAGE 350 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
teachers of the Institute. AH go to her for comfort and
advice.
"The 'mothers* meetings' grew out ofthe first Tuskegee
Negro Conference held at Tuskegee In February, 1892.
Mrs- Washington, as she sat in the first meeting of Negro
farmers and heard what they had to say, was impressed
with the fact that history was repeating itself. Here
again, as in the early days ofthe woman's suffrage move-
ment, women had no place worth mentioning in the im-
portant concerns of life outside the household; While
there were many women present at this first conference,
they did not seem to realize that they had any interest
in the practical affairs that were being discussed by their
sons and husbands* While her husband was trying to
give these farmers new ideas, new hopes, new aspirations,
the thought came to Mrs. Washington that the Tuskegee
village was the place for her to begin a workwhich should
eventually include all the women ofthe county and of the
neighboring counties. The country colored women crowd
into the villages of the South on Saturday, seeking to
vary the monotony of their hard and cheerless lives.
Mrs. Washington determined to get hold of these women
and utilize the time spent in town to some good purpose.
Accordingly, the first mothers' meeting was organized in
the upper story of an old store which then stood on the
main street of the village. The stairs were so rickety
that the women were almost afraid to ascend them. It
answered the purpose temporarily, however, and there
was no rent to pay. Howto get the women to the meet-
296


--- PAGE 351 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
Ing was, for a time, a question. For fear of opposition
Mrs. Washington took no one into her confidence except
the manwho let her have the room. She sent a small boy
through the streets with the instruction to go to every
colored womanloitering about thestreets andsay: 'There
is a woman upstairs who has something for you/ Mrs.
Washington says: 'That first meeting I can never forget.
The women came, and each one, as she entered, looked
at me and seemed to say,
*
Where is It?' We talked it
all over, the needs of our women of the country, the
best wayof helping each other, and there and then began
the first mothers' meeting which now has in its member-
ship two hundred and twenty-nine women/ . . .
"Mrs. Washington asked some of the teachers at
Tuskegee to begin to help these people (the people of
the country districts surrounding the schcol). At first
they went to the plantation (selected for the purpose)
on Sundays only. Mrs. Washington selected what
seemed to be the most promising cabin and asked the
woman who lived there if she could come to that house
the next Sunday and hold a meeting. When the party
went down early the next Sunday morning a stout new
broom was taken along. Making the woman a present
of the broom, it was suggested that all take a hand in
cleaning the house a little before the people should begin
to come. The woman took the broom and swept half of
the room, when Mrs. Washington volunteered to finish
the job.
"She had not gone far along on her half before the
297


--- PAGE 352 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
woman was saying: 'Oh, Mis* Washington, lernme take
de brom an' do mah half ovah/ Mrs. Washington says;
'I have always thought that that one unconscious lesson
in thoroughness was the foundation of our work on that
plantation/
-
"Not the least of the duties which fall to Mrs, Wash-
ington is that of caring for the distinguished people who
visit the Tuskegee Institute. The Tuskegee rule that
everything must be in readiness for the inspection of
visitors, as much so in the kitchen as in any other depart-
ment of the school, prevails in her home also.
"An interesting part of this home life is the Sunday
morning breakfast* The teachers have slept later than
usual, and, through the year, when Mr. Washington is at
home, they are invited in groups of three and four to
share this morning meal. In this way he keeps in per-
sonal touch with each of his teachers; he knows what they
are doing; he hears their complaints, if they have any;
fee counsels with them; they 'get together/
"Mrs. Washington's labors for the good of her people
are not confined to the school Sheis (has been) president
of the Southern Federation of Colored Women's Clubs,
editor of the official organ of the National Federation of
Colored Women's Clubs, of which she is also an officer.
She is a frequent contributor to the newspapers and
magazines. (Mrs. Washington has since served two
terms as president of the National Federation of Colored
Women's Clubs.)
"Mr. Washington's own estimate of his wife's help-
298


--- PAGE 353 ---
MANAGING A GREAT INSTITUTION
fulness to him may be gathered from his tribute in his
widely read autobiography, *Up from Slavery*: 'She
is completely one with me in the work directly connected
with the school, relieving me of many burdens and per-
plexities/"


--- PAGE 354 ---
CHAPTER TWELVE
WASHINGTON: THE MAN
JUST as in the first chapter we sought to show the
man in the making, so in this last chapter we shall
seek to picture him as he became in the full frui-
tion of his life. In the fully developed man of the last
decade of his life we find the same traits and qualities
which began to show themselves in those early years of
constant struggle and frequent privation. There is the
same intense mental and physical activity; the same
readiness to fight against any odds in a good cause; the
same modesty, frankness, open-mindedness, and passion
for service.
Oneofthe manyillustrations ofthis intense activity was
shownin a trip he madetoAtlanta, Ga., three or four years
before he died. Even at this time his strength had begun
to wane. In accordance with his unfailing practice he got
up at six o'clock in the morning, and after visiting his
poultry and his beloved pigs, mounted his horse and rode
over farms and grounds inspecting crops and buildings and
what-not until eight o'clock, when he wentto his office and
attacked his huge morning's mail. After dictating for an
hour or more he left his office just in time to catch a train
which brought him to Atlanta at two o'clock in the after-
300


--- PAGE 355 ---
THE MAN
noon. At the station he shook hands with four hundred
people who had gathered to meet him. As he went along
the streets to the Government Building he shook hands
with many others who recognized him in passing. At the
Government Building he shook hands with another large
group assembled there to meet him. After the dinner
tendered him by some of the leading individuals and asso-
ciations among the Negroes of the city he posed for his
photograph with a group ofthose at the dinner. He then
made a tour of the city by motor, during which he visited
three or four schools for Negroes and at each made a half-
hour speech into which, as always, he threw all the force
and energy there was in him.
After supper that evening he addressed twelve hundred
people in the Auditorium Armory, speaking for an hour
and a half. From the armory he went to a banquet given
in his honor where he gave a twenty-minute talk. He did
not get to bed until one o'clock. Four hours later he took a
return train which brought him back to the school by ten-
thirty. Hewent at once to his office and to work, working
until late in the afternoon when he called for his horse and
took his usual ride before supper. After supper he pre-
sided at a meeting of the Executive Council and after the
Council meeting he attended the Chapel exercises. After
these exercises were over at ten o'clock he made an in-
spection on foot of various parts of the buildings and
grounds before going to bed. Byjust such excessive over-
work did he constantly undermine and finally break down
his almost superhuman strength and powers of endurance.
301


--- PAGE 356 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
This he did with an obstinate persistence in spite of wise
and increasingly urgent warnings from physicians, friends,
and associates. Where his own health was concerned he
obdurately refused to listen to reason. It would almost
seem as though he had deliberately chosen to put forth
herculean efforts until he dropped from sheer exhaustion
rather than to work with moderation for a longer span of
life.
Booker Washington was a manwho thought, lived, and
acted on a very high plane. He was, in other words, an
idealist, but unlike too manyidealists he was sternly prac-
tical. His mind worked with the rapidity of flashes of
lightning, particularly when he was aroused. This led
him at times to feel and show impatience in dealing with
slower-minded people, particularly his subordinates. He
was often stirred to righteous indignation by injustice, but
always kept his temper under control. He had a lucid
mind which reasoned from cause to effect with machine-
like accuracy. His intuitions were amazingly keen and
accurate. In other words, his subconscious reasoning
powers were very highly developed. Consequently his
judgments of men and events were almost infallible. Al-
though practically devoid ofpersonal vanity, hewas a very
proud and independent man, and one who could not brook
dictation from any one or bear to be under obligation to
anyone. Hehad the tenacity ofa bulldog. His capacity
for incessant work and his unswerving pursuit ofa purpose
once formed, were a constant marvel to those who sur-
rounded him. While he was without conceit or vanity he
302


--- PAGE 357 ---
THE MAN
had almost unlimited self-confidence. While it cannot be
said that he overrated his own abilities, neither can it be
said that he underrated them. His sympathies were
easily aroused and he was abnormally sensitive, but he
never allowed his emotions to get the better of his judg-
ment. He forgave easily and always tried to find excuses
for people whowronged, insulted, or injured him. In rep-
artee he could hold his own with any one and enjoyed
nothing more than a duel ofwits either with an individual
or an audience.
Less than a monthbefore he died,whenhewaswasted by
disease and suffering almost constant pain, he received this
letterof appeal from Madame Helena Paderewski:
New York., October 26, 1915.
MYDEARMR, WASHINGTON: I amwriting you a very
personal letter on a subject that is close to myheart, and I
knowthe message it carries will find a responsein your gen-
erous sympathy. It is with great pleasure that I recall
our meeting, some years ago, and I havewatched the suc-
cess of your work among your people with sincere satis-
faction, for I have always been an advocate of the prin-
ciples for which you stand, the uplift of the colored race.
It is because I know you have ever directed your broad
influence toward the most worthy causes that I am asking
you in the name of the starving babies and their helpless
mothers, to tell your people that weneed them in ourwork
of sending food and medicines to Poland. We need, my
dear sir, even the smallest contribution that your beloved
followers may offer, andI beg of you to make an appeal to
your people. Tell them, for they maynot all know as well
303


--- PAGE 358 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
as you, yourself, that it was a Pole Kosciusko who,^ in
addition to fighting for American liberty, gave that which
he needed himself to help the colored race. As you will
recall, after refusing the grant of land offered him in
recognition ofhis services in the Warofthe Revolution, he
returned to Poland, not wishing to accept a reward for
doing what he considered a sublime duty to those in need.
Later, after eight years, when he again visited America, he
was given a pension as General in the American Army.
With the back pay during his absence, the sum amounted
to about $15,000. Although poor himself, he felt deep
compassion for the neglected colored children and, with
the money given him, he established the first school in
America devoted exclusively to the education of the
colored youth.
I amsure you know the story in all its details, but I de-
sire the colored people ofAmerica to knowthat to-day the
descendants of the man who unasked aided them
plead for a crust of bread, a spoonful of rnilk for their
hungry children. Tell them this and God will bless and
prosper you in your telling and them in their giving. Do
not think that small amounts are useless five cents may
save a life. I am sending Mr. Paderewski's appeal, but
conditions, to-day, are worsenowthan whenit waswritten.
Will you help Poland? Will you do it now?
Please reply to Hotel Gotham.
Yours in work for humanity,
[Signed] HELENA PADEREWSKI.
Dr. Booker T. Washington, Tuskegee> Alabama.
In spite of disease, pain, and weakness in spite of the
fact that he must have realized that his remaining time for
his own chosen work had narrowed down to a matter of
304


--- PAGE 359 ---
THE MAN
weeks he instantly responded to this appeal. Immedi-
ately he sent Madame Paderewski's letter to the Negro
press of the entire country with this explanatory note;
MADAME PADEREWSKI*S APPEAL FOR POLISH VICTIMS
Madame Helena Paderewski, wife of the famous
pianist, has addressed a letter to Dr. Booker T Washing-
ton, of the Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute,
making an appeal for the Polish victims of the European
War. Theletter is sent to the press with the thought that
there may be those among the Negro people who mayfeel
disposed to respond to Madame Paderewski's appeal.
An organization known as the Polish Victims
3
Relief
Fund has been organized, with headquarters in Aeolian
Building, 35 West Forty-Second Street, New York City.
Madame Paderewski's letter follows, etc.
Immediately after Mr. Washington's death Mrs* Wash-
ington received the following note from Madame Pade-
rewski:
New York, November 15, 1916.
Mrs. Booker T. Washington^ Tuskegee', Alabama.
MYDEAR MRS. WASHINGTON: It was with a feeling of
personal loss that I read this morning of the death of Dr.
Washington. I have always admired his courage and
wonderful ability, and his passing at this time brings a
double sorrow, for in this morning's mail I received a copy
of the Tuskegee Student containing my letter and ap-
peal to Dr. Washington. I wish it had been possible for
me to have thanked him for what he has done, but I am
sure that the Heavenly Fatherwill bless this and the many
other good workswith whichhewas connected.
30S


--- PAGE 360 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
I desire youto knowhowmuchI appreciate the kindness
ofDr. Washington and howhighly I esteemed him. Please
accept my deep sympathy and believe me,
Very sincerely yours,
[Signed] HELENA PADEREWSKI.
Although apparently indifferent to the treatment he re-
ceived from those about him Booker Washington was in
reality, as has been said, unusually sensitive. No matter
what his engagements he always insisted upon being at
homewith his wife and children on Thanksgiving Day and
on Christmas. One Christmas, about ten years ago, it so
happened that no Christmas presents were provided for
him. The children gave presents to one another and to
their mother and she to them, but through oversight there
were no presents for Mr. Washington. Mrs. Washington
says that after the presents had been opened her husband
drewher aside and said in broken tones: "Maggie, theyVe
not given me a single Christmas present!*' From then on
Mrs. Washington saw to it that the children remembered
their father at Christmas.
In Birmingham, Ala,, about three years before his death,
he and his secretary entered an office building one day to
call on one of the Tuskegee Trustees whose office was on
the top floor. Whenthey looked for an elevator theywere
referred by the hall man to the elevator for colored people*
On this elevator was a sign reading, "For Negroes and
Freight/' His secretary expected him to comment on
this, but he said nothing and seemed hardly to notice it.
306


--- PAGE 361 ---
Mr. Washington
.
feeding his chickens with green stuffs raised in his
own garden
Mr. Washington in his onion patch
Mr, Washington sorting in his lettuce bed


--- PAGE 362 ---



--- PAGE 363 ---
THE MAN
That evening, in addressing a great audience of both races
in one of the big theatres of the city, he was urging the
Negroes to look upon their Southern white neighbors as
their friends and to turn to them for advice when he said
very slowly and distinctly: "I visited, this morning, a
building which had on the elevator for colored people a
sign reading, 'For Negroes and Freight/ Now, my
friends, that is mighty discouraging to the colored man!"
At this not only the colored people, but the white people
sprang to their feet and shouted, many of them, "You're
right, Doctor!" "That's mean!" "That's not fair!"
and other such expressions.
Every morning before breakfast when at home Mr.
Washington would visit his chickens, pigs, and cows.
Hesaid of finding the newly laid eggs: "I like to find the
new eggs each morning myself, and am selfish enough to
permit no one else to do this in myplace. Aswith growing
plants, there is a sense of freshness and newness and rest-
fulness in connection with the finding and handling of
newly laid eggs that is delightful to me. Both the real-
ization and the anticipation are most pleasing. I be-
gin the day by seeing how many eggs I can find or how
many little chicks there are that are just beginning to
creep through the shells, I am deeply interested in the
different kinds of fowls, and always grow a number of
different breeds at my own home."
But none of the animals interested him and aroused his
enthusiasm as did the pigs. He always kept on his own
place some choice specimens of Berkshires and Poland
307


--- PAGE 364 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Chinas at whose shrine he worshipped each morning.
Also he always insisted that the swine herd of the In-
stitute be kept recruited up to full strength and in fact
considerably beyond full strength in the opinion of the
Agricultural Director whoin vain protested that it was not
profitable to keep so large a herd. It would be interesting
to knowwhetherthe great economic importance ofthe pig
to his race was at the bottom of Booker Washington's
fondness for the animal.
After breakfast he mounted his horse and made a round
of the Institute farms, truck gardens, dormitories, and
shops before going to his office and attacking his huge
correspondence. This correspondence, both in its dimen-
sions andcatholicity, wastypical ofthe man. His dailyin-
coming mail amounted to between 125 and 150 letters.
The outgoing ran to between 500 and 1,000 letters daily
in large part, of course,
"
campaign letters/* as he called
them, letters seekingto interest new friends in the work of
the Institute, and others keeping in touch with friends al-
ready interested, etc. His advice, opinion, or comments
were sought on every conceivable subject both by seri-
ous and sensible men and women and by cranks of both
races. Hundreds of the humbler people of his own race
were constantly applying to him for information and ad-
vice as to whether it would be profitable to start this or
that business venture, or whether or not it would be possi-
ble to establish a school in this or that community, and
howthey should set about it.
Booker Washington's sense of justice was unquench-
308


--- PAGE 365 ---
THE MAN
able. While at Coden-on-the-Bay, near Mobile, Ala., in
September, 1915, snatching a few days of rest and recrea-
tion as a palliative for the insidious disease which was so
soon to end his life, he was distressed by a newspaper re-
port of the killing of a number of Haitians by United
States Marines. Heread the report in a Mobilepaperlate
one afternoon on his return from a fishing trip. Hewent
to bed but could not sleep. The misfortunes of the tur-
bulent little black republic seethed through his mind.
Early in the morning, while his companions were still
sleeping, he awakened the inevitable stenographer and
dictated an article counselling patience in dealing with the
unfortunate little country. This article, dictated by a
dying man on the impulse of the moment, briefly recites
the history of Haiti from the period over a hundred years
ago when the people of the island wrested their liberty
from France under the leadership of Toussaint L'Ouver-
ture, up to the present time. He then says in part:
"Associated Press dispatches a few days ago stated that
forty or fifty Haitians had been killed on Haytian soil in
one day by American marines and a number of marines
wounded. To every black man in the United States this
dispatch brought a feeling of disappointment and sorrow.
While, as I have stated, tfie United States, under the cir-
eujnstances, was compelled to take notice of conditions in
Haiti and is being compelled to control matters, largely
because of the fault of the Haitians, I had hoped that the
United States would be patient in dealingwith the Haitian
Government and people. The United States has been
309


--- PAGE 366 ---
BOOKER T, WASHINGTON
patient with Germany, It has been patient in the Phil-
ippines. It has been exceedingly patient in dealing with
Mexico. I hope this country will be equally patient and
more than patient in dealing with Haiti a weaker and
more unfortunate country!
**I very muchwish that it might have been possible for
the United States to have taken a little more time in mak-
ing knownto the Haitians the purposes wehave in mind in
taking over the control of their custom houses and their
governmental affairs. Whileeverythingthat weintend to
do, and have in mind to do, is perfectly plain to the
officials of the United States, we must remember that all
this is not perfectly plain to the Haitians. It would have
been worth while, in my opinion, before attempting
arbitrarily to force Haiti to sign the treaty put before its
officials, to have spent a little time and a little patience ill
informing the Haitian people of the unselfish benevolence
of our intentions. They, in time, would have understood
why it is necessary to intervene in their affairs.
"Another reason, in my opinion, why patience may be
manifested in this matter is that the treaty, even at the
best, cannot be ratified by the United States Senate until
it meets in regular session in December, unless the Presi-
dent calls it in special session earlier.
"I confess that while I am unschooled in such matters,
since reading the treaty the Haitians have been told they
must ratify, it seems to me rather harsh and precipitate;
one cannot be surprised that the Haitians have hesitated
to agree to all the conditions provided for in this treaty.
310


--- PAGE 367 ---
THE MAN
No wonder they have hesitated when they have had so
little time in which to understand it, when the masses of
the Haitian people know little or nothing of what the
treaty contemplates.
"The way matters are now going, there is likely to be
bitterness and war. The United States, in the end, will
conquer, will control, will have its way, but it is one thing
to conquer a people through love, through unselfish inter-
est in their welfare, and another thing to conquer them
through the bullet, through the shotgun. Shooting civili-
zation into the Haitians on their own soil will be an amaz-
ing spectacle. Sending marines as diplomats and Mauser
bullets as messengers of destruction breed riot and an-
archy, and are likely to leave a legacy of age-long hatreds
and regrets.
"I also hope the United States will not pursue a mere
negative policy in Haiti, that is, a policy of controlling
the customs and what-not, without going further in pro-
gressive, constructive directions. In a word, the United
States now has an opportunity to do a big piece of fine
work for Haiti in the way of education, something the
island has never had. I hope some way will be provided
by which a portion of the revenues will be used in giving
the people a thorough, up-to-date system of common
school, agricultural, and industrial education. Here is an
excellent opportunity for some of the young colored men
and women of the United States who have been educated
in the best methods of education in this country to go to
Haiti and help their fellows. Here is an opportunity for
3"


--- PAGE 368 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
some of the most promising Haitian boys and girls to be
sent to schools in the United States. Here is an oppor-
tunity for us to use our influence and power in giving the
Haitians something they have never had, and that is edu-
cation, real education. At least 95 per cent, of the peo-
ple, as I have said, are unlettered and ignorant so far as
books are concerned."
Booker Washington's self-control was never more
needed than on an occasion at Tuskegee described by T.
Thomas Fortune, the Negro author and publicist. A
Confederate veteran who had lost an arm fighting for the
Confederacy and who had served for a number of years
in Congress was on the program to speak at a Tuskegee
meeting. This Confederate veteran had. a great liking
for Mr. Washington and believed in his ideas on the im-
portance of industrial education for the colored people*
Mr. Fortune says:
"John C. Dancy, a colored man, at that time Collector
of Customs at Wilmington, N. C., was to speak first, the
Confederate veteran second, and I was to follow the latter.
Mr. Dancy is an unusually bright and eloquent man.
Mr. Dancy paid a glowing tribute to the New England
men and womenwhohad built up the educational interest
amongthe colored people after the war, ofwhich Hampton
and Tuskegee Institutes are lasting monuments. Mr.
Dancy had plenty of applause from the great concourse
of countrymen, but his address made the white speaker
furious. When the former Congressman was called upon
to speak he showed plainly that he was agitated out ofhis
312


--- PAGE 369 ---
THE MAN
self-restraint. Without any introductory remarks what-
ever, he said, as I rememberit :
"*I have written this address for you/ waving it at the
audience, 'but I will not deliver it. I want to give you
niggers a few words of plain talk and advice. No such
address as you have just listened to is going to do you any
good; it's going to spoil you. You had better not listen
to such speeches. You might just as well understand
that this is a white man's country, as far as the South is
concerned, and we are going to make you keep your place.
Understand that. I have nothingmore to say to you/
"The audience was taken back as much by the blunt-
ness of the remarks as if they had been doused with cold
water. Indignation was everywhere visible on the coun-
tenances of the people. But Mr. Washington appeared
unruffled. On the contrary, his heavy jaw was hard set
and his eyes danced in a merry measure. It was a time to
keep one's temper and wits, and he did so, as usual. With-
out betraying any feeling in the matter, and when every-
body expected him to announce the next speaker, he said:
"*
Ladies and Gentlemen: I amsure you will agree with
me that we have had enough eloquence for one occasion.
We shall listen to the next speaker at another occasion,
when we are not so fagged out. We will now rise, sing
the doxology, and be dismissed/
**The audience did so, but it was the most funereal
proceeding I had ever witnessed upon such an occasion.
Mr. Washington's imperturbable good nature alone saved
the day/'
313


--- PAGE 370 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
Some time after President Roosevelt had begun to con-
sult Booker Washington on practically all his appoint-
ments and policies which particularly affected the rela-
tions between the races, and after several Southern white
men had been given Federal appointments on Mr. Wash-
ington's recommendation, the bitterness against him
grew so intense, especially among the "Talented Tenth"
element ofthe Northern Negroes, that he decided to meet
a group of their leaders face to face, and have it out.
Accordingly, through Mr. Fortune, he arranged to meet a
number of these men at a dinner at Young's Hotel in
Boston, Mr. Fortune thus describes what took place:
"At the proper time, when the coffee and cigars were
served, I arose and told the diners that Dr. Washington
had desired to meet them at the banquet table and at the
proper time to have each one of them express freely his
opinion of the race question, and how best the race could
be served in the delicate crisis through which it was then
passing- Each of the speakers launched into a tirade
against Dr. Washington and his policies and methods,
many of them in lofty flights of speech they had learned
at Harvard University. The atmosphere was dense with
discontent and denunciation.
"The climax was reached when William H. Lewis, the
famous Harvard football coach, told Dr. Washington to go
back South, and attend to his work ofeducating the Negro
and 'leave to us the matters political affecting the race/
Every eye was upon Dr. Washington's face, but none of
them could read anything in it; it was as inscrutable as a


--- PAGE 371 ---
THE MAN
wooden Indian's. When every one of them had had his
say, I called upon Dr. Washington to respond to the speak-
ers who had unburdened themselves. Dr. Washington
rose slowly, and with a slip ofpaper in his hand, said:
"'Gentlemen, I want to tell you about what we are
doing at Tuskegee Institute in the Black Belt of Ala-
bama/
"For more than a half-hour he told them of the needs
and the work without once alluding to anything that had
been said in heat and anger by those to whom he spoke.
He held them close to him by his simple recital, with here
and there a small blaze of eloquence, and then thanking
them for the candorwith which they had spoken, sat down.
They were all disappointed, as they expected that he
would attempt to excuse himself for the things they had
complained of/*
At the time of Mr. Washington's death, the same Wil-
liam H. Lewis, who told him at this time to go back to the
South and attend to his work and "leave to us the matters
political affecting the race," said ofhim:
"Words, like tears, are vain and idle things to express
the great anguish I feel at the untimely death of Booker
Washington. He was my friend who understood me and
believed in me. I did not always believe in him because
I did not, understand him. I first saw and heard him
when a junior at Amherst in the early 90'$, when he spoke
at Old John Brown's church in Springfield, where I jour-
neyed to hear him. I could not then appreciate his
love for the Southern people and his gospel of work. I


--- PAGE 372 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
even doubted his loyalty to his race. When I came to
Boston I joined in with his most violent and bitterest
critics. The one thing that I am so thankful for is that
I early saw the light and came to appreciate and under-
stand the great workofBookerT. Washington.
"I have just finished reading an old letter from him,
date, October i, 1901, in which he said: "The main point
of this letter is to say I believe that both you and I ar-e
going to be in a position in the future to serve the race
effectually, and while it is very probable that we shall al-
ways differ as to detailed methods of lifting up the race,
It seems to me that if we agree in each doing our best to
lift it up the main point will have been gained, and I am
sure that in our anxiety to better the condition of the
race there is no difference between us, and I shall be de-
lighted toworkin hearty cooperation with you/
"Since then, I have known him intimately and well
He was unselfish and generous to a fault; he was modest
yet masterful; he was quiet yet intense; his common
sense and sagacity seemed uncanny, such was his knowl-
edge of human nature. His was a great soul in which no
bitterness or littleness could even find a lurking place.
His was the great heart of Lincoln, with malice toward
none and charity for all He loved all men and all men
loved him.
"Myhumble prayer is that his torch has lighted another
among the dark millions of America, to lead the race on-
ward and upward/'
Booker Washington's insistence that the classrooms,
316


--- PAGE 373 ---
THE MAN
shops, and farms were for the developmentofthe students
rather than the students for their development was well
illustrated by a remark he once made to Bishop William
Lawrence of Massachusetts when the Bishop was visiting
the Institute. In reply to Bishop Lawrence's question
as to whether he had chosen the best available land for his
agricultural work, he said, "No, sir, I chose pretty nearly
the poorest land I could find. I chose land on which men
would have to spend all their energies to bring out the
life in the land. They work here under the hardest
conditions. When they go out to other lands to their
own lands, perhaps theywon't find anyworse land to till.
If they find any better land the difference will be all gain
for them."
Perhaps more remarkable than any or all ofhis achieve-
ments was the fact that Booker Washington was a gentle-
man. It would be difficult to find a man who better
conformed to the exacting yet illusive requirements of
that term. He had not only the naturalness and the
goodness of heart which are the fundamentals, but he
had also the breeding and the polish which distinguish
the finished gentleman from the "rough diamond/* This
fact about Booker Washington has been well described
by Hamilton Wright Mabie in an article entitled: "Booker
T. Washington: Gentleman," in which he says in part:"Booker Washington became one of the foremost men
in America; hewas heard on great occasions bygreat audi-
ences with profound attention; hewas awriter andspeaker
of National position, the founder of a college, and the
317


--- PAGE 374 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
organizing leader of a race in ideas and industry. These
were notable achievements; but there was another achieve-
ment which was in its way more notable. Without any
advantages of birth or station or training, a member of
an ostracized race, with the doors of social life closed in
his face, Dr. Washington was a gentleman. I recall two
illustrations of *this quality of nature, often lacking in
men of great ability and usefulness. The first was in
Stafford House, London, the residence of the Duke of
Sutherland, The older Duke was the lifelong friend of
Queen Victoria; and once, when she was going to Stafford
House, she wrote the Duke that she was about to leave
her uninteresting house for his beautiful palace. Nothing
could be more stately than the great hall ofStafford House,
with its two marble stairways ascending to the galleries
above; and when the Duchess of Sutherland, standing on
the dais fromwhich the stairs ascended, received her guests
she reminded more than one of her guests of the splendid
picture drawn by Edmund Burke of Marie Antoinette
moving like a star through the palace of Versailles. On
that evening Dr, Washington was present. At one time
in one of the rooms he happened to be talking with the
duchess and two other women of high rank, two of them
women of great beauty and stateliness. There were some
people present who were evidently very much impressed
by their surroundings. Booker Washington seemed to
be absolutely unconscious of the splendor of the house in
which he was, or of the society in which for the moment
he found himself. Born in a hut without a door-sill, he
318


--- PAGE 375 ---
THE MAN
was at ease in the most stately and beautiful private
palace in London.
"On another occasion there was to be a Tuskegee meet-
ing at Bar Harbor. The Casino had been beautifully
decorated for a dance the night before. The harbor was
full ofyachts, the tennis courts of fine-looking young men
and women; it was a picture of luxury tempered with
intelligence. Mr. Washington was looking out of the
window. Presently he turned to me and said, with a
smile, 'And last Wednesday morning I was eating break-
fast in a shanty in Alabama; there were five of us and
we had one spoonF"
At the time of his stay in London, during which this
reception at Stafford House took place, he was given a
luncheon by a group of distinguished men to which Mr.
Asquith, the Prime Minister, was invited. In reply, Mr.
Asquith sent this note:
10 Downing Street, Whitehall, S. W
26th September, 1910.
DEAR SIR: I much regret that my engagements do
not allow me to accept your invitation to be present at
the luncheon which it is proposed to give in honor of
Mr. Booker T. Washington. I feel sure, however, that
he will be welcomed with a cordiality which his persistent
and successful labors in the cause of the education of the
AmericanNegro deserve, especially at the hands of English
men, whose difficulties in many parts of the Empire have
been helped toward a solution by the results of his work.
Yours faithfully,
[Signed] H. H. ASQUITH,
319


--- PAGE 376 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
While at home, no matter howpressed and driven with
work, Booker Washington snatched an hour or so every
day for hunting or riding. This daily exercise became a
fetich with him which he clung to with unreasonable
obstinacy. He would frequently set off upon these hunts
or rides in so exhausted a condition that obviously their
only effect could be worse exhaustion. His intense ad-
miration for Theodore Roosevelt probably h,ad its in-
fluence, conscious or unconscious, in strengthening his
devotion to violent outdoor exercise.
Whatever he was doing or wherever he was, his mind
seemed constantly at work along constructive lines- At
the most unexpected times and places he would suddenly
call the inevitable stenographer and dictate some idea for
an article or address or some plan for the improvement of
Tuskegee or for the betterment of the whole race in this
or that particular. He would sometimes reduce his
immediate subordinates to the verge of despair by pour-
ing out upon them in rapid succession constructive sugges-
tions each one ofwhich meant hours, days, and evenweeks
oftime to work out, and then calling for the results of all
before even one could be fairly put into effect. This
tendency became particularly marked in his closing years
when the consciousness of an immense amount of work
to be done and a short and constantly lessening period in
which to do it must have become an obsession and almost
a nightmare to him.
He would sometimes wound"the feelings of acquaint-
ances and friends, particularly his teachers, by passing
320


--- PAGE 377 ---
THE MAN
them on the street and even looking at them without
recognition. This naturally was not intentional, nor was
it because his mind was wool-gathering, but merely be-
cause he was thinkingout some idea with which the people
and events immediately about him had for the moment
no connection and were consequently totally obliterated
from his consciousness.
Mr. Washington^ strength of will and determination
were never better shown than in the closing hours of his
Kfe. When he was told by his doctors at St, Luke's Hos-
pital, NewYork, whither he had been taken by the New
York trustees of the Institute after his final collapse, that
he had but a few hours to live, he insisted upon starting
for home at once. His physicians expostulated and
warned him that in his condition he could not reasonably
expect to survive the journey. He insisted that he must
go and be true to his oft-repeated assertion, "I was born
in the South, I have lived and labored in the South, and I
expect to die and be buried in the South." This remark,
when sent % out in the Associated Press dispatches an-
nouncing his death, touched the South as nothing else
could have. NoNegrowas ever eulogized in the Southern
press as he was. Long accounts of his career and death
with sympathetic and appreciative editorial comments
appeared in most of the Southern papers.
One of the doctors who was called in to attend him at
the time he was taken to the hospital remarked that it
was "uncanny to see a man up and about who ought by
all the laws of nature to be dead." In this condition,
321


--- PAGE 378 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
then, he set out upon the longjourney from New York to
Tuskegee. When the party reached the Pennsylvania
Station an invalid's chair was awaiting him, but he de-
clined to use it, and leaning on the arms of his companions
walked or rather tottered to his seat in the train. As
soon as the train began to move Southward a slight in-
vigoration of triumph seemed to come over him which
increased as the journey continued, until at its close he
seemed stronger than when he started. All along the way
he would inquire at frequent intervals what point they
had reached. The reaching and passing ofeach important
station such as Greensboro, Charlotte, and Atlanta he
would seem to score up in his mind's eye as a newtriumph.
Andwhen finally he reached Chehaw, the little station five
miles from Tuskegee, he was fairly trembling with eager
expectancy. As we have said, he reached Tuskegee ap-
parently stronger than when he left NewYork and strong
enough to enjoy the final triumph of his indomitable will
over his overworked and weakened body* The next
morning, November 14, 1915, he was dead.
Of the myriads of tributes to Booker Washington by
white men and black both North and South, which were
spoken from platforms and pulpits and printed in news-
papers and periodicals throughout the length and breadth
not only of America but the world, there are two which
we feel irresistibly compelled to use in concluding this
chapter and book. One is the tribute of a former student,
Isaac Fisher, president of the Tuskegee Alumni Associa-
tion, speaking for the graduates at the memorial exercises
322


--- PAGE 379 ---
THE MAN
held at Tuskegee on December 12, 1915; the other is
the tribute of one of his teachers, Clement Richardson,
head of the division of English, speaking in effect for the
Tuskegee teachers in an article published in the Survey
of December 4, 1915.
At this memorial meeting, after being introduced by
Seth Low, Chairmanofthe Board ofTrustees, as the repre-
sentative of the Tuskegee Alumni Association, Mr. Fisher
said:
"Mr. Chairman: The greatest citizens of this nation
have paused long enough to pay tributes of honor to the
memory of Dr. Washington; and to-night some of the
world's most distinguished citizens are present to say their
words of love for the departed chieftain whose body lies
in a grave just outside of those walls. In the presence of
these great men I do not see why you have asked me, one
of the least of all, to add my simple praise.
"But I can say that no persons have sustained so great a
loss as have the members ofthe Tuskegee Alumni Associa-
tion; and I come to bear testimony to the depth and
sincerity of their grief.
"There is a story which has not yet been told, in con-
nectionwith the spread ofindustrial education in the South
and throughout the entire country. I must tell that story
here before I can make clear just howgreat is the Alumni's
loss.
"In telling of the spread of industrial education, during
the past twenty-five years, we seem not to know that the
work has been difficult and prosecuted at great sacrifice on
3*3


--- PAGE 380 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
the part of the Tuskegee graduates who have sought to
interpret Dr. Washington's theory that economic fitness
was the basis of racial growth in many other directions,
"The people did not take kindly to this form of educa-
tion, believing that it was the same old slavery from which
we have emerged under a new name; and the Tuskegee
graduates have prosecuted their work in the face of the
misrepresentations, prejudice, opposition, and ridicule of
those oftheir own race who could or would not understand
the spirit of industrial education a spirit broader and
finer than the phrase suggests. More than this: in the
communities where they have worked it has been the
fashion to permit our graduates to do the difficult tasks
and carry all the burdens of leadership; but if there were
any honors to be bestowed, they were given to the gradu-
ates ofother schools.
"Being human and denied those honors and public
marks of esteem which always gladden the heart, these
Tuskegee men and women have often grown discouraged
and have been tempted to lay down their work. But like
Daniel, when those gloomy hours came, they have turned
their faces toward Jerusalem, to Tuskegee, over which the
great spirit of Dr. Washington brooded and lived; and
from this place he has sent back to them whenever they
have called, encouragement, counsel, and help.
"Sometimes they have been so depressed that they have
come to Tuskegee just to see and talk with their prophet
once more and to be baptized again in his sweet and noble
spirit. Manytimeswehaveseen themhere and wondered
324


--- PAGE 381 ---
THE MAN
at their presence. Theywere here to receive comfort, and
to hear Mr.Washingtonsayin his ownconvincing manner:
'It has been myexperience that if a manwill do the right
thing and go ahead, everything will be all right at last/
And these men and women who have sat at his feet and
who trusted him have gone back to their work with new
and increasing strength.
"ButnowDr. Washington is gone, and the graduates of
the school will never again receive his counsel and en-
couragement, however gloomy their paths may be. That
is the measure of our loss.
"And yet our Principal is not buried out yonder* It is
his tired bodywhich is restingjust beyond thatwall; but he
is not buried in that grave. The real Dr. Washington is
buried in the graduates whosat at his feet and imbibed his
spirit, and he lives in them.
"
King David, pondering over God's mercies and good-
ness to him, thinkingofhowhe had been taken from mind-
ing sheep and placed upon the throne of Israel; and how
God had guided and protected him and made his name
great in the earth, exclaimed reverently, one day, 'What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits unto me?*
and he answered his question, in part, by saying: *I will
pay myvows unto the Lord nowin the presence of all the
people/
"If all our graduates could speak to-night, they would
have mepaytheir vowsofgratitude for the opportunityto
make blessed and beautiful their lives, given by our great
teacher; and they would have me give public assurance of
3*5


--- PAGE 382 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
their fealty to the work for which Mr. Washington gave
his life.
"And so, Mr. Chairman, in the name of the Alumni
Association and in the spirit ofhim whose body lies buried
just beyond those walls, I pledge you and the Trustees the
loyalty of the Tuskegee graduates to whatever work they
are called in connection with the realization of Dr. Wash-
ington's great purpose. I pledge you their support in the
work which you have come to Tuskegee to perform; be-
cause we are learning self-government and wish to help
prove to the world that we can pass the succession to the
Principalship here without revolution. By this time to-
morrow night another prophet will have been raised up to
serve in the room of the great founder of this school. I
want you, Sir, and the Board of Trustees to know that
when the proclamation is made that 'The Kingis Dead!
5
ourAlumniAssociation will be ready to reply: 'Long Live
the King!" and wewill faithfully, honestly, and loyally sup-
port the person you elect to succeed our great father, who-
ever that person may be.
"In the furtherance of Dr. Washington's work, the
graduates stand ready to say:
"*F11 go where you want me to go, dear Lord,
O'er the mountain, or plain, or sea;
Fll say what you want me to say, dear Lord;
Fll be what you want me to be/
**
In the Survey article, after briefly describing the ups and
downs of Mr. Washington's long fight against a breaking
constitution, Mr. Richardson says:
326


--- PAGE 383 ---
THE MAN
"With such perpetual rallying power who could cope?
Alatent feeling crept amongmanythat he was immune to
pain as he had been to insult and abuse. You know he
could steer on over an insult and never see it, Some of us
shook our heads and said, 'Why he is good for ten years
yet/ Seeing that he thus defied nerves and baffled pain,
we hoped. It was in the hour ofhope that the last stroke
came, and we felt that pulling at the throat which we
should have felt had he gone by sudden accident.
"How Tuskegee took Dr. Washington's death can
probably best be appreciated by an account of what his
life meant among his teachers. Officially he was a stern
and exacting task master. A tireless worker himself, he
imposed heavy tasks upon others. In the home, however,
he had a genius for cheering by little kindnesses and by a
thoughtful word. Nowhe would send around a basket of
vegetables from his garden, now a cut of one of his pigs
which he had killed and in which he took great de-
light.
"People who sent books and pictures to Tuskegee can
hardly realize what a double pleasure they were shipping:
the pleasure they gave him and others through him. He
would have the boxes opened and books and pictures
brought in to his office. Then from all his heaps of corre-
spondence, from business engagements, from matters of
national importance, he would turn aside and go through
these himself, culling them out. Hewould sort a pile here
for this family; one there for another, accordingto what he
considered would suit each. Many a time one could
327


--- PAGE 384 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
scarcely find a place to step in his office for the pictures and
books. In all things he received, but to share.
"Thenhehad awayofkickingorganizations topieces for
a fewminutes. Ifsomeruralschoolhadacreditableexhibit
he would order that the senior class, 150 strong, should be
takenthere, whetherit wasone mile or ten miles away. He
would order the class out to see how some poor, illiterate
fanner had raised a bumper crop ofpeas, corn, sugar cane,
and peanuts, how he surrounded himself with conven-
iences, both inside and outside the home. Nowhe would
declare a halfholiday; now he would allow the students to
sleep a half-hour later in the morning.
.
"In the samewaythe teachers would get an outing once
or twice a year, sometimes at night, sometimes in the day.
As the teachers are on duty for both day and night school,
and as the students usually rise at 5:30 and breakfast at 6,
these little breaks were windfalls. They sent each one
back to his labors with a smile. He knew the value of
change andthe psychologyofcheer. Nowonderthenthat
when death closed his eyes both teachers and students
went about heavy of limb and with eyes that told too
plainly what the heart felt.
**
Just as he touched the students and teachers with little
thoughtful deeds so he touched the town and State, both
white and black. One feature of his funeral illustrated
how complete had been his triumph over narrow prej-
udices. He was always talking about the white manup
the hollow, back in the woods. How many times have
I heard him urge picturesquely upongatherings ofteachers
328


--- PAGE 385 ---
THE MAN
to
*
win that old fellow who, when you begin to talk Negro
education andNegroschoolhouse, scratches his head, leans
to one side, and looks far away. That's the man/ he
would say, 'that you've got to convince that Negro
education is not a farce/
"Well, that man was at Booker T. Washington's
funeral. He carne there on foot, on horseback, in bug-
gies, in wagons. He was there in working clothes, in
slouched hat, with no collar.
"During the service I chanced to stand near the end of
the platform. Pretty soon I felt a rough brushing against
myelbow. As I turned I saw a small white child, poorly
clad, being thrust upon the end of the flower-laden plat-
form. Thenfollowed an old whiteman,coilarless, wearing
a dingy blue shirt and a coat somewhat tattered. After
him came two strapping fellows, apparently his sons. AH
grouped themselves there and listened eagerly, freely
spitting their tobacco juice on the platform steps and on
the floor.
"How thankful would Dr. Washington have been for
their presence. What a triumph! Ten years ago those
menwould not stop at the school. Theycursed it, cursed
the whole system and the man at the head of it. But
quietly, persistently, he had gone on with that everlasting
doctrine that service can win even the meanest heart, that
an institution had the right to survive in just so far as it
dovetailed its life into the life of all the people. Beautiful
to behold, to remember forever; there was no race and no
class in the Tuskegee chapel on Wednesday morning,
329


--- PAGE 386 ---
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON
November lyth; heart went out to heart that a common
friend had gone.
"Broken as everybody is over the loss, no one is afraid.
Nopanic as to the future ofthe school disturbs the breasts
of the 190 odd teachers here. In the first place, poor as
most of us are, we are ready to suffer manya privation be-
fore we see the institution slip back the slightest fraction
of an inch. AHthese years it has been on trial, on record*
It has been a test, not of a mere school, but of a race. A
tacit pledge not a word has thus far been spoken has
gone out among us that it shall remain on record, that it
shall stand here as a breathing evidence that Negroes can
bring things to pass.
"Back of this is the unshaken faith in our Board of
Trustees. I doubt if such another board exists. It
is made up of white men and black men, of men of the
North and men of the South. There is not a figurehead
among them. Though intensely engaged they go into the
details of the workings of the school, getting close to the
inner workings and to the lives of the teachers and
students.
"Finally, we are confident that the public will have a
good deal to say before Tuskegee is let die. The beaten
path has been made to her door. Her methods have not
only been commended but adopted wholly or in part both
in this country and in other lands. Her use is undisputed.
She takes students almost literally out of the gutter, puts
them on their feet, and sends them out honest, peaceful,
useful citizens. This is the ideal for which Dr. Washing-
330


--- PAGE 387 ---
THE MAN
ton struggled, and over which his life-cord snapped too
soon.
"For the same ideal the people at Tuskegee, though
broken in spirit, are willing to spend themselves; for they
are confident that their cause is just and that the world is
with them/'
THE END
331


--- PAGE 388 ---
THE COUNTRY UEE EBESS
crnr, N. y.


--- PAGE 389 ---



--- PAGE 390 ---
1 36 548

