=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Cecil-Rhodes-and-De-Beers-Genocide-Diamond.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 32
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:56:34.829241
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: 
Genocide Diamonds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
… “But it was Rhodes who originated the racist “land grabs” to which Zimbabwe’s 
current miseries can ultimately be traced. It was Rhodes, too, who in 1887 told the 
House of Assembly in Cape Town that “the native is to be treated as a child and denied 
the franchise. We must adopt a system of despotism in our relations with the barbarians 
of South Africa”. In less oratorical moments, he put it even more bluntly: “I prefer land 
to niggers.” 
In relation to diamond trading, conflict diamond  refers to a 
diamond mined in a war zone and sold to finance an 
insurgency, invading army's war efforts, or a warlord's 
activity, usua lly in Africa  where around two -thirds of the 
world's diamonds are extracted. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_diamond 
“FRUIT OF THE POISONOUS TREE” 
Icebreaker Video: Cecil Rhodes & The Round Table Group


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Cecil Rhodes: A Bad Man in Africa 
 
 
The evil that men do lives after t hem – and rarely more miserably than in the 
case of Cecil Rhodes, who died 100 years ago this month. 
By Matthew Sweet, 16 March 2002 
Source: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/cecil-rhodes-a-bad-man-in-africa-654195.html 
North of the Zambezi, they have long known about the suppression of free speech, about the 
bloody redistribution of land along racial line s, about politicians happy to employ armed – and 
sometimes uniformed – mobs to kill their opponents. They are practices imported to this region, 
along with the railways, by the British. 
Unlike the African press, the Western media rarely invoke the name of Cecil John Rhodes: 
nearly a century after his death – on 26 March 1902 – his name is more associated with Oxford 
Scholarships than with murder. It’s easier to focus on the region’s more recent, less Anglo white 
supremacists: Ian Smith, for instance, who – despite his Scottish background – seems cut from 
the same stuff as those Afrikaner politicians who nurtured and maintained apartheid farther 
south. 
But it was Rhodes who originated the racist ―land grabs‖ to which Zimbabwe’s current miseries 
can ultimately be traced. It was Rhodes, too, who in 1887 told the House of Assembly in Cape 
Town that ―the native is to be treated as a child and denied the franchise. We must adopt a 
system of despotism in our relations with the barbarians of South Africa‖. In less or atorical 
moments, he put it even more bluntly: ―I prefer land to niggers.‖ 
For much of the century since his death, Rhodes has been revered as a national hero. Today, 
however, he is closer to a national embarrassment, about whom the less said the better. Y et there


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
are plenty of memorials to him to be found. In Bishop’s Stortford, his Hertfordshire birthplace, 
St Michael’s Church displays a plaque. The town has a Rhodes arts centre, a Rhodes junior 
theatre group, and a small Rhodes Museum – currently closed – which houses a collection of 
African art objects. In Oxford, his statue adorns Oriel College, while Rhodes House, in which the 
Rhodes Trust is based, is packed with memorabilia. Even Kensington Gardens boasts a statue – 
of a naked man on horseback – based on the central feature of his memorial in Cape Town. 
But his presence is more strongly felt – and resented – in the territories that once bore his name. 
Delegates at the Pan Africanist Congress in January argued that ―the problems which were being 
blamed on [President Robert] Mugabe were created by British colonialism, whose agent Cecil 
Rhodes used armed force to acquire land for settlers‖. He is the reason why, during the campaign 
for the presidential election in Zimbabwe, Mugabe’s Zanu -PF described its enemies – white or 
black – as ―colonialists‖; why, when Zimbabwe gained full independence in 1980, Rhodes’s 
name was wiped from the world’s maps. 
The prosecution case is strong. Rhodes connived his way to wealth in a lawless frontier culture, 
then used that fortune to fund a private invasion of East Africa. He bought newspapers in order 
to shape and control public opinion. He brokered secret deals, issued bribes and used gangs of 
mercenaries to butcher his opponents, seizing close to a million square miles of territory from its 
inhabitants. Although he did this in the name of the British Empire, he was regarded with some 
suspicion in his home country, and when it suited him to work against Britain’s imperial interests 
– by slipping £10,000 to Parnell’s Irish nationalists, for example – he did so without scruple. 
Rhodes was born in the summer of 1853, the fifth son of a parson who prided himself on never 
having preached a sermon longer than 10 minutes. A sickly, asthmatic teenager, he was sent to 
the improving climate of his brother’s cotton plantation in Natal. The pair soon became involved 
in the rush to exploit South Africa’s diamond and gold deposits – and unlike many prospectors 
and speculators who wandered, dazed and luckless, around the continent, their claim proved 
fruitful. 
When Rhodes began his studies at Oriel College, he returned to South Africa each vacation to 
attend to his mining interests – which, by his mid -thirties, had made him, in today’s terms, a


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
billionaire. By 1891, he had amalgamated the De Beers mines under his control, giving him 
dominion over 90 per cent of the world’s diamond output. He had also secured two other 
important positions; Prime Minister of the British Cape Colony, and president of the British 
South Africa Company, an organi sation that was formed – in the manner of the old East India 
companies – to pursue expansionist adventures for which sponsoring governments did not have 
the stomach or the cash. The result of his endeavours produced new British annexations: 
Nyasaland (now Malawi), Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia) and Southern Rhodesia (now 
Zimbabwe).


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Rhodes imprinted his personality on the region with monarchical energy: dams , railway engines, 
towns and anti -dandruff tonics were all named after him. But his expansionist zeal was not 
always matched at home in Britain. ―Our burden is too great,‖ Gladstone once grumbled. ―We 
have too much, Mr Rhodes, to do. Apart from increasing our obligations in every part of the 
world, what advantage do you see to the English race in the acquisition of new territory?‖ 
Rhodes replied: ―Great Britain is a very small island. Great Britain’s position depends on her 
trade, and if we do not open up t he dependencies of the world which are at present devoted to 
barbarism, we shall shut out the world’s trade. It must be brought home to you that your trade is 
the world, and your life is the world, not England. That is why you must deal with these 
questions of expansion and retention of the world.‖ 
At around the same time, Henry John Heinz was outlining a comparable manifesto: ―Our field,‖ 
he pronounced, ―is the world.‖ By 1900, his 57 varieties were available in every continent. 
Global capitalism and imper ial expansion developed in collaboration; shared aims, aspirations, 
patterns of influence. Today, most of the world’s political empires have been dissolved and 
discredited, but the routes along which capital moves remain the same. After Rhodes came 
Nestlé, Coca-Cola, BP, McDonald’s, Microsoft. 
In 1896, Rhodes’s name was linked with the Jameson Raid – a disastrous (and illegal) attempt to 
annex Transvaal territory held by the Boers, and a principal cause of the South African War of 
1899-1902. His reputation in Britain accrued a lasting tarnish. A defence of his character, 
published in 1897 and co-authored by the pseudonymous ―Imperialist‖, offers an insight into the 
charges against him: ―Bribery and corruption‖, ―neglect of duty‖, ―harshness to the natives‖ a nd 
the allegation that ―that Mr Rhodes is utterly unscrupulous‖. His lifelong companion Dr Leander 
Starr Jameson – a future premier of the Cape Colony and the leader of the ill-fated raid – added a 
postscript insisting that some of Rhodes’s best blacks wer e friends: ―His favourite Sunday 
pastime was to go into the De Beers native compound, where he had built them a fine swimming 
bath, and throw in shillings for the natives to dive for. He knew enough of their languages to talk 
to them freely, and they looked up to him – indeed, fairly worshipped the great white man.‖ 
Did anyone buy this stuff? After Rhodes’s fatal heart attack on 26 March 1902, the death notices 
were ambivalent. News editors across the world cleared their pages for obituaries and reports of


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
public grief in South Africa, but few wholehearted endorsements of his career emanated from 
London. ―He has done more than any single contemporary to place before the imagination of his 
countrymen a clear conception of the Imperial destinies of our race,‖ conceded The Times, ―[but] 
we wish we could forget the other matters associated with his name.‖ Empire -builders such as 
Rhodes, the paper said, attracted as much opprobrium as praise: ―On the one hand they are 
enthusiastically admired, on the other they ar e stones of stumbling, they provoke a degree of 
repugnance, sometimes of hatred, in exact proportion to the size of their achievements.‖ Jameson 
and ―Imperialist‖, it seems, had not succeeded in rehabilitating their mentor. 
But the story of Rhodes’s posthumous reputation is just as complex and contentious as that of his 
life and career. And curiously, his sexuality was one of the main battlegrounds. In 1911, 
Rhodes’s former private secretary Philip Jourdan wrote a biography of his late employer in order 
to counter ―the most unjust libels with reference to his private life [which] were being 
disseminated throughout the length and breadth of the country‖. Despite the aggressive romantic 
attentions of a Polish adventuress and forger named Princess Catherine Rad ziwill, Rhodes was 
indifferent to women and gained a reputation for misogyny. His most intense relationships were 
with men – his private secretary Neville Pickering, who died in his arms; Jameson, whom he met 
at the diamond mines in Kimberley where, the do ctor recalled, ―we shared a quiet little bachelor 
establishment‖; and Johnny Grimmer, of whom Jourdan (defeating the purpose of his memoir) 
said: ―He liked Johnny to be near him… The two had many little quarrels. On one occasion for a 
couple of days they hardly exchanged a word. They were not unlike two schoolboys.‖ 
Rhodes’s excuse for remaining single was the one used today by members of boy bands: ―I know 
everybody asks why I do not marry. I cannot get married. I have too much work on my hands.‖ 
Instead, he accumulated a shifting entourage of young men, known as ―Rhodes’s lambs‖. It’s 
probable that these relationships were more homosocial than homosexual, but that didn’t stop the 
gossips or biographical theoreticians. In 1946, Stuart Collete suggested Rhod es was ―one of 
those who, passing beyond the ordinary heterosexuality of the common man, that the French call 
l’homme moyen sensual, was beyond bisexuality, beyond homosexuality and was literally 
asexual – beyond sex. It appears to have had no literal mean ing to him except as a human 
weakness that he understood he could exploit in others‖. The same biographer wove these 
comments into an analysis of Rhodes’s appeal to another set of posthumous acolytes: the Nazis.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
As the 20th century moved on, Rhodes’s memory became increasingly attractive to extreme (and 
eventually moderate) right -wing opinion. Oswald Spengler’s The Decline of the West (1918) 
hailed him as ―the first precursor of a Western type of Caesar – in our Germanic world, the 
spirits of Alaric and Theodoric will come again – there is a first hint of them in Cecil Rhodes‖. 
It’s easy to see why Spengler, and later Hitler, were fans. Asked by Jameson how long he would 
endure in memory, Rhodes replied: ―I give myself four thousand years.‖ To the journalist  WT 
Stead he said: ―I would annex the planets, if I could. I often think of that.‖ When, in 1877, he 
first made his will, he urged his executors to use his fortune to establish a secret society that 
would aim to redden every area of the planet. He envision ed a world in which British settlers 
would occupy Africa, the Middle East, South America, the Pacific and Malay islands, China and 
Japan, before restoring America to colonial rule and founding an imperial world government. 
―He was deeply impressed,‖ Jameso n recalled, ―with a belief in the ultimate destiny of the 
Anglo-Saxon race. He dwelt repeatedly on the fact that their great want was new territory fit for 
the overflow population to settle in permanently, and thus provide markets for the wares of the 
old country – the workshop of the world.‖ It was a dream of mercantile Lebensraum for the 
English: an empire of entrepreneurs, occupying African territories in order to fill them with 
Sheffield cutlery, Tate & Lyle’s Golden Syrup and Uncle Joe’s Mint Balls. 
But it was Rhodes’s Alma Mater that did most to brighten his prestige. In 1899, Oxford 
University, an institution with a long and continuing history of accepting money from morally 
dubious millionaires, agreed to administer a more cuddly and less clandestine  version of the 
―Imperial Carbonari‖ of the 1877 will: the Rhodes Scholars. In 1903, the first names were 
selected. A group of men fitted for ―manly outdoor sports‖, who would display ―qualities of 
manhood, truth, courage, devotion to duty, sympathy for th e protection of the weak, kindliness, 
unselfishness and fellowship‖ – men such asBill Clinton, the CIA director Stansfield Turner, the 
first Secretary General of the Commonwealth Sir Arnold Smith, and the Nato Supreme 
Commander Bernard Rogers. 
By 1936, ML Andrews was praising Rhodes’s ―vision of world peace, to be brought about by the 
domination of the English -speaking nations‖. In the same year the Gaumont -British film 
company produced the hagiographic movie, Rhodes of Africa. Two years later, the little R hodes


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Museum was founded in Bishop’s Stortford. When it reopens next year, children will, for a fiver, 
be able to sign up as one of ―Rhodes’s Little Rhinos‖. 
A 1956 children’s book, Peter Gibbs’s The True Book About Cecil Rhodes – one of a series that 
also profiled Marie Curie, Captain Scott and Joan of Arc – is the best example of how, in the 
mid-20th century, Rhodes was reclaimed as a national hero. More unalloyed in its enthusiasm for 
Rhodes than any comparable 19th-century text, it makes for queasy reading. Especially, perhaps, 
if you were voting in Zimbabwe last weekend. Southern Rhodesia, it reports, is now ―tamed and 
civilised and cultivated, and many thousands of white people have settled there, and made it their 
home. Today there are beautiful moder n towns; homes, gardens, parks, towering blocks of 
offices and flats; factories, railways and airports. It is a new and thriving country of the British 
Commonwealth, where but recently only savages and wild animals dwelt. And it started from the 
dreams of one young Englishman – Cecil Rhodes‖. 
 
All Diamonds are Blood Diamonds 
1. Africa and all its resources 
are the birthright of African people 
everywhere All Diamonds are 
Blood Diamonds 
2. The U.S. invasion and 
occupation of Iraq has forced us to 
recognize the terrible price paid by 
peoples around the world the oil 
reserves necessary for the daily 
functioning of the U.S. economic 
life. The slogan is ―No blood for 
oil.‖


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
3. In the Niger Delta of Nigeria African people living in dire poverty are fighting shell Oil 
for control over the multi -dollar oil industry on their own land. 70 percent on less than a 
dollar a day. The poverty, lack of electricity and sanitation and profound pollution. Yet 
Shell Oil and other oil corporations have made more than $300 billion on Nigerian oil. 
White people live in mansions with big SUVs in the same area. The people of this area 
are waging armed struggle. They say if they cannot benefit from the oil, no one will 
benefit from the oil. They call it ―blood oil.‖ 
4. The U.S. and European controlled chocolate industry in Africa is a bitter reality. Ivory 
Coast produces 40 percent of the world’s cocoa and in West Africa there are more than a 
quarter million young African chil dren working in enslavement in the cocoa plantations. 
All chocolate is blood chocolate. 
5. We can even show that even aluminum foil can be called Blood aluminum . In Guinea 
Conakry earlier this year there was a general strike for over a month. Guinea has 40 
percent of the world’s bauxite, the mineral needed to make aluminum, but the average 
income of those considered ―middle class‖ is $500 a year. Alcoa, Reynolds and other 
corporations are making billions of dollars but the people are forced to live under a 
repressive government and cannot even afford to buy rice in a country where gas costs 
almost $5 a liter. 
6. In Congo 5 million people have been killed in the past few years in U.S. and imperialist 
backed wars over Coltan the mineral that is the electrical condu ctor necessary for cell 
phones and computers. 80 percent of the world’s coltan is in Congo. So we say all 
computers and cell phones are blood computers and cell phones. Coltan worth over $400 
a pound in a world where 1.7 billion people have wireless phones –one out of every 4 on 
the planet. Child labor, murder, dire poverty–a few dollars a day at best–rape, death in the 
mines–thousands die in the mine shafts and also from starvation–mostly children. 
7. Blood cell phones and computers 
8. We don’t have to go to Afri ca or other places. The U.S. is built on African enslaved 
labor. IIn the U.S. a multitude o products such as office furniture, jeans, clothing, 
bedding, clocks and signs are made by slave labor inside of prisons. The prison industry 
has half a million work ers more than any Fortune 500 corporation. With more than 2 
million mostly African and Mexican people incarcerated With more than 2 million


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
mostly African and Mexican people incarcerated inside the U.S. facing Three Strikes and 
mandatory minimums, one in t hree African men between the ages of 20 and 29 is either 
in jail, on probation or parole. In a private Texas prison guards were videotaped beating, 
shocking, kicking and setting dogs on prisoners —what u.S. soldiers did in Abu Ghraib 
has been practiced agai nst African people in U.S. prisons for years. So we can say all 
prison products are blood products. 
9. In a system built on centuries of the enslavement of African people, on genocide, 
oppression and colonialism in this country and around the world we can say  that beneath 
the sparkling veneer of every resource that we take for granted is a very ugly story. 
10. So this is the context that we say that All diamonds are blood diamonds! 
11. We are sold the idea that diamonds are a symbol of beauty and long -lasting love. 
―Diamonds are forever,‖ ―a girl’s best friend.‖ 
12. The truth about diamonds is not beautiful —diamonds are steeped genocide, colonialism, 
poverty and oppression–controlled by the brutal DeBeers diamond cartel. 
13. In 1938 DeBeers cartel hired a Philadelphia public r elations firm when sales were 
sagging– to market to Americans that diamond rings were a necessity for engagements 
and weddings. In the past diamonds were relatively rare as engagement rings. To do this 
they launched slogan ―A diamond is forever,‖ and promoted the myth that a diamond ring 
should cost two months salary. 
14. The reality is diamonds are not particularly valuable. They can be found around the 
world. Their value is created by manufactured scarcity —forcibly keeping diamonds off 
the market to increase their value. Unlike most other precious stones they do no 
appreciate with age and have a poor resale value. 
15. Finest large gem-quality diamonds come from Sierra Leone, along with Angola, Namibia 
and Congo. 
16. Diamonds are not just for jewelry–it is the strongest material in the world.Used in cutting, 
in airplanes and in defense –ESSENTIAL to the U.S. military industry. Industrial 
diamonds worth $10,000 a pound. 
17. DeBeers is a cartel which is a monopoly that controls every aspect of the economy of the 
product. DeBee rs controls not only mining but cutting, polishing, setting into jewelry,


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
pricing and selling world wide. Millions of children and very young people involved in 
diamond industry. 
18. The concept of blood or conflict diamonds came about in reference to the brut al 
imperialist backed wars in Sierra Leone and West Africa in the 1990s. 
19. Sierra Leone is a former British colony on the West Coast of Africa. 
20. British colonialism In the 1700s Bunce Island in the Sierra Leone River was called the 
―slave factory.‖ From here the British supplied captive Africans particularly to 
Charlestown South Carolina and to Georgia. Americans. The North American slave ships 
that called at Bunce Island were sailing out of Newport (Rhode Island), New London 
(Connecticut), Salem (Massachusetts), and New York. 
21. More than 50,000 Africans were kidnapped from Sierra Leone mostly into South 
Carolina and Georgia. They were called the Gullah people –worked in rice paddies in 
cotton plantations in the U.S. They were fierce fighters and many escaped from  
enslavement by joining the Seminoles in Florida where they built thatched roof houses as 
in their homeland. Thatched roof–environmentally sustainable! 
22. Sierra Leone won nominal independence from Britain in 1961 with the establishment of 
neocolonialism as in the rest of Africa. 
23. Sierra Leone is one of the most impoverished countries in the world –most of the people 
live on less than a dollar a day. It has the highest infant mortality in the world and the life 
expectancy for men is 38 years. 
24. Yet Sierra Leone has immense natural resources Diamonds-some of the best in the world 
Titanium ore (red)– ･ in the aerospace industry – for example in aircraft engines and air 
frames; ･ for replacement hip joints; ･ for pipes, etc, in the nuclear, oil and chemical 
industries where corrosion is likely to occur. Bauxite used for aluminum Gold Chromite 
(green) used in stainless steel. 
25. Chromite–stainless steel. As in the rest of Africa the profits and benefits of Sierra 
Leone’s natural resources are in Europe and North America. A lthough the resources are 
on their land, the people are deeply impoverished. 80 percent of households in Sierra 
Leone must use charcoal and wood for cooking. . In the world 2.4 billion people still 
cook over wood , charcoal or dung fires.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
26. Neocolonialism. Former British colonizers continue to control the economy, the military 
and the governing of Sierra Leone — neocolonialism leaving only crumbs. Along with 
other imperialist states they continue to extract the wealth. 
27. In the 1990s The Revolutionary United Fr ont emerged led by Foday Sankoh. At first the 
people thought they were fighting in the interest of the people. But they were imperialist 
influenced fighting for crumbs of the colonial plunder. They launched a brutal war 
against the people of Sierra Leone w ith 50,000 murdered and tens of thousands of 
mutilations. It is said that DeBeers and Israel were the biggest benefactors of the war. 
28. By cutting off the people’s hands-signature torture used by the Belgian colonizers against 
African people in Congo during Belgian colonialism. 
29. The RUF forced young children to fight and to carry out most of the atrocities –often 
against other children The child soldiers given tea, coffee and stimulant drugs. 
30. RUF took over some of the diamond mines –this is a picture of one — and began selling 
diamonds on the open market outside of the control of DeBeers. 
31. From DeBeers website Because this served to depress DeBeers artificially high prices for 
diamonds based on manufactured scarcity, the DeBeers cartel was threatened. This 
prompted DeBeers to come up with the concept of the ―blood‖ or ―conflict‖ diamond –not 
because of concern for the people but because they did not want to see the price of 
diamonds go down. 
32. So DeBeers diamond cartel set up the Kimberley Process Certification Sche me–that 
would supposedly determine if a diamond is ―blood‖ or clean. Police policing 
themselves–like Alberto Gonzalez policing himself. 
33. The reality is DeBeers is the key figure behind the issue of blood diamonds. Under the 
―legitimate‖ diamond mines of Sie rra Leone –meaning the DeBeers and imperialist 
controlled mines –African miners are forced to work for almost nothing. Most of the 
diggers must work ―independently getting only a tiny percentage on any diamonds that 
they find which are taken by the mine. Onl y a few workers actually get a salary –from 30 
cents to $2 a day. Nicky Oppenheimer and CEOs of DeBeers –one world’s richest men 
worth 3 billion dollars–eats organic foods and farm. 
34. According to an international trade union report 72 percent of the children of Sierra 
Leone between the ages of 5 to 14 are forced into paid or unpaid labor –in the legitimate


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
diamonds mines or other industry. In that region nearly a half million children are forced 
into labor. Childhood is a result of privilege. 
35. There is no electr ical grid. Only oil lanterns at night. Only electricity is from generators 
and 82% of that is in Freetown. In sierra Leone only 1% use generators and 85 percent 
use oil lamps. 
36. Sierra Leone has no running water, no water purification system, little hygiene or few 
toilets. 
37. Sierra Leone has no system of roads, few paved roads and most roads are impassable in 
rainy season. 
38. How things got the way they are 
39. Africa is the birthplace of civilization –all science, mathematics, art, philosophy, religion 
and archeology originated in Africa. Sierra Leone and most of West Africa was part of 
the African civilization of Mali (the people called it Manden) from 1235 to 1645 — 
ended by the enslavement of African people. It had enormous influence in the whole 
world. One of its cities Timbuktu was a center of learning–people came from everywhere 
to study and to enjoy the lively social and artistic culture. There was a medical school 
that taught delicate eye operations to remove cataracts. Mansa Musa was one of the 
famous rulers of Mali in the 1300s. He brought architects and scholars into Mali. His rule 
was known for prosperity and stability of the country as well as for artistic, educational 
and technological achievement. 
40. Europe in the middle ages was backwards, disease ridden, poor oppressed and warlike. 
41. In the 1300s the plague swept through Europe killing up to a half of the population and 
destroying the already impoverished agricultural economy of feudalism. 
42. Europe rescued itself by its assault on Africa. In 1415 Henry the Navig ator (never sailed 
a ship) sent Portuguese fleets out to the west coast of Africa to attempt to gain control of 
the wealthy African trade in gold, silver and other resources –trade that had gone on for 
centuries–millennia–connecting trade routes to the Midd le East and Asia. They found 
African people themselves to be their most valuable commodity. The Arabs had a trade in 
African people as slaves for a thousand years. The slave trade started almost 80 years 
before Columbus sailed for the Americas By 1500 Port ugal had extracted 700 tons of


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
African gold, shipping it to Portugal and had kidnapped more than 81,000 African people 
into slavery. 
43. Men, women and children in chains were stacked on top of each other on pallets in the 
holds of ships with the hideous stenc h of open pits of human waste. The pallets (seen on 
the lower left) were no more than 15 inches high. Hundreds of thousands of African 
people died of disease or starvation, or were murdered for attempted resistance and 
thrown overboard. The ecology of the Atlantic Ocean was changed by the slave trade. 
Schools of sharks would follow the slave ships to feed off the African men, women and 
children who died and were murdered on board and who were thrown overboard. 
44. The trade in African people was the key ingredi ent in the triangular trade bringing 
captives from Africa as forced labor for the plantations of the Americas, transporting 
resources such as cotton, sugar, tobacco and rum to North America and to England. 
45. Along with the assault on Africa was the genocide against the Indigenous people and the 
theft of their land and resources. Above is aftermath of U.S. slaughter at Wounded Knee 
in 1890. And VOLUNTEER cavalry. 
46. This slaughter, genocide, rape and plunder of the peoples of the Earth brought 
unprecedented wealth into Europe for the first time. 
47. This is what brought about the industrial revolution and transform Europe from feudalism 
to capitalism. 
48. In the U.S. the ―founding fathers‖ were slave masters, owners of African people and 
instigators of the genocide agains t the Indigenous people. This is the ―founding values‖ 
of America. This slide shows an idealized, falsified serene picture of the treatment by 
George Washington of enslaved Africans who was known for his brutality. Washington 
―owned‖ more than 300 African people, giving them meager daily rations of a few 
ounces of grain and fish by-products. 
49. There were tens of thousands of burnings and lynchings like this one in Kansas City. 
50. Children at lynchings 
51. As Omali Yeshitela, Chairman of the African People’s Socialis t Party and leader of the 
Uhuru Movement states all classes of white people sit on the pedestal of the enslavement 
of African people and colonized and oppressed peoples around the world.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
52. Wall Street was the center of New York’s slave auction blocks. In the  18th and 19th 
centuries enslaved Africans were one fifth the population of New York. When the civil 
war was declared, New York was so dependent on the cotton industry that the city 
considered joining the Confederacy. It is telling that an African cemetery  was found in 
recent years under the high rise buildings of Wall Streets —American wealth resting 
literally on the bodies of African people. 
53. White people sit on the pedestal of slavery and genocide. 
54. Throughout Africa and the Americas the resistance of Afric an people was fierce and 
powerful. We do not learn enough about that–covered over in history books. On the slave 
ships resistance was the major cause of death for captain and crew. The African 
Revolution in Haiti in the early 19th century, resistance by th e Maroons in the Caribbean 
and South America the resistance of Denmark Vesey, Nat Turner, two city -wide African 
rebellions in New York City, Gabriel Prosser, Cinque, Harriet Tubman. In Brazil, 
Surinam–everywhere Africans were enslaved they were in a state of resistance. 
55. The Shona, Zulu, Chokwe and many other African peoples waged fierce resistance to 
colonialism and the colonial borders imposed by the Berlin conference. The Ashanti 
people in Ghana waged armed resistance to the British for 200 years.Above is  Yaa 
Asantewaa, the Ashanti woman resistance leader in 1900. 
56. King Leopold of Belgium was a leading Abolitionist of his day. He was responsible for 
turning Congo into a rubber plantation to provide tires for bicycles and the newly 
emerging automobile indust ry in Europe and the U.S. in the 1890s. At least 10 million 
Africans were slaughtered by Leopold’s forces before there was even a word for 
genocide. Millions had their hands chopped off for resisting being enslaved on their own 
land. People were sexually a ssaulted and mutilated. Children were stolen from their 
parents and taken into camps to be groomed as a colonial army –genocide under 
international law. Leopold GAVE Congo to Belgium–it was his personal business! 
57. The scramble for Africa and Africa’s resources. At least two million Africans were killed 
in the scramble for ivory tusks for piano keys and billiard balls –the center of the ivory 
trade was Connecticut. 
58. 80 percent of the Nama and Herero peoples in Namibia were wiped out by the Germans 
They were rounded up and left to die in the desert without food, water or shelter to die a


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
slow torturous death. Germany has never recognized this genocide or paid reparations 
even as they paid billions in reparations to Israel. Same methods used by Hitler. 
59. During this same time the British colonizer Cecil Rhodes came to southern Africa. 
Rhodes was an ideological colonizer. He believed in British imperialism and promoted it. 
He said to ―prevent civil war you must become an imperialist ― among  the workers of 
England….He created the Rhodes scholarship. 
60. His goal was to install British imperialism from Cape Town to Cairo and built the Cape -
Cairo railway. 
61. His vision was part of the British empire on which they boasted ―the sun never set‖ 
because it  went around the world. The British empire included 77 countries including 
India and15 countries in Africa. 458 million people were oppressed in this empire –one 
quarter of the world’s population at that time under British colonialism. At that time 
England had the highest standard of living in the world based on the near starvation of the 
people in Africa, India and the other colonies. 
62. Cecil Rhodes was a perpetrator of genocide, responsible for the displacement of millions 
of African people for the benefit o f white settlers and enslavement of African people on 
their own land. White people came from Europe and became wealthy from the theft of 
the gold and diamonds in Southern Africa. Pass laws. 
63. Cecil Rhodes founded DeBeers diamond cartel. Rhodes went to south Africa from Britain 
when he was 18 years sold –he took over the diamond mines at Kimberley south Africa 
and others in the area. By his early 20s he was a millionaire but he did not retire –he 
believed in subjugating Africa for the benefit of England. 
64. Rhodes went to Zimbabwe, the land of the Matabele and Shona who launched fierce 
resistance led by their leader Lobengula. 
65. Rhodes paid a mercenary army from England and stocked them with Maxim machine 
guns. With just 5 machine guns the English slaughtered 5,000 Af rican people in one 
afternoon alone–then they celebrated with dinner and champagne. 
66. Winston Churchill and Baden Powell boy scouts. Cecil Rhodes, gay, said he, ―thoroughly 
enjoyed the outing.‖ Saw the slaughter of Africans as sport and adventure. 
67. The Chokwe , Shona and Zulu people were among those who led powerful struggles 
against the European invasions.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
68. Cecil Rhodes helped set up the apartheid system in south Africa and the pass laws –based 
on the Jim Crow laws of the United States. 
69. Pass laws, colonial taxat ion of African people to force them to work to be used as near 
slave labor in the diamond mines. 
70. Africans in the diamond mines were forced to stay away from family and wife, in 
compounds with only cold tea and bread.–much the same conditions today. 
71. When Ce cil Rhodes died the DeBeers diamond cartel was taken over by the 
Oppenheimer family. 
72. The atrocities that took place in Sierra Leone and West Africa were what DeBeers itself 
has done to African people for a hundred years. On knees Africans, with cans, body 
cavity searches, Zulu forced to pull rickshaw for owners. 
73. Diamonds have long played a role in neocolonialism in Africa. Mobutu’s villa on the 
Riviera , his diamonds, Mobutu one of richest men in the world which says something 
about the worth of the resourc es in Congo. CIA worked with Kennedy, Eisenhower and 
DeBeers to assassinate Lumumba. 
74. Neocolonialism continues today. Mandela with Nicky Oppenheimer in front of statue of 
Cecil Rhodes. Mandela has praised DeBeers and Cecil Rhodes. Below: Mandela with 
Mobutu 
75. Under Mandela and the ANC the conditions are worse for African workers and better for 
white people. Today 12 years after the end of apartheid, 61 percent of African people live 
below the poverty line in South Africa, while only one percent of whites. 96 p ercent of 
commercial arable land is still in the hands of whites. Conditions are 14 percent BETTER 
for white people than they were under apartheid. 
76. Africa also has up to 90 percent of the world’s reserves of cobalt, manganese, chromium 
and platinum–in West and Southern Africa. U.S. military needs these to function in the 
defense industry. Pentagon report say they would do anything to maintain those 
resources. 
77. U.S. military and AFRICOM in Africa –says its in the name of ―war on terror‖ U.S. 
military deploys w ell over half a million soldiers, spies, technicians, teachers, 
dependents, and civilian contractors in other nations.US has more than 700 military 
bases–growing to 1000 by end of decade in 130 countries around the world.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
78. What is the solution? 
79. Our lifestyle requires the suffering of African people–in this country There is colonialism 
inside the U.S. Two Americas Wake up to reality. 
80. In Africa–our lives are at the expense of African people. 
81. African people are a colony inside the U.S. –not racism - not ideas ins ide our heads –
political and economic relationship–same as in Iraq, Palestine etc. Two Americas. 
82. Uhuru Movement is led by Omali Yeshitela, leader of the African People’s Socialist 
Party, united African People around the world for one united and liberated Af rica. In the 
spirit of Marcus Garvey, Malcolm X, Kwame Nkrumah, Patrice Lumumba. 
83. Africans are one people all over the world. 
84. Not charity, not peace corps, missionaries, movie stars adopting African babies. 
85. African resources belong to African people everywhere! 
86. Building the African Socialist International around the world. Touch One! Touch All! 
87. Africa in the hands of African working class people, not neocolonialists. 
88. Unite with the struggle for reparations to African people! 
We have to see the world through the eyes of the peoples of the planet struggling 
for control of their resources, land and lives. 
Return your diamond to Africa! Return diamonds to Africa!


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
 
British colonizer Cecil Rhodes came to southern Africa. Rhodes was an ideological colonizer – 
he believed in British imperialism and promoted it. He said to ―prevent civil war you must 
become an imperialist.‖ He created the Rhodes scholarship. His goal was to install British 
imperialism from Cape Town to Cairo and built the Cape -Cairo railway. His vision was part of 
the British Empire on which they boasted ―the sun never set‖ because it went around the world. 
The British empire included 77 countries  including India and 15 countries in Africa. 458 million 
people were oppressed in this empire –one quarter of the world’s population at that time under 
British colonialism. At that time England had the highest standard of living in the world based on 
the near starvation of the people in Africa, India and the other colonies. 
Cecil Rhodes was a perpetrator of genocide, responsible for the displacement of millions of 
African people for the benefit of white settlers and enslavement of African people on their own  
land. White people came from Europe and became wealthy from the theft of the gold and 
diamonds in Southern Africa.


--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 20 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Cecil Rhodes founded DeBeers diamond cartel. Rhodes went to south Africa from Britain when 
he was 18 years sold –he took over the diamond min es at Kimberley south Africa and others in 
the area. By his early 20s he was a millionaire but he did not retire –he believed in subjugating 
Africa for the benefit of England. 
Rhodes went to Zimbabwe, the land of the Matabele and Shona who launched fierce r esistance 
led by their leader Lobengula 
 
Rhodes paid a mercenary army from England and stocked them with Maxim machine guns. With 
just 5 machine guns the English slaughtered 5,000 African people in one afternoon alone –then 
they celebrated with dinner and champagne. 
Winston Churchill and Baden Powell boy scouts. Cecil Rhodes, gay, said he, ―thoroughly 
enjoyed the outing.‖ Saw the slaughter of Africans as sport and adventure. 
The Chokwe, Shona and Zulu people were among those who led powerful struggles against the 
European invasions. 
Cecil Rhodes helped set up the apartheid system in south Africa and the pass laws–based on the 
Jim Crow laws of the United States. 
Pass laws, colonial taxation of African people to force them to work to be used as near slave 
labor in the diamond mines. 
Africans in the diamond mines were forced to stay away from family and wife, in compounds 
with only cold tea and bread.–much the same conditions today. 
When Cecil Rhodes died the DeBeers diamond cartel was taken over by the Oppenheimer 
family. 
The atrocities that took place in Sierra Leone and West Africa were what DeBeers itself has done 
to African people for a hundred years. On knees Africans, with cans, body cavity searches, Zulu 
forced to pull rickshaw for owners 
Diamonds have long played a role in neocolonialism in Africa. Mobutu’s villa on the Riviera , 
his diamonds, Mobutu one of richest men in the world which says something about the worth of 
the resources in Congo. CIA worked with Kennedy, Eisenhower and DeBeers to assassinate 
Lumumba


--- PAGE 21 ---
Page 21 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Cecil Rhodes and the Cult of Eugenics 
The British East India Company, modeled on the older Levant Company of Venice, had been 
raping India since the early 1700s; but it wasn’t until 1763 that this Venetian faction was able to 
seize control over the Empire as a whole. 
It was the rapacious looting policies of this faction that forced the American colonies to declare 
their independence. 
British imperialist Cecil Rhodes, founder of the British Roundtable, 
set out to establish institutions which would en sure that his white supremacist policies would 
outlive him. 
After the American Revolution, the British launched a renewed drive against India, completely 
conquering the Subcontinent by the first years of the new century. It was in this period that the 
opium trade, for which India was the linchpin, became the dominant pursuit of the Empire. 
After Lincoln’s victory over the Confederacy in the American Civil War, and even more so after 
the 1876 Centennial Celebration, it became clear that the United States cou ld not be conquered 
militarily. The British responded by launching the pseudo -science of eugenics, and also the 
Round Table movements of Cecil Rhodes and Lord Alfred Milner. 
In the 1880s and 1890s, this elite movement created: 
the Eugenics Society, founded by Sir Arthur Balfour of the Venetian-origin Cecil family 
John Ruskin’s Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, opposing the entire European Renaissance 
the Round Table of Cecil Rhodes, Alfred Milner, Balfour, and their friends, strategists from the 
African and Asian empire, seeking world power for the Anglo-Saxon master race. 
These men shared a bored contempt for the existence of mankind, like the satanic Zeus of 
Aeschylus’ Prometheus Bound. Their idea was to convince the United States to join them in their 
quest for Anglo-Saxon world government.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Page 22 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
The Round Table of Cecil Rhodes was centered on the imperial networks of South Africa, which 
later spawned raw materials monoliths such as, 
Rio Tinto Zinc 
Anglo American 
Lonrho 
DeBeers 
It was this inhuman cabal which ran the Boer War, conducted genocide against the black 
population, and later set up the horrendous Apartheid regime. 
One of the wealthiest, most influential, and evil men of his day, Rhodes was a virulent racist, or 
as he an d his friends termed it, a race patriot, who wrote in a document called Confession of 
Faith: 
―I contend that we are the finest race in the world and that the more of the world we inhabit the 
better it is for the human race. Just fancy those parts that are at present inhabited by the most 
despicable specimens of human beings; what an alteration there would be if they were brought 
under Anglo-Saxon influence, look again at the extra employment a new country added to our 
dominions gives. I contend that every a cre added to our territory means in the future birth to 
some more of the English race who otherwise would not be brought into existence. 
Added to this the absorption of the greater portion of the world under our rule simply means the 
end of all wars; at th is moment had we not lost America I believe we could have stopped the 
Russian-Turkish war by merely refusing money and supplies. Having these ideas what scheme 
could we think of to forward this object? 
―Why should we not form a secret society with but one object: the furtherance of the British 
Empire and the bringing of the whole uncivilized world under British rule, for the recovery of 
the United States, and for the making of the Anglo-Saxon race but one Empire?


--- PAGE 23 ---
Page 23 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
―Africa is still lying ready for us, it is o ur duty to take it. It is our duty to seize every opportunity 
of acquiring more territory and we should keep this one idea steadily before our eyes: that more 
territory simply means more of the Anglo -Saxon race, more of the best, the most human, most 
honorable race the world possesses‖ 
Over the course of his life, Rhodes commissioned seven wills to be written, all expressing this 
same purpose. 
His fortune was to be used for setting up the Rhodes Trust and Rhodes Scholarship as a means of 
recruiting American and Commonwealth Anglophiles into the imperial faction: 
―Let us form the same kind of society, a Church for the extension of the British Empire. 
A society which should have its members in every part of the British Empire working with one 
object and one id ea we should have its members placed at our universities and our schools and 
should watch the English youth passing through their hands just one perhaps in every thousand 
would have the mind and feelings for such an object, he should be tried in every way,  he should 
be tested whether he is endurant, possessed of eloquence, disregardful of the petty details of life, 
and if found to be such, then elected and bound by oath to serve for the rest of his life in his 
Country. 
He should then be supported if without  means by the Society and sent to that part of the Empire 
where it was felt he was needed.‖ 
In his will, Rhodes authorized provisions for: 
―…the extension of British rule throughout the world. The colonization by British subjects of all 
lands where the mea ns of livelihood are attainable by energy, labour, and enterprise and 
especially the occupation by British settlers of: 
the entire Continent of Africa 
the Holy Land


--- PAGE 24 ---
Page 24 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
the Valley of the Euphrates 
the islands of Cyprus and Candia 
the whole of South America 
the islands of the Pacific not heretofore possessed by Great Britain 
the whole of the Malay Archipelago 
the seaboard of China and Japan 
the ultimate recovery of the United States of America as an integral part of the British Empire‖ 
It was this same British n etwork of families (including the Huxley clan, the Cadburys, the 
Darwins, and the Wedgewoods) and banking interests, with offshoots in North America and the 
rest of Europe, which spawned the early 20th-century eugenics movement. 
This set ran the zoos, and said men were base animals, and they directed British colonial strategy 
and official science. Eugenics claimed that the English upper class ruled because they were 
genetically superior. 
The English masters humored themselves with this doctrine enforced on their beaten -down 
subjects, in India, which the English reduced to starvation and political impotence by closing 
native industries; and in South Africa under white rule. 
These were the very same families who funded Hitler, and exerted their influence over the 
German banking system to have him appointed Chancellor in 1933. In 1917, while World War I 
was still raging, Lord Lothian, one of Lord Milner’s most important protégés, suddenly departed 
from his previously fanatical anti -German rhetoric. As soon as Ge rmany is crushed, he said, let 
us rearm and remilitarize it under the most reactionary leaders, and point Germany towards war 
with Russia and France. 
This was done 16 years later, in 1933.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Page 25 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
At the same time, the Anglo -Saxon eugenics doctrine was imported into Germany, to help shape 
Nazi rule. 
The cabal called for the sterilization or euthanizing of unfit members of society, to spare the 
expense of their lives, much like today’s privatized HMO  system functions; and these policies 
have always been a doctrine of racial aggression. 
In 1932, the Third International Eugenics Conference was held in New York City, chaired by the 
rabid bigot Fairfield Osborn, whose like -minded nephew would later create  the Conservation 
Foundation. 
Osborn was president of the American Museum of Natural History and a close colleague of the 
notoriously racist Julian Huxley, and the co-host of the conference, the Harriman family. 
 
 
Rhodesia 
The state was named after Cecil John Rhodes, whose British South Africa Company acquired the 
land in the 19th century. 
The state was governed by a predominantly white minority government until 1979, initially as a 
self-governing colony then, after the Unilateral Declaration of Independence,  as a self -
proclaimed sovereign Dominion, and latterly a Republic. Throughout its history, Rhodesia 
continued to be referred to by the British, who did not recognize the state, as ―Southern 
Rhodesia‖. 
Rhodes has been portrayed by Dr. C. Magbaily Fyle as a violent and brutal racist who used 
forced labour tactics as a means of founding De Beers and other portions of his lucrative success. 
lan Smith promised the whites who elected him Prime Minister of Rhodesia in 1982 that he 
would keep Rhodesia white, at any  cost. To stop the black guerrilla fighters trying to overthrow


--- PAGE 26 ---
Page 26 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
his regime, Smith rationed food for Africans whom he believed were feeding the guerrillas. This 
cruel measure only served to starve the already undernourished black population. Studies found 
that over 90% of Rhodesia’s black children were malnourished and nutritional deficiencies were 
the major cause of infant death. Smith rounded up blacks into concentration camps he called 
―protective‖ villages. Believing that ignorant people were less likely  to revolt, he cut funding for 
black education, spending $5 on each black child compared to $80 on each white child. His all 
white Parliament passed a law protecting officials who took actions for the suppression of 
―terrorism‖, enabling the police and mil itary to commit atrocities. An international trade boycott 
against Rhodesia arose, but while the US publicly condemned the government, it continued to do 
business there. In 1971, President Nixon lifted the chrome embargo against Rhodesia at a time 
when there was a surplus of chrome in the US. Blacks were eventually given the right to vote for 
some officials, but the opposition to Smith’s government grew so strong that he was ultimately 
forced to give up some power to blacks. In 1979, Rhodesia became Zimbabw e, a country 
primarily ruled by blacks.


--- PAGE 27 ---
Page 27 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Rhodes to Hell 
Was the father of Rhodesia really the epitome of pure evil? 
By Peter Godwin 
When I was growing up in Rhodesia, the foreboding image o f Cecil John Rhodes, our founder, 
glowered from bank notes and coins, and from the obverse side of the medal white boys were 
awarded for doing national service in the Rhodesian security forces. It was a brooding face of 
livid complexion, a prominent nose o verhanging disapproving jowls and a drooping mustache. 
Even then he struck me as an unlikely visionary and hero. 
Rhodes’ story is an inherently implausible one: a sickly, asthmatic vicar’s son from Bishop’s 
Stortford, England, heads to South Africa for the  sake of his health and ends up the richest man 
in the Western world and the colonizer of a vast tract of Africa. Rhodes had three simultaneous 
careers in his 49 years –diamond magnate, politician, and imperialist. His big idea was to ―save 
Africa from itself.‖ Only after his death, in 1902, did the dizzying extent of his imperial fantasy 
become apparent. In his will, he left a fortune for the establishment of a ―secret society‖ modeled 
on the Jesuits, with the aim of extending British rule throughout the world. 
He was one of few men in history, apart from Simón Bolívar, who managed to get a sizable 
mainland country named after himself–two countries, actually, Northern and Southern Rhodesia. 
Only one person topped that, the Italian -born explorer Amerigo Vespucci, who claimed an entire 
continent. Of course, Northern Rhodesia became Zambia in 1964. And when ―Southern 
Rhodesia‖ was jettisoned for ―Zimbabwe‖ in 1980, the new black government began 
energetically wiping away all signs of the man. 
In the new South Af rica, Rhodes’ statue still clings to the side of Cape Town’s Table Mountain, 
for the moment at least. Standing on a rough -hewn granite pedestal in his trademark crumpled 
linen suit, he points northward. ―Your hinterland is there,‖ the inscription mocks, as  whites flock 
out of Africa. Other than that, the scholarships –originally envisioned by Rhodes as part of his 
plan to create a worldwide, English -speaking ruling elite –which have sent Bill Clinton and 
thousands of other Americans and Commonwealth students to Oxford, are about all that save 
Rhodes’ name from obscurity. His most enduring legacy in the post -apartheid world is the De


--- PAGE 28 ---
Page 28 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Beers cartel, which he set up to manipulate the world diamond market, and even that looks 
increasingly shaky. [...] 
But somehow t his shabbily dressed buffoon, with his falsetto giggle; this fidgeting, bumbling 
public speaker who was once described by a senior Colonial Office mandarin as ―grotesque, 
impulsive, school -boyish, humorous and almost clownish … not to be regarded as a seri ous 
person,‖ rose to become a business colossus and the prime minister of the Cape Colony, and ran 
rings around the British government. Lord Salisbury, the British prime minister, eventually 
granted Rhodes his royal charter to occupy the north. ―Take all y ou can–and ask afterwards,‖ 
was his typically wimpish advice, as Rhodes’ pioneer column trekked into the interior. So, like 
much of British imperialism, the conquest of Rhodesia was a private -sector colonization, costing 
the British taxpayer nothing, at least initially. 
All that remained in the way of Rhodes’ imperial vision of controlling the African interior was 
―one naked old savage,‖ as Rhodes called King Lobengula. The story of how the ruler of the 
Matabele, a tribe that lives in what is now southern Zimbabwe, was cheated of his lands is truly a 
sad one[.] A pair of binoculars here, a few hundred Martini-Henry rifles there, fail to do the trick. 
So Dr. Jameson, Rhodes’ sidekick (played by Neil Pearson), treats Lobengula for his gout by 
turning him into a trembling morphine junkie, prepared to sign anything put in front of him for 
his next fix. As Rhodes announces to his shareholders in London that shares in the Charter 
Company have risen 1,500 percent, Lobengula, defeated, his people reduced to servitude , kills 
himself. 
[Rhodes] was discredited even before his death, by his implication in Jameson’s raid on Boer -
ruled Johannesburg, an effort to overthrow the Kruger regime and take over the Transvaal that 
was never sanctioned by the British and turned into a military fiasco and grave political 
embarrassment. [...] 
White men’s memorials don’t usually fare well in Africa. The old pioneer memorial in 
Chimanimani, the eastern Zimbabwean village where I grew up, was smashed by a posse of 
comrades from the ruling party’s youth league shortly after independence. But Rhodes’ grave 
remains intact and undisturbed. A heavy brass plaque marks the spot where his body lies interred


--- PAGE 29 ---
Page 29 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
within a swollen granite hill –a dwala, we call them –and I dare say it will probably still be  there 
when the next wave of reassessment breaks over Rhodes’ legacy. For Africans are loathe to 
offend the dead: There is no surer way of provoking ancestral spirits than interfering with their 
graves, and for all the mixed feelings he evokes, Rhodes is still a powerful spirit. 
Rhodes and the white pioneers in southern Africa did behave despicably by today’s standards, 
but no worse than the white settlers in North America, South America, and Australia; and in 
some senses better, considering that the genoci de of natives in Africa was less complete. For all 
the former African colonies are now ruled by indigenous peoples, unlike the Americas and the 
Antipodes, most of whose aboriginal natives were all but exterminated. 
History 
his nation declared its independe nce from the United Kingdom. It depicts Prime Minister Ian 
Smith and has the text: 
Rhodesian Independence – 11 November1965 
The back depicts Rhodesian symbols and the message: 
We stand behind you 
In December 1962 the Rhodesian Front party was elected to po wer. The party was committed to 
the concept of white supremacy without the involvement of a United Kingdom that was seen as 
particularly liberal with the election of a Labor Party Government in 1964. The leader of the 
Rhodesian Front, Ian Douglas Smith, wa s elected Prime Minister on 14 April 1964. On 
Armistice Day, 11 November 1965, the British colony of Southern Rhodesia declared its 
independence. 
The British government had adopted a policy known as No Independence before Majority 
African Rule (NIBMAR). Th is policy dictated that those colonies with a substantial population 
of white settlers would not receive independence except under conditions of universal suffrage 
and majority rule. The timing of Smith’s telegram announcing the Unilateral Declaration of 
Independence (UDI) to British Prime Minister Harold Wilson is significant. It was sent precisely


--- PAGE 30 ---
Page 30 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
at 11 a.m. in London on November 11, at the precise moment that the UK started its traditional 
one minute of silence to mark the end of World War I and honor it s war dead. The message was 
a reminder that Southern Rhodesia had helped the Britain during World War I and World War II 
and was owed a debt. 
Daniel Marston and Carter Malkasian discuss the British philosophy in Counterinsurgency in 
Modern Warfare, Osprey Publishing, Oxford, UK, 2008: 
In 1964 the new British Labor Prime Minister, Harold Wilson, stonewalled Ian Smith, refusing 
to contemplate anything less than a transfer of power to the African majority. After 18 months of 
frustration and insecurity, denied British money owed from the breakup of the Federation, 
excluded from Commonwealth conferences and committees, enduring an unofficial arms 
embargo, humiliated and blocked at every turn while Rhodesia’s economy stalled and people 
began to emigrate, Ian Smith acted, declaring Rhodesia unilaterally independent. 
There is reason to believe that the British government planned and studied a possible military 
intervention against the Rhodesian government during the years up to 1965. By the time of the 
Unilateral Declaration of Independence, the British had decided that a military response was out 
of the question. No British politician wanted to deploy British troops against white Rhodesian 
forces. However, there is evidence that plans were made for a ―contested re inforcement,‖ (an 
interesting neutral term that translates to ―invasion‖). There were two major problems. The first 
was the loyalty of white British troops that would be asked to fight and possibly kill white 
Rhodesian soldiers, many of whom had been train ed by British instructors or served in the 
British military. The second and greater problem was the politician’s desire for a limited, 
sanitary surgical strike on Rhodesia. The generals pointed out that any British invasion would be 
preceded by air attacks to eliminate the Royal Rhodesian Air Force. This bombing of Rhodesian 
airfields would lead to a loss of life, both military and civilian. There would be no return to 
normalcy after such an attack. It would be considered a ―stab in the back‖ by the Europea n 
Rhodesians. The political results of such an attack were considered so disastrous that no real 
discussion of invading Rhodesia took place after the declaration of independence.


--- PAGE 31 ---
Page 31 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Both leaflets and posters were prepared and distributed in Great Britain to p rotest the Rhodesian 
declaration of independence. The poster above accuses the British Government of selling out the 
blacks in Rhodesia and demands, ―No independence before majority rule. Support the struggle of 
the Zimbabwe people.‖ 
Prime Minister Ian Dou glas Smith signs  
the Unilateral Declaration of Independence 
The Unilateral Declaration of Independence was internationally condemned, and at the behest of 
Britain, Rhodesia was placed under a United Nations Security Council sanction beginning in 
1965 and l asting until the restoration of British rule in December 1979. The sanctions forbade 
most forms of trade or financial exchange with Rhodesia. South Africa, Portugal, Israel and 
some Arab states did continue to trade with Rhodesia. Rhodesia maintained its l oyalty to Queen 
Elizabeth but on March 2, 1970 formally severed links with the British Crown. 
The Daily Mail of 1 January 1996 reported that Harold Wilson considered dropping leaflets over 
Rhodesia with a message from the Queen to persuade the country not to rebel against Britain: 
It was one of the most extravagant measures contemplated after Ian Smith’s racist regime issued 
its Unilateral Declaration of Independence on 11 November 1965. The move was branded as 
―treason‖ by Harold Wilson, whose Government swiftly responded with economic sanctions. 
The idea of a leaflet drop aimed at the colony’s 200,000 whites came from the Governor of 
Rhodesia, Sir Humphrey Gibbs, whose authority was ignored after the Unilateral Declaration of 
Independence. But Wilson turne d down the plan, saying it would not be ―proper‖ for him to 
advise the Queen to intervene and that the leaflet drop would be ―quite a formidable 
undertaking.‖ 
But less than a fortnight later, the Prime Minister was under pressure from his own Foreign 
Secretary to take far more drastic action. The Government, said Michael Stewart, could either 
wash its hands of Rhodesia altogether and let the United Nations sort it out, or send in troops. 
The consequences of abandoning Rhodesia would be disastrous, he warned.


--- PAGE 32 ---
Page 32 of 32 
  
Cecil Rhodes & De Beers: Genocide Diamonds                                                  Matthew Sweet 
RBG Communiversity  
 
The Afro-Asian world as a whole would be embittered by the spectacle of a Western country 
leaving four million colored people to ―the tender mercies of 200,000 white overlords.‖ 
Prime Minister Ian Douglas Smith believed that his Rhodesian Front Party cou ld hold power by 
force for the white minority group it represented. Fifteen years later on 18 April 1980, Zimbabwe 
emerged as an independent country under majority rule with international recognition. 
Zimbabwe was once the center of the Munhumutapa Empire,  a great trading dynasty and 
producer of gold, sometimes believed to be the home of the legendary King Solomon’s mines. 
recruitment and training of the Black Nationalist army went into high gear about 1963. Both the 
Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) a nd the Zimbabwe African Peoples Union (ZAPU) 
were created and this led directly to combat with the white controlled Rhodesian Security Forces. 
War was waged for 15 years with the Black Nationalist armies slowly beating back the much 
better equipped armed forces of Rhodesia. The British had won wars against native insurgents in 
Kenya and Malaya in recent years and the Rhodesians had every reason to believe that they 
could do the same thing using similar tactics. It was not to be. The tactics that had worked earlier 
for the British did not work against the insurgents in Rhodesia. 
http://www.psywarrior.com/RhodesiaPSYOP.html

