=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Cheikh-Anta-Diop-by-John-Henrik-Clarke.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 7
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:50:05.875859
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Cheikh Anta Diop
and the
New Light on African History 
by John Henrik Clarke (1974)
Cheikh Anta Diop, one of the most able of present day scholars writing about 
Africa, is also one of the greatest living Black historians. His first major work, 
Nations Negres et Culture (1955) is still disturbing the white historians who have 
make quick reputations as authorities on African history and culture. In this book 
Dr. Diop shows the interrelationships between African nations, north and south, 
and proves, because in this case proof is needed again and again, that ancient 
Egypt was a distinct African nation and was not historically or culturally a part of 
Asia or Europe. More myths about Africa are put to rest in another one of his 
books, The Cultural Unity of Negro Africa, (1959). The publication of his first book 
in the United States, The African Origin of Civilization: Myth of Reality, is a cause 
for celebration. This book and others of recent years, all by Black writers, have 
called for a total reconsideration of the role that African people have played in 
history and their impact on the development of early societies and institutions.
Cheikh Anta Diop1 was born in the town of Diourbel, in Senegal, on the West 
coast of Africa in 1923. His birthplace has a long tradition of producing Muslim 
scholars and oral historians. This is where his inspiration and interest in history, 
the humanities and social sciences from an African point of view began. After the 
publication of his first book Nations Negres et Culture, that had been rejected as 
a Ph.D. thesis at the Sorbonne in Paris, he became one of the most controversial 
of present day African historians. Nations Negres et Culture is both a 
reassessment of the African past and a challenge to Western scholarship on


--- PAGE 2 ---
Africa. He refutes the myth of Egypt as a white nation and shows its southern 
African origins. It is his intention to prove that, through Egyptian civilization, Africa 
had made the oldest and one of the most significant contributions to world 
culture. This is not a new argument that started with Cheikh Anta Diop's 
generation of Africans. The Ghanaian historian, Joseph B. Danquah, in his 
introduction to the book, United West Africa at the Bar of the Family of Nations, 
by Ladipo Solanke, published in 1927, four years after Cheikh Anta Diop was 
born, said exactly the same thing. His statement reads:
"By the time Alexander the Great was sweeping the civilized world 
with conquest after conquest from Chaeronia to Gaza, from 
Babylon to Cabul; by the time the first Aryan conquerors were 
learning the rudiments of war and government at the feet of the 
philosopher Aristotle; and by the time Athens was laying down the 
foundations of European civilization, the earliest and greatest 
Ethiopian culture had already flourished and dominated the civilized 
world for over four centuries and a half. Imperial Ethiopia had 
conquered Egypt and founded the XXVth Dynasty, and for a 
century and a half the central seat of civilization in the known world 
was held by the ancestors of the modern Negro, maintaining and 
defending it against the Assyrian and Persian Empires of the East. 
Thus, at the time when Ethiopia was leading the civilized world in 
culture and conquest, East was East, but West was not, and the 
first European (Grecian) Olympiad was yet to be held. Rome was 
nowhere to be seen on the map, and sixteen centuries were to 
pass before Charlemagne would rule in Europe and Egbert became 
first King of England. Even then, history was to drag on for another 
seven hundred weary years, before Roman Catholic Europe could 
see fit to end the Great Schism, soon to be followed by the 
disturbing news of the discovery of America and the fateful rebirth 
of the youngest of world civilizations."2
Here Dr. Danquah is showing that African history is the foundation of world 
history. In the present book by Cheikh Anta Diop, and in most of his other works, 
his objective is the same. In his first major work on history, Dr. Diop has said:
"The general problem confronting African history is this: how to 
recognize effectively, through meaningful research, all of the 
fragments of the past into a single ancient epoch, a common origin 
which will reestablish African continuity. … If the ancients were not 
victims of a mirage, it should be easy enough to draw upon another 
series of arguments and proofs for the union of the history of 
Ethiopian and Egyptian societies with the rest of Africa. Thus 
combined, these histories would lead to a properly patterned past in 
which it would be seen that (ancient) Ghana rose in the interior 
(West Africa) of the continent at the moment of Egyptian decline,


--- PAGE 3 ---
just as the Western European empires were born with the decline 
of Rome."
While using Africa as the vantage point and the basis for his thesis, Dr. Diop does 
not neglect the broader dimensions of history. He shows that history cannot be 
restricted by the limits of ethnic group, nation, or culture. Roman history is Greek 
as well as Roman, and both the Greek and the Roman histories are Egyptian 
because the entire Mediterranean was civilized Egypt; and Egypt in turn 
borrowed from other parts of Africa, especially Ethiopia.
Africa came into the Mediterranean world mainly through Greece, which had 
been under African influence. The first Greek invasion of Africa was peaceful and 
scholarly. This invasion brought in Herodotus. Egypt had lost its independence 
over a century before his visit. This was the beginning of the period of foreign 
domination over Egypt that would last, in different forms, for two thousand years.
The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality is a one-volume translation of 
the major sections of the first and last of the books by Cheikh Anta Diop, i.e., 
Nations Negres et Culture and Anteriorite des Civilisations Negres. These two 
works have challenged and changed the direction of attitudes about the place of 
African people in history in scholarly circles around the world. It was largely due 
to these works that Cheikh Anta Diop, with W.E.B. Du Bois, was honored as "the 
writer who had exerted the greatest influence on African people in the 20th 
century" at the World Festival of Arts held in Dakar, Senegal, in 1966.
The main thesis of the present work is a redefinition of the place of Egypt in 
African history in particular and in world history in general. Dr. Diop calls attention 
to the historical, archeological and anthropological evidence that supports his 
thesis. The civilization of Egypt, he maintains, is African in origin and in early 
development. In his book Dr. Diop says:
"The history of Africa will remain suspended in air and cannot be 
written correctly until African historians connect it with the history of 
Egypt."
He further states:
"The African historian who evades the problem of Egypt is neither 
modest or objective, nor unruffled, he is ignorant, cowardly, and 
neurotic."
Dr. Diop approaches the history of Africa frontally, head-on with explanations, but 
no apologies. In locating Egypt on the map of human geography he asks and 
answers the question: who were the Egyptians of the ancient world?


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Ethiopians say that the Egyptians were one of their colonies which was 
brought into Egypt by the deity Osiris. The Greek writer Herodotus repeatedly 
referred to the Egyptians as being dark-skinned people with woolly hair. "They," 
he says, "have the same tint of skin which approaches that of the Ethiopians." 
The opinion of the ancient writers on the Egyptians is more or less summed up 
by Gaston Maspero (1846–1916) when he says, "By the almost unanimous 
testimony of ancient historians, they [the Egyptians] belong to an African race 
which first settled in Ethiopia on the Middle Nile: following the course of the river 
they gradually reached the sea."
 
"The Greek writer, Herodotus, may be mistaken," Cheikh Anta Diop tells us, 
"when he reports the customs of a people. But one must grant that he was at 
least capable of recognizing the skin color of the inhabitants of countries he 
visited." His descriptions of the Egyptians were the descriptions of a Black 
people. At this point the reader needs to be reminded of the fact that at the time 
of Herodotus's visit to Egypt and other parts of Africa (between 480 and 425 
B.C.) Egypt's Golden Age was over. Egypt had suffered from several invasions, 
mainly the Kushite invasions, coming from within Africa, and starting in 751 B.C., 
and the Assyrians' invasions from Western Asia (called the Middle East), starting 
in 671 B.C. If Egypt, after years of invasions by other people and nations was a 
distinct Black African nation at the time of Herodotus, shouldn't we at least 
assume that it was more so before these invasions occurred?
If Egypt is a dilemma in Western historiography, it is a created dilemma. The 
Western historians, in most cases, have rested the foundation of what is called 
"Western Civilization" on the false assumptions, or claim, that the ancient 
Egyptians were white people. To do this they had to ignore great masterpieces 
on Egyptian history written by other white historians who did not support this 
point of view, such as Gerald Massey's great classic, Ancient Egypt, The Light of 
the World, (1907) and his other works, A Book of the Beginnings and The Natural 
Genesis. Other neglected works by white writers are Politics, Intercourse, and 
Trade of the Carthaginians, Ethiopians, Egyptians, by A.H.L. Heeren (1833), and 
Ruins of Empires, by Count Volney (1787).
In the first chapter of his book, Dr. Diop refers to the Southern African origins of 
the people later known as Egyptians. Here he is on sound ground with a lot of 
support coming from another group of neglected white writers. In his book Egypt, 
Sir E.A. Wallis Budge says: "The prehistoric native of Egypt, both in the old and 
in the new Stone Ages, was African and there is every reason for saying that the 
earliest settlers came from the South." He further states: "There are many things 
in the manners and customs and religions of the historic Egyptians that suggests 
that the original home of their prehistoric ancestors was in a country in the 
neighborhood of Uganda and Punt." (Some historians believe that the biblical 
land of Punt was in the area known on modern maps as Somalia.)


--- PAGE 5 ---
European interest in "Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization" dates from the early 
part of the nineteenth century and is best reflected in a little known, though 
important, paper in Karl Richard Lepsius' Incomparable Survey of the 
Monumental Ruins in the Ethiopian Nile Valley in 1842–1844. The records found 
by Lepsius tend to show how Ethiopia was once able to sustain an ancient 
population that was numerous and powerful enough not only to challenge but, on 
a number of occasions, to conquer completely the populous land of Egypt. 
Further, these records show that the antiquity of Ethiopian civilization had a direct 
link with civilization of ancient Egypt.
Many of the leading antiquarians of the time, based largely on the strength of 
what the classical authors, particularly Diodorus Siculus and Stephanus of 
Byzantium, had to say on the matter, were exponents of the view that the ancient 
Ethiopians, or at any rate, the Black people of remote antiquity were the earliest 
of all civilized peoples and that the first civilized inhabitants of ancient Egypt were 
members of what is refereed to as the Black race who entered the country as 
emigrants from Ethiopia. A number of Europe's leading writers on the civilizations 
of remote antiquity have written brilliant defenses of this point of view. Some of 
these writers are Brice, Count Volney, Fabre, d'Oliver, and Heeren. In spite of the 
fact that these writers defended this thesis with all the learning at their command 
and documented their defense, most of the present-day writers of African history 
continue to ignore their findings.
In 1825, German backwardness in this respect came definitely to an end. In that 
year, Arnold Hermann Heeren (1760–1842), Professor of History and Politics in 
the University of Gottengen and one of the ablest of the early exponents of the 
economic interpretation of history, published, in the fourth and revised edition of 
his great work Ideen Uber Die Politik, Den Verkehr Und Den Handel Der 
Vornehmsten Volker Der Alten Weld, a lengthy essay on the history, culture, and 
commerce of the ancient Ethiopians, which had profound influence on 
contemporary writers in the conclusion that it was among these ancient Black 
people of Africa and Asia that international trade was first developed. He thinks 
that as a by-product of these international contacts there was an exchange of 
ideas and cultural practices that laid the foundations of the earliest civilizations of 
the ancient world.
The French writer Count C. F. Volney, in his important work, The Ruins of 
Empires, extends this point of view by saying that the Egyptians were the first 
people to "attain the physical and moral sciences necessary to civilized life." In 
referring to the basis of this achievement he states further that, "It was, then, on 
the borders of the Upper Nile, among a Black race of men, that was organized 
the complicated system of worship of the stars, considered in relation to the 
productions of the earth and the labors of agriculture; and this first worship, 
characterized by their adoration under their own forms and national attributes, 
was a simple proceeding of the human mind."3


--- PAGE 6 ---
Over a generation ago African American historians such as Carter G. Woodson, 
W.E.B. Du Bois, Willis N. Huggins, J. A. Rogers, and Charles C. Seifort read the 
works of these radical writer-historians and began to expand on their findings. 
This tradition continued and is reflected in the works of present day Black 
historians such as John G. Jackson's Introduction to African Civilizations (1970), 
Yosef ben-Jochannan's Black Man of the Nile (1972), and Chancellor Williams's 
The Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race From 4500 B.C. to 
2000 A.D. (1971).
Until the publication of James G. Spady's article, "Negritude, Pan-Benegritude 
and the Diopian Philosophy of African History," in A Current Bibliography on 
African Affairs, volume 5, number 1, January, 1972, and the recent interview by 
Harun Kofi Wangara, published in Black World magazine, February, 1974, Dr. 
Cheikh Anta Diop was known to only a small group of Black writers and teachers 
in the United States. For over seven years his books were offered to American 
publishers with no show of interest. Now two of his books will be published in the 
United States within one year. The Third World Press in Chicago is preparing to 
publish his book, The Cultural Unity of Negro Africa. All of his books were 
originally published by Presence Africaine, the Paris-based publication arm of the 
International Society of African Culture.
Egyptology developed in concurrence with the development of the slave trade 
and the colonial system. It was during this period that Egypt was literally taken 
out of Africa, academically, and made an extension of Europe. In many ways 
Egypt is the key to ancient African history. African history is out of kilter until 
ancient Egypt is looked upon as a distinct African nation. The Nile River played a 
major role in the relationship to Egypt to the nations in Southeast Africa. During 
the early history of Africa, the Nile was a great cultural highway on which 
elements of civilization came into and out of inner Africa. Egypt's relationship with 
the people in the South was both good and bad, depending on the period and the 
dynasty in power.
In his chapter called, "What were the Egyptians?," Dr. Diop explains the rise and 
fall of Egypt's Golden Age and the beginnings of the invasions, first from Western 
Asia, that turned this nation's first age of greatness into a nightmare. This was 
the period of the Hyksos, or Shepherd Kings. During this time seventy Jews, 
grouped in twelve patriarchal families, nomads without industry or culture, 
entered Egypt. These Jews left Egypt four hundred years later 600,000 strong, 
after acquiring from African people all of the elements of their future religion, 
tradition, and culture, including monotheism. Whosoever the Jews were when 
they entered Africa, when they left, four hundreds later, they were ethnically, 
culturally, and religiously an African people. In this part of his book, Cheikh Anta 
Diop leaves no room for argument.
In the chapter called, "Birth of the Negro Myth," Dr. Diop shows how African 
people, whose civilizations were old before Europe was born, were


--- PAGE 7 ---
systematically read out of the respectful commentary of human history. This 
examination is continued in the chapter called, "Modern Falsification of History." 
Here, Cheikh Anta Diop deals with how Western historians, for the last five 
hundred years wrote or rewrote history glorifying the people of European 
extraction and distorted the history of the rest of the world.
Those who read this book seriously are in for a shock and rewarding experience 
in learning. This is a major work by a major Black historian. At last, the 
renaissance of African historiography from an African point of view has begun, 
and none too soon. I will say again, the publication of Cheikh Anta Diop's book 
The African Origin of Civilization": Myth or Reality is a cause for celebration.

