=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Christopher-Kill-umbus-The-Mind-of-a-Serial-Killer-by-M-Bwebe-Aja-Ishangi.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 10
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:58:31.919123
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
home | current issue | r-kyvz | mission | lectures | subscribe | onlinestore 
 
 
Source: http://daghettotymz.com/_Kill-umbus:_The_Mind_of_a_Serial_Killer 
"History is written by those who win and those who dominate."  
— Edward Said, literary critic 
Every second Monday in October, Banks and schoolz are closed and government offices are 
empty in remembrance of the infamous European explorer, Christopher Columbus. For hundredz 
of yearz, Columbus has had a special place in the history of the New World. To Afrikanz, 
celebrating Columbus Day is actually celebrating the mass destruction of our own people! 
Instead of a day where we see parades and floats down Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, it should be a 
day of mourning.  
Not only was Columbus part of the initial european conquest of the world, his legacy serves as a 
blockade to the real history behind the purposel y-covered fact that there were otherz, including 
Afrikanz not only in the America's, but sailed from other parts of the world to here well before 
him.  
Still there's something historianz marvel Columbus for than the otherz. If you ask me, it's that 
thing t hat resides in YTs nature, the barbaric act of violence! He claimed everything he saw 
when he set foot on these territories. Native landz, mineral wealth, natural resources, and even 
the inhabitants immediately became European "property." This could only b e launched with 
violence using torture, maim, rape, and other unspeakable acts.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
Columbus introduced two phenomena that revolutionized race relationz and transformed the 
modern world: (1)the taking of land, wealth, and labor from indigenous peoples, which lead to 
their near extermination, and (2)the transatlantic slave trade or Maangamizi , which created a 
racial underclass.  
The New World fascinated YT, most n otably the elite. This obsession was directly responsible 
for a rise in European self -consciousness. From the beginning, America was perceived as an 
"opposite" to Europe in wayz that even Afrika never had been. In a sense, there was no "Europe" 
before 1492. People were simply French, Tuscan, etc. Now they began to see similarities among 
themselves, at least when compared to the native from the Americas. Basically, until the first 
Indianz and Afrikanz arrived, there were no "white" people in Europe before 14 92. With the 
Transatlantic Slave Trade, Europeanz began seein' "white" as a race and race as an important 
human characteristic.  
Columbus' own writingz reflect this increasing ideology on racizm. When he tried selling Queen 
Isabella on the wonderz of the Americas, the Indianz were "well built" and "of quick intelligence. 
They have very good customize,"  he wrote, "and the king maintains a very marvelous state, of a 
style so orderly that it is a pleasure to see it, and they have good memories and they wish to  see 
everything and ask what it is and for what it is used."  
Later, when Columbus was justifying his terrorist attacks and enslavement of them, they became 
"cruel" and "stupid," "a people warlike and numerous, whose customz and religion are very 
different from ourz."  
He gives us the first recorded example of contradictory reports in the Americas, for although the 
Indianz may have changed from hospitable to angry, they c ould hardly have gone from 
intelligent to stupid that quickly. This change had to be in Columbus.  
History has shown YT cares little of indigenous culture and viewz the local population as 
nothing more than a slave labor force. As a result, they began to disappear as the European 
invaderz advanced. Disease, forced labor, invasion, and conquest caused the deaths of millionz, 
something YTs clever enough to leave out of their history books.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
It is this mass enslavement that provided America and Europe with its vast resources of wealth, 
natural resources, and free labor that enabled them to gain world domination mainly on the backs 
of Afrikan and other indigenous people.  
Even though it has been historically documented there were otherz (including Afrikanz) who 
travelled to the America's hundredz if not thousandz of yearz before Columbus, there was one 
thing that set him apart from the other explorerz.  
Starting in their early school yearz our children are told  Columbus was an adventurer, forefather 
of human progress, a hero to humanity, and the sole discoverer of the Americas. History 
textbooks have painted him  as a brave, da ring, and enlightened explorer who singlehandedly 
pulled Europe out of the Dark Ages, but how he did it has been blatantly left out. The hidden 
jewel is the fact that Columbus is responsible for the murder of millionz of indigenous people. In 
fact, he may be on the Top 5 murdererz in the history of wo/man!  
Let's be clear, if the life of Columbus continues to be celebrated, then hedz should be made 
aware of his entire life. By his own admission, he described himself as a slave trader — probably 
having sent some 5000 more than any other individual, starting first in Afrika then bringing this 
practice to the Americas — and a conquerer. I think he was bein' modest. I would add he was an 
invader, pirate, savage, and probably the worldz first serial killer! I mea n, this man should be 
added to the notorious list of murdererz which include Napoleon, the Rothschild click, Cecil 
Rhodes, Hitler, Stalin, Jim Jones, even the (George) Bush family (to name a few)!  
Tallying the total number of victimz will probably never b e known, but they may likely surpass 
the amount of hedz just mentioned. Columbus was a different kind of killer. He was more like 
the alleged islamic terrorists behind 9/11, which i s called a spree killer. Only in a whiteman's 
society can a man who instigated the genocide of a people be widely celebrated for it.  
He was responsible for slaughtering, enslaving, and exploiting Native inhabitants and Afrikanz 
the moment he arrived to th e New World, causing a massive epidemic, along with European 
diseases that claimed countless lives. What emerges from this hallow-day is not only the memory 
of the bloodshed t hat he caused, but also the accompanying sainthood he's received serving as 
YTs tribute and praise of white dominion by way of widespread destruction.  
1492 marked the beginning of the end for the natives. Most of those who didn't die from the 
diseases YT brought — like diphtheria, measles, smallpox, and malaria — were killed outright, 
expelled from their land, or forced into slavery. By the way, there's insurmountable evidence that 
show Columbus wasn't the first European to reach the Americas. As a matter of fact, he never 
claimed to have done so; white historianz did it for him.  
By this time, our Afrikan Ancestorz already knew the earth was round and sailed here as early as 
1500BC; almost 3000 yearz before Columbus. Thanks to the work of Ivan Van Sertima,  this is 
proven by the numerous unmistakably Afrikan -featured Olmec Headz (17 found to date) that 
were sculpted in the Gulf of Mexico region. During Columbus' era (the 15th century), the 
greatest mindz of europe were still thinking Earth was flat. Actually , Columbus thought the earth


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
was pear -shaped and was way off on his calculationz about the size of Earth as well as the 
distance between Europe and Asia.  
As said, Columbus wasn't the discoverer of the Americas and although he was the vital piece to 
the european conquest of this part of the world, he wasn't the first at that either. A viking by the 
name of Leif Erikson who visited what we know call Newfoundland almost 500 yearz before 
Columbus reached Hispaniola — a major island of the Caribbean which compr ises of Haiti and 
the Dominican Republic. So actually, Erikson was the man who pioneered european 
colonization. But I digress, this piece is about Columbus, hedz know who he is… or do we?  
THE TRUTH ABOUT COLUMBUS 
What do the wordz 'colon' and 'colonializm' have in common? Not only do we find one as the 
root word of the other, it is also the original name of this infamous pirate, Christopher 
Columbus! A 'colonic' is a procedure that uses irrigation to clean the colo n for therapeutic 
benefits. 'Irrigate' is defined as a continuous flow of water. In this case, water is symbolic for 
caucasianz as they flooded the globe with their terrorist crusades to conquer land and its 
inhabitants.  
Columbus' real name was Cristobol Colon! Some additional facts you won't find in YTs history 
books are:  
1) Colon came to the western hemisphere by mistake. He was searching for the "East" looking 
for, among other thingz, spices and other commodities to help a starving Europe to preserve t heir 
meats. Since Europeanz did not, at that time, have knowledge of longitude and latitude, Colon 
ended up sailing West to the Caribbean Islandz. Arriving there, he called the Indigenous people 
"Indianz", thinking he was in the "East Indies" near the Asia n country of India. Thus, he re -
named all of the Indigenous people "Indianz" which was not their natural names. He later had 
Afrikan navigatorz on board who knew longitude and latitude.  
2) Colon never stepped foot on the American mainland. He landed in th e Caribbean islandz. 
Upon landing there, he received reports of Afrikanz having visited there long before his voyages. 
In fact, Afrikanz had sailed to the Pacific Islandz at least 1000 yearz before Colon and traveled to 
the western hemisphere at least 2000 yearz before he was even born!


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
3) Colon praised the hospitality of the native people, yet said that they had to be destroyed in 
order to take control of the wealth of their landz.  
4) Prior to sailing to the New World, Colon sailed along the coast of Wes t Afrika, capturing 
Afrikanz for enslavement in Portugal. This was facilitated by Papal Bulles, another name for 
proclamationz, statues, or a bill, issued by Popes of the Christian Roman Catholic Church. In 
1455, the Pope issued a bulle to Portugal authori zing it to reduce to servitude, better put, enslave 
"infidelz" or non-christian people. This was followed by a Papl bulle issued by — peep the name 
— Pope Innocent VIII in 1491 that divided the world into two halves for the purpose of 
enslaving Afrikan and  other Indigenous people. The Pope gave the eastern half (Afrika, etc.) to 
Portugal, and the western half (the Americas, etc.) to Spain. Colon came to the Americas 
representing Spain. Britain, France, and other enslaving European countries did not follow t his 
protocol and the mad dash to slice up the world for European benefit began and its damaging 
effects persist to this day.  
When we analyze the Columbus Day Parade, which again happenz every second Monday in 
October since 1929, it beginz on Fifth Avenue at 47th street and goes on up to 79th Street. Is 
there any surprise the day starts out with, 'Columbus Day Mass' which takes place at St. Patrick's 
Cathedral on Fifth Avenue and 50th Street?!!? So we see here again, the Roman Catholic Church 
and christianz  paying homage to their god whom they believe condones these acts of the 
monstrous wrath the lineage of Popes have unleashed (and continue to unleash) on the world, 
particularly, Afrikan people — I can't tell you how much it vexes me to see brainwashed 
Afrikanz attend.  
Make no mistake about it, this country shows their appreciation of Columbus' pillages religiously 
and through government — naming state capitolz (Columbus, Ohio), cities and even built statues 
in his honor. Columbus Circle sits right next to  Central Park in New York City. See, we have to 
really take a look — with Afrikan eyes — who this country deemz worthy of praise. When you 
do, you'll see of the many monuments, statues, parks, and streets names, most are of men who 
should be considered cri minalz to humanity because they either were in on the origin or 
participated in the enslavement of Afrikanz and exploitation of our resources.  
CHRISTOPHER KILL-UMBUS: THE EXPLORATION/EXPLOITATION OF THE 
NEW WORLD 
"As one gatherz eggz that have been abando ned in fright have I gathered the whole earth..."   
— Sennacherib, the Assyrian King (705-681BC) 
 
As mentioned, the significance of Cristobol Colon’s voyages to the western hemisphere, is that 
this opened up Afrika and the Americas to mass murder, rape, des truction of entire cultures, 
stolen wealth of the people, and mass enslavement of Afrikanz and the Indigenous people of the 
Americas for hundredz of yearz by Europeanz. European profits from enslavement were shot 
well over 5000%! Dr. Cheikh Anta Diop estim ated that upwardz of 300million Afrikanz lost 
their lives during the 400+ yearz of European enslavement.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
In Ivan Van Sertima's book, They Came Before Columbus , he spoke of the origin of the Treaty 
of Tordesillas, drawn June 7, 1494. This was the result of  a meeting Columbus had with Don 
Juan, the King of Portugal. Juan conspired with Columbus, drawing a divider of the world 
between the two Catholic kingdomz. Any and everything west of the line would go to Columbus 
and Spain, everything east, to Juan and Po rtugal. This is the audacious mindset of an invader, 
havin' no regard of other humanz, feelin' — through the "authority" of their church — they can 
divide the world and take everything in it for themselves.  
What hedz don't know is accompanying his lust of invasion, Columbus had an insatiable appetite 
for greed. He demanded from Spain one third, one eighth, and one tenth of everything found in 
the New World. "Thus, if the gainz amounted to $2400 for a ship, Columbus would expect to 
receive first $800 for th e third; next $300 for his eighth; and last, $240 for his tenth, making in 
all $1340, more than the Crown." (James Bailey, The God-Kings and the Titans pg. 51)  
Columbus was also a con man plotting further to scam his own country for riches from King 
Ferdinand and Queen Isabella — the only one's who financed his expedition in the first place 
giving him 3 ships (the Nina, Pinta, and Santa Maria), a crew of 90 men and money. He 
convinced them of a few islandz he could explore not revealing the vast land and riches the 
Guinea route and South America had. He basically told the King and Queen South America was 
an island so he could have the rest for himself. Because of this and other growing skepticizmz 
they had with him dealing with the Portuguese Isabella started to become suspicious.  
History doesn't talk much about his partnerz -in-crime and blood -brotherz, Bartholomew and 
Giacomo. Bartholomew built a colony in Espanola named after the Queen, Isabela, then moving 
to a new settlement called Santo Domingo near newfound gold mines. Rebellion from the 
settlerz soon evolved forcing Columbus to request a judge be sent from Ferdinand and Isabella to 
calm thingz in the fall of 1500AD. Little did he know this judge really came to strip Columbus of 
his title as governor and viceroy and actually arrest him and his brotherz. They were seized, 
placed in chainz and dragged back to Spain naked and in disgrace.  
On December 17, 1500, he went before the royal court and was given back stolen his riches but 
not his titles. He spent the remaining six yearz of his life trying to, as historianz put it, restore his 
"honor" as if his deedz were honorable (well they were if you were white).


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
But his pillaging didn't end there. Now that YT was able to continue their global conquest, on 
May 9, 1502, he was granted a fourth voyage with instructionz to search for gold, silver, precious 
stones, spices, and other riches and was told to stay away from Hispaniola. Of course he did the 
opposite, landing at Santo Domingo on June 29th, partly because of an oncoming hurricane.  
After the hurricane he sailed to Central America. The voyage took a toll on his ships forcing him 
to land in Jamaica instead of a return to Hispaniola. Literally shipwrecked, he and his men were 
marooned on the island. The people of Jamaica grew tired of providing food for these pirates. In 
response, Columbus came u p with one of his tricks. Using an almanac he had, he threatened to 
punish the islanderz by taking light away from the Moon. On the night of February 29, 1504, 
there was a lunar eclipse, but the people of Jamaica were unaware, so they believed Columbus' 
alleged spell. They immediately went back to providing for them (realize the kind of devious 
manipulator he was to even come up with that).  
On his first voyage, Columbus kidnapped some ten to twenty -five Indianz and brought them to 
Spain. Only seven or eigh t of the Indianz arrived alive, but along with the parrots, gold trinkets, 
and other exotica, YT began to froth at the mouth. King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella 
immediately provided Columbus with seventeen ships, about 1,500 men, cannonz, crossbows, 
gun, cavalry, and attack dogz for a second voyage.  
This savage documented all this in his own journal! On October 13, 1492, his initial encounter 
with the Arawaks, he wrote, "At daybreak great multitudes of men came to the shore, all young 
and of fine shapes, and very handsome. Their hair was not curly but loose and coarse like horse -
hair… Their eyes are large and very beautiful." He added, "I was very attentive to them, and 
strove to learn if they had any gold. Seeing some of them with little bits of metal hangi ng at their 
noses, I gathered from them by signs that by going southward or steering round the island in that 
direction, there would be found a king who possessed great cups full of gold."  
At dawn the next day, Columbus sailed to the other side of the isl and, probably one of the 
Bahamas, and saw two or three villages. He ended his description of them with these menacing 
wordz, "I could conquer the whole of them with fifty men and govern them as I pleased." His log 
further illustrates his intentionz, "As so on as I arrived in the Indies [Bahamas], on the first 
Island which I found, I took some of the natives by force in order that they might learn and might 
give me information of whatever there is in these parts."  
When he returned to Haiti in 1493, they dema nded food, gold, spun cotton -whatever the Indianz 
had that they wanted, including sex with their women. To ensure cooperation, Columbus used 
punishment by example. When an Indian committed even a minor offense, the Spanish cut off 
his earz or nose. Disfigu red, the person was sent back to his village as living evidence of the 
brutality the Spaniardz were capable of.  
After a while, the Indianz had had enough. They initially refused to plant food for them and they 
abandoned townz near the Spanish settlements.  Eventually, the Arawaks had to physically fight 
back, but their sticks and stones were no match to what Columbus had.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
These attempts at resistance gave Columbus an excuse to make war. On March 24, 1495, he set 
out to conquer the Arawaks. According to Kir kpatrick Sale, who quotes Ferdinand Columbus' 
biography of his father, "The soldierz mowed down dozenz with point -blank volleyz, loosed the 
dog to rip open limbz and bellies, chased fleeing Indianz into the bush to skewer them on sword 
and pike, and 'with God's aid [wtf?!!?] soon gained a complete victory, killing many Indianz and 
capturing otherz who were also killed.'"  
Having as yet found any gold, Columbus had to return some kind of "commodity" to Spain. In 
1495 the Spanish on Haiti initiated a great sl ave raid. They rounded up 1,500 Arawaks, then 
selected the 500 best specimenz (200 died on the way to Spain). Another 500 were chosen as 
slaves for the Spaniardz staying on the island. Columbus was excited. "In the name of the Holy 
Trinity, we can send fro m here all the slaves and brazil -wood which could be sold," he wrote to 
Ferdinand and Isabella in 1496.  "In Castile, Portugal, Aragon,.. . and the Canary Islands they 
need many slaves, and I do not think they get enough from Guinea."  He closed saying, "Let us in 
the name of the Holy Trinity go on sending all the slaves that can be sold."  
Author Hans Koning, who wrote a couple books on Columbus writes, "There now began a reign 
of terror in Hispani ola." Spaniardz began hunting Indianz for sport, murdering them for dog 
food. Columbus was certain gold was on the island and in his rage, set up a tribute system the 
Indianz were forced to pay tribute to the Catholic Sovereignz every three months.  
In the Cibao (Dominican Republic today), where the gold mines were, every person 14 yearz of 
age and up was to pay a large hawk's bell of gold dust; all otherz were each to pay 25 poundz of 
cotton. Whenever an Indian delivered, he received a brass or copper toke n he must wear around 
his neck as proof he made his payment. Any Indian found without this token was punished. The 
punishment? Their handz were cut off! With a fresh token, an Indian was safe for three months, 
where much of which time would be devoted to collecting more gold.  
The tribute system eventually broke down because its demandz were impossible to meet. To 
replace it, Columbus installed the encomienda system, which he granted Indian villages to 
individual or groups of colonists, a so -called "lighter" form of what was able to escape the 
classified term, 'slavery'. Since it was not called slavery, this forced -labor system didn't receive 
the backlash slavery received. Following his example, Spain made the encomienda system


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
official policy on Haiti in 1502; other colonialists followed suite introducing it to Mexico, Peru, 
and Florida.  
The tribute and encomienda systemz killed many more. In Haiti, the colonists made the Indianz 
mine gold for them, raise Spanish food, and eve n carry them everywhere they went. Pedro de 
Cordoba wrote in a letter to King Ferdinand in 1517, "As a result of the sufferings and hard 
labor they endured, the Indianz choose and have chosen suicide. Occasionally a hundred have 
committed mass suicide. The  women, exhausted by labor, have shunned conception and 
childbirth… Many, when pregnant, have taken something to abort and have aborted. Otherz 
after delivery have killed their children with their own handz, so as not to leave them in such 
oppressive slavery."  
Some tried fleeing to Cuba, but the Spanish followed them there. Estimates of Haiti's pre -
Columbian population range was as high as 8,000,000 people. When Columbus returned to 
Spain, he left his brother Bartholomew in charge of the island. He took a census in 1496 and 
came up with 1,100,000. "By 1516," according to author, Benjamin Keen, "thanks to the sinister 
Indian slave trade and labor policies initiated by Columbus, only some 12,000 remained."  There 
were fewer than 200 alive in 1542. By 1555, they were all gone.  
The slave trade destroyed whole Indian nationz. To replace the dying Haitianz, the Spanish 
imported tenz of thousandz more from the Bahamas. Packed in below deck, with hatchways 
closed to prevent their e scape, so many slaves died on the trip from the Bahamas to Hispaniola 
that a ship without a compass, chart, or guide, only needed to follow the trail of dead Indianz 
who had been thrown overboard.  
Because the Indianz died, slavery then led to the massive slave trade the other way across the 
Atlantic, from Africa. This trade also began on Haiti, initiated by Columbus's son, Ferdinand, in 
1505. Predictably, Haiti then became the site of the first large -scale slave revolt, when Blacks 
and Indianz banded toget her in 1519. The uprising lasted more than a decade and was finally 
brought to an end by the Spanish in the 1530s.  
Long after the death of Columbus, his family struggled to have his titles reinstated and his legacy 
restored. This struggle resulted in a sm all victory in 1509 when Diego became governor of 
Hispaniola. However, the new landz that Columbus invaded were never given his name. They 
were given to another invader and fellow Italian, Amerigo Vespucci.  
Murdererz of humanity are honored/remembered wit h holidayz in this country even as a 
foreigner, but home-grown Freedom Fighterz like the non-violent Martin Luther King have to go 
through great lengths to even be in the discussion (and there are many more worthy like 
Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, Malc olm X; not to mention global iconz who've yet to be 
bestowed this honor like Steven Biko and Patrice Lumumba or of Antiquity, Queen Hatshepsut 
and ancient Kemet)! This gives a clear indication as to what America and other european nationz 
regard worth remembering, so it shouldn't come as a surprise. This is the nature of the beast. 
But for everyone else, there is no way we should participate nor honor this wicked iconic 
european holiday, parade, and certainly no statues! Columbus Day celebrates the doctrine  of


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 10 
  
Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer 
by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
From: Da Ghetto Tymz 
 
rediscovery — the legal process that stole indigenous people's territories which continue to this 
day.  
Since we live in a country supposedly founded upon freedom, liberty, and democracy, does 
Christopher Columbus deserve to have a national holiday? It 's obvious for me, but I leave this 
question for you to decide… 
 
REFERENCES  
• Christopher Columbus and the Afrikan Holocaust by Dr. John Henrik Clarke  
• They Came Before Columbus by Prof. Ivan Van Sertima  
• Capitalism and Slavery by Eric Williams  
• Ancient Egyptian Survivals in the Pacific by R. A. Jairazbhoy  
• Criminalizing A Race by Dr. Charshee C. L. McIntyre  
• Christopher Columbus and the Afrikan Holocaust: Slavery and the Rise of European 
Capitalism - John Henrik Clarke  
• Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong by James 
Loewen  
• Thanks (for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving 
• Afrikan Burial Ground - Urban Unrest...Literally 
• http://columbus-day.123holiday.net/christopher_columbus.html  
VIDEO  
• Black History in America • They Came before Columbus (Short Clip): 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wRUG98yrHlE&feature=related 
 
• Way Before Columbus or the Egypt Pyramids Washitaw: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Woh6JlpfrTU&feature=related 
 
• Video clips that shows mounds in North America:  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nDENGjJmH68&feature=related 
 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e_xtDjzOYos&feature=related 
 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DZGhrsrGEHI&feature=related 
 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TuAlBcmKbPY&feature=related 
 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yw3J5wP7gjI&feature=related 
  
Read more from our Current and R-Kyvz Vault

