=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Compare-the-Great-Depression-to-What-s-Happening-in-Today-s-Economy.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 11
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:48.502881
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
  
“Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in 
today's economy” 
 
  
 
Related video playlist: The Dust Bowl, Stock Market Crash and Great 
Depression 
 
Great Depression Picture: A Black Family Standing Together 
From: Great Depression Pictures - 20th Century History 
A large compilation of pictures from the Great Depression, including pictures of dust storms, 
farm foreclosures, migrant workers, women and children, unemployed, and ... 
http://history1900s.about.com/od/photographs/tp/greatdepressionpictures.htm


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
    Source of text that follows: http://www.thegreatdepressioncauses.com/ 
The Great Depression Causes and Effects 
The Great Depression represents one of the darkest  periods 
in American economic history. Most people think the Great 
Depression started in October 1929, with the famous Black 
Tuesday stock market crash, but economists and historians 
point to an economic downturn which took hold in early 
1929. The stock ma rket crash led to unprecedented runs on 
banks, and by 1933, more than 11,000 of the nation’s 25,000 
banks had failed. 
Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal is largely credited with bringing America out of the Great Depression 
by providing jobs and relief, but  in truth, the country didn’t fully recover until 1941, when munitions and 
ammunition factories geared up for World War II. 
That means the Great Depression timeline spanned approximately twelve years, with unemployment 
reaching its highest point in 1933,  when 25% of American workers were idle. Photos of the Great 
Depression depict harsh conditions, for men, women, and children. 
From 1930-1936, American farmers struggled with conditions of the Dust Bowl, a drought that affected 
more than a million acres of farmland, and the result was mass migrations of people f rom rural lands to 
urban areas. 
As we face tough economic times today and economic stimulus packages are being introduced right and 
left, it’s interesting to look at then and now Great Depression comparisons. 
Read on…because the answers to our economic future may very well have a lready been forged in the 
past. 
Great Depression Facts 
-At its highest point during the Great Depression, unemployment reached 25% (in 1933). 
-The Great Depression began in 1929 and ended in 1941 when America prepared to enter World War II. 
-Social Security, a program that continues to this day, was introduced by Franklin D. Roosevelt in the  
midst of the Great Depression. 
Home | Then & Now | Causes Of The Great 
Depression | Effects Of The Great Depression 
The Great Depression Timelines | 1929 Stock 
Market Crash | Great Depression Bank Failures 
Dust Bowl 1930s | Unemployment During The 
Great Depression | FDR New Deal 
Great Depression Facts


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
-The “Roaring Twenties” weren’t roaring for everyone. By 1929, 1% of Americans controlled 40%  of the 
wealth in this country. 
- The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) was formed in 1934 to insure deposits in banks and 
restore customers’ faith in the American banking system. 
-The Dust Bowl years spanned 1930 -1936, when a million acres of farmland across the Plains became 
worthless due to severe drought and overfarming. 
 -After the stock market crash in 1929, it took 27 years to reach pre-crash levels. 
-In 1939, the unemployment rate in America had dropped from a high of 25% to 15%, largely due to the 
New Deal programs introduced by Franklin D. Roosevelt. 
-Tuesday, October 29, 1929 is known as Black Tuesday because of the plunge the stock market too k, and 
it largely symbolizes the start of the Great Depression, though the economy had been in decline for at 
least six months prior to that date. 
-By 1933, more than 11,000 of the nation’s 25,000 American banks had shuttered, v ictims of the Great 
Depression. 
-Hoovervilles were the catchphrase for the shantytowns that cropped up across the United States, as 
homeless Americans improvised with scraps, abandoned cars, and packing crates. 
-At its highest point during the Great Depression, unemployment reached 25% (in 1933). 
-The Great Depression began in 1929 and ended in 1941 when America prepared to enter World War II. 
-The Great Depress ions of 2008 and 2009 undoubtedly would have been worse without the $700 billion 
and $770 billion stimulus packages from President Bush and President Obama (not to mention bailouts of 
the automakers, AIG, and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac). 
-In March 201 2, it was reported that 4 out of 15 of the major U.S. banks (including Citigroup) wouldn’t 
survive another severe recession, much less a depression. 
The Great Depression – Comparisons To Today 
As the economy began to falter in December 2007 (the official start of today’s recession) and 
went into a freefall in September 2008, many Americans’ thoughts turned to the Great 
Depression. 
Read more about today's Great Depression: 
Great Depression 2008 Facts 
Great Depression 2009 Facts 
How To Survive The Great Depression


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
Great Depression 2008 and 2009 Job Losses (by month) 
Great Depression Workers  
Great Depression Stimulus Packages 
Great Depression Bank Bailouts 
Great Depression Stock Market Crash 2008 
Comparing the Great Depression to what’s happening today, many simi larities and differences 
can be noted. 
Similarities Between The Great Depression And Today 
Some of the eerie similarities between the Great Depression and today’s economic crisis include: 
Speculation: Speculation on stock led to the historic stock market crash in 1929  that brought on 
the Great Depression. Speculation on housing prices in 2003 -2007 brought on the current 
recession. As of April 2008, the top 26 cities with the  highest foreclosure rates in the country 
were all located in just four states: California, Arizona, Nevada, and Florida. For years, these 
states enjoyed double -digit increases in housing prices, leading to a housing bubble that was 
bound to burst. 
Buying on margin : With little regulations on stock market purchases, in the months and years 
leading up to the Great Depression, investors were able to buy stocks on margin, with the only 
requirement that they put 10% down. In other words, they could buy $100 w orth of stock for a 
$10 investment, and if that stock went up by a mere 10%, they’d doubled their investment. This 
leveraging led to wild speculation, with people cashing in their life savings to funnel money into 
the stock market, which led to artificially high prices. Stock market regulations were put in place 
during the Great Depression to prevent the same catastrophe from repeating in the financial 
markets, but seventy years later, Americans aimed a similar greed toward the housing market. 
Millions of p eople bought homes they couldn’t afford, with money they didn’t have, taking out 
100% or 110% loans. 
Bank crisis : During the Great Depression, banks failed because Americans panicked and 
withdrew all of their money, virtually overnight, after the stock market crashed in October 1929. 
This time around, the banks are failing again, because of their own suspect lending practices, 
when seemingly all credit standards were thrown out the window as l enders rode the wave of the 
housing market boom. 
Loss of consumer confidence : History proves, through the Great Depression, that when average 
Americans get scared, they stop spending money. Our parents and grandparents became frugal in 
the 1930s, and we’re following suit today.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
High unemployment rates: The Great Depression saw the U.S. unemployment rate soar to 25% in 
1933, and in 2008 and 2009, millions of jobs have again been lost. As of April 2009, the U.S. 
unemployment rate was 8.5%, with eight states in the nation reporting rates higher than 10%. If 
the amount of people who stopped looking for work and/or settled for part -time work are 
included in the U.S. unemployment calculations, the true rates climb to 15%. 
Government intervention : While Herbert Hoover largely ignored the causes and effects of the 
Great Depression, Franklin D. Roosevelt took immediate charge when he was elected and sworn 
into office in March 1933. He introduced a variety of regulations to prevent financial 
catastrophes from recurring, he strove to assuage the fears of the American public, and he 
invested billions of dollars in federal fundin g toward job creation. President Barack Obama is 
following in Roosevelt’s footsteps, except that his “New Deal” programs are costing American 
taxpayers trillions of dollars, not billions. 
 
Differences Between The Great Depression And Today 
There are marked differences between circumstances of the Great Depression and the economic 
crisis today. 
Quick Response: Essentially, the stock market crash of 1929 was followed by almost four years 
of lethargy on the part of the federal government. This time around, the action has been swift and 
sweeping. More than a dozen economic stimulus packages were introduced in 2008 and 2009, all 
designed to jumpstart the economy and/or save and create jobs. 
Dust Bowl in the 1930s : Drought conditions in the 1930s brought farmers in the Plains to their 
knees when millions of acres of farmland were rendered useless. This environmental catastrophe 
contributed to the failure of banks during the Great Depression (man y of which had outstanding 
farm loans that went bad) and led to high unemployment rates as farmers lost their livelihood. So 
far, America hasn’t experienced a comparable natural disaster. 
World War II : The Great Depression finally came to an end, not bec ause of Franklin D. 
Roosevelt’s New Deal or the massive growth of federal government programs and intervention, 
but because of World War II. American exports increased as Europe ordered munitions, 
ammunitions, and supplies for the war, and that, combined w ith America’s war efforts, put 
millions of workers back in factories. 
FDIC: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was created in 1934, for the exact 
circumstances that we’re facing today.  The federal government insures every individual bank 
account up to $100,000, and in the fall of 2008, that level was raised to $250,000 to reassure 
concerned Americans. There hasn’t been a marked run on banks during this recession, and only a 
handful of banks have failed across the country.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
Causes Of The Great Depression 
The stock market crash on October 29, 1929 set in motion a series of events that led to the Great 
Depression, but in fact, the American economy and global economy had been in turmoil six 
months prior to Black Tuesday, and a variety of factors before and after that fateful date in 
October caused and exacerbated the Great Depression. 
False Sense Of Prosperity Before The Great Depression 
The 1920s, known as “The Roar ing Twenties” marked a time when America was overdependent 
on production, automobiles were the leading industry, and there was a great disparity between 
rich and poor. More than 60% of the population was living below poverty levels, while a mere 
5% of the wealthiest people in America accounted for 33% of the income, and the richest 1% 
owned 40% of the nation’s wealth. This uneven distribution of wealth was mirrored in the 
unequal distribution of riches between industry and agriculture. 
Global Crisis And The Great Depression 
While America prospered during the 1920s, most of Europe, still reeling from the devastation of 
World War I, fell into economic decline. America soon became the world’s banker, and as 
Europe started defaulting on loan s and buying less American products, the Great Depression 
spread. 
Speculation And Overleverage In The Great Depression 
With only loose stock market regulations in place before the Great Depression, investors were 
able speculate wildly, buying stocks on m argin, needing only 10% of the price of a stock to be 
able to complete the purchase. Rampant speculation led to falsely high stock prices, and when 
the stock market began to tumble in the months leading up to the October 1929 crash , 
speculative investors couldn’t make their margin calls, and a massive sell -off began. While the 
great rise in the stock market (from 181 points in early 1928 to 381 points in September 1929) 
was fueled by optimism and false hope, the plunge was flamed by stark fear. 
Stock Market Crash Of The Great Depression 
On September 3, 1929, the Dow Jones was at a high of 381 points, and on October 29, 1929, it 
had fallen to 41 points after a week of panic selling. 
Bank Failures And The Great Depression 
Once the stock market crashed, fearful that banks would fail, millions of Americans began to 
withdraw their money. Virtually overnight, they put thousands of banks in peril . The more 
money Americans withdrew, the more banks failed, and the more banks failed, the more money 
Americans withdrew. By 1933, more than 11,000 of the nation’s 25,000 banks had collapsed. 
Lack Of Available Credit During The Great Depression


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
With massive draws on funds during the Great Depression, banks had no money to lend, and this 
lack of available credit led to a further worsening of economic conditions. 
People Stopped Spending Money During The Great Depression 
When the stock marke t crashed, and the banks failed, and unemployment levels reached higher 
and higher points, people understandably stopped spending money, which also deepened the 
economic crisis as demand for products and services ground to a halt. 
High Unemployment Rates During The Great Depression 
When consumer spending plummeted during the Great Depression, unemployment rose , 
reaching its highest level in 1933, when 25% of the workforce was idle. 
Dust Bowl During The Great Depression 
A drought that lasted from 1930 to 1936, known as the Dust Bowl, aggravated the problems of 
the Great Depression. More than a million acres of farmland w ere rendered useless because of 
severe drought and years of overfarming, and hundreds of thousands of farmers joined the ranks 
of the unemployed. 
Effects Of The Great Depression 
The Great Depression caused a myriad of changes in American society and economic policies, 
many of which linger to this day. 
Below are some of the primary effects of the Great Depression: 
Stock Market And Banking Regulations 
After the stock market crash of 1929 and the collapse of more than 40% of American banks by 
1933, strict trading and banking regulations were put in place, as well as financial protections, 
enforced by the newly formed Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 
Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal An Effect Of Great Depression 
Franklin D. Roosevelt introduced programs between 1933 and 1938, designed to help America 
pull out of the Great Depression by addressing high rates of unemployment and poverty. An 
array of services, regulations, and subsidies were introduced by FDR and Congress, including 
widespread work creation programs. The cornerstones of the New Deal were the Public Works 
Administration and the National Recovery Administration. 
Expanded Role Of Government An Effect Of The Great Depression


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
FDR’s New Deal increased the role of government in people’s lives to unprecedented levels, 
levels that continued long after America had recovered from the Great Depression. 
Mass Migration An Effect Of The Great Depression 
When the Dust Bowl conditions in the 1930s led to farmers abandoning their fields, mass 
migration patterns emerged during the Great Depression, with populations shifting from rural 
areas to urban centers. 
Societal Change An Effect Of The Great Depression 
Many people who survived the Great Depression would remain frugal throughout the rest of their 
lives, wary of banks, apt to hoard food, and suspicious of the stock market. 
The Great Depression Timelines 
The Great Depression and its effects lasted more than a decade, from 1929 until 1941. 
Following are some of the key dates in the timeline of the Great Depression: 
October 29, 1929: Stock market crashed, Black Tuesday 
1930: Severe drought and Dust Bowl conditions began to ruin farmers’ land, a condition that 
lasted until 1935  
1931: Food riots broke out, workers marched on Detroit, and “foreign workers” were deported 
January 1932: Congress established the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to lend $2 billion to 
banks, insurance companies, building and loan associations, and farming organizations 
Late 1932: Stocks reached their lowest point 
November 1932: Franklin D. Roosevelt beat Herbert Hoover in a landslide 
March 1933: Franklin D. Roosevelt took office 
1933: More than 11,000 of the nation’s 25,000 banks had closed 
1933: Roosevelt announced a three-day “bank holiday” to prevent a third run on banks and to 
shore up the banking system 
1933: Unemployment reached its highest level, at 25% 
1933: The Civilian Conservation Corp (CCC) was established to put young men to work in 
federal and state parks 
1933: The National Recovery Administration (NRA) was introduced 
1933: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) was established to insure bank 
deposits 
1933: The Civil Works Administration (CWA) was established to employ up to 4 million people 
on public works projects 
1935: The Work Projects Administration (WPA) was formed to employ up to 8.5 million people 
on public works projects across the country 
1935: The Social Security Act was signed into law, financed through payroll taxes 
November 1936: FDR was elected to a second term as president 
April 1938: FDR asked Congress for an additional $3.75 billion to stimulate the still floundering 
economy 
November 1940: FDR was elected to a third term as president


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
1941: Preparations for World War II stimulated the American economy and effectively brought 
an end to the Great Depression 
The Stock Market Crash 1929 – Black Tuesday 
October 29, 1929 is often marked as the start of the Great Depression in America, a dark day 
when the U.S. stock market crashed. Over a two-day period, the market lost 24% of its value. 
The 1920s, known as “The Roaring Twenties” had been a time of unprecedented prosperity in 
America, and as the stock market soared, investors used their life savings and  borrowed (buying 
stocks on margin) to take advantage of the boom. From 1920 to 1929, stocks more than 
quadrupled in value – not because of fundamentals such as corporate production and profits, but 
rather fueled by rampant speculation. 
The economic hous e of cards came to a screeching halt on Black Tuesday, October 29, 1929 
when the bubble burst. 
Other well -known dates in that fateful October are “Black Thursday” (October 24, 1929) and 
“Black Monday” (October 28, 1929), which were horrible dates for investors. 
It would take 27 years for the stock market to recover and surpass its pre-crash level. 
Bank Failures During The Great Depression 
Economists can debate whether bank failu res caused the Great Depression , or the Great 
Depression caused bank failures, but this much is undisputed: By 1933, 11,000 of the nation’s 
25,000 banks had disappeared. 
The run on America’s  banks began immediately following the stock market crash of 1929. 
Overnight, hundreds of thousands of customers began to withdraw their deposits. With no money 
to lend and loans going sour as businesses and farmers went belly up, the American banking 
crisis deepened. 
After taking office in March 1933, Franklin D. Roosevelt did his best to shore up the flagging 
banking system. When a third banking panic in less than four years threatened, he announced a 
three-day bank holiday to stop the run on banks by h alting all financial transactions. When the 
banks were allowed to reopen, nearly 1,000 banks had been saved. 
On January 1, 1934, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) was established, and 
since that time, not one depositor has lost insured funds. 
Prior to the fall of 2008, FDIC insured bank accounts up to $100,000. The Bush Administration 
changed those levels to $250,000.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
The Dust Bowl And Its Role In The Great Depression 
 For years, American farmers overplanted and poorly managed their crop rotations, and between 
1930 and 1936, when severe drought conditions prevailed across much of America’s Plains, Dust 
Bowls were created. Soil turned to dust and large dark clouds could be seen across the horizon in 
Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, Colorado, and New Mexico. Topsoil was carried by the ton 
from barren fields, across hundreds of miles of Plains in the driest regions of the country. 
Black Sunday, April 14, 1935, a day whe n winds reached top speeds of 60 miles per hour, 
prompted an AP reporter to coin the term “dust bowl” for the first time. 
The agricultural depression was a major factor in the Great Depressi on, as bank loans went bad, 
credit dried up, and banks closed across the country. 
Throughout the 1930s, more than a million acres of land were affected in the Dust Bowl, 
thousands of farmers lost their livelihoods and property, and mass migration pattern s began to 
emerge as farmers left rural America in search of work in urban areas. This migration added to 
Great Depression unemployment woes, stressed relief and benefits programs, and c reated social 
strife in many large American cities. 
Unemployment During The Great Depression 
In 1933, at the worst point in the Great Depression years, unemployment rates in the United 
States reached almost 25%, with more than 11 million people looking for work. 
Farmers who had lost their land and homes to foreclosure as a result of the Dust Bowl made up a 
large part of the idle workforce. “Hoovervilles” (named after Herbert Hoover, the Am erican 
president many blamed for the Great Depression) and shantytowns sprung up all across America, 
areas in which people gathered and constructed makeshift homes out of boxes, packing crates, 
abandoned cars, and scraps of wood. 
To solve the problem of unemployment during the Great Depression, Franklin D. Roosevelt 
created a number of job-related programs as part of his New Deal, most notably: 
•Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) 
•Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) 
•Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) 
•Work Projects Administration, Works Progress Administration (WPA)


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 11 
 
Compare the Great Depression to what's happening in today's economy 
FDR New Deal During The Great Depression 
In 1932, in his acceptance speech as the Democratic party’s nomi nee, Franklin D. Roosevelt 
promised a “new deal for the American people.” 
Roosevelt won the office of President of the United States of America in November 1932, by a 
landslide over incumbent Herbert Hoover. When he took office in March 1933, he wasted n o 
time in following through on his campaign promises. 
FDR’s “First Hundred Days” saw a whirlwind of activity as Roosevelt worked tirelessly, then 
and throughout his three terms, to pull America out of the Great Depression. 
President Roosevelt’s New Deal programs were designed to tackle the economic crisis on many 
levels: 
•federal assistance for people who had lost their jobs, houses, savings, and livelihoods 
•job creation for the unemployed through massive public works projects 
•agricultural assistance for troubled farmers 
•manufacturing assistance for troubled industries 
•stricter banking regulations to prevent bank failures 
•creation of the FDIC to protect bank customers’ deposits 
•investment in the banking system to free up credit 
While FDR’s New Deal efforts might have helped keep the Great Depression from becoming 
even worse than it was, only World War II finally healed the economy. War -related exports, as 
well as America’s own preparation with munitions and ammunition, fired up t he factories again 
and effectively ended the Great Depression, almost twelve years after it began in 1929.

