=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Consciencism Philosophy and the Ideology for Decolonization.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 65
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:54:20.271590
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
"<:I 
n1I1 ....."l1 
t"" 
0~ 
0 
Vl 0 
t:! 0 ~ t:t:l "<:I 
I 1I1 C/J 
C"J -< (j0 
t"" i> )--I. • 
o z (tl 
Z t:! ..... 
N ~ ..... 
i> t:! (j ..., t:t:l 
..... 0 )--I. • 
o t"" C/J 
Z 0 
4'l 
-< S 
4 
~ 
~ 
> 
~ 
td 
Z 
~ 
~ 
C 
~ 
>
::c


--- PAGE 3 ---
Library of Congress Card Number: 6S-II8 34 
Standard Book Number: SBN-8S34S-1 36-2 
First Modem Reader Paperback Edition 1970 
10 9 8 7 
Manufactured ill the United States of America 
, 
AUTHOR S NOTE 
INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER ONE 
CHAPTER TWO 
CHAPTER THREE 
CHAPTER FOUR 
CHAPTER FIVE 
CONTENTS 
• 
IV 
1 
Philosophy in Retrospect 5 
Philosophy and Society 29 
Society and Ideology 56 
Consciencism 78 
Set Theoretic Terms 10 7


--- PAGE 4 ---
AUTHOR'S NOTE 
S
INCE THE publication of the first edition of Consciencism in 
1964, the African Revolution has decisively entered a new 
phase, the phase of armed struggle. In part of our 
continent, African revolutionaries are either preparing for 
struggle, or are actively engaged in military against 
the forces of reaction and counter-revolution. 
The issues are now clearer . 
succession of military coups which have in rt:cent years taken 
place in Africa, have exposed the close links between the interests 
of neo-colonialism and the indigenous bourgeoisie. coups 
have brought into sharp relief the nature and the extent of the 
class struggle in Nrica. Foreign monopoly capitalists are in close 
association with local reactionaries, and have made nse of officers 
among the armed forces in order to frustrate the purposes of the 
African Revolution. 
It is in consideration of the new situation in Africa that some 
changes have become necessary in this edition. They occur 
principally in Chapter Three. 
August 15, 1969 
Conakry 
reproduction 
Marx nor I have ever asserted. 
twists this into that the economic 
element is the only determining one, transforms that pro-
into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase.... Marx and 
I are ourselves partly to blame the fact that the yotmger people 
sometimes lay more stress on economic side than is due to it. We 
had to emphasize the main principle vis-a-vis our adversaries, who 
denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or the oppor­
tunity to allow the other elements involved in the interaction to 
come into their rights. But when it was a case of presenting a 
section of history, that is, of a practical application, it was a 
different matter and there no error was possible. Unfortunately, 
however, it happens only too often that people think they have 
fully understood a new theory and can apply it without more ado 
from the moment they have mastered its main principles, and even 
those not always correctly. And I cannot exempt many ofthe more 
recent 'Marxists' fron1 this reproach, for the most amazing rubbish 
has been produced in this quarter, too.-Letter from Engels to 
J. Bloch, London, 21-22 September 1890 
INTRODUCTION 
T
HE LINES of the partition of Africa 
education of the colonized Africans. Students from English­
speaking territories went to Britain as a matter of course, 
just as those from French-speaking went to France as a 
matter of course. In this way, the yearning for formal education, 
African students conld only satisfy at great cost of effort,


--- PAGE 5 ---
2 3 INTRODUCTION 
will, and sacrifice, was hemmed in within the confmes of the 
colonial system. 
Recoiling from this strait-jacketing, a number ofus tried to study 
at centres outside the metropolis of our administering power. 
That is how America came to appeal to me as a Western cOUlltry 
which stood refreshingly Ulltainted by territorial colonialism in 
Africa. To America I therefore went; how and in what circum­
stances, I have already related in my autobiography, Ghana. I spent 
almost ten years in the United States of America, studying and 
working for a living; teaching and carrying out my own private 
researches. 
The evaluation of one's own social circumstance is part of the 
analysis of facts and events, and this kind of evaluation is, I feel, as 
good a starting point of the inquiry into the relations between 
philosophy and society as any other. Philosophy, in understanding 
human society, cans for an analysis of facts and events, and an 
attempt to see how they fit into human life, and so how they make 
up human experience. In this way, philosophy, like history, can 
come to enrich, indeed to defme, the experience ofman. 
The ten years which I spent in the United States of America 
represents a crucial period in the development ofmy philosophical 
conscience. It was at the Universities of Lincoln and Pemlsylvania 
that this conscience was first awakened. I was introduced to the 
great philosophical systems of the past to which the Western 
universities have given their blessing, arranging and classifying 
them with the delicate care lavished on museum pieces. Whell 
once these systems were so handled, it was natural that they should 
be regarded as monuments ofhuman intellection. And mon umen ts, 
because they mark achievements at their particular point in history, 
soon become conservative in the impression which they make on 
posterity. 
I was introduced to Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Kant, Hegel, 
Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Marx and other immortals, to whom I 
should like to refer as the university philosophers. But these titans 
were expoUllded in such a way that a studel1t from a colony could 
easily fl11d his breast agitated by COllflicting attitudes. These 
INTRODUCTION 
attitudes can have effects which spread out over a whole society, 
should such a student finally pursue a political life. 
A colonial student does not by origin belong to the intellectual 
history in which the university philosophers are such impressive 
landmarks. The colonial student can be so seduced by these 
attempts to give a philosophical account of the universe, that 
surrenders his whole personality to them. When he does this, he 
loses sight of the fundamental social fact that he is a colonial 
subject. In this way, he omits to draw from his education and from 
the concern displayed by the great philosophers for human 
problems, anything which he might relate to the very real prohlem 
of colonial domination, which, as it happens, cOllditions the 
immediate life ofevery colonized African. 
With single-minded devotion, the colonial student meanders 
through the intricacies of the philosophical systems. And yet these 
systems did aim at providing a philosophical account of the world 
in the circumstances and conditions of their time. For even 
philosophical systems are facts of history. By the time, however, 
that they come to he accepted in the wliversities for exposition, 
they have lost the vital power which they had at their first state­
ment, they have shed their dynamism and polemic reference. This 
is a result of the academic treatment which they are given. The 
academic treatment is the result of an attitude to philosophical 
systems as though there was nothing to them hut statements stand­
ing in logical relation to one another. 
This defective approach to scholarship was suffered hy different 
categories of colonial student. Many of them had heen hand­
picked and, so to say, carried certificates of worthiness with them. 
These were considered fit to hecome enlightened servants of the 
colonial administration. The process by which this category of 
student became ftt usually started at an early age, for not in­
frequently they had lost contact early in life with their traditional 
hackground. By reason of their lack of contact with their own 
roots, they hecame prone to accept some theory of Ulliversalism, 
provided it was expressed in vague, mellifluous terms. 
Armed with their universa,lism, they carried away from their


--- PAGE 6 ---
4 INTRODUCTION 
university courses an attitude entirely at variance with the concrete 
reality of their people and their struggle. When they came across 
doctrines of a combative nature, like those of Marxism, they 
reduced them to arid abstractions, to common-room subtleties. In 
tIlls way, through the good graces oftheir colonialist patrons, these 
students, now competent in the art of fOIming not a concrete 
environmental view of social political problems, but an abstract, 
'liberal' outlook, began to fulfil the hopes and expectations oftheir 
guides and guardians. 
A few colonial students gained access to metropolitan univer­
sities almost as ofright, on account of their social standing. Instead 
of considering culture as a gift and a pleasure, the intellectual who 
emerged therefrom now saw it as a personal distinction and 
privilege. might have suffered mild persecution at the hands of 
the colonialists, but hardly ever really in the flesh. From his wobbly 
pedestal, he indulged in the history and sociology of his country, 
and thereby managed to preserve some measure ofpositive involve­
ment with the national processes. It must however be obvious that 
the degree of national consciousness attained by him was not 
of such an order as to permit his full grasp ofthe laws ofhistorical 
development or ofthe thorough-going nature of the struggle to be 
waged, if national independence was to be won. 
Finally, there were the vast numbers of ordinary Africans, who, 
animated by a lively national consciousness, sought knowledge as 
an instrument of national emancipation and integrity. This is not 
to say that these Africans overlooked the purely cultural value of 
their studies. But in order that their cultural acquisition should be 
valuable, they needed to be capable of appreciating it as free men. 
I was one of this number. 
CHAPTER I 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 
T
HE CRITICAL study of the philosophies of the past should 
lead to the study of modern theories, for these latter, born 
of the fire ofcontemporary struggles, are militant and alive. 
It is not only the study of philosophy which can become per­
verted. The study of history too can become warped. The colon­
ized African student, whose roots in his own society are systematic­
ally starved of sustenance, is introd uced to Greek and Roman 
history, the cradle history ofmodern Europe, and he is encouraged 
to treat tIlis portion of the story of man together with the sub­
sequent history of Europe as the only worthwhile portion. This 
history is anointed with a tmiversalist flavouring which titillates 
the palate of certain African intellectuals so agreeably that they 
become alienated from their own immediate society. 
For tI1e third category of colonial student it was especially 
impossible to read the works of Marx and Engels as desiccated 
abstract philosophies having no bearing on our colonial situation. 
During my stay in America the conviction was firmly created in 
me that a great deal in their thought could assist us in the fight 
against colonialism. I learnt to see philosophical systems in the 
context of the social milieu which produced them. I therefore 
learnt to look for social contention in philosophical systems. I am not 
saying, however, that this is the only way to look at philosophy. 
It is ofcourse possible to see the history ofphilosophy in diverse 
ways, each way ofseeing it being in fact an illumination ofthe type 
of problem dealt with in this branch of human thought. It is 
possible, for instance, to look upon philosophy as a series ofabstract 
systems. When philosophy is so seen, even moral philosophers, 
with regrettable coyness, say that their preoccupation has nothing 
to do with life. They say that their concern is not to name moral


--- PAGE 7 ---
--
6 7 CONSCIENCISM 
principles or to improve anybody's character, but narrowly to 
elucidate the meaning of terms used in ethical discourse, and to 
determine the status of moral principles and ru1es, as regards the 
obligation which they impose upon us. 
When philosophy is regarded in the light of a series of abstract 
systems, it can be said to concern itself with two fundamental 
questions: first, the question 'what there is'; second, the question 
how 'what there may be explained. 
answer to the first question has a number of aspects. It lays 
down a minimum number of general under which every 
item in the world can and must be brought. It does this without 
naming the items themselves, without furnishing us with an 
inventory, a roll-call of the items, the objects in the world. It 
specifies, not particu1ar objects, but the basic types of object. The 
answer further implies a certain reductionism; for in naming only a 
few basic types as exhausting all objects in the world, it brings 
object directly under one ofthe basic types. 
Let me illustrate my meaning with the following example. 
Thales, the earliest known Western philosopher, held that every­
thing was water. By this, he did not ofcourse mean that everything 
was drinkable. That everything was directly water or constructible 
from water alone as raw material is in fact the heart ofhis epigram. 
Thales recognized just one basic type of substance. 
For another illustration let me use Berkeley, the man according 
to whose understanding the world consisted of spirits and their 
ideas. For Berkeley, every item in the world was either itself a spirit 
or some idea possessed by some spirit. It must be said in mitigation 
that neither Berkeley nor Thales robbed the world of a single item 
or object. The world was still full ofathletes and grapes, bishops and 
apples. But, in both cases, minimal basic types were selected, and 
everytlling in the world was said to come under them either directly 
or by an analysis which reduced them to the basic types. That is, for 
Thales, everything was water or could be reduced to water; for 
Berkeley, everything was a spirit or idea or was reducible to spirits 
and ideas. 
By appeal to both venerable philosophers. I have sought to 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETR OSPECT 
illustrate the character ofanswers to the first question ofphilosophy, 
the question 'what there is'. Thales's answer was water, Berkeley's 
answer was spirits and their ideas. 
In this first answer, philosophers in fact tackle the question ofthe 
origin of things. Thales traces this origin to water, Berkeley to 
spirits and their ideas. In effect, however, they both seek the 
origins of the varieties of object of the world in something which 
itself forms part ofthe world. There thus arises a supervening need 
to discourse about the possible origins ofthe cosmic raw material. 
It is thus that the requirement to explain the cosmic raw material 
comes to raise the second question of philosophy. There are two 
to its answer. In its first aspect, the explanation offers an 
account ofthe origin ofthe cosmic raw material. If, as according to 
Thales, water was all that God needed when, on the eve ofcreation, 
he girded up his loins, then first of all, the answer to the second 
question offers an account ofthe origin ofthe cosmic raw material, 
in the present case, water. 
In its second aspect, it is an account of the extent of the cosmic 
raw material. It lets us know whether God, addressing himself to 
the task on the day of creation, can find that there is an economic 
shortage, that is to say, a shortage of raw material; it lets us know 
whether an error of costing can come to frustrate God's plan for 
universe-building. 
In the urgency of the second question of philosophy can be 
detected a certain anxiety about the Principle of Sufficient Reason. 
According to this principle, everything has an explanation why it 
is as it is, and not otherwise. the cosmic raw material a cause or 
explanation, or has it not? To deem it not to have one is to enter a 
plea of exception against the Principle of Sufficient Reason. Now 
the pressure to withhold a cause from the cosmic raw material ­
that which is the matrix of the universe, and from which springs 
everything which there is or can be - takes its beginning from 
the fact that whatever cause is proposed for it must be vexed by 
persistent problems. 
According to the hypothesis that what we seek to explain is the 
basic raw material, any proposed cause for it can only itself arise


--- PAGE 8 ---
8 CONSCIENCISM 
from the basic raw material. Therefore, it must either be part ofthe 
basic raw material or be a product of it. If it is part of it, then the 
basic raw material is being said to be a cause ofitsel£ Ifthe cause is a 
product of the basic raw material, then an effect is being said 
paradoxically to cause its own cause! A circle of a very vicious 
kind is thus described. Furthermore, to say that 'what there is' 
is self-caused is, speaking without bias, to deny that it has a cause 
at all. 
In this, there is as broad a hint as one can desire that the question 
of the origin of 'what there is' has no affirmative answer. Nor 
indeed is the vicious circle the only tribulation which awaits an 
affirmative answer. If a cause is suggested for the cosmic raw 
material, this neurotic insistence on a cause will open up an infinite 
about the cause of the cause of the cosmic material, and so 
on. 
In sum, then, the denial that 'what there is' has a cause is a claim 
ofan exception to the Principle of Sufficient Reason, or, in of 
moderation, it is a caveat that this principle is only applicable inside 
world, and not, from the outside, to the world. It applies only to 
transformations the cosmic raw material, only to its products. 
To apply the law to the cosmic raw material is to £1.11 into the maw 
of contradiction; even to say that it is its own cause, is to make a 
merely formal salutation to the principle, for there can be no 
scientifIC or signifIcant difference between a thing being se1f­
caused and its being uncaused. 
However, it is worthy of note how this second question of 
philosophy in its first aspect stands vis-a.-vis theological beliefs. In 
this aspect, the question relates to the possible origin of the cosmic 
raw material; it relates, if you like, to its possible excuse from the 
Principle of Sufficient Reason. If this principle is thought to apply 
to it, if, that is to say, the cosmic raw material is conceived to have 
an origin, then one adopts a theist or a deist position. In either case 
one posits a force transcendent to the cosmic raw material, and 
which occasions it. One is a theist ifone supposes that this transcen­
dent force is nevertheless immanent after some fashion in what there 
is, continuing to affect it one way or another. If, on the other hand, 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 9 
one holds the force to be strictly transcendental, and excludes it 
from the world once made, then one is a deist. 
If, however, the Principle of Sufficient Reason is thought not to 
to what there is, and the world is thereby denied an outside, 
one is an atheist. For this purpose, pantheism is but a kind of 
atheism. It is atheism using tlleologicallanguage. 
In the other aspect ofphilosophy's second question, the extent of 
the cosmic raw material is determined. The basic consideration is 
whether this raw material is finite or infinite. Here the driving 
interest is that the world should be permanent. 
There are various ways in which this driving interest is satisfied. 
For example, some people say that it is impossible that nothing 
should exist, that the statement that nothing exists cannot be 
conceived as true. (And this, by the way, is one case in which the 
truth of a proposition determines reality, and not versa.) In 
this way, many come to be satisfied that at any given time there 
must be something. In this way, also, the desire for permanence 
comes to be more than satisfied. But it cannot be inferred from 
non-vacuity of the universe that some given object will always 
exist. It is therefore impossible to infer the existence of God from 
fact that something must always 
Other persons, displaying more passion for controversy than for 
philosophical cogency, say that the world is periodic, that the 
universe repeats itself ad infinitum in cycles oftime. But, for this, it is 
unnecessary that the initial basic raw material should be infinite in 
extent, for however meagre it may be, it has been infused with the 
phoenix power ofself-regeneration, in its being said to repeat itself. 
Unfortunately, the problem of time is a stumbling-block to 
cyclic theory. Whatever is multiple can be ordered in a series. It is 
evident that the cycles of the universe must, by reason of being 
multiple, admit of order in a series. Accordingly, these cycles can 
be associated with a linear time-dimension which extends 
finitely beyond anyone of the cycles themselves. Indeed, this time­
dimension must order the cycles themselves, because some ofthem 
must come before others. Now it is possible to conceive this time­
dimension as itself spanning. a universe, in which the alleged 
£.,


--- PAGE 9 ---
10 II 
.-~,-~.' 
CONSCIENCISM 
cycles, instead of being universes, merely spell out seasonal 
changes inside a super-universe. When this is done, one starts from 
a series ofuniverses and strings them together into a super-universe. 
Thus the cyclic nature of the universe pales away like a bad dream. 
Several persons who reject the cyclic theory acclaim the universe 
as an infmite presence, and seek in this way to make it permanent. 
But an infmite universe is no more a permanent universe than is a 
fmite one. Even a universe which is infmite may come to an end, 
irrespective of whether it is infmite in time, in space, or both. A 
universe which is infmite in time call end in the same way as 
negative integers, for it is sufficient that it should have existed in­
finitely backwards. A universe which has existed infmitely back­
wards can cease at any time without its infinitude suffering decrease. 
Its cessation would be comparable to a cut at any point in the series 
ofnegative integers. Given any negative integer, there is always an 
;nhn;ty of negative integers which lie behind it. As to a universe 
is infinite in space, it can cease to exist at any time without 
prejudice to its size. 
In order that a universe should be permanent, it must have neither 
beginning nor end, like the continuity of the negative with the 
positive integers. 
Nearly all who consider the question of the permanence of the 
world seek to anchor the world in a foundation of a permanent 
cause which they identify with God. In this way, they hope that the 
universe will duly be protected. But all postulate something as 
abiding throughout the extent of time, be it the universe itself, 
cycles of it, or God. Indeed, the reluctance to conceive time as 
empty of all content is another manifestation of the desire for 
permanence. For the historical process is here accepted as an ever­
lasting one, in order that time should not be disembowelled. In this 
way, permanence is secured. 
And yet, at first blush, an infmite seems to be no less 
miraculous than a spontaneous, uncaused existence. It is at least 
clear that the world cannot come to be known as infinite or finite. 
It can only be by the provision a theoretical conception that 
it is said to be finite or infinite. If the world is finite, it must be 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 
because it is so conceived; ifit is infmite, it must be because it is so 
conceived. The finitude or infinitude of the world is logically 
incapable of experimental exposure. Nor is it even possible to 
construct a model of the universe, for any model is itself a con­
stituent of the universe, whereas it is a logical characteristic of any 
model that it must stand apart from that which it seeks to illumine; 
it cannot form a part ofit. 
But especially if the universe is infmitc, it is impossible to 
construct a model of it. The construction of a model implies 
achievement, a fmish. And to start and complete a model of the 
infinite is of the same order of piquancy as the performance of a 
man, who, to use Wittgenstein's example, should breathlessly 
burst into a room panting '... minus four, minus three, minus 
two and minus one: 1've done it! 1've recited the negative 
numbers \' 
In order that a situation could be coherently described as the 
causing or the causelessness of the world, it would have to be a 
situation in which the world could be placed. But any situation 
can only be a situation which is part of the world. The world can 
have no outside; and as it can have no outside it can have no cause. 
There can, therefore, be no material grounds on which the adjec­
tives, 'caused', 'uncaused', or 'finite', 'infmite', can be descriptive] 
applied to the universe. No empirical discourse can logicall 
stitute the material ground of any ofthe epithets. It is 
they should be postulates. 
If, however, one postulates a cause for 'what there is', one is 
thereby committed to the conception of an' outside' and an 'inside' 
of the world. This need not lead to any irreducible contradiction, 
for whether the world is finite or infinite depends, as suggested 
earlier, upon the mode of conceiving the world. Hence the 
opposition is strictly dialecticaL 
Beyond mere formal dialectics, however, one significance ofthe 
cosmic contrast of the' inside' and 'outside' of the world is that it 
implies an acknowledgement that there is a conversion of a process 
which commences 'outside' the world into the world and its 
contents. It is therefore hardly surprising that in the Christian Bible


--- PAGE 10 ---
12 13 CONSCIENCISM 
precisely this is held. There, God is first converted to Adam 
through his living breath, and second to Jesus Christ through a 
mystic incarnation. Appropriately, therefore, Christianity holds 
that we have our being in God in whom we live. 
But especially when this conversion is thought to be reversible, a 
definite contradiction is created in society, the contradiction 
between interests inside the world and interests outside the world. 
This . kind of contradiction is made articulate in religion; in 
Christianity, for example, we are enjoined to lay up treasures in 
heaven where moths do not corrupt. We are also assured by St 
Augustine that though we are in the world, we are not ofit, being 
wayfarers. 
The contradiction takes effect when with the gaze steadfastly 
fIXed upon things' outside' the world, the requirements of earthly 
life, which in fact condition the of every human being, 
suffer neglect. This opposition of interests, this social opposition 
between 'inside' and 'outside' is dialectical in nature and can be 
used to explain the course of many includin(! African 
societies: The course of such societies is determined 
a contest between the inside and outside, between 
the contradiction described above. It is the recognition 
ofcontradiction and the use to which it might be put in the exploi­
tation of the workers that impelled Marx to criticize religion as an 
instrument of exploitation, because religion was used to divert the 
workers' attention from the value which they had created by their 
labour to 'outside' concerns. 
Many African societies in fact forestalled this kind ofperversion. 
The dialectical contradiction between 'inside' and 'outside' was 
reduced by making the visible world continuous with the invisible 
world. For them heaven was not outside the world but inside it. 
These African societies did not accept transcendentalism, and may 
indeed be regarded as having attempted to synthesize the dialectical 
opposites 'outside' and 'inside' by making them continuous, that 
is, by abolishing them. In present-day Africa, however, a 
recognition of the dialectical contradiction between 'inside' and 
'outside' has a deal to contribute to the process of decololli-
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 
zation and development, for it helps us to anticipate colonialist and 
imperialist devices for furthering exploitation by diverting our 
energies from secular concerns. The recognition of the dialectical 
opposition is nniversally necessary. Religion is an instrument of 
bourgeois social reaction. But its social use is not always confined to 
colonialists and imperialists. Its success in their hands can exercise 
ofAfricans who begin by being 
revolutionary, but are bewitched by passing opportunist 
chance to use religion to political gains. Seizing the slightest 
of these chances, they in fact take two steps backward for the one 
step forward in order to enjoy a transitory consolidation based on a 
common religious belief and practice. This idiosyncratic tactic 
can only create more problems than it promises to solve. For certain, 
it will check the advancing social consciousness of the people. 
Besides, in the long run a dialectical opposition between church 
and state will be re-created through what begins by being a tactical 
move becoming entrenched. This indiosyncratic tactic actively 
encourages religious forms and pactices, as well as a religious 
ideology. When the relative political consolidation aimed at is 
achieved, the tactic is dropped, but the religious revivalism which 
it has fomented and exploited cannot be so easily checked. It is 
essential to emphasize the historical condition of Africa that the 
state must be secular. 
secular nature ofthe state is not to be interpreted 
declaration of war on religion, for religion is also a 
social fact, and must be understood before it can be tackled. To 
declare a political war on religion is to treat it as an ideal pheno­
menon, to suppose that it might be wished away, or at the worst 
scared out of The indispensable starting point is to 
appreciate the sociological connection between religious belief and 
practice on the one hand, and poverty on the other. People who 
are most aggressively religious are the poorer people; for, in 
accordance with the Marxist analysis, religion is social, and con­
temporary religious forms and practices have their main root in 
the social depression ofworkers. Quick confirmation can be found 
in Africa, Asia, Latin America and among the people of African


--- PAGE 11 ---
14 CONSCIENCISM 
descent in America and the Caribbean. Terrifying pauperism, aris­
ing from the pre-teclUlical nature of most contemporary societies, 
combined with the encroachments of world capitalism, a combi­
nation which can mete out prostitution, destruction, ruin and 
death from starvation and exploitation to its victims, quickly 
reinforces the religious feeling. Fear created the gods, and fear 
preserves them: fear in bygone ages of wars, pestilences, earth­
quakes and nature gone berserk, fear of 'acts of God'; fear today 
of the equally blind forces of backwardness and rapacious capital. 
Answers to the question 'what there is' can be said to be idealist 
or materialist. Inasmuch, however, as an empiricist philosophy 
can be idealist, even though a materialist philosophy cannot be 
rationalist, the opposition between idealism and materialism can­
not be made identical with the opposition between rationalism and 
empiricism. 
Rationalism is a philosophical breed imbued with certain dis­
tinctive characters. In it, an explanation is conceived in such a 
way that the explanation must create a logical inference to that 
which is explained. Empiricism, on the other hand, has no such 
inference to offer. If one kind of event is regularly and inva­
riably followed by another kind, empiricism accepts the first 
of event as explaining the second kind. But rationalism can­
not, because tllls succession of events is not a necessary one; 
is no logical inference from the occurrence of one kind 
of event to the occurrence of another kind of event. Indeed, 
David Hume is celebrated mainly for establishing the empiricist 
position, and it is for this reason that rationalists are convinced that 
Hume was ignorant of the real nature of an explanation. 
Rationalism and empiricism also vary over the avenues to know­
ledge. According to the former, a set of procedures or tasks can 
constitute a method of obtaining knowledge only if, provided the 
have been correctly performed, the desired knowledge must 
1ll1auibly be obtained. Here a fruitful comparison can be made 
with the method of addition. The method of addition imposes 
certain tasks upon us. These tasks require that digits be added up 
from the uuits column through the tens colullUl to the final 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT IS 
colullUl. And ifthese tasks are correctly performed the correctness 
ofthe emergent total is guaranteed. The method ofaddition is thus 
seen to fulfil rationalism's specifications for method. 
According to empiricism, however, a method need not 
guarantee its own infallible success. And one frods John Stuart Mill 
saying that induction, notwithstanding its being a valid method of 
obtaining truth, is still fallible. For rationalism, a valid but fallible 
procedure is a logical howler. 
Finally, rationalism holds that there are some ideas in the human 
mind which are irmate to it. That is to say, these ideas have not 
entered the mind from outside, and moreover could not do so. In 
practice, rationalists do not agree over the precise catalogue ofsuch 
ideas, though they tend to agree that the idea of God is a shining 
example. But empiricism cannot countenance innate ideas. For it, 
all ideas without exception come to the mind from the external 
world, or are composed exclusively from ideas which come into 
the mind from the external world through the senses. 
As to idealism, it is a species of philosophy in which spiritual 
factors are recognized as being primary, and matter held to be 
dependent for its existence on spirit. In Leibniz's idealist 
philosophy, for the sake of an example, matter is even said to be 
really unconscious spirit. And in Berkeley's idealist philosophy, 
though matter is not said to be spirit, but an idea possessed by 
spirit, its existence and continuance is said to consist in its being 
possessed by spirit. For Leibniz the world was nothing but spirit; 
for Berkeley it was nothing but spirits and their knowledge, Since, 
however, the central tenet of idealism is the withdrawal from 
matter of an existence independent of spirit, materialism in its 
opposition to idealism must as a minimum assert the independent 
existence of matter. 
But, now, to the extent that idealism makes the existence of 
matter dependent on perception, or on the possession of ideas by 
the mind, I am sure that it can be refuted. ofthe normal sources of 
idealism, two can be discerned. On the one hand, idealism comes of 
solipsism, whether complete or incipient; on the other, it comes 
from some theory or other of perception.


--- PAGE 12 ---
~ 
I6 	 CONSCIENCISM 
In complete solipsism the individual is identified with the 
universe. The universe comes to consist of the individual and his 
experience. And when we seek to inquire a little of what this 
gigantic individual who fills the universe is compounded, we are 
confronted with diverse degrees of incoherence. In solipsism, the 
individual starts from a depressing scepticism about the existence of 
other people and other things. While in the grip of this pessimism, 
he pleasantly ignores the fact that his own body is part of the 
external world, that he sees and touches his own body in exactly the 
same sense that he sees and touches any other body. Ifother bodies 
are only portions of the individual's experience, then by the same 
magic he must disincarnate himsel£ In this way, the individual's 
role as the centre of solipsism begins to wobble seriously, he is no 
longer the peg on which the universe hangs, the hub around which 
it revolves. Solipsism begins to shed its focal point for the universe. 
The individual begins to coalesce with his own experience. The 
individual as a subject, the sufferer and enjoyer ofexperience, melts 
away, and we are left with unattached experience. 
In incipient solipsism, like that which affiicted Descartes, one 
encounters a form of argument which is in its essence sincerely 
fallacious. Descartes says that he can think of himself as being 
without eyes, or as being without arms, etc. In short, he claims that 
he can think of himself as having been deprived of any of his 
physical features which anyone might care to name. Whatever be 
the truth-value ofthis, he sets it up as a reason for saying that he can 
think of himself as being without a body. Though one may not 
wish to deny that Descartes could indeed have been physically 
deformed, indeed even hideously deformed, one must, I think, 
resolutely maintain that disincarnation is not a physical deformity ! 
There still remains a distinction between mere deformity and dis­
incarnation. Descartes' reasoning is ofthe same level ofspeciousness 
as the notion that because one can think of a cow without a tail or 
horns, etc., one can think of a cow without a body. Thinking of a 
cow without a body is as different from the thought of a cow 
without a tail, as thinking ofDescartes without a body is different 
from his thought of himself without arms. 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT I7 
My reason for referring to Cartesianism as incipient solipsism is 
that Descartes' alleged ftrst principle is the admission of his own 
existence. On this sole ftrst principle, he proposed, quite unsoberly, 
to hang the whole universe as well as God. I say that Cartesianism is 
incipient solipsism because it contains inside itself the seeds of a 
fully-fledged solipsism. These seeds can be seen to grow in the 
following way: Descartes proposes to doubt everything which 
might be known through the senses or through the reason. He sets 
out to doubt everything which might be known through the senses 
because the senses sometimes suffer from illusions and delusions, 
not to mention the fact that anything which is said to form part of 
. waking experience can equally well form part ofdream experience. 
After all, the objects and situations which dreams represent are not 
qualitatively different from the representation of sense. Since the 
senses can be affected by illusions and delusions, he proposes to 
treat them as unreliable witnesses to truth. And as to the reason, 
though at the best of times he wishes to hold it to be essentially 
I 	 infallible, he points at the well-known paralogisms of his pre­
decessors in philosophy and geometry. If reason could so badly 
have misled them, it, too, must for the time being be regarded as 
untrustworthy. 
Descartes notes just in time that he who is so anxious about the 
: truth and doubts everything, has been thinking, and must exist if 
he thinks. Hobbes was misguided when he thought that it was 
equally open to Descartes to say that because he walked he existed. 
Descartes, having doubted away his body, could not suppose 
himself to walle But even ifhe doubted that he thought, he would 
still be thinking, as doubting was a form of thinking. It was 
necessary for Descartes to single out what he could not coherently 
doubt in order to peg his existence on it. And that is why he says 
that he thinks, therefore he exists. 
But it is at this point that Descartes runs the gauntlet ofa creeping 
solipsism. Though Descartes is entitled to say: Cogito: ergo sum ­
'I think: therefore I exist' - he would clearly be understanding too 
much ifhe understood from this that some object existed, let alone 
;hat Monsieur Descartes existed. All that is indubitable in the ftrst


--- PAGE 13 ---
18 19 
~,. 
CONSCIENCISM 
section of Descartes' statement is that there is thinking. The first 
person is in that statement no more than the subject ofa verb, with 
no more connotation of an object than there is in the anticipatory 
'it' of the sentence 'it is raining'. The pronoun in this sentence is a 
mere subject of a sentence, and does not refer to any object or 
group ofobjects which is raining. 'It' in that sentence does not stand 
for anything. It is a quack pronoun. 
And so once again we have unattached experience, thinking 
without an object which thinks. And as the subject is merely 
grammatical, it cannot serve as a genuine principle ofcollection of 
thoughts which will mark one batch of thoughts as belonging to 
one person rather than another. The universe thus becomes a 
plurality of thoughts which are unattached. 
It is more normal to found idealism upon some theory of per­
ception. Here, the idealist holds that we only know of the external 
world through perception; and, ifmatter be held to be constitutive 
of the external world, then we only know ofmatter through per­
ception. Quite gratuitously, the conclusion is drawn that matter 
owes its existence to perception. Granted that perception is a 
function of the mind or spirit, matter ends up depending on spirit 
for its existence. 
I am at this stage compelled to emphasize once more that our own 
bodies are elements in the external world. If, therefore, matter were 
dependent on knowledge for its existence, so would our own 
bodies be. In that case, however, perception would require an 
altogether new conception. For perception only takes place by 
agency of the senses, and the senses are capacities of the living and 
organic body. If, therefore, body, being matter, wins its existence 
from perceptual knowledge, it could not at the same time be the 
means to that knowledge; it could not itself be the avenue to 
perception. The idea of perception through physical senses there­
fore becomes incoherent in idealism. And with this one step, 
idealism collapses in our hands; indeed, idealism itself stands 
revealed as the self-devouring cormorant ofphilosophy. 
The eighteenth-century African philosopher from Ghana, 
Anthony William Amo, who taught in the German Universities 
, 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 
of Halle, Jena and Wittenberg, pointed out in his De Humanae 
Mentis Apatheia that idealism was enmeshed in contradictions. The 
mind, he said, was conceived by idealism as a pure, active, un­
extended substance. Ideas, the alleged constituents of physical 
objects, were held to be only in the mind, and to be incapable 
of existence outside it. Amo's question here was how the ideas, 
largely those of physical objects, many of which were ideas of 
extension, could subsist in the mind; since physical objects were 
actually extended, if they were really ideas, some ideas must be 
actually extended. And if all ideas must be in the mind, it became 
hard to resist the conclusion that the mind itself was extended, in 
order to be a spatial receptacle for its extended ideas. The con­
tradiction is in the denial of the spatial nature of mind and the 
compulsion to harbour spatial objects in it. For in idealism it is 
not only our bodies which are in our minds, instead of our minds 
being in our bodies; the whole universe, to the extent that we 
can perceive or be aware of it, is neatly tucked away in our 
minds. 
Idealism suffers from what I might call the God-complex; it is 
what Marx called 'intoxicated speculation'; it is what may be 
called the ecstasy of intellectualism. The concept of an object, let 
. alone the concept of the same object, cannot be properly for­
mulated in idealism. Having once dismantled the world, idealists 
are unable to put it together again, and Berkeley has to say that his 
apple is only a simultaneity of sweetness, roundness, smoothness, 
etc. It is as if one could not have soup any more, but only its 
ingredients. The distinction between reality and appearance slips 
between the spectral fingers of idealism, for in idealism reality 
becomes merely a persistent appearance. In this way, idealism 
makes itself incompatible with science. 
That matter can exist unperceived, that it has a continuance 
independent of mind, should really be axiomatic. Idealists them­
selves hanker after this independent reality when they strive so 
hard to reconcile their theoretical ebullience with the sobriety of 
ordinary language. Ordinary language is not just a vocabulary and 
a grammar. It also comprises a conceptual framework which is


--- PAGE 14 ---
20 CONSCIENCISM 
largely realist and objectivist. The idealist attempt to reconcile its 
theory-spinning with ordinary language must therefore be 
regarded as a deep-seated desire to anchor idealism in a certain 
measure of objectivity. 
Now, materialism is a serious, objective, almost descriptive kind 
of metaphysics. As a minimum, it affirms the existence of matter 
independent of knowledge by mind. This minimal conc:eption is 
obviously grossly inadequate. It is open to a materialist philosophy, 
but not compulsory, to assert for its second thesis the primary 
reality ofmatter. Here, matter would be whatever has mass and is 
perpetually active; and, in its manifestation, matter would be co­
extensive with the universe. 
If, however, the sole or primary reality of matter is asserted, 
one is brought up sharply against certain hard facts, notably those 
centring around the phenomenon of consciousness and of self­
consciousness. Ifconsciousness is to be explained in terms of overt 
response to stimuli, then it must be distinguished from self­
consciousness, and perception from apperception. Of self­
consciousness we only have an internal experience. Another hard 
fact is the distinction between qualities and quantities, while a 
third is the distinction between energy and matter. 
One might unwarily think that the assertion ofthe sole or even 
primary reality ofmatter in the face ofthe above hard facts betrays 
an unwarranted intrepidity in face of paradox and categorial 
absurdity. The key to the solution of the problem, the key to the 
accommodation ofthese hard facts, lies in categorial convertibility. 
But it is not the task of philosophy to trace the details of such 
categorial conversion; that is one of the tasks of science. Philo­
sophy is only called upon to show the possibility ofthe conversion. 
By categorial conversion, I mean such a thing as the emergence 
of self-consciousness from that which is not self-conscious; such a 
thing as the emergence of mind from matter, of quality from 
quantity. 
Philosophy can demonstrate the possibility of the conversion in 
one or other oftwo ways: either by means ofa conceptual analysis 
or by poipting at a model. As it happens, philosophy is in a position 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 21 
to do both. Philosophy prepares itself for the accommodation of 
the hard facts by asserting not the crude sole reality of matter, but 
its primary reality. Other categories must then be shown to be 
able to arise from matter through process. It is at this point that 
philosophical materialism becomes dialectical. 
Problems of categorial conversion have haunted philosophy 
at least since early Greek times. The Greek monists, beginning, 
as far as we know, with Thales, were all confronted with such 
problems. Thinking that opposites were irreducible to each 
other, Thales' successor, Anaximander, postulated a neutral 
monism. in his 'Boundless', an amorphous, undifferentiated, 
undetermined source, capable ofbegetting opposite properties, the 
womb of the differentiated world. It seems to me, however, that 
neutral monism is merely crypto-dualism or crypto-pluralism. For 
even ifthey are only in a stifled state, all the elements ofdualist and 
pluralist positions swim in neutral monism. 
Today, however, philosophy has little need to resort to 
crypticisms. Speaking in general terms, I may say that philosophy 
has fashioned two branches of study which enable it to solve the 
problem of categorial conversion in a satisfying way. These· tools 
•are Logic and Science, both of which owe their origin and early 
development to the demands of philosphy. The conceptual tools 
which philosophy has fashioned in Logic, and by means ofwhich it 
can cope with the formal problems of categorial conversion, are 
contained in nominalism, constructionism and reductionism. For 
philosophy's model of categorial conversion, it turns to science. 
Matter and energy are two distinct, but, as science has shown, not 
unconnected or irreducible, categories. The inter-reducibility of 
. matter and energy offers a model for categorial conversion. Arid 
another model is given in the distinction between physical change 
and chemical change, for in chemical change physical quantities 
give rise to emergent qualities. 
In nominalism, constructionism and materialist reductionism, 
one holds some category to be a primary category of reality, and 
holds other real things to become real only in so far as they are 
ultimately derived from the primary category of reality. The


--- PAGE 15 ---
22 CONSCIENCISM 
derivation is such that for every true proposition about an item 
which falls under a derivative category, there are provided true 
propositions about items falling under the primary category, such 
that the former proposition could not be true unless the latter 
propositions were true; and, further, such that the former pro­
position could not even make sense unless there were items falling 
under the primary category. 
For an explanatory comparison, one can take the average man. 
The average man belongs to a category derivative from the cate­
gory ofliving men and women. For any true proposition about the 
average man, there must be true propositions about men and 
women, such that the propositions about the average man could 
not be true unless the propositions about men and women were 
true. Further, propositions about the average man could not 
even make sense unless there were items falling under the category 
of men and women. That is, propositions about the average man 
could not make sense unless there were actual men and women. 
In the same way, if one says that matter is the primary category, 
then spirit must, to the extent that it is recognized as a category, be a 
derivative category. And in order that propositions about spirit 
should make sense, there must be matter. Secondly, even when 
propositions about spirit make sense, in order that they should be 
true, certain propositions about matter need to be true. 
In constructionism, one has a picture how those concepts which 
are proper to derivative categories might be formed, using as raw 
materials concepts which are proper to the primary category. In 
reductionism one sees how concepts proper to a derivative category 
can be reduced completely to concepts which are proper to a 
primary category. When a certain reductionism holds matter to be 
primary, such a reduction has, for its product, concepts which are 
directly applicable only to matter. In nominalism, only concrete 
existences are held to be primary and real, all other existences 
being, as it were, surrogates of concrete existences on a higher 
logical plane. 
Now it would of course be a mistake to seek to infer from the 
foregoing that according to philosophical dialectical materialism, 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 23 
mind is, say, brain; qualities are quantities; energy is mass. These 
locutions would commit what are referred to as category mistakes. 
Dialectical materialism recognizes differences between mind 
and brain, between qualities and quantities, between energy and 
mass. It however gives a special account of the nature of the 
differences. Both in metaphysics and in theory of knowledge, it 
does not allow the differences to become fundamental and 
irreducible. 
A sober philosophy cannot ignore categorial differences. But it 
has the right to give a valid account of these differences in such a 
o way as to reveal them as fa~ons de parler. From the standpoint of 
theory of knowledge, philosophical materialism treats the 
differences as belonging to logical grammar. This, if one may 
express an opinion, is the kind of difference also drawn by Frege 
between concepts and objects, when he said with truth that the 
concept 'horse' was not a concept but an object. The difference in 
question is a difference in the role or function of certain terms, and 
the difference is subject to logical parsing. 
Let me illustrate this point in another way. Suppose a man were 
asked to provide an inventory ofobjects in a room, and he counted 
all the legs oftables and chairs, as well as flat tops and backs, then he 
could not in the same inventory count tables and chairs. True 
though it is that a table comprises a flat top and legs, there is 
nevertheless a difference between a table and a flat top and legs. The 
difference is said to be epistemological, not ontological. That is to 
say, tables do not exist on the one hand, while on the other, tops and 
legs exist alongside. In the same way one may admit epistemo­
logical differences between mind and brain, quality and quantity, 
.energy and mass, without accepting any metaphysical differences 
between them, without, in other words, admitting that for mind 
one needs any more than a brain in a certain condition; for quality 
any more than a certain disposition of quantity; for energy any 
more than mass in a certain critical state. 
From the standpoint of metaphysics, philosophical materialism 
accepts mind or conscience only as a derivative of matter. Now, 
nominalism, constructionism and reductionism indicate that


--- PAGE 16 ---
24 CONSCIENCISM 
categoria1 differences are differences of logical grammar and 
syntax. Such differences are, even so, objective, and neither 
arbitrary nor ideal. TIley are founded in the condition of matter 
and its objective laws. Quality is a surrogate of a quantitative 
disposition of matter: it can be altered by altering quantitative 
dispositions of matter. 
Mind, according to philosophical materialism, is the result of a 
critical organization of matter. Nervous organization has to attain 
a certain minimum of complexity for the display of intelligent 
activity, or the presence of mind. The presence of mind and the 
attainment of this critical minimum of organization of matter are 
one and the same thing. Energy, too, is a critical quantitative 
process of matter. Heat, for example, is a particular sort of pro­
cess ofatoms. Though none of the above equivalences is a formal 
equivalence, they are at least material equivalences. That is to 
say, notwithstanding that the meaning of, say, 'mind', is not 'a 
critical organization of nervous matter', as the meaning of'sub­
marine' is 'a ship capable ofmoving under water', mind is nothing 
but the upshot of matter with a critical nervous arrangement. The 
equivalence intended is a material one, not a defining or formal one; 
that is to say, the propositions about minds, qualities, energy, are 
reducible without residue to propositions about body, quantity 
and mass; the former propositions could not make sense unless the 
latter propositions were sometimes true. As it were, mind, quality, 
energy are metaphysical adjectives. 
I think the matter would be further clarified if philosophical 
materialism were distinguished from nominalism, constructionism 
and reductionism. The merit ofthe latter as a species ofmetaphysics 
arises from their demonstration of category reducibility. Their 
weakness as species of metaphysics rests in their lifelessness. They 
propose to tell us that x, strictly speaking, is, or really is, or at 
bottom is, nothing but yz. But tlley vouchsafe not the slightest 
hint about the condition under which yz is x. 
Indeed, it is only in the philosophy of mathematics, in the 
generation of critical numbers, tllat conditions are given for a 
categoria11eap in the generation ofnumbers. 
i 
•. 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 25 
When materialism becomes dialectical, the world is not regarded 
as a world of states, but as a world of processes; a world not of 
things, but offacts. The endurance ofthe world consists in process; 
and activity, or process, becomes the life-blood of reality. Con­
structionism, nominalism, reductionism, all stop at the logical basis 
of categorial conversion; they ascertain only that conversion is 
logically possible. But when materialism becomes dialectical, it 
ensures the material basis ofcategorial conversion. 
Dialectical change in matter is that which serves as ground to the 
possibility ofthe evolution ofkinds • The evolution ofa kind is the 
loss of a set of old properties and tlle acquisition of a new set 
through the dialectical movement ofmatter. When it is said that an 
evolved kind arises from, or is reducible to, matter, the concern is 
. with the dialectical source or origin of the evolved kind, not with 
its formal nature. To say, therefore, that mind, quality or energy 
arises from, or is reducible to matter, is neither to say that mind has 
mass, or quality has mass, nor to say that energy has mass. It is to 
say that given the basic matter of the universe with its objective 
laws, the universe is forthwith closed in the sense that nothing can 
become present in the universe ifit is not entirely anchored in the 
initial matter. 
Let me suggest a parallel with formal logic. An axiomatic formal 
, system is said to be complete when its axioms suffice for the 
deduction, by means of admitted rules of inference, of all the 
propositions belonging to the system. Ifpropositions belonging to 
the system are made parallel to items of the universe, if the ad­
mitted rules of inference are made parallel to the objective laws of 
matter, and if the initial set of axioms is made parallel to initial 
matter, then the completeness of the axiom system becomes 
parallel to the constructibility from matter, according to its 
objective laws, ofall the supervening items ofthe universe. It is in a 
sense analogous to that in which an axiomatic formal system is, say, 
Godel-complete and therefore closed, that the universe ofmatter is 
here said to be closed. 
And when a system is said to be Godel-complete, what is meant is 
that every non-initial truth in it.is derivable from the initial truths


--- PAGE 17 ---
26 CONSCIENCISM 
alone by use ofthe rules ofderivation. Hence in the analogy, every 
form or category in the universe which is not directly matter must 
be derivable from matter alone in accordance with the dialectical 
laws ofthe evolution of matter. 
I have suggested that dialectic is that which makes the evolution 
of kinds possible, that, accordingly, which is the ground of the 
evolution of mind from matter, of quality from quantity, of 
energy from mass. This kind of emergence, since it depends on a 
critical organization of matter, truly represents a leap. When a 
crisis results in an advance, it is its nature to perpetrate a leap. The 
solution ofa crisis always represents a discontinuity. And just as in 
the foundations ofmathematics, critical numbers represent a break 
in continuity in the evolution of numbers, so in nature does the 
emergence of quality from quantity represent a break in the 
continuity of a quantitative process. 
It is important that dialectical evolution be not conceived as 
being linear, continuous and mono directional. Evolution, so 
conceived, has no explanation to offer, and, especially, it gives no 
explanation of the transformation of one kind into another, for it 
only represents an accumulation of phenomena of the same sort. 
Linear evolution is incompatible with the evolution of kinds, 
because the evolution ofkinds represents a linear discontinuity. In 
dialectical evolution, progress isnot linear; it is, so to say, from one 
plane to another. It is through a leap from one plane to another 
that new kinds are produced and the emergence of mind from 
matter attained. 
The dialectical materialist position on mind must be dis­
tinguished from an epiphenomenalist one. For the former, mind is 
a development from matter; for the latter, it is merely something 
which accompanies the activity of matter. 
It is impossible to conceal the fact that through the ages 
materialism has been the butt of numerous quips. The most 
fashionable criticism in antiquity was on the question of purpose 
and consciousness. It was felt by the critics ofmaterialism that there 
were certain (usually undisclosed) conceptual difficulties to prevent 
the emergence ofpurpose and consciousness from what is without 
PHILOSOPHY IN RETROSPECT 27 
purpose and without consciousness. This kind of objection has 
been met in the discussion of categorial conversion. A more 
important objection to materialism is alleged to be provided by the 
Theory of Relativity. This objection is important because dia­
lectical materialism itself upholds science. 
According to this objection, Relativity's merging ofspace-time 
constitutes an objection to materialism, whether dialectical or 
serene. There is a nagging feeling that with the merging of space 
and time, matter's life in space and its movement in time are snuffed 
out. But this nagging feeling can be soothed by the reflection that 
only independent reality which philosophical materialism 
allows is matter; and since absolute time and absolute space must 
be conceived as independent if they are absolute, in a way they are 
incompatible with philosophical materialism. The abandonment 
ofboth would therefore be so far from representing the disgrace of 
philosophical materialism, that it would be its triumph. 
The mechanism of sensation, too, has sometimes been 
brandished in the face ofphilosophical materialism. This is in fact a 
species ofscepticism. Sensation, it is said, is our primary avenue to 
. knowledge. Mankind, it is alleged, has no road to knowledge save 
the highway ofsensation. But sensation does not give us any direct 
knowledge of matter, hence there is no reason to suppose that 
there is any such thing as matter. 
I believe that this adumbrated scepticism turns in upon itsel£ It is 
not possible to use the physics of perception to impugn the reality 
and independence of the external world, for the physics of per­
ception itself presupposes and relies upon the reality and independ­
. ence of the external world. It is only through some occult reasoning 
that physics can be used to locate the external world inside our 
mind. 
It is further said that not all the processes in the physiology of 
perception are physical. It is said, by of expansion, that if 
light did not strike the eye, an image form on the retina, etc., we 
could not see. But the travelling of light and the forming of an 
image on the retina could not either singly or collectively be the 
inwardness of that illumination which is seeing. These processes


--- PAGE 18 ---
28 CONSCIENCISM 
are accounted to be so far from explaining perception that they 
deepen the mystery. 
And yet, to a certain extel1t, all this must be deemed to be correct. 
When it is made a basis for idealism, however, then an indulgence 
in fallacies occurs. We know that in normal physiological and 
physical conditions, we cannot choose whether to see or not. If 
spirit or consciousness were completely independent of matter for 
its arising, there should be the possibility of such breakdowns in 
perception as are not completely explicable in terms ofphysiology 
and physics. The doctor, one supposes, would then need to be 
aided occasionally by the priest, as indeed was supposed to be the 
case in the Dark Ages of Knowledge. 
Our universe is a natural universe. And its basis is matter with its 
objective laws. 
CHAPTER 2 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 
T IS OBVIOUS from the foregoing skeleton history of philo­
sophy that philosophy could very easily come to be divorced 
from human life. It becomes so abstract in certain Western 
. as to bring its practitioners under the suspicion ofbeing 
of concepts. And yet the early history of philosophy 
it to have had living roots in human life and human society. 
Philosophy had its origins in theological speculation. The 
earliest theological speculations were a conglomeration ofthoughts 
milling around the great ideas of God, Soul, Destiny and Law. At 
point, these thoughts enjoyed a practical inspiration. For, in 
those far-off days, the religious life was one of the cardinal con­
~erns of human existence. That was a time when it was sincerely 
l-,,,l'p..:red that man's cultivation of the gods at the same time as his 
was one ofhis major purposes on earth. Religion and worship 
preoccupations of day-to-day life, they were the ways in 
man conducted himself in his privacy, before others and in 
presence ofhis gods. 
Even much later than ancient times, even as recently as the 
middle ages of Europe, other concerns of life were tyrannically 
subjected to the religious concern at the insistence of the clergy. 
Economic concerns, without which the clergy themselves could 
have survived, were required by them to be confined within 
the limits of human sustenance. To transgress these limits was in 
their eyes to indulge greed, and so to hazard their disfavour in this 
life and the divine disfavour in the after life. 
Suitably, therefore, the chief concern of philosophy continued 
to be an elucidation of the nature of God, of the human soul, of 
human freedom and of kindred concepts. 
According to this notion of philosophy, when the primary


--- PAGE 19 ---
30 CONSCIENCISM 
concerns ofhuman life are differently concd ved, philosophy reveals 
a different bias. And as society becomes differently organized, 
philosophy is differently conceived. During the European Renais­
sance, when man became the centre of the tmiverse, the hmnan 
mind and the ways in which it might fix the limits of what is 
real became the chief topics of philosophy. There was a grow­
ing attempt to identify what could be with what could be known, 
and this tendency later attained its subtlest and most defmitive 
statement in the critical philosophy of Kant. The rise of ration­
alism was indeed one whole stream of thought which kept reality 
firmly within the light of human reason, until in the writings 
of Leibniz processes came to be mere analogues in nature of 
logical relations. In this way the limits of the human tmderstand­
ing came to be identified with the limits of nature. This idea 
survives today in the notion that logically there are no mysteries, 
that to every question there is an answer, that there is nothing on 
earth, beneath the waters or in the heavens above, which is in 
principle unknowable. 
Empiricism too was, despite its antagonism to rationalism, a 
reflection ofman's conception ofhis own position in the scheme of 
things. It, too, sought to make the limits of what is real coincide 
with the limits of the human understanding. For it tended to 
regard what is real exclusively in terms of impressions upon our 
senses. 
During the European Renaissance, when man gained an increased 
appreciation of his personal and individual dignity and freedom, 
philosophy responded with disquisitions on the nature of natural 
rights and connected ideas. Philosophy attempted to provide 
principles which should inform any political theory, ifit is to con­
form to the Renaissance conception of man. Nor had philosophy 
in this departed from its early character. At every stage between 
Thales and modern times, philosophy was firmly geared on to 
what were, for the time being, conceived as primary concerns of 
life. 
The history of Greek democracy, for example, must really be 
traced to Thales. Thales spearheaded two revolutions. The first 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 31 
revolution matured in his attempt to explain nature in terms of 
nature. The second revolution consisted in his belief that the unity 
of nature consisted not in its being. but in its materiality. 
The social milieu in which Thales lived encouraged him to 
insist on explaining nature in terms of nature. In Ionia. where he 
. lived, political power was becoming entrenched in the hands of a 
. mercantile class which had a vested interest in the development of 
nautical techniques and techniques of production, for it was on 
such techniques that their prosperity hinged - more so when their 
society later became more firmly based on slave labour. The Greeks, 
as Xenophon confirms in his Economics, came to regard mechanical 
· arts with contempt. But in Thales' time, individuals, including 
philosophers, depended more on their own productivity for sus­
tenance. Indeed, during one particularly good olive harvest, Thales 
astutely cornered the available olive presses in Miletus and sub­
sequently hired them out at exorbitant rates. Owing to the change 
in the structure of society whereby social-political hegemony 
passed into the hands of the mercantile oligarchy, prosperity no 
· longer depended in a crucial way on a propitiation of the gods in 
connection with agriculture. It depended on commerce with its 
ancillaries whereby the Ionian products were marketed along and 
across the Mediterranean. 
There was consequently no need to continue to explain the 
world by reference to the gods. Thales' intellectual predecessors 
had invoked supernature in order to explain nature. But ifthe gods 
were to be explanatory devices for accounting for phenomena, 
then there was nothing to prevent the most vicious inequalities 
from arising in society. Where gods are used to account for nature 
a certain degree of sacerdotal power is inevitable; and where 
· priests have wielded political power, it is not only explanations of 
natural phenomena which have been bemused with theology; 
theological explanations for social phenomena have also been 
encouraged. With the priests securely installed as the onlyauthor­
ized popularizers of the divine will, the only persons fitted by 
calling and by grace to expound mystic purposes, social inequalities 
arise to fortify their exclusive role .. And since their power is thought


--- PAGE 20 ---
32 33 CONSCIENCISM 
of as being rooted in the divine will it becomes hard to contest. 
It therefore assumes the form of an authoritarianism which, if 
unhindered, can come to revel in the most extreme oppression. 
The history of societies in which priests have wielded political 
power abundantly illustrates tllls tendency. 
In the particular case of Greek societies, however, certain 
qualifications need to be made. The early Greeks without doubt 
had a religion. This religion was distinguished by its lack of an 
established creed. Nevertheless, the Greek priests enjoyed social­
political power, by which they could among other things institute 
action at court on charges of irreligion. This alone was a power 
which could be translated into political terms even as late as during 
trial of Socrates. 
The Greek religion was congregationaL This fact helped to 
consolidate priestly power, for when rites are performed com­
munally and not individually (in order that a small farming com­
munity should be insured by the gods against drought and famine), 
the priest is encouraged to come down heavily on individuals who 
by their irreligion endanger the community or the state. And 
was true with the Greeks. It was as their religion became les!> 
congregational and more individual that the power of the priest, 
already implicitly queried by the new philosophies, diminished 
significantly. The rise of the mercantile class, with its dependence 
on mechanical arts rather than religious ritual, tended to reduce the 
social relevance ofthe priest and encouraged the individualizatlon 
of Greek religion. It was tllls growing irrelevance of the priest 
which Thales emphasized by dispensing with the gods altogether 
as sources of explanation ofnatural or social phenomena. 
Thales was able peacefully to spearhead tllls intellectual revo­
lution, which was itself a reflection of a social revolution, because 
the Greek priesthood did not in the strictest sense form a class. The 
Greeks, mindful of the massive constricting power which the 
priesthood could exert if it formed a class, shunned the oriental 
example, discouraged life-priests, and otten flXed the length of 
time for which one was a priest or priestess. Moreover, the high­
priesthood was often invested ex officio in the political leader. 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 
The above contrast ofGreek society with oriental society should 
not suggest that Greek society was without theocratic manifes­
tations, as is often thought. Greek society had theocratic mani­
festations which were intensified under Persian rule. 
The pre-Thales hereditary aristocracy comprising the land­
owning class converted the ancient clan cults into hereditary 
priesthoods. To these priesthoods was assigned the power of 
passing and executing sentence at their discretion, especially on those 
who were accused of homicide. As private property grew, so did 
the incentive to homicide on the part of those who wished to 
.. ensure that they inherited property. The power of the aristocratic 
priesthood was based on the belief that those who committed 
certain crimes infringed the sacred moral order ofsociety, and that 
they needed to expiate their crimes and be absolved if the whole 
community was not to be thrown into jeopardy. The idea that the 
. whole community was endangered before the gods as a result of 
certain malpractices of individuals was not abandoned even by 
Solon, a contemporary of Anaximander. 
Thales' first revolution therefore knocked the bottom out of 
the theocratic and crypto-theocratic manifestations of Greek 
society. In destroying the gods as explanatory devices, he neutral­
ized them and undermined the social effectiveness ofthe aristocratic 
priesthood. 
The second revolution consisted in his contention that the unity 
ofnature consisted not in its being but in its materiality. His choice 
ofone substance for his monism had its root in mercantilism, in the 
belief that all goods were exchangeable in tetrns of a common 
denominator. Water, the common denominator which Thales 
chose, fittingly reflected the Ionian dependence on its navy for its 
mercantilism, the growth of the navy being crucial for Ionia's 
Mediterranean trade. 
But the interaction between the alteration of social circum­
stances and the content of consciousness is not one-sided, for 
circumstances can be changed by revolution and revolutions are 
brought about by men, by men who think as men of action and 
act as men of thought. It is true that revolutionaries are produced


--- PAGE 21 ---
35 
. ~--- ­
34 CONSCIBNCISM 
by historical circumstances - at the same time, they are not chaff 
before the wind of change, but have a solid ideological basis. 
Revolution has two aspects. Revolution is a revolution against 
an old order; and it is also a contestfor a new order. The Marxist 
emphasis on the determining force ofthe material circumstances of 
life is correct. But I would like also to give great emphasis to the 
determining power of ideology. A revolutionary ideology is not 
merely negative. It is not a mere conceptual refutation of a dying 
social order, but a positive creative theory, the guiding light of the 
emerging social order. This is conftrmed by the letter from Engels 
quoted on the motto page of this book. 
Not only is it signifIcant that Thales should have chosen water 
as the fundamental substance, but the fact that he maintained 
at all that everything was derived from one and the same substance 
was ofgreat importance. For, by maintaining this, he was implying 
the fundamental identity of man as well, man according to him 
being not half natural, half supernatural, but wholly natural. That 
is to say, on the social plane, his metaphysical principle amounted 
to an assertion ofthe fundamental equality and brotherhood ofmen. 
Nevertheless his philosophy only supported a revolution which 
was in a sense bourgeois. The assertion of the fundamental equality 
and brotherhood ofman does not automatically issue in socialism, 
for it does not amount to the assertion of social equality. Indeed, 
Thales' specification of a form of matter as basic naturally places 
a premium on water, and in the social plane, remains compatible 
with a class structure. His philosophy therefore only supported a 
sort of bourgeois democratic revolution, and not a socialist one. 
On the only recorded opportunity which Thales had of trans­
lating his metaphysics into politics, he firmly urged unity on the 
balkanized Ionian states. This was hardly surprising as he had 
asserted the unity of nature. The Ionians paid scant heed to him 
and they were duly undone. 
The point which I am anxious to make is not merely that the 
earliest philosophies carried implications of a political and social 
nature, and so were warmly connected with the actualities oflife; 
I am suggesting that these philosophies were reflections of social 
f!MiRd nttH P7 t 'tt 771 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 
currents, that they arose from social exigencies. Thus, 'fhales' 
philosophy needed, if it was to destroy the allegedly heaven­
sanctioned aristocratic society, to assert the irrelevance of a pan­
theon, and this he did in his attempt to bring all explanation of 
nature within the ambit of nature itscl£ A revolutionary, as op­
posed to a reformist, attenuation ofclerical influence called not for 
an amelioration here and there ofsocial inequalities, the smoothing 
of this sharp corner and the trimming of that eminence, but for a 
total rejection ofthe idea ofsocial inequality. That, in metaphysics, 
which implies this rejection of social inequality is precisely that 
which is common to all monists, those who assert the unity of 
nature and of different kinds of things as only different manifes­
tations of the same thing. 
It was this idea of the unity of nature as well as that of basic 
equality and justice whidl required that Thales should generalize 
those rules of thumb picked up in the marshes of the Nile delta. 
Rules of thumb allow for a certain measure of arbitrariness and 
partiality in application. The rules which the Egyptian arpedonapts 
used in marking out farms were bound to lead to injustices, for 
they were measured with knotted pieces ofcord. Thales' egalitarian 
perceptions necessary for a mercantile economy, led him to seek 
general forms ofrules. When rules become general, they guarantee 
an objective impartiality, and impartiality is the outward mark 
of egalitarianism. 
Thales' successor, Anaximander, reasoned however that the 
unity of nature could not by itself guarantee equality and im­
partiality. Indeed, Thales himself was bourgeois in his actual 
political life. In Anaximander's thought, a need was felt for an 
active social principle which would illuminate and sanction social 
structure. This he called the principle of justice, a groundwork 
principle which in Anaximander's system regulated both social 
organization and the metaphysical generation of things. 
In his philosophy, he conceived a stock of neutral material in 
which nothing was differentiated, a boundless, featureless, eternal 
expanse whose restlessness separated out the things of this world. 
These things abide in the world for a time, measured out according


--- PAGE 22 ---
36 37 CONSCIENCISM 
to principles ofjustice. At the end of their time, they give way to 
other things and flow back whence they came, back into the 
boundless neutral stock. So whereas at first blush Anaximander 
seems to have diverged widely from Thales, his master and friend, 
he in fact only tried to secure similar social objectives by means of 
conceptual instruments not too different from those of Thales. 
The early Greek philosophers had a social-moral preoccupation 
which they expressed in terms of metaphysics. It was this social­
moral preoccupation which made them continual sufferers of 
political persecution. 
The point I wish to underline in this respect is that the priests had 
grounded their power and all manner of social hierarchy in their 
supernatural account of the world. To destroy sacerdotal power 
and its associated arbitrary social structure, it was necessary to 
remove their grounding; it was necessary to give a natural account 
of the world. In this way, philosophy served as an instrument of 
social justice. 
However revolutionary were the monists, that is to say those 
who claimed that everything was at bottom the same thing, they 
were still bogged down once they had claimed the fundamental 
equality ofall. It is possible, admittedly, to regard Anaximander as 
haVing had an awareness of this stagnation, for he envisaged not a 
static and immobile social equality, but a social equality pursued 
at all times by the active principle ofjustice. Anaximander was not 
a lotus-eater. He could not allow society to remain dormant, com­
placent with the social structure which was current in his time. His 
principle ofjustice was one which called for social change, for he 
could not see an egalitarian society as one in which everything was 
permanently as it was, in which inequalities remained undisturbed. 
It fell to Heraclitus to introduce the notion ofgrowth into the con 
ception of society. 
The preceding early Greek philosophers were so bent on 
destroying the foundations ofpriestly aristocratic power that they 
paid little attention to social growth. They were so rapt in their 
purposes that they also jibbed at the immortality of the soul, 
Socrates being the first Greek philosopher to make the immortality 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 
ofthe soul a tenet ofphilosophy as distinct from a belief ofreligion. 
According to Heraclitus, too, all things are one. But fire, the 
fundamental thing, suffers transformations into other things. 
There is a permanent potential of instability in everything, and 
it is this instability which makes transformations possible. Ob­
jects are only deceptively serene, they are all delicate balances of 
opposing forces. This opposition of forces is conceived by Hera­
clitus to be so fundamental that without it everything would 
pass away. An object is an attunement of opposite tensions and 
without the tensions there could be no object. 
Social laws, too, are conceived by Heraclitus after the same 
manner. He conceives them as an attunement of tensions, tlle 
resultant ofopposing tendencies. Without the opposing tendencies, 
there could be no laws. It can be seen that Heraclitus conceived 
society as a dynamism, in which out ofthe strife ofopposites there 
emerges an attunement. Heraclitus makes this strife of opposites 
indispensable to growth and creation both in nature and in society. 
And growth or creation is nothing but that attunement or balance 
which emerges from a strife of opposites. In social terms, this 
means that society is permanently in revolution, and that revolu­
tion is indispensable to social growth and progress. Evolution by 
revolution is the Heraclitean touchstone of progress. 
The idea of the cosmic strife of opposites came to be impressed 
on Heraclitus by the eruptions which shook Greek society. After 
the aristocrats had overthrown the monarchies, Greek colonies 
came to be established on the lip of the Mediterranean basin. With 
this and the introduction of coinage, the value oflanded property 
as an instrument of economic transactions declined. Trade became 
more widespread, and the development of a merchant navy to 
assist the spread oftrade further depressed the economic significance 
of the landed aristocracy. The new merchant force began to seek 
political prizes from the decadent aristocracy. This fundamental 
social change initiated by econ01nic driv;es, coupled with the 
opposition oflocal forces to Persian rule in the Asia Minor States, 
created among the Greeks a society which was comparatively 
redeemed. Even the thirty tyrants marked a redemption of Greek


--- PAGE 23 ---
38 39 CONSCIENCISM 
society. Redemption could not however mean a society languishing 
in drugged serenity. Internal dissensions persisted on all sides, 
society was twisted by swift change, but always out of a melee 
there emerged in course of time a discernible pattern. 
Strife, and an emergent pattern, a seeming attunement, which 
served as a resting point until contending forces should once again 
become pronouncedly factious, this see-saw, this sweltering social 
environment gave birth in the mind of Heraclitus to the idea that 
the universe itself is an attunement of forces perpetually in strife. 
From that moment the idea of a fInite history was killed and that 
of the dialectic ofhistory born. 
In the examples chosen I have tried to illustrate the way in which 
early materialist philosophy of a monist kind is suggested by 
social phenomena, and in turn inspires social phenomena and 
policy. I can perhaps illustrate the way in which idealist philosophy 
serves the same function by citing the philosophy of Anaxagoras. 
In this philosophy the diverse things of the universe were said to 
arise from seeds. These seeds of the things that are were conceived 
after such a fashion that they represented minute universes, each 
seed in fact containing the whole range of diversity in the macro­
cosmic universe. Each specific object was nothing but an accretion 
of seeds. The whole agglomeration of seeds constituting the uni­
verse was said by Anaxagoras to have an external principle of 
motion. Naturally a principle of motion was required to regulate 
the quantities of seed involved in each object if this was to be the 
source of the differences between things; and this principle of 
motion was for Anaxagoras an intellectualist one. He called it not/s, 
reason, mind. 
Anaxagoras, too, can be exhibited as supporting an egalitarian­
ism. Indeed, his theory of the unity of nature is in certain respects 
a more rigorous and close one than that of the monists. He did 
not affirm a mere identity of basic make-up. He put forward 
a theory of the participation of anyone kind of object in every 
other kind of object. In his philosophy, nature was more firmly 
united than in allY other philosophy. The distinction between his 
view and that of the monists, if given social expression, becomes 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 
the distinction between socialism and democracy. Whereas in 
democracy it is sufficient to affirm a mere egalitarianism, in social­
ism it is necessary to affirm a convertible involvement ofeach in all. 
In other words, whereas the monists in social terms sought to 
transform an oligarchic society into a democratic one, Anaxagoras 
sought to transform a democratic one into a socialist society. 
Indeed, once Anaxagoras had emphasized socialistic responsi­
bility of each for all and all for each, the next step was to emphasize 
the intrinsic worth of the 'individual. Thus a sodal progressive 
movement, which started with the supervention of a people over 
a class, ended with the separating out, the cult, ofindividuals. It was 
left to the Sophists to achieve this. This phase was given its most 
defInitive utterance in the Protagoran statement that man is the 
measure of all things. The universe had passed from the hands of 
the gods into the hands of men. This Protagoran view, which was 
a passionate testimony to the new place of mall in the scheme of 
things, was quickly perverted by lesser minds into a grasping 
idealistic subjectivism. In this transformed form, it was a claim that 
reality was a replica of the subjective will. Indeed, it was in this 
form that Socrates criticized it. It was necessary to destroy this 
idealistic subjectivism; fIrst, because it was but a short step from it 
to solipsism, the view that only oneself exists and other things 
exist as one's experiences; and, second, because in addition to 
damaging the possibility of science and the public and objective 
grounding of truth, it undermined the foundations of society; for 
it made social reality, too, depend upon the subjective will. The 
original attempt to redeem society by giving it a united foundation, 
by asserting the unity and brotherhood of man, now promised 
to destroy the society which it had set out to save. Egalitarianism 
desperately needed to be distinguished from anarchism, for 
anarchism is the political expression of subjective idealism. 
Socrates consequendy made it his duty to destroy this form of 
the Protagoran maxim. His social aim in seeking this destruction 
was to restore the objectivity of society. Socrates, too, was a firm 
theoretical believer in egalitarianism. He exemplifIed this in his 
whole life by his unwavering contempt for pomp, circumstance


--- PAGE 24 ---
40 CONSCIENCISM 
and humbug. He has left us an undying testimony ofhis egalitarian 
beliefs in his use ofthe slave-boy in the Meno: in this Platonic dia­
logue. Socrates tries to prove the disincarnate existence ofthe soul 
and the innateness of certain ideas of mathematics and ethics. In 
selecting a slave-boy for the purpose ofhis proof, he showed that he 
held a belief in the common and equal nature of man. This belief 
activates Socrates' whole philosophy. He believed in the equal en­
dowment of all with ilUlate ideas. the equal ability ofall to lead a 
good life. Knowledge. he said, was virtue. And knowledge. he 
further held, was innate. learning being in fact a way ofremember­
ing what was already engraved upon the individual soul. 
Though in the Men0, Socrates put forward a fundamental 
egalitarianism. it would not be pretended that egalitarianism was 
to be found among the established facts oflife. The reason for this 
discrepancy between truth and social fact was conceived by him 
in moral terms. If people were not conceited, mistaking their 
ignorance for knowledge. and if they reflected. they would all be 
equally moral, both because virtue is knowledge, and because they 
would fundamentally all have the same knowledge as suggested 
in the Meno. 
It has not been my purpose to argue that all the early precursors 
of Our modern philosophers in trying to modify or support a 
modification of society conceived this in terms of egalitarianism. 
But even when they pursued a social line in reaction to the egali­
tarian line, they were still responding to social urges and social 
conditions. In a genuine sense, their philosophies were intellectual 
reflections ofcontemporary social conditions. 
One example of an early philosopher who became reactionary 
in respect of the egalitarian development was Plato. Socrates' 
judges and executioners were not half as cruel to him as was his 
betrayer Plato, also his loving disciple. 
Whereas Socrates had affirmed the original equal endowment of 
men and explained differences between men in terms ofeducation, 
Plato was no believer in the fundamental equality ofman. He held 
to the original inequality ofmen which an unrelenting educational 
system would quickly reveal. He held that some men had a higher 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 4I 
reason than others, and though education might up to a point con­
ceal them. these differences were bound to reveal themselves after 
a certain stage of a thorough-going education. These differences 
in the level of intelligence, according to Plato, implied a natural 
division and hierarchy oflabour, each man being fitted by nature 
for functions appropriate to him, the less intelligent being in fact 
only qualified to undertake menial forms of labour. All political 
and social power was at the same time to be concentrated in 
the hands of the intellectuals, in trust. In this way, plato 
adumbrated an unconscionable totalitarianism of intellectuals. 
Not even this could exhaust Plato's anti-egalitarianism. He 
looked for ways in which this lop-headed group of intellectuals 
might harden into a class. He found his solution in some form of 
eugenics: women and men were to be mated according to his 
principles ofeugenics and thus there would be created a succession, 
based on birth, of people who would in perpetuity hold all power 
in trust. 
It must be said that plato was profoundly upset by the turn which 
Athenian democracy had taken. In particular he could not forgive 
a system which made it possible for his master, Socrates, to be 
executed. In pursuit of his private vendetta, he elaborated the 
principles of The Republic. In this, however, he seriously betrayed 
Socrates, for Socrates himself had acknowledged the political 
system in virtuously refusing to flee from it when accorded the 
opportunity of doing so. I do not wish, in saying that Plato 
betrayed Socrates by assailing the Athenian democracy, to suggest 
that the Athenian democracy was a full democracy. The Greek 
democracy as a whole, but especially the Athenian, never 
embraced all resident adults, nor did it aim, even as an 
ideal. at the redistribution of wealth. Women were not 
included under the provisions of the democratic constitution. 
And the aristocrats and merchant class continued to depend 
for their wealth 011 slave and other exploited labour. It was 
indeed due to the availability ofslave labour that the free citizenry 
were not as oppressed as they might have been. The citizenry were 
expected to remain content with the fact that certain offices ofstate


--- PAGE 25 ---
42 
43 
CONSCIENCISM 
were filled by lot, and average citizens were able to become judges 
and executives. 
There is one other interesting aspect of Plato's betrayal. philo­
sophy has its own sociology, and it is not surprising that Plato 
failed to make a certain appropriate distinction. Faced with one, 
for him, unpleasant effect of the Greek democracy, he failed 
to draw a distinction between the theory of democracy and 
its practice in Athens. Theory and practice are always connected; 
but not always in the way which Plato thought. While each social 
system has a supporting ideology, a revolutionary ideology seeks 
to introduce a new social system. It is besides common for practice 
to fall short of the demands of theory. Democracy could not 
therefore be made to stand or £ill with Athenian society. Plato 
failed grotesquely to separate a condenlllation of the Athenian 
political practice from a condel1lllation of democratic theory. 
But Plato was himself too much of a reactionary ever to have 
been content with simply criticizing, even condemning, the 
Athenian misrepresentation of democracy. 
Plato's reactionary philosophy received development at the 
hands of the Christian intellectuals. For when they needed a 
philosophy to buttress their division between a heavenly order 
and an earthly order, it was to Plato and, to a lesser extent, Plotinus, 
that they turned. 
It is important to see clearly the nature ofthe swing that had thus 
taken place. I started this sketch ofWestern philosophical thought 
from a time in the history ofits Greek founders when an aristocratic 
class, assisted by a priestly oligarchy, held the sum total of social­
political power. The earliest philosophers, rebelling against the 
social order which a theological explanation ofnatural phenomena 
encouraged, went to the root of the matter by introducing a 
different kind of explanation for social and natural phenomena. 
The social implication of their metaphysics was a certain egali­
tarianism which theoretically implied democracy and socialism. 
As the secular metaphysics with its concern for the fundamental 
identity ofman suffered corruption, it tended towards a subjective 
idealism, a change which was complete by the time ofthe Sophists. 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIBTY 
And the political image of subjective idealism is anarchism. 
Socrates and some of his students were largely iustrumental in 
checking the rise of anarchism which the Sophists both by their 
precept and by their moral neutrality were already fostering. But 
that very egalitarianism which Socrates was in a limited way 
endeavouring to save in its objective form, had by his time accom­
modated elements ofthe Sophists' teaching. It had bred a rapacious 
individualism which could not take correction lightly. The 
system destroyed Socrates. And Socrates' soi-disant avenger, Plato, 
sought in turn to destroy even this limited democracy. III this 
attempt he only succeeded in adumbrating a philosophy which 
could be used in supporting a society in which one class sat on the 
neck of anotller. It encouraged a new oligarchy. And tlns new 
oligarchy ofthe dark and middle ages, like the one from which we 
started, sought its sacerdotal ally. So it is that Plato, in trying to 
avenge the defender of human equality, the man who always said 
that men did not differ as men, any more than bees differed as bees, 
helped ironically in instituting his more complete overthrow. 
A few centuries later, Platonism having been seized upon, the 
priesthood set about acquiring an empire and political power. 
The world was treated to a re-hash of the old familiar argunlents, 
and re-encumbered with a theological explanation of the cosmos; 
Heraclitus' hypothesis that neither god nor man had made the 
universe was swamped with eamest pietisms. The priests empha­
sized their role of experts on matters divine; and, since this 
world was held to be but a dividend of divine enterprise, they 
claimed expertise on mundane matters as well. Deeply in league 
with the aristocrats, they plunged Europe into the Dark Ages and 
the most terrible feudalism which history records, as the Church 
exercised her divine right of grab. 
The Church, however, was not allowed to hold imperial sway 
long. Whereas the Pope had been an equal and colleague ofCharle­
magne, with the accession of Otto I he sank to a junior position. 
Indeed, he was beholden to Otto for quelling the Italian threats to 
the Papacy. With the emergence in this way ofthe secular emperor 
as the protector of the Pope, the whole question of the relation


--- PAGE 26 ---
44 45 CONSCIENCISM 
between Church and State was vigorously broached. And secularists 
argued that as the Pope had not founded an empire, he could not 
rule one. Now the Pope's claim to earthly sway had drawn 
inspiration from St Augustine's Civitas Dei, which was itself milked 
from Plato and Plotinus. While pretending that she was only 
interested in the higher reality of heaven, the Church was not 
reluctant to embroil herself in the sordidness of power politics. 
With the Pope at bay, the effectiveness ofa Platonist philosophy 
as the ideology of papal sway was seriously compromised, for it 
could not ensure the continued ascendancy of the Pope. With 
Plato thus discredited, the Church turned to Aristotle, Plato's 
telling critic. 
Aristotle was a champion of some form of democracy. He 
connected democracy with knowledge by saying that the truth 
on any matter had several sides which no single person could 
encompass in his individual gaze. Any individual could only 
grasp a portion, and it was through the collaboration ofmany that 
the whole truth was attained. One social-political significance of 
this is the rejection of anarchism - the political extreme of in­
dividualism. 
Aristotle did not however believe that each man was able to 
contribute to the truth. In this he was reflecting in his thinking 
what was a social fact in Greece. To say that each man was able to 
contribute to the truth would require at the social level that each 
man should have political rights. To say that each man was 
equally able to contribute to the truth would require that each man 
should have equal political rights. The facts of Greek society were 
not in accord with this. The democracy of the Greeks was a 
democracy which was supported in the main by slave labour. 
Aristotle criticized neither the inequality of the sexes nor the 
exploitation of slave labour. He even thought that slavery was 
right provided the slave was naturally inferior to his master. Such 
men, he said, were by nature not their own. He enjoined his 
fellow countrymen not to enslave Greeks but only an inferior race 
with less spirit. 
According to Aristotle, the state is not a mere aggregate ofmen, 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 
but a union of individuals bent on a common goal through co­
operative action. It has for its purpose the pursuit of the highest 
good. Men, he however said, are not the same, and do not perform 
the same functions in the pursuit of this common goal. At the 
same time, no man can by his single exertions bring about the 
highest good. The state is therefore founded upon an interdepend­
ence of men pursuing the same ultimate goal. 
Aristotle was prevented from fully appreciating egalitarianism 
by his superstitious reverence for facts. The interdependence of the 
members of society implies the illegitimacy of the pursuit of 
sectional interests above the common good, or the achievement 
of the latter as a mere by-product of the pursuit of the former. He 
has however been often misunderstood when he stresses that 
there are differences among men. Egalitarianism cannot mean 
the absence ofdifference. It does not require this. It recognizes and 
accepts differences among men, but allows them to make a differ­
ence only at the functional level. Beyond that the differences are 
not allowed to make a difference, certainly not at the level of the 
intrinsic worth of the individual. 
Thus, it was not enough for Aristotle to recognize that there 
were slaves. He should have criticized the institution ofslavery, for 
reverence for facts does not mean inebriation with them. It does 
not mean that they cannot be appraised, criticized and undermined. 
To say that slavery was a fact was not to bless it. Its economic 
importance to Greek society should not have hoodwinked 
Aristotle into thinking it necessary or even acceptable, for if 
society, according to him, is a complementary and co-operative 
plurality of men, let it be added that co-operation is free. When 
Aristotle himself came to consider how co-operation might be 
made spontaneous, he always underscored the necessity of 
education, never of tyranny or injustice. 
Man, says Aristotle, aims at the good. But how can a continuing 
slave be said to aim at anything? According to Aristotle, the 
principle of order in a political society is justice, the bond of men 
in states. But what justice can slaves be said to enjoy? Aristotle, 
usually tough-minded, becomes all too delicate when he writes


--- PAGE 27 ---
46 47 CONSCIENCISM 
about slavery. At the same time, his writings about slavery have 
been distorted. When he defines a slave as someone who is by 
nature not his own but another's, a human being and yet a posses­
sion, is he implying that there can be men who by their own 
nature as men are not their own but others'? A man cannot be 
discovered to be a slave through an examination of his nature. 
What Aristotle means is that ifsomeone is a slave, then it follows 
that he is not his own but another's, a human being and yet a 
possession. 
Initial egalitarianism does not pre-determine its own future 
course. Its course depends on facts of production and the social 
economic relations consequent on such facts. Initial egalitarianism 
can be perverted into a cruel and grasping social atomism, a 
barbaric free-for-all in which each man is said to be for himself, 
and God for us all. This is the kind of coUrse seminal in Aristotle's 
egalitarianism. 
In order to destroy the Platonic philosophical basis of oligarchy, 
as I have already mentioned, Aristotle rejected the Platonic hypo­
thesis about the knowledge of truth. To Plato's mind, the truth 
can only be perceived and appreciated by the highest reasons sub­
jected to the most exacting discipline. Political and social truth was 
therefore accessible only to the brainwashed minds of his intel­
lectual oligarchy. Aristotle rejected this and made the truth 
accessible to all and possible of appreciation by all. Plato, to make 
sure that the truth was really out ofthe reach ofmany, deposited it 
in a heavenly bank. He called his truths 'forms' and he made them 
eerie population of a gossamer heaven. Just as Marx stood 
Hegel's 'idea' on its head, so Aristotle recalled the 'forms' back 
to earth and restored them to nature, the nature which is open 
to us all, and with which we are all familiar. He denied that 
the 'forms' were capable of existence outside natural objects. He 
held that whoever was capable of observing natural objects was 
capable of detecting 'forms'. But in any case he impugned the 
'forms' on the ground of their utter uselessness as instruments of 
knowledge or of explanation. No carpenter, he said, first studied a 
'form' in order to make his furniture. 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 
With the Church's embracing ofneo-Aristotelianism, she saved 
herself in the nick of time. For she thus adopted a philosophical 
standpoint which enabled her to make concessions to the Renais­
sance and man's regained social importance. 
Nevertheless, in his anxiety to restore the egalitarian form of 
society, Aristotle actually tried to arrest the dialectic ofthought. 
tried to secure this arrest by laying down his categories. According 
to him, these categories are the most general concepts under which 
the world can be thought of. There is no object or process in nature 
which does not, so far as it can be conceived, fall under one or 
more of the categories, examples of which are quality, quantity, 
rest, motion, time, place. A great deal ofmetaphysics in such a view 
can therefore only consist ofthe identifying ofthese categories and 
the elucidation ofthem. But in this way also, an attempt is made to 
fix in advance the form of any future metaphysics. Indeed, prole­
gomena to future metaphysics are commonplaces of philosophy. 
These prolegomena are a kind of preface written by philosophers 
and addressed to all future philosophers. In these prefaces, the 
authors lay down the limits, the purposes, and the forms which, 
they claim, must guide all future philosophies. Kant is another 
example of a philosopher who identified the basic concepts in 
terms of which alone nature can appear to us and become intel­
ligible. 
The motive lying behind prolegomena is a natural one. In certain 
circumstances, it is even commendable. It is an attempt to make 
sure that one's philosophical insights shall be conserved, an attempt 
to persuade the world that all the spade-work of philosophy has 
been done, that all there is left to do is to build upon this final 
foundation. It is a claim to perfection. 
In the political sphere, Aristotle made a similar claim to per­
fection. Having analysed the nature of a democratic constitution 
he said that it was the natural way oforganizing a society. To claim 
that it is natural is to contrast it with other types of constitution 
which are presumably unnatural or less natural. By a natural con­
stitution, Aristotle meant one which consorted most with 
talents of man and the ethics which best suited him. A natural


--- PAGE 28 ---
48 CONSCIENCISM 
constitution was therefore for him one which gave political expres­
sion to the nature of man. In saying, therefore, that a democratic 
constitution is the natural way of organizing a society, he was 
claiming perfection for it. 
Plato was called to Syracuse to educate a future ruler. There he 
saw a beautiful opportunity of producing a ruler tailored to 
political ideas. He seized the opportunity and failed; so he returned 
to Athens a disappointed man. Aristotle, too, had responsibility for 
the education of Alexander, later called the Great. But the demo­
cratic seeds which he sowed withered in Alexander's barren 
ground. These two great philosophers of antiquity, so full ofideas 
for the 'regeneration' ofsociety, utterly lacked the power to bring 
them to social fruition. 
One interesting point is that, the difference between them not­
withstanding, Plato and Aristotle both conceived society in static 
terms. Their conception was of a society which permitted of no 
revision. In Plato's view, once a society had been set up according 
to the provisions outlined The Republic, the perfect society 
would have been attained. And what is perfect cannot change for 
the better. In this way, he introduced the idea of a finite social 
evolution. And Aristotle, to the extent that he regarded the 
democratic society as the perfect form ofsociety, also operated the 
idea of a fmite social evolution. 
Though neither Plato nor Aristotle had tlle power to bring his 
ideas to social fruition, Europe threw up men who had the power 
and the will but not the good fortune to implement the 'perfect 
society'. Napoleon was such a person. And of the Prussian State, 
Hegel confessed that it represented the political incarnation of his 
Absolute idea the march ofGod in history. Hitler, too, in our own 
times, sought to introduce 'the perfect society'! Since 'the perfect 
society' is conceived in terms ofthe terminal ofsocial evolution, its 
procreators have persistently envisaged millennia of unruilled 
monotony! 
I have suggested that the attempt to fix categories, basic general 
concepts, in terms ofwhich alone the world must appear to us and 
become intelligible, is an attempt to halt the dialectic of thought, 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 49 
an attempt to freeze it at a certain stage. In the dialectic ofthought, 
a cardinal idea is introduced, and it is worked out in considerable 
detail. After a certain point, an idea antithetic to it appears on the 
scene. And, in an attempt to reconcile them, a new idea is pro­
duced. And this new idea initiates a similar process. In laying down 
basic concepts, which cannot admit of revision, Aristotle was 
attempting to halt the dialectic ofthought. 
I also suggest that in the social field Aristotle tried to arrest the 
dialectic of society, for in his treatment of the democratic society 
as the perfect form of society he was attempting to lay down a 
terminal to social evolution, and so to thwart dialectic. 
And yet his own position represents a stage in the unfolding of 
social dialectic. The egalitarianism which early Greek philosophy 
introduced could be formulated in terms of individualism. And 
Aristotle's democratic ideal with its insistence on an equal in­
dividualism was after all a particular way of spelling out that 
egalitarianism which the earlier Greek philosophers pitted against 
the sacerdotal-aristocratic oligarchy. To the extent that individual­
ism accepts as axiomatic the initial equal value of the individual, 
egalitarianism can be formulated in terms of it. But, evidently, 
individualism alone cannot determine the form ofsocial organiza­
tion. For individualism may lead to capitalism or it may lead to 
socialism. 
Ifone takes for the sake ofan example the economic doctrines of 
Stuart Mill, one must confess that he based them on a 
passionate individualism. Indeed, so passionate was his defence of 
individualism that he required governments to exercise the mini­
mum of regulation on citizens. He advocated free economic 
activity. But true as it is that in Mill's doctrine every citizen had the 
right to free economic activity, in the context of an already 
technical society this meant little. In the technical society, this 
would inevitably breed an economic disproportion, and it would 
head society straight towards capitalism. 
If, however, one considers individualism not as giving to men an 
equal right to dominate and exploit one another, but as imposing 
upon us all the duty to support one another and make the


--- PAGE 29 ---
50 CONSCIENCISM 
happiness of others a condition for the happiness of oneself, then 
individualism so conceived and practised heads society towards 
socialism. 
It is precisely because individualism does not determine the 
form of social organization that both the capitalistic and the 
socialistic traditions in Europe can trace their origins to the earliest 
Greek philosophers. Indeed, because the cultural history ofEurope 
is the unfolding of a social dialectic, it is hardly surprising that 
antithetic strands of thought should simultaneously trace 
spring and origin to the same cradle. The dialectic would not be 
full unless the antitheses were present. 
At this point I must go back to the Renaissance, because the 
Renaissance is often conceived of as the emancipation of thought, 
as the time when thinking itselfofall social and other limiting 
shackles. 
itself from certain spec~fic 
'-.hd.LHJ:'LI.-, it was in spirit profoundly non-religious. 
aspect oEit, however, remained largely endemic in 
the sixteenth century except the works of a few like Rabelais 
who in his thought rejected Catholicism as well as Protestantism 
as huge irrelevances to Christianity. In order to negate the 
emancipation, Christian theology shiftily modified its position 
here and accepted a compromise there. 
The humanism to which the Renaissance gave rise served as the 
link between the emancipation of thought from religious shackles 
and the strengthening ofcapitalism. For it raised from the economic 
sphere the unfeeling competition and pursuit of supremacy which 
characterize capitalism, and transposed them to a philosophical 
conception in which each man, armed with his natural and inalien­
able rights, is pitted against every other man. This transposition 
became a tour de force in the political philosophy ofTohn Locke. 
It is this political philosophy which largely inspired 
Constitution. 
Both the Renaissance and humanism which it fortified were 
the second renaissance renaissance and 
Aristotle. He, too, as I have tried 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 51 
no 
hegemony. 
_ ... _...___.._ .. 
to show, represented man as the centre of the universe, and made 
the limits of knowledge coincide with the limits of the human 
understanding in reclaiming the 'forms' and putting them back in 
nature; and also in his fixing of the categories of thought which 
were at the same time the categories of being. His humanism was 
a co-operative one, in which each man, perceiving a different 
ofthe truth, contributed it to the common whole. 
Aristotle saved thought from the mystic vapours with which 
surrounded it. The second renaissance emancipated thought 
from the mysticism of the Middle Ages. But whereas Aristotle 
stood for a co-operative humanism, the second humanism was an 
atomistic one. This atomistic humanism was assisted by the travels 
of merchants and adventurers, who returning with tales of diverse 
social organizations, diverse moral and religious principles and 
practices, assisted the growth of the thought that there could be 
universally valid single religious creed, morality, or social 
order. This thought confirmed their challenge of the church 
But just as John Locke's political philosophy was a UI.UUd.WO) 
attempt to assert the personal and independent dignity ofman, and 
make man, not God, the reference point of political organization, 
so in his empiricist philosophy he attempted to make man 
centre and source of knowledge. Since knowledge is thus not a 
matter of divine revelation but one of human mental activity, 
man's intellectual independence and dignity was by this token 
asserted. I have said tlut in face of the humanism which the 
Renaissance developed, the Church preserved herself by making a 
corlce~;S10n here and a compromise there, thus avoiding a head-on 
Church became subtle, and, while seeming to 
endorse the philosophies ofhumanism, tried to place God at their 
centre. She ran with the hare and hunted with the hounds. 
philosophy of Berkeley, empiricism appears to be en­
dorsed, but is in fact strictly speaking denied. For however glibly 
Berkeley said that material objects were agglomerations of ideas 
of sense, he told us that it was really God who put the ideas in our 
mind. Sense was completely otiose in the philosophy of Berkeley . 
~~~~~~_______________________ --l


--- PAGE 30 ---
52 CONSCIENCISM 
This was necessarily so because for him our bodies were carried in 
our mind. The stage could not therefore be set for sensation. So 
impressive were the insinuations of this Berkeleyan double-speak 
that the grateful Church rewarded him with a bishopric. 
The power ofthe Church could still be felt, and philosophers like 
Descartes and Leibniz, inspired by fear of being recognized 
immediately as undermining the social power of the Church in 
favour of humanism, prudently suppressed their defmitive works 
which only saw the light of day posthumously. I have already said 
that humanism branched off into a democratic capitalism and co­
operative socialism. The two philosophies ofLeibniz and Descartes 
provide further illustration of the way in which this happened. 
Leibniz believed that the universe consisted of an infmite 
number of units, which he called monads. Each monad was a 
spirit, but monads enjoyed different levels of consciousness. And 
matter, in his philosophy, was a collection of spirits which were 
in a complete state ofunconsciousness. He was an idealist. But that 
was not what constituted his contribution to democratic capitalism. 
For this, we must turn to his remarks about the nature of monads. 
According to Leibniz, every monad is completely self-contained, 
and is completely windowless on every other monad. Every 
monad is, furthermore, invested with a private law of its develop­
ment, a law which provides sometimes for the dimness of other 
monads at a time when a particular monad luxuriates in well-being. 
And this whole arrangement is sanctified by the principle of 
Pre-established Harmony. In social terms, this means that every 
individual has an inalienable right to develop according to his 
nature, even if his development requires the suffering and sub­
ordination of others either in a political or in an economic sense. 
It is in this way that Leibniz's philosophy contributes to a demo­
cratic capitalism. 
On the other hand, in the philosophy of Descartes support is 
given to co-operative socialism. Descartes begins from the position 
that reason is the same in all, and that fundamentally we are equally 
able to perceive and appreciate the same truths. We do not have 
private truths; we all share public objective truths, and pursue 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 53 
them. And even when, because we have not paid full attention to 
the matter on hand, we have not yet ascertained the truth, we must 
co-operate with others in supporting the demands oforder as con­
ceived by them. Consequently, Descartes says that while he was 
busy doubting everything in order the better to appreciate what 
was true, he still conceived it as necessary to co-operate with others 
in supporting the stability and order ofsociety. 
By multiplying examples to show how there is a social contention, 
implicit or explicit, in the thought of the philosophers, the history 
of philosophy, as I sketched it earlier on, suddenly enjoys a trans­
fusion of blood and springs to life. These philosophies appear in 
situ not as abstract ethereal systems but as intellectual weapons 
implying social purpose. 
It is evident from the foregoing that Cartesian philosophy repre­
sented the most radical break in a social sense from the hegemony 
ofthe Church and her aristocratic allies. The spread ofCartesianism 
in the form of free-thinking therefore ensured that there ensued in 
France competing philosophies which engendered an acute social 
and ideological conflict. On the one hand there was the oligarchic 
philosophy ofthe Church, on the other, the egalitarian philosophy 
of Descartes with its removal of the region of truth from mystic 
revelation to mathematical and public demonstration. The acute 
social and ideological conflict so generated could only be resolved 
by revolution. 
Intellectual tension had been mounting for a hundred years 
or more. The libertins, the French free-thinkers, had suffered 
persecutions and crisis after crisis. In 1624, the Parliament of Paris, 
obedient to the Church, restrained certain chemists from dis­
seminating anti-Aristotelian theses. Uncanonical doctrines were 
proscribed and their libertin disseminators were abused as im­
moralists, tricksters and hypocrites who publicly professed religion 
but in private undermined it. The Jesuits touched new heights of 
violence and raillery when they dealt with the libertins, who 
naturally did not turn the other cheek but delivered their ripostes 
with the full edge of their wit, accusing the schoolmen of forgery, 
vanity, emptiness and uselessness.


--- PAGE 31 ---
54 CONSCIENCISM 
This dichotomy in French thought cleft the nation seriously, and 
Huet, Foucher and Pascal contributed to this dichotomy, as against 
Malebranche and Montaigne. By 1789 the divergence had 
hardened seriously, and only a revolution could re-shuffle French 
thought and deal it out anew. 
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the social contention 
in philosophy became explicit, especially as law, politics, economics 
and ethics came to be publicly founded on philosophy. The social 
contention of philosophy was accepted even as late as the Russian 
revolution of 1917. 
It is therefore not a little amazing that in the twentieth century, 
Western philosophers should largely disinherit themselves and 
affect an aristocratic professional unconcern over the social realities 
of the day. Even the ethical philosophers say that it is not their 
concern to improve themselves or anybody else. They restrict their 
calling to disputable elucidations of moral terms which we all 
know how to use correctly. They say that their professional job 
begins and ends with the elucidation of the meaning of moral 
terms and principles, and the source of moral obligation. They 
never purport to support and maintain any moral principles. In 
fact some of them sometimes confess their inability to see or admit 
any difference between the statement ofmoral principles and brute 
ejaculation. 
On the irrelevance of social irritants and urges to the content of 
philosophy, Western philosophers are largely agreed. They say 
that they are not interested in what made a philosopher say the 
things he says; but only in the reasons which he gives. Philosophy 
is thus effectively emasculated, and it loses its arresting power. 
Whereas the great philosophers, the titans, have always been 
passionately interested in social reality and the welfare ofman, many 
of their twentieth-century descendants in the West serenely settle 
down to a compilation of a dictionary of sentences as opposed 
to a dictionary of words; engulfed in their intellectual hermitage, 
they excuse themselves from philosophical comment on 'social 
progress or social oppression, on peace or war. While they thus 
pursue 'the exact sense of the word', all authority, political or 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY 55 
moral, passes ever more firmly into the hands of the politicians. 
But however desiccated the new passions ofsome Western philo­
sophers are, they can admittedly claim to share a continuity with a 
European cultural history. A non-Western student of philosophy 
has no excuse, except a paedeutic one, for studying Western philo­
sophy in the same spirit. He lacks even the minimal excuse of 
belonging to a cultural history in which the philosophies figure. 
It is my opinion that when we study a philosophy which is not 
ours, we must see it in the context of the intellectual history to 
which it belongs, and we must see it in the context of the milieu 
in which it was born. That way, we can use it in the furtherance of 
cultural' development and in the strengthening of our human 
society.


--- PAGE 32 ---
57 
CHAPTER 3 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
I
N THE LAST chapter, I tried to show, and confIrm by test cases, 
that philosophy always arose from a social milieu, and that a 
social contention is always present in it either explicitly or 
implicitly. Social milieu affects the content ofphilosophy, and the 
content of philosophy seeks to affect social milieu. either by con­
fIrming it or by opposing it. In either case, philosophy implies some­
thing ofthe nature ofan ideology. In the case where the philosophy 
confIrms a social milieu, it implies something of the ideology of 
that society. In the other case in which philosophy opposes a social 
milieu, it implies something of the ideology ofa revolution against 
that social milieu. Philosophy in its social aspect can therefore be 
regarded as pointing up an ideology. 
On the motto page ofmy book Towards Colonial Freedom I make 
the following quotation from Mazzini: 
Every true revolution is a programme; and derived from a new. 
general, positive and organic principle. The first thing necessary is to 
accept that principle. Its development must then be confmed to men 
who are believers in it, and emancipated from every tie or con­
nection with any principle of an opposite nature. 
Here Mazzini asserts the connection between a revolution and an 
ideology. When the revolution has been successful, the ideology 
comes to characterize the society. It is the ideology which gives a 
countenance to the ensuing social milieu. Mazzini further states 
the principle to be general, positive and organic. The statement, 
elucidation and theoretical defence of such a principle will collec­
tively form a philosophy. Hence philosophy admits of being an 
instrument of ideology. 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
Indeed it can be said that in every society there is to be found an 
ideology. In every society, there is at least one militant segment 
which is the dominant segment of that society. In communalistic 
societies, this segment coincides with the whole. This dominant 
segment has its fundamental principles, its beliefs about the nature 
ofman, and the type ofsociety which must be created for man. Its 
fundamental principles help in designing and controlling the type 
of organization which the dominant segment uses. And the same 
principles give rise to a network ofpurposes, which what com­
promises are possible or not possible. One can compromise over 
programme, but not over principle. Any compromise over 
principle is the same as an abandonment ofit. 
In societies where there are competing ideologies, it is still usual 
for one ideology to be dominant. TIllS dominant ideology is 
of the ruling group. Though the ideology is the key to the inward 
identity of its group, it is in intent solidarist. For an ideology does 
not seek merely to unite a section of the people; it seeks to unite 
the whole of the society in which it fmds itsel£ In its effects, it 
certainly reaches the whole society, when it is dominant. For, 
besides seeking to establish common attitudes and purposes for the 
society, the dominant ideology is that which in the light of cir­
cumstances decides what forms institutions shall take, and in what 
channels the common effort is to be directed. 
Just as there can be competing ideologies in the same society, so 
there can be opposing ideologies between different societies. How.... 
ever. while societies with different social systems can coexist, 
their ideologies cannot. There is such a thing as peaceful coexistence 
between states with different social systems; but as long as oppres­
sive classes exist, there can be no such thing as peaceful coexistence 
between opposing ideologies. 
Imperialism, which is the highest stage of capitalism, 
continue to flourish in different forms as long as conditions 
permit it. Though its end is certain, it can only come about under 
pressure of nationalist awakening and an alliance of progressive 
forces which hasten its end and destroy its conditions of existence. 
It will end when there are no nations and peoples exploiting


--- PAGE 33 ---
58 59 CONSCIENCISM 
others; when there are no vested interests exploiting the earth, 
its fruits and resources for the benefit of a few against the well­
being of the many. 
When I say that in every society there is at least one ideology, I 
do not thereby mean that in every society a fully articulated set of 
statements is to be found. In fact, it is not ideology alone which can 
be so pervasive and at the same time largely covert. 
In every society, there is to be found a morality; this hardly 
means that there is an explicitset ofstatements defining the morality. 
A morality is a network of principles and ru1es for the guidance 
and appraisal of conduct. And upon these rules and principles we 
constantly fall back. It is they which give support to our moral 
decisions and opinions. Very often we are quite definite about the 
moral quality of an act, but even when we are so defmite, we are 
not necessarily ready with the reasons for this decision or opinion. 
It is not to be inferred from any such reticence, however, that there 
are no such reasons.We share within the same society a body of 
moral principles and rules garnered from our own experience and 
that of our forebears. The principles directing these experiences 
give us skill in forming moral opinions without our having to be 
articulate about the sources of the judgements. 
Another example of a similar phenomenon can be found in 
Freud. Sigmund Freud believed that nothing was ever forgotten 
by the individual. He did not through this imply that the individual 
consciously remembered everything. On the one hand it is because 
the individual did not consciously remember everything that 
psychoanalysis was necessary - as a probe into the subconscious 
and the unconscious: on the other hand, it is because nothing was 
really forgotten that psychoanalysis is possible at all, for every­
thing is there for it to probe. Thus, according to Freud, all our ex­
periences are stored up, and they affect our overt behaviour even if 
we have no conscious memory ofthe experiences themselves. 
Just as a morality guides and seeks to counect the actions of 
millions of persons, so an ideology aims at uniting the actions of 
millions towards specific and definite goals, notwithstanding that 
an ideology can be largely implicit. I am aware that in this usage 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
I depart somewhat from the fashionable one. It is often thought 
that an ideology has to be a body ofwriting of one individual, or a 
small group of individuals, directed only at fundamental change 
in a society. This is an evident mistake. An ideology, even when it 
is revolutionary, does not merely express the wish that a present 
social order should be abolished. It seeks also to defend and main­
tain the new social order which it introduces. But while it is defend­
ing its own social order, it is still an ideology, and the same. That 
is to say, an ideology can remain an ideology while defending an 
existing progressive society. Nor can the fact that some particu1ar 
ideology is not explicit on paper prevent it from being one. What 
is crucial is not the paper, but the thought. 
I have said an ideology seeks to bring a speciflC order into the 
total life ofits society. To achieve this, it needs to employ a number 
of instruments. The ideology of a society displays itself in political 
theory, social theory and moral theory, and uses these as instru­
ments. It establishes a particu1ar range ofpolitical, social and moral 
behaviour, such that unless behaviour of this sort fell within the 
established range, it would be incompatible with the ideology. 
What I mean may also be expressed in the following terms. Given 
the ideology of a society, then some political behaviour would 
incompatible with it and some other political behaviour wou1d be 
compatible with it. Given a socialist ideology, for example, the 
political dictatorship of capital wou1d be incompatible with it. 
There is always a defmite range within which social-political 
theory and practice must fall if they are to conform to a socialist 
ideology. Thus ideology displays itselfin moral theory and practice. 
In the account of some Greek philosophers in the last chapter, I 
suggested how a humanist ideology held implications for political 
theory, and illustrated this mainly from Aristotle. 
The ideology ofa society is total. It embraces the whole lifc of a 
people, and manifests itself in their class-structure, history, litera­
ture, art, religion. It also acquires a philosophical statement. If an 
ideology is integrative in intent, that is to say, ifit seeks to introduce 
a certain order which will unite the actions of millions towards 
speciflc and definite goals, then its instruments can also be seen as


--- PAGE 34 ---
60 61 CONSCIENCISM 
instruments of social control. It is even possible to look upon 
'coercion' as a fundamental idea in society. This way oflooking at 
society readily gives rise to the idea of a social contract. According 
to this idea, man lived, during certain dark ages in the dim past, 
outside the ambit of society. During those dark ages, man was 
alleged to have lived a poor, nasty, brutish, short and fearful life. 
Life, not surprisingly, soon became intolerable. And so the poor 
men came together, and subtly agreed upon a contract. By means 
ofthis contract they waived certain rights oftheirs in order to invest 
a representative with legislative and executive powers of coercion 
Over themselves. 
We know that the social contract is quite unhistorical, for unless 
men already lived in a society, they could have no common 
language, and a common language is already a social fact, which is 
incompatible with the social contract. Nevertheless, howsoever 
it is that societies arose, the notion of a society implies organized 
obligation. 
I have made mention of the way in which ideology requires 
definite ranges of behaviour. It is difficult, however, to fix the 
limits ofthese ranges. Still the impression is not to be formed from 
this difficulty that the ranges are not definite. They are as defmite 
as territories, even if, on occasion, border uncertainties arise 
between territories next to each other. Obviously, there are at 
least two senses of definiteness. The one sense is mathematical. In 
this sense, a range of conduct is definite if and only ifevery item 
of conduct either falls unambiguously inside it or £aIls unam­
biguously outside it. In the other sense, a range of conduct is 
definite if there are items of behaviour unambiguously falling 
inside it, and items of behaviour unambiguously falling outside it. 
Any ambiguity that there is must only be at the extremes. It is this 
possible fluidity at the extremes which makes growth and progress 
logically possible in human conduct. 
Every society stresses its permissible ranges of conduct, and 
evolves instruments whereby it seeks to obtain conformity to such 
a range. It evolves these instruments because the unity out of 
diversity which a society represents is hardly automatic, calling as 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
it does for means whereby unity might be secured, and, when 
secured, maintained. Though, in a formal sense, these means are 
means of' coercion', in intent they are means of cohesion. They 
become means ofcohesion by underlining common values, which 
themselves generate common interests, and hence common 
attitudes and common reactions. It is this community, this identity 
in the range of principles and values, in the range of interests, 
attitudes, and so of reactions, which lies at the bottom of social 
order. It is also this community which makes social sanction 
necessary, which inspires the physical institutions of society, like 
the police force, and decides the purposes for which they are called 
into being. 
Indeed, when I spoke at the Law Conference at Accra in January 
1962, I emphasized that law, with its executive arms, must be 
inspired at every level by the ideals ofits society. Nevertheless, a 
society has a choice of instruments. By this, I do not merely mean 
that different societies could have different instruments. I mean 
a society can for example decide that all its instruments of 
'coercion' and unity shall be centralized. The logical extreme of 
this is where every permissive right is explicitly backed by an 
enactment, and where every social disapprobation is made explicit 
a prohibitive enactment. This logical extreme of centralization 
is, needless to say, impossible of attainment. But any society can 
attempt to approxinlate to it as much as it desires. A society, how­
ever, which approximates too closely to this extreme will engender 
such an unwieldy bureaucracy that the intention of bureaucracy 
will be annulled. Of course, ideally the intention of bureaucracy 
is to achieve impartiality and eschew the arbitrary. But when a 
society develops an unwieldy bureaucracy it has allowed this fear 
of the arbitrary to become pathological, and it is itself autocratic. 
And yet, a society must count among its instruments of' coercion' 
and cohesion, prohibitions and permissions which are made explicit 
in a statutory way. In many societies, there is in addition a whole 
gamut ofinstruments which are at once subtle and insidious. The 
sermon in the pulpit, the pressures of trade unionism, the oppro­
brium inflicted by the press, the ridicule of friends, the ostracism


--- PAGE 35 ---
62 63 CONSCIENCISM 
of colleagues; the sneer, the snub and countless other devices, these 
are all non-statutory instruments by means of which societies 
exert coercion, by means ofwhich they achieve and preserve unity. 
'Coercion' could unfortunately be rather painful, but it is signally 
effective in ensuring that individual behaviour does not become 
dangerously irresponsible. The individual is not an anarchic unit. 
He lives in orderly surroundings, and 
surroundings calls for methods 
One of these subtle methods is to be found in the account of 
history. The history of Africa, as presented by European scholars, 
been encumbered with malicious myths. It was even denied 
we were a historical people. It was said that whereas other 
shaped history, and determined its course, Africa 
had stood still, held down by inertia; that Africa was only propelled 
history by the European contact. African history was therefore 
presented as an extension of European history. Hegel's authority 
was lent to this a-historical hypothesis concerning Africa, which he 
himself unhappily helped to promote. And apologists of colonial­
ism lost little time in seizing upon it and writing wildly thereon. 
In presenting the history of Africa as the history of the collapse of 
our traditional societies in the presence of the European advent, 
colonialism and imperialism employed their account of African 
history and anthropology as an instrument oppressive 
ideology. 
Earlier on, such disparaging accounts had of African 
<"""'A.nand culture as to appear to justify slavery, slavery, posed 
accounts, seemed a positive deliverance of our 
ancestors. When the slave trade and slavery became illegal, the 
pVlnpr1-< on Africa yielded to the new wind of change, and now 
to present African culture and society as being so rudi­
mentary and primitive that colonialism was a duty of Christianity 
and civilization. Even ifwe were no longer, on the evidence of the 
shape ofour skulls, regarded as the missing link, unblessed with the 
arts of good government, material and spiritual progress, we were 
still regarded as representing the infancy of mankind. Our highly 
sophisticated cnlture was said to be simple and paralysed by inertia, 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
and we had to be encumbered with tutelage. And this tutelage, it 
was thought, could only be implemented if we were fmt sub­
jugated politically. 
history of a nation is, unfortunately, too easily written as 
history of its dominant class. But if the history of a nation, or a 
people, cannot be found in the history of a class, how much less 
can the history of a continent be found in what is not even a part 
of it - Europe. Africa cannot be validly treated merely as the space 
in which Europe swelled up. If African history is interpreted in 
terms of the interests of European merchandise and capital, mis­
sionaries and administrators, it is no wonder that African national­
ism is in the forms it takes regarded as a perversion and neo­
colonialism as a virtue. 
In the new African renaissance, we place great emphasis on 
presentation of history. Our history needs to be written as 
history of our society, not as the story of European adventures. 
African society must be treated as enjoying its own integrity; 
history must be a mirror of that society, and the European contact 
must fmd its place in this history only as an African eXlDerlell.ce. 
even if as a crucial one. That is to say, the European contact needs 
to be assessed and judged from the point of view of the principles 
animating African society, and from the point of view of the 
harmony and progress of this society. 
When history is presented in this way, it can become not an 
account of how those African students referred to in the intro­
duction became more europeanized than others; it can become a 
map of the growing tragedy and the fmal triumph of our society. 
In this way, African history can come to guide and direct African 
action. African history can thus become a pointer at the ideology 
which should guide and direct African reconstruction. 
This connection between an ideological standpoint and the 
writing of history is a perennial one. A check on the work 
great historians, including Herodotus and 
exposes their passionate concern with ideology. 
moral, political and sociological comments are particular mani­
festations of more e:eneral ideological standpoints. Classically. the


--- PAGE 36 ---
64 65 CONSCIENCISM 
great historians have been self-appointed public prosecutors, 
accusing on behalf ofthe past, admonishing on behalf ofthe future. 
Their accusations and admonishings have been set in a rigid frame­
work of presuppositions, both about the nature of the good man 
and about the nature of the good society, in such a way that these 
presuppositions serve as intimations of an implicit ideology. 
Even Ranke, the great nineteenth-century German historian, 
who boasted that his aim was not to sit in judgement on the 
past, but only to show us what really happened, was far from 
being a mere chronicler of the past. He was, in spite of his claims, 
an engage historian. The key to the attitude which he strikes in his 
historical works lies frrst in his views on the necessity of strife for 
progress, and second in his ideas on the source of the state and the 
relation of the individual to the state. Dutifully grinding an axe for 
His Prussian Majesty, on the first point Ranke holds that it is pre­
cisely through one state seeking a hegemony ofEurope, and thereby 
provoking a rivalry, that the civilization of the European state is 
maintained; on the second pOllIt he holds that the state, in being 
an idea of God, enjoys a spiritual personality, and hence that 
neither reform nor revolution is exportable, for this would do 
violence to the personality of the importing state. He also holds 
that it is only through the state to which an individual belongs that 
he can develop and preserve his fullness of being. And the ideal of 
liberty which he is able to propose to Prussian subjects is a spon­
taneous subjection to the State. Is it surprising that he should have 
'explained' Luther's condemnation of the Peasants' War? Ranke, 
writing history, implements an ideological viewpolllt which he at 
the same time seeks to conceal. 
I have mentioned art as another of the subtle instruments of 
ideology. One can illustrate this in various ways. In the Medieval 
Age of Europe, when religion was considered to be the main pre­
occupation of life, all other concerns were subordinated to the 
religious, and actions tended to win approval to the extent that 
they supported religion, or at least were not in conflict with it. In 
the second chapter, I illustrated how economic activity was sub­
ordinated to the religious concern. Art, too, became infected by 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
this idea. It accordingly specialized in Biblical illustration and 
apocalypses of paradise. 
Today, in the socialist countries of Europe, where the range of 
conduct is fixed by socialist principles, that particular art which 
glorifIes the socialist ideology is encouraged at the expense of that 
art which the supremacy of aristocrats or the bourgeoisie might 
inspire. The former in general encouraged a bucolic and a classical 
kllld of art, its subjects appropriated from the class of gods and 
goddesses, and leisurely flute-playing shepherd boys. The bour­
geoisie for their part injected a puritan strain into art, and in general 
directed it along lines of portraiture. Art has not, however, always 
propagated ideals within an already accepted ideology. It has some­
times thrived in the vanguard ofreform or even revolution. Goya, 
for example, was responsible for signifIcant conscience-stricken 
and protest painting in which by paint and brush he lam­
basted the brutalities of the nineteenth-century ruling classes. Here 
he was not defending an ideology, but was exposing one to 
attack. 
In African art, too, society was oftell portrayed. It is the moral-
philosophical preoccupation in tenns of which this portrayal was 
done which explains its typical power. It is this also which explains 
the characteristic distortion of form in African art. In the portrayal 
of force, whether as forces of the world, of generation and death, 
or the force of destiny, it was essential that it should not be de­
lineated as something assimilated and overcome. And this is the 
impression which the soft symmetries of lifelike art would have 
given. It is to avoid this impression of force overcome that African 
art resorted to distortion of forms. 
By treating of such examples, one may illustrate subtle methods 
of , coercion' and cohesion. To cope with the teddy-boy problem, 
many churches in Britain fornIed clubs. In these clubs they hoped 
to entice teddy boys by the provision of rock-and-roll music. 
Once these youths were so trapped, the churches expected so to 
influence, and so 'coerce' them as to reinstate their behaviour 
within the range of passable conduct. The churches used a non­
subtle instrument which was at the same tinle not centralized.


--- PAGE 37 ---
66 CONSCIENCISM 
In the Soviet Union, too, open and systematic ridicule was 
resorted to, and when this did not work well enough, teddy boys 
were moved from one area of the country to another. Through 
inconveniencing them, Soviet authorities sought by a non­
statutory instrument to influence, and so 'coerce', teddy boys in 
order to bring their activities within the range of passable be­
haviour. 
These instruments all relate to some conception of 'the desirable 
society'. This is a conception which is nurtured by ideology. As the 
conception of 'the desirable society' changes, some of its instru­
ments too change, the subtle ones changing in a quiet and discreet 
way. When this happens, it is said that new ground is broken. 
Philosophy, too, is one ofthe subtle instruments ofideology and 
social cohesion. Indeed, it affords a theoretical basis for the cohesion. 
In The Republic of Plato, we are confronted with an example 
which philosophy is made the theoretical basis of a proposed 
social order. In that proposal, philosophy would be an instrument 
of the ideology belonging to the social order proposed by Plato. 
Philosophy performs this function in two ways. It performs it 
as a general theoretical statement to which a specific social-political 
theory is parallel. I have illustrated this in the discussion of some 
early Greek philosophers in the second chapter. Philosophy also 
performs this ideological function when it takes shape as political 
philosophy or as ethics. Through political philosophy, it lays down 
certain ideals for our pursuit and fortification, and it becomes an 
instrument of unity by laying down the same ideals for all the 
members ofa given society. 
As ethics, philosophy proposes to throw light upon the nature 
of moral principles and moral judgements; it also seeks to expose 
the source of the validity of ethical principles, and so of moral 
obligation. In ethics, we have an instrument of great fascination 
which runs parallel to statutory instruments without itself being 
statutory. Moral laws were never passed; there are no policemen 
or courts to ensure adherence to them. 
There is a certain fascination about morality. When someone 
asks why he has to take notice ofany state law, the intention ofthe 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 67 
law can be explained to him. Ifhe is not satisfied, it can be pointed 
out to him that he supported a certain constitution, or at least that a 
certain constitution is binding upon him, and under that con­
stitution Parliament is empowered to enact laws. If this does not 
satisfy him, then it can be pointed out to him that the laws of the 
land are to be tak;n note of, on pain of unpleasant consequences. 
But ifsomeone should ask why he has to be moral, a similar kind of 
answer cannot be made to him. Indeed, tIus fact led David Hume 
to say that reason could not tell him why he should not prefer the 
safety ofhis little fmger to the survival of mankind. 
Philosophers, grappling with the question ofthe source ofmoral 
obligation, have attempted different sorts of answer. Many have 
given their answer in terms ofthe individual psychology, in terms 
ofthe pleasure or the pain which certain courses ofaction entail for 
their perpetrators. Here, these philosophers have tried to anchor 
moral obligation in something, in regard to which the question 
'why?' would, they hoped, be impossible. They accordingly 
expected that the question why one likes pleasant things and dis­
likes painful ones could not be sensibly asked. If, therefore, moral 
obligation could be founded on pleasure and pain in such a way 
that morality raised expectations ofpleasure and immorality raised 
expectations of pain, a final answer would be procured to the 
question why one should be moral. But this account relates to the 
individual welfare and not the social. 
A few have tried to base moral laws on the nature of the human 
reason itsel£ In this way they hoped to give a final answer to the 
question why one should be moral. If moral laws were purely 
commands ofthe reason, to ask why one should be moral would be 
like asking why one should be consistent. Just as consistency is a 
requirement ofhuman discourse, so morality would be a require­
men t of human action. 
Yet others, eschewing a psychological or a rationalist answer, 
explore a sociological one, giving their account in terms of the 
general welfare or the general consensus. According to the 
utilitarians, for example, an action is right to the extent that it tends 
to promote the general welfare, and wrong to the extent that it


--- PAGE 38 ---
68 69 CONSCIENCISM 
tends to hinder it. Here they regard as devoid of meaning 
question why one ought to seek the general welfare. Ifthis question 
is devoid of sense, so is the question why one ought to be moral. 
A consequence of this view is that social welfare officers should 
be among the most ethical of men. 
The need for subtle means of social cohesion lies in the fact that 
there is a large portion oflife which is outside direct central inter­
vention. In order that this portion of life should be filled with 
order, non-statutory methods are required. These non-statutory 
methods, by and large, are the subtle means of social cohesion. 
But different societies lay different emphases on subtle means 
even if the range of conformity which they is the same. The 
emphasis which a particular society lays on a means depends 
on the experience, social-economic circumstances and the philo­
sophical foundation of that society. 
In Africa, this kind of emphasis must take objective account of 
our present situation at the return of political independence. From 
this point ofview, there are three broad features to be distinguished 
here. African society has one segment which comprises our 
traditional way oflife; it has a second segment which is filled by the 
presence of the Islamic tradition in Africa; it has a fmal segment 
represents the infiltration of the Christian tradition and 
,",UnI,U,-, ofWestern Europe into Africa, using colonialism and neo­
colonialism as its primary vehicles. These different segments are 
animated by competing ideologies. But society implies a 
certain dynamic unity, there needs to an ideology which, 
genuinely catering for the needs of all, the place 
competing ideologies, and so reflect the dynamic unity ofsociety, 
and be the guide to society's continual progress. 
The traditional face of Africa includes an attitude towards man 
which can only be described, in its social manifestation, as being 
socialist. This arises from the fact that man is regarded in Africa as 
primarily a spiritual being, a being endowed originally with a 
certain inward dignity, integrity and value. It stands refreshingly 
opposed to the Christian idea ofthe original sin and degradation of 
man. 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
idea ofthe original value ofman imposes duties ofa socialist 
upon us. Herein lies the theoretical basis of African com­
munalism. This theoretical basis expressed itself on the social level 
in terms institutions such as the clan, underlining the initial 
equality of all and the responsibility of many for one. In this social 
situation, it was impossible for classes of a Marxian kind to arise. 
By a Marxian kind of class, I mean one which has a place in a 
horizontal social stratification. Here classes are related in such a way 
that there is a disproportion of economic and political power 
between them. In such a society there exist classes which are 
crushed, lacerated and ground down by the encumbrance of 
exploitation. One class sits upon the neck of another. 
In the traditional African society, no sectional interest could 
be regarded as supreme; nor did legislative and executive power 
aid the interests of any particular group. welfare of the 
people was 
But colonialism came and changed 
necessities of the colonial administration to 
Introduction. For its success, the colonial adnnlllstratlOn needed a 
cadre ofAfricans, who, by being introduced to a certain minimum 
of European education, became infected with European ideals, 
which they tacitly accepted as being valid for African societies. 
Because these African instruments of the colonial administration 
were seen by all to be closely associated with the new sources of 
power, they acquired a certain prestige and rank to which they 
were not entitled by the demands of the harmonious development 
own society. 
In addition to them, groups of merchants and traders, lawyers, 
doctors, politicians and trade unionists emerged, who, armed with 
skills and levels of affluence which were gratifying to the colonial 
administration, initiated something parallel to the European middle 
class. There were also certain feudal-minded elements who became 
imbued with European ideals either through direct European 
education or through hobnobbing with the local colonial ad­
ministration. They gave the impression that they could be relied


--- PAGE 39 ---
70 CONSCIENCISM 
upon implicitly as repositories of all those staid and conservative 
virtues indispensable to any exploiter administration. They, as it 
were, paid the registration fee for membership of a class which was 
now associated with social power and authority. 
Such education as we were all given put before us right from our 
infancy ideals of the metropolitan countries, ideals which could 
seldom be seen as representing the scheme, the harmony and 
progress of African society. The scale and type of economic 
activity, the idea of the accountability of the individual conscience 
introduced by the Christian religion, countless other silent 
influences, these have all made an indelible impression upon 
African society. 
But neither economic nor political subjugation could be 
considered as being in tune with the traditional African egalitarian 
view of man and society. Colonialism had in any case to be done 
away with. The African Hercules has his club poised ready to smite 
any new head which the colonialist hydra may care to put out. 
With true independence regained, however, a new harmony 
needs to be forged, a harmony that will allow the combined 
presence of traditional Africa, Islamic Africa and Euro-Christian 
Africa, so that this presence is in tune with the original humanist 
principles underlying African society. Our society is not the old 
society, but a new society enlarged by Islamic and Euro-Christian 
influences. A new emergent ideology is therefore required, an 
ideology which can solidify in a philosophical statement, but at the 
same time an ideology which will not abandon the original 
humanist principles ofAfrica. 
Such a philosophical statement will be born out of the crisis of 
the African conscience confronted with the three strands ofpresent 
African society. Such a philosophical statement I propose to name 
philosophical consciencism, for it will give the theoretical basis for an 
ideology whose aim shall be to contain the African experience of 
Islamic and Euro-Christian presence as well as the experience ofthe 
traditional African society, and, by gestation, employ them for the 
harmonious growth and development of that society. 
Every society is placed in nature. And it seeks to influence 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 7I 
nature, to impose such transformations upon nature, as will 
develop the environment of the society for its better fulfilment. 
The changed environment, in bringing about a better fulfilment of 
the society, thereby alters the society. Society placed in nature is 
therefore caught in the correlation oftransformation with develop­
ment. This correlation represents the toil of man both as a social 
being and as an individual. This kind of correlation has achieved 
expression in various social-political theories. For a social-political 
theory has a section which determines the way in which social forces 
are to be deployed in order to increase the transformation ofsociety. 
Slavery and feudalism represent social-political theories in which 
the deployment of forces is not a problematic question. In both 
slavery and feudalism, workers, the people whose toil transforms 
nature for the development ofsociety, are dissociated from any say 
in rule. By a vicious division oflabour, one class ofcitizen toils and 
another reaps where it has not sown. In the slave society, as in the 
feudal society, that part of society whose labours transform nature 
is not the same as the part which is better fulfilled as a result of this 
transformation. If by their fruits we shall know them, they must 
first grow the fruits. In slave and feudal society, the fruit-eaters are 
not the fruit-growers. This is the cardinal factor in exploitation, 
that the section of a society whose labours transform nature is not 
the same as the section which is better fulfilled as a result of this 
transformation. 
In every non-socialist society, there can be found two strata 
which correspond to that of the oppressor and the oppressed, the 
exploiter and the exploited. In all such societies, the essential 
relation between the two strata is the same as that between masters 
and slaves, lords and serfS. In capitalism, which is only a social­
political theory in which the important aspects of slavery and 
feudalism are refined, a stratified society is required for its proper 
functioning, a society is required in which the working class is 
oppressed by the ruling class; for, under capitalism, that portion of 
society whose labours transform nature and produce goods is not 
the portion ofsociety which enjoys the fruits ofthis transformation 
and productivity. Nor is it the whole ofsociety which is so enhanced.


--- PAGE 40 ---
----- ----------------------------
CONSCIENCISM72 
This might indeed be termed a contradiction. It is a social 
contradiction in so far as it is contrary to genuine principles of 
social equity and social justice. It is also an economic contradiction 
in so far as it is contrary to a harmonious and unlimited economic 
development. 
Capitalism is a development by refmement from feudalism, just 
as feudalism is a development by refmement from slavery. The 
essence of reform is to combine a continuity of fundamental 
principle, with a tactical change in the manner ofexpression ofthe 
fundamental principle. Reform is not a change in the thought, but 
one in its manner ofexpression, not a change in what is said but one 
in idiom. In capitalism, feudalism suffers, or rather enjoys reform, 
and the ftmdamental principle of feudalism merely strikes new 
levels of subtlety. In slavery, it is thought that exploitation, the 
alienation of the fruits of the labour of others, requires a certain 
degree of political and forcible subjection. In feudalism, it is 
thought that a lesser degree of the same kind of subjection is 
adequate to the same purpose. In capitalism, it is thought that a still 
lesser degree is adequate. In this way, psychological irritants to 
revolution are appeased, and exploitation fmds a new lease of life, 
until the people should discover the opposition between reform and 
revolution. 
In this way, capitalism continues with its characteristic pompous 
plans for niggardly reforms, while it coerces one section ofa society 
somehow into making itself available to another section, which 
battens on it. That development which capitalism marks over 
slavery and feudalism consists as much in the methods by means 
ofwhich labour is coerced as in the mode ofproduction. Capital­
ism is but the gentleman's method of slavery. 
Indeed, a standard ruse of capitalism today is to imitate some of 
the proposals of socialism, and tum this imitation to its own use. 
Running with the hare and hunting with the hounds is much more 
than a pastime to capitalism; it is the hub ofa complete strategy. In 
socialism, we seek an increase in levels ofproduction in order solely 
that the people, by whose exertions production is possible, shall 
raise their standard of living and attain a new consciousness and 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 73 
level oflife. Capitalism does this too, but not for the same purpose. 
Increased productivity under capitalism does indeed lead to a rise in 
the standard ofliving; but when the proportion of distribution of 
value between exploited and exploiter is kept constant, then any 
increase in levels of production must mean a greater quantity, but 
nor proportion, ofvalue accruing to the exploited. Capitalism thus 
discovers a new way ofseeming to implement reform, while really 
genuinely avoiding it. It creates the welfare state. 
Whereas capitalism is a development by refmement from 
slavery and feudalism, socialism does not contain the funda­
mental ingredient of capitalism, the principle of exploitation. 
Socialism stands for the negation of that very principle wherein 
capitalism has its being, lives, and thrives, that principle which 
links capitalism with slavery and feudalism. 
If one seeks the social-political ancestor of socialism, one must 
go to communalism. Socialism has characteristics in common 
with communalism, just as capitalism is linked with feudalism 
and slavery. In socialism, the principles underlying communalism 
are given expression in modern circumstances. Thus, whereas 
communalism in an untechnical society can be laissez jaire, in a 
technical society where sophisticated means of production are at 
hand, if the underlying principles of communalism are not given 
centralised and correlated expression, class cleavages arise, which 
are the result of economic disparities, and accompanying political 
inequalities. Socialism, therefore, can be and is the defence of the 
principles of communalism in a modern setting. Socialism is a 
form ofsocial organisation which, guided by the principles under­
lying communism, adopts procedures and measures made 
necessary by demographic and technological developments. 
These considerations throw great light on the bearing of 
revolution and reform on socialism. The passage from the an­
cestralline ofslavery via feudalism and capitalism to socialism can 
only lie through revolution: it cannot lie through reform. For in 
reform, fundamental principles are held constant and the details 
of their expression modified. In the words of Marx, it leaves the 
pillars of the building intact. Indeed, sometimes, reform itself


--- PAGE 41 ---
74 CONSCIENCISM 
may be initiated by the necessities of preserving identical funda­
mental principles. Reform is a tactic of self-preservation. 
Revolution is thus an indispensable avenue to socialism, where 
the antecedent social-political structure is animated by principles 
which are a negation of those of socialism, as in a 
ture (and therefore also in a colonialist structure, for a cOJomanst 
structure is essentially ancillary to capitalism). Indeed, I dis­
tinguish between two colonialisms, between a domestic one, and 
an external one. Capitalism at home is domestic colonialism. 
But because the spirit of communalism still exists to some 
extent in societies with a communalist past, socialism and com­
munism are not in the strict sense of the word 'revolutionary' 
creeds. They may be described as restatements in contemporary 
idiom of the principles underlying communalism. On the other 
hand, in societies with no history of communalism, the creeds of 
socialism and communism are fully revolutionary, and the pas­
sage to socialism must be guided by the principles of scientific 
socialism. 
The nature and cause of the conflict between the ruling class 
and the exploited class is influenced by the development of 
productive forces, that is, changes in technology; the economic 
relations which these forces condition; and the ideologies that 
reflect the properties and psychology of the people living in that 
society. The basis of a socialist revolution is created when the 
struggle within a given society has resulted in mass consent 
and mass desire for positive action to change or transform that 
society. It is then that the foundation is laid for the highest form 
of political action - when a revolution attains its excellence, 
workers and peasants succeed in overthrowing all other classes. 
I have explained how society's desire to transform nature 
reflects itself in different social-political theories. I wish now to 
suggest how the same desire reflects itself in philosophy. Just as 
social-political theories, to the extent that they deploy forces for 
the harnessing and development ofnature, fall into two lots, so do 
philosophies. From this standpoint, the two real social-political 
alternatives facing society are either that one section should pro-
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 75 
duce, and another section batten thereon, or that all sections 
should produce and all sections should be fulfilled by the value 
created by labour. 
In the same way, there are two real philosophical alternatives. 
These alternatives coincide with idealism and materialism. In the 
preceding chapter, I explained how idealism was connected with a 
tiered society, how through its mode of explaining nature and 
social phenomena by reference to spirit, idealism favoured a class 
structure ofa horizontal sort, in which one class sat upon the neck of 
another. 
I also explained there how materialism, on the other hand, was 
connected with a humanist organization, how through its being 
monistic, and its referring all natural processes to matter and 
its laws, it inspired an egalitarian organization of society. The 
unity and fundamental identity of nature suggests the unity and 
fundamental identity of man in society. Idealism favours an 
oligarchy, materialism favours an egalitarianism. 
Individuals have both idealist and materialist tendencies in them. 
So have societies both idealist and materialist streaks. But these 
streaks do not exist in equipoise. They are connected by a conflict in 
which now one streak predominates, now the other. 
By reason of the connection with an oligarchy and 
of materialism with an egalitarianism, the opposition of idealism 
and materialism in the same society is paralleled by the opposition 
ofconservative and progressive forces on the social level. When in 
the dialectical opposition ofcapitalism to socialism, the former for a 
time becomes triumphant, social progress is not thereby altogether 
arrested, though it is seriously attenuated. But since it is not 
arrested, it is hardly cause for wonder that the workers of today in 
respects enjoy better circumstances of life than even a good 
many feudal lords ofthe past. To confess to this degree ofprogress 
is not to say, however, that capitalism has been without its shanty 
towns and slums, its captive workers languishing and finally dying 
in public squares, victims ofhunger, cold and disease. 
The question is not whether there has been discernible progress 
under capitalism, but rather whether what progress is admitted


--- PAGE 42 ---
76 77 CONSCIENCISM 
can be said to be adequate. Here we discern one of capitalism's 
deadly sins. Under this social-political system, man's materialist 
approach to nature loses its bearings. It sheds its humanist stimulus 
under the impulse ofthe profit motivc. Ifhappincss is defmed in the 
context of society, thcn happiness becomes that fecling which an 
individual derives, from a given economic, political and cultural 
context, that he is in a position to make good his aspirations. Since 
capitalist development is unfortmlately a process in which a 
rapacious oligarchy is pitted against an exploited mass. happiness, 
according to this definition, is denied to many. The achievements 
ofthe capitalist oligarchy defme new limits ofwhat is attainable by 
the individual, and thereby push outward the frontiers oflegitimate 
aspirations. But capitalism is a system in which these limiting 
aspirations are by defmition denied to the people, and only reserved 
for a few. 
The evil of capitalism consists in its alienation of the fruit of 
labour from those who with the toil oftheir body and the sweat of 
their brow produce this fruit. This aspect of capitalism makes it 
irreconcilable with those basic principles which animate the 
traditional African society. Capitalism is unjust; in our newly 
independent cotmtries it is not only too complicated to be work­
able, it is also alien. 
Under socialism, however, the study and mastery ofnature has a 
humanist impulse, and is directed not towards a profiteering 
accomplishment, but the affording of ever-increasing satisfaction 
for the material and spiritual needs ofthe greatest number. Ideas of 
transformation and development, in so far as they relate to the 
purposes ofsociety as a whole and not to an oligarch purpose, are 
properly speaking appropriate to socialism. 
On the philosophical level, too, it is materialism, not idealism, 
that in one form or another will give the flrmest conceptual basis to 
the restitution of Africa's egalitarian and humanist principles. 
Idealism breeds an oligarchy, and its social implication, as drawn 
out in my second chapter, is obnoxious to Mrican society. It is 
materialism, with its monistic and naturalistic account of nature, 
which will balk arbitrariness, inequality and injustice. How· 
SOCIETY AND IDEOLOGY 
materialism suggests a socialist philosophy I have explained in my 
sccond chapter. 
In sum, the restitution of Africa's humanist and egalitarian 
principles of society requires socialism. It is materialism that 
ensures the only effective transformation of nature, and socialism 
that derives the highest development from this transformation.


--- PAGE 43 ---
79 
CHAPTER 4 
CONSCIENCISM 
P
RACTICE without thought is blind; thought without 
practice is empty. The three segments of African society 
which I specified in the last chapter, the traditional, the 
Western, and the Islamic, co-exist uneasily; the principles animating 
them are often in conflict with one another. I have in illustration 
tried to show how the principles which inform capitalism are in 
conflict with the socialist egalitarianism of the traditional African 
society. 
What is to be done then? I have stressed that the two other' 
segments, in order to be rightly seen, must be accommodated only 
as experiences ofthe traditional African society. Ifwe fail to do this 
our society will be racked by the most malignant schizophrenia. 
Our attitude to the Western and the Islamic experience must be 
purposeful. It must also be guided by thought, for practice without 
thought is blind. What is called for as a first step is a body of 
connected thought which will determine the general nature ofour 
action in unifying the society which we have inherited, this uni­
fication to take account, at all times, of the elevated ideals under­
lying the traditional African society. Social revolution must there­
fore have, standing firmly behind it, a1]l'mtellectual revolution, a 
revolution in which our thinking a?8. philosophy are directed 
towards the redemption ofour sociey1. Our philosophy must find 
its weapons in the environment I~nd living conditions of the 
African people. It is from those.;t:onditions that the intellectual 
content of our philosophy muwhe created. The emancipation of 
the African continent is the emancipation of man. This requires 
two aims: first, the restitution of the egalitarianism of human 
society, and, second, the logistic mobilization of all our resources 
towards the attainment ofthat restitution. 
CONSCIENCISM 
The philosophy that must stand behind this social revolution is 
that which I have once referred to as philosophical consciencism; 
consciencism is the map in intellectual terms of the disposition of 
forces which will enable African society to digest the Western and 
the Islamic and the Euro-Christian elements in Africa, and develop 
them in such a way that they fit into the African personality. The 
African personality is itself defined by the cluster of humanist 
principles which underlie the traditional African society. Philo­
sophical consciencism is that philosophical standpoint which, 
taking its start from the present content of the African conscience, 
indicates the way in which progress is forged out of the conflict in 
that conscience. 
Its basis is in materialism. The minimum assertion ofmaterialism 
is the absolute and independent existence of matter. Matter, how­
ever, is also a plenum of forces which are in antithesis to one 
another. The philosophical point ofsaying this is that matter is thus 
endowed with powers of self-motion. 
Ofcourse, there are diverse sorts of motion. Philosophers have 
accepted different kinds of phenomena as illustrating motion. 
There is the obvious case ofchange of place. If one object changes 
its position in relation to objects in a locality, it is said to move. 
Against this, it might be thought at first that the whole universe 
could revolve asymmetrically around an object, in which case it 
could in absolute terms be fancied that the object hadnot moved. If 
this happened it would be indistinguishable from the first situation 
in which the object itself changes its position relative to the rest of 
the universe; it does not signify a difference. And if these putative 
two states do not signifY a difference, the latter cannot constitute an 
objection to the former. 
The statement that an object moves is a significant one. And 
when two significant statements fail in the above way to indicate a 
difference they must signify the same thing. What I am enunciating 
here is quite other than the Verification Principle. The Veriflcation 
Principle, as is well known, has two parts. In the first place, it asserts 
a proposition to be significant only if it is subject to empirical 
verification; and in the second place, it asserts that the meaning ofa


--- PAGE 44 ---
80 
81 CONSCIENCISM 
significant proposition is yielded by its method of verificatino. 
The principle which r am on the other hand anxious to defend 
states no condition for meaningfulness, but only establishes a 
sufficient condition for identity of meaning. The central idea is as 
follows: if there are two expressions such that precisely the same 
consequences follow from the conjunction of the first with any 
other proposition as follow from the conjunction of the second 
with the same proposition, then the two expressions are identical in 
meaning. 
It will be seen that this Principle ofIdentity ofMeaning is akin to 
Leibniz's Principle of Identity of Meaning and to Frege's Principle 
ofIdentity ofMeaning. I have described one kind ofmotion which 
philosophers accept. They also distinguish rotary motion, which 
Plato illustrated with the movement of a top. There is however a 
third kind of motion, which consists in alteration of property. If 
properties can be distinguished from relations, it can be said that 
there are two broad categories ofmotion, such that one introduces 
a change in relation while the other introduces a change in property, 
seeing that linear as well as rotary motion involves change of 
relation. If there are these two kinds of motion, one resulting in a 
change ofrelation, the other in a change ofproperty, then when it is 
said that matter has an original power of self-motion, neither kind 
is necessarily implied, nor are both together. 
It is fashionable, in particular among philosophers who eschew 
dialectics, to say that matter is inert. What tllls means must be 
distinguished from what the inertia of matter means in Newton. 
Newton defined inertia axiomatically as, for example, in his first 
law ofmotion. According to this law, a body, except in so far as it is 
impressed upon by an external force, continues in its state of 
uniform motion in a straight line. The position of rest is easily 
accommodated as a limiting case ofmotion in a straight line. Now 
it is quite proper, instead of giving a direct defmition of an intro­
duced term, to elucidate its meaning by means of axioms. The 
axioms will in fact set out what one is to gather from the use ofthe 
introduced term. In the case ofNewton' s first law ofmotion, we see 
that here too a body's power of linear self-motion is denied. 
CONSCIENCISM 
Indeed, Newton would also deny a body's power of rotary self­
motion. To borrow a word invented by Whitehead, the inertia of 
matter corresponds to its pushiness. 
When it is enquired what the philosophers mean by the inertness 
ofmatter, something different transpires. In reality the plillosophers 
seek an intellectual parallel to physical motion, and deny this of 
matter. Hence, we find them harping incontinently on the 
'stupidity' ofmatter. They mean by this that matter is incapable of 
intellectual action, neither thinking, perceiving nor feeling. Of 
course, they are grateful for Newton's denial of the physical 
activity of matter. They take this up and increase it with a further 
denial of the intellectual activity of matter. Hence, when a philo­
sopher says that matter is 'stupid', he does not mean that it is slow­
witted, but that it has no wit at all. In this denial of activity, both 
physical and mental, of matter, it is however not 1.ll1usual for 
philosophers to contradict themselves. Ifone looks through Locke's 
magnum opus, The Essay on Human Understanding, one quickly 
comes upon such contradictions. 
There Locke denies that matter is active, attributing all activity to 
spirit. Nevertheless, in his theory of perception, he says that 
corpuscles travel from a perceived object to our appropriate organ of 
sense in order that we should be able to perceive it. These cor':' 
puscles are said by him to be parts of the perceived object which 
detach themselves and subject us to a kind of radiative bombard­
ment. Here, Locke patently contradicts himsel£ For tllis activity of 
matter is not said by him to be induced, but origina~ natural. 
But even the theory ofgravity, while it does explain the current 
motion of bodies (including rest), is properly silent over the 
question of antecedents. It does not face the question why bodies 
move at all, how it is that the heavenly bodies, for example, come 
to be moving, but only how they keep moving and why they keep 
moving as they do. 
And yet, all those who conceive the universe in terms of an 
original super-atom which multiplied internal stresses to such a 
pitch as to burst aS1.ll1der, thereby imply that matter has powers of 
self-motion, for they do not conceive this primordial building­


--- PAGE 45 ---
82 
83 
CONSCIENCISM 
Up of internal stresses in terms of externally impressed forces. 
Both the phenomenon of radiation and the wave mechanics of 
quantum theory indubitably presuppose that body has original 
powers of self-motion even in that sense which requires something 
other than change ofproperty. Ifmatter perpetrates a spontaneous 
emission, then to the extent that there is an emission of particles 
there is motion; to the extent that this emission is spontaneous, 
there is self-motion. 
The classical philosophers have in fact been over-impressed by at 
least two considerations. The first is that we do not discern a direct 
phenomenon of radiation or corpuscular motion by any of our 
celebrated five senses. But we do see apples thrown to go up. And 
we observe feathers blown to make them air-borne. By contrast, 
even though we know of cases where humans and animals are 
pushed, we witness day after day the more overt and directly 
obtrusive phenomenon of spontaneous motion in living things. 
Our classical philosophers have then without much ado closed the 
dossier, pleasantly identifying the limits of their own knowledge 
with the limits ofwhat can be. 
Now, if one wishes to maintain the philosophical inertness of 
matter, one must ascribe the phenomenal self-motion ofbodies to 
some non-material principle, usually a soul or a spirit. This soul or 
spirit may of course be said to inhere in matter or to be external to 
it. But even when it is said that there is a spirit or a soul in matter 
which is responsible for its spontaneous motion, it will not have 
been said that in every case ofphenomenal spontaneous motion ofa 
body there must be presumed a spirit concealed in the body, a 
ghost lurking in the machine. Hence the philosophical inertness of 
matter is not achieved by the mere postulate ofspirit or soul. It is in 
fact made a defining characteristic ofmatter that it is philosophically 
inert. 
In the postulate of a soul or spirit, vitalism and diverse forms of 
occultism could easily be provided sustenance and defence. But in 
this also, we fmd the secoud consideration which has over­
impressed philosophers. This is the idea ofintention. It was thought 
that spontaneous motion could only be deliberate or purposeful, 
CONSCIBNCISM 
subsuming the idea of intention in any case. Deliberateness, 
purpose, intention was at the same time exclusively attributed 
only to living things, and not even to all living things at that. 
Matter, in itself non-living, was therefore held to be incapable of 
deliberateness, purpose or intention. Spontaneity of any sort could 
not therefore be ascribed to it. This is in fact at the heart of 
philosophical inertness which is quaintly called 'stupidity' ! 
In a way, it is not the philosophers of today but the natural 
scientists who are the successors of the ancient philosophers. 
Attentive to the phenomenon of radiation, that of spontaneous 
emission of particles of matter, and Newton's silence over the 
source of the original motion of bodies, one can, if an 'inert' 
philosopher, embrace a thorough-going animism, and infuse non­
living matter with a plethora of spirits, or one can correctly 
abandon the now groundless denial of the capacity of matter for 
self-motion. 
Indeed, the philosophical ancestor of all Western philosophers, 
Thales, was stared in the face by both alternatives. He had said that 
the world was not to be explained in terms ofsuper-nature, and had 
accordingly said that everything was water. It now fell upon him to 
explain why hosts of things were not 'watery'. The minimum he 
could do was to put a principle ofchange in water itself, so that by 
the operation of that principle, a transmutation from the state we 
know as water to other things would be possible. But ifhe was not 
to abandon his first statement that everything is water, the prin­
ciple must permit only geometrical changes in water, that is, in its 
operation, it must be limited to the rarefaction and condensation of 
water. For this, the principle needed to be a principle of motion. 
Hence, he said that things were full of gods. Though this smells 
unpleasantly of animism, he only meant, through asserting the 
capacity of matter for spontaneous self-motion, to reject its inert­
ness. In saying things were full of gods, he did not mean that every 
object was the locus of some god, for his whole philosophical 
revolution consisted in his neutralizing of the gods, his rendering 
them irrelevant for purposes of explanation of the objects and 
processes of the world. It is his idiom, not his thought, which was


--- PAGE 46 ---
84 85 CONSCIENCISM 
picturesque. Just as Aristotle was later to recover the forms from 
Plato's heaven and restore them to matter, so Thales was now 
retrieving the source ofmotion and the cause ofprocesses from the 
priests' heaven for matter. 
Matter is not inert in the sense ofthe philosophers. It is capable of 
self-motion both in the sense of change of relation, and in the sense 
of change ofproperty. But matter has inertia. Inertia and inertness 
have been sufficiently distinguished, and while inertness implies 
inertia, inertia does not imply inertness. 
The initial assertions of what I put forward as philosophical 
consciencism are therefore twofold. First, there is the assertion of 
the absolute and independent existence of matter; second, there is 
the assertion ofthe capacity ofmatter for spontaneous self-motion. 
To the extent of these two initial assertions, philosophical con­
sciencism is deeply materialist. 
There is a supreme need to distinguish here between the 
materialism which is involved in philosophical consciencism and 
that materialism which implies the sole existence of matter. I 
pOlllted out in the first chapter that a materialist philosophy which 
accepts the primary reality of matter must either deny other 
categories ofbeing, or else claim that they are one and all reducible 
without left-overs to matter. If this does not present a dilemma, at 
least the choice is often palllful. In a materialist philosophy 
admitting the primary reality of matter, if spirit is accepted as a 
category of being, non-residual reduction to matter must be 
claimed. Furthermore, the phenomenon ofconsciousness, like that 
of self-consciousness, must be held to be in the ultimate analysis 
nothing but an aspect of matter. 
Strictly speaking, the assertion of the sole reality of matter is 
atheistic, for pantheism, too, is a species of atheism. Philosophical 
consciencism, even though deeply rooted in materialism, is not 
necessarily atheistic. 
According to philosophical consciencism, certam activities 
possessing all the syndromes of purpose may still be the direct 
activity of matter. Such activity is widespread and is characterized 
by a non-apperceptive response to stimulus; that is to say, it is 
CONSCIENCISM 
characterized by a response to stimulus emptied of all self-aware­
ness, a response devoid ofany cognition beyond the reaction to that 
which is for the time being acting as stimulus. Instinctive response is 
this kind of activity, for in instinctive response there is a non­
apperceptive response to stimulus, a response which is not con­
ditioned by any realization of a possible relation of purpose 
between the stimulus and the stimulated. On the other hand, 
apperceptive response is deliberate. Here, there is a self-awareness 
and an appraisal ofthe situation involving stimulus and response. 
The suspicion that living things exhibit non-apperceptive 
response is not new. Indeed, Descartes thought that the response of 
all non-human animals was non-apperceptive. He therefore denied 
that non-human animals possessed souls, remaming content to 
believe that all the actions of such animals could be given a 
mechanical explanation which is complete. But even humans are 
not entirely above non-apperceptive response. Indeed a response 
that starts by being apperceptive could in time be rendered non­
apperceptive by the technique ofproducing a conditioned reflex. 
Aristotle had, before Descartes, maintained a similar opinion, 
that only humans were capable of a self-conscious, apperceptive 
response. This opinion ofAristotle's was confirmed in his invention 
of the vegetable and the animal souls, as distinct from the rational 
soul. 
It might seem that a philosophical position which accepts a 
duality of the Cartesian type cannot comfortably treat all the 
actions of animals as purdy mechanical. For this kind of duality, 
there should ensue a nagging doubt, the doubt whether spirit as a 
category should not really be excised with Occam's razor. Accord­
ing to Occam's razor, entities should not be multiplied without 
logical need. 
But according to Cartesian duality, there are two irreducible 
types of substance. There is spiritual substance which is purely 
active, thinks and is non-extended. Then there is matter which is 
purely extended and is inert in the philosopher's sense. Now a great 
many of the actions ofanimals are, as outward marks, quite similar 
to those of men. It is therefore a kmd of special pleading to hold


--- PAGE 47 ---
86 87 CONSCIENCISM 
that these actions are spirit-produced in the one case and not in the 
other, especially since Descartes makes an issue of the existence of 
minds other than his own and God's. 
In order to remove this feeling that Occam's razor might be 
applied to shave off spirit, it is necessary to show, as distinct from 
claiming, that actions which have syndromes of being mind­
inspired can result from mere matter. To do this is to show how 
some mind-language is reducible without residue to body­
language. That is, to show how expressions which might be used in 
describing spirit-directed operations can be shown to be com­
pletely apt in describing mechanical action; almost to show, 
indeed, that rudimentary minds are nothing but active matter. 
That this is so was in fact explicitly claimed by Leibniz, who said 
that matter was rudimentary mind, thereby breaking the categorial 
ice between matter and mind. 
In the fmt chapter, I discussed at some length how categorial 
conversion or reduction is possible, making free reference in 
course ofthe discussion to the work oflogicians. Ifspiritual pheno­
mena are in fact the outcome of material phenomena, then it is 
hardly surprising that environment, which is but a disposition of 
matter, can enhance, intensify, even develop the consciousness. 
Furthermore, the mind-body problem is solved. This solution of 
the mind-body problem has sometimes taken the form of cutting 
the Gordian knot. The mind-body problem arises in the following 
manner. If one says that there are ouly two types of substances, 
matter and mind, and furthermore allows interaction between 
them, then the question arises how there can be interaction between 
substances which are so disparate. Mind is purely active, thinks, and 
is unextended; matter is passive, extended and is without aware­
ness. If one asserts the sole reality of matter, as extreme materialists 
do, or if one asserts the sole reality of spirit as Leibniz must be 
deemed to have done, then the mind-body problem is solved by 
removing the conditions in which the perplexity arises. This is to cut 
the Gordian knot, for now mind and body will not be disparate, 
but will either both be forms of matter or both be forms of spirit. 
In philosophical consciencism, however, the interaction ofmind 
CONSCIENCISM 
and body is accepted as a fact. The philosophical perplexity which 
darkens this interaction is removed by the demonstration of the 
possibility ofcategorial conversion. Categorial conversion must be 
distinguished from parallelism. Descartes himself tried to solve the 
mind-body problem by resorting to a kind of parallelism. He 
instituted parallel occurrences, and thus explained pain as that grief 
which the soul felt at the damage to its body. On this point, as on 
several others, Descartes was assailed by the critical acumen of 
the Ghanian philosopher Anthony William Amo. According to 
Amo, all that the soul could do on Descartes' terms is to take 
cognizance of the fact that there is a hole in its body or a contusion 
on it, and uuless knowledge is itself painful, the mind could not be 
said to grieve thereat. Ofcourse, ifthe mind could be said to grieve 
in this way, on bare knowledge of the state of the body, then one 
might say that the body could affect the mind. But not so neces­
sarily, for, strictly speaking, according to Descartes the body does 
not affect the mind, but the mind commiserates with the body. 
Philosophical consciencism has no room for a mere parallelism 
on the mind-body problem. For philosophical consciencism 
retains the two categories ofmind and body, recognizes the problem 
accepting the fact of interaction, but offers a solution thereto .. 
Parallelism, while recognizing the two categories, in fact denies 
interaction. The solution offered by philosophical consciencism is 
by way ofcategorial conversion. 
According to philosophical consciencism, qualities are generated 
by matter. Behind any qualitative appearance, there stands a 
quantitative disposition of matter, such that the qualitative 
appearance is a surrogate of the quantitative disposition. I do not 
mean by this that qualities are the quantities themselves. I am not, 
for example, saying that a colour is the same thing as a certain wave­
length. Ofcourse the wave-length is not the colour, though we do 
know, thanks to the physicists, that individual colours are tied to 
characteristic wave-lengths. What I am however saying is that the 
colour is precisely the visual surrogate of a wave-length. A colour 
is the eye's mode of impression of a wave with certain mathe­
matical properties; it is the visual surrogate of a quantitative


--- PAGE 48 ---
88 89 CONSCIENCISM 
disposition of matter. Sounds, similarly, are the ear's mode ofim­
pression ofwaves with certain properties. In general, sensations and 
perceptions are sensory surrogates of quantitative dispositions of 
matter. All natural properties, whatever property is discernible by 
medium ofone sense or more, are nothing but sensory surrogates of 
quantitative dispositions of matter. 
In the first chapter, I refuted the claim that Einstein's Theory of 
Relativity was incompatible with materialism. The gravamen of 
the objection was that philosophical materialism requires the 
absolute and independent existence of space and time as necessary 
receptacles for matter. At that point, I explained that there was no 
conflict with the Theory of Relativity, and also that materialism 
was itself inconsistent with the absolute and independent existence 
of space or time. 
Ifthe sole existence ofmatter is asserted, then space and time, in so 
far as they are not matter, must be unreal. Philosophical con­
sciencism does not assert the sole reality of matter. Rather it asserts 
the primary reality ofmatter. Here again, ifspace were a bsolute and 
independent, matter could not with respect to it be primary. There­
fore philosophical consciencism, in asserting the primary existence 
ofmatter, also maintains that space must, to the extent that it is real, 
derive its properties from those of matter through a categorial 
conversion. And since the properties of space are geometrical, it 
then follows from philosophical consciencism that the geometry of 
space is determined by the properties of matter. 
When one now turns to Einstein's General Theory ofRelativity, 
one fmds exactly the same conclusion there. For in his Theory, 
Einstein relies on a principle of Mach's about the conditions of 
significance to affirm that the properties of space are fixed by the 
masses ofbodies in a gravitational field. This principle ofEinstein's, 
like philosophical consciencism, rejects the absolute and inde­
pendent existence of space. With regard to space, relativity and 
philosophical consciencism are mutually consistent. 
In discussing the possibility of categorial conversion, I said that 
two approaches were available to philosophy. First, the possibility 
of categorial conversion could be demonstrated in conceptual 
CONSCIENCISM 
terms. This has been achieved by modern logic. Second, models 
fulfilling the conditions of categorial conversion might be cited. 
Such models are offered by modern science. 
Philosophical consciencism claims the reality of categorial 
conversion. But if the conversion from one category to another 
category is not to represent a mere apparition, a philosophical will­
0'-the-wisp, then such a conversion must represent a variation in 
the mass of its initial matter. The conversion is produced by a 
dialectical process, and ifit is from a lower logical type to a higher 
logical type, it involves loss of mass. 
Here again, that loss of mass actually takes place is deducible 
from Einstein's General Theory of Relativity. It follows from this 
Theory that every chemical change from simpler substances to 
more complex substances, in so far as it entails the emergence of 
new properties, represents a loss of mass. Indeed, it represents a 
conversion of part of the mass of matter. In Einstein's Theory, the 
loss is calculable according to the general formula e = mc2 where e 
represents ergs ofenergy, m mass, and c the velocity oflight. If, for 
example, one gram ofmass were substituted for m, the equivalence 
in ergs ofenergy will be 9 x 2010 ergs, for in this case e will be equal 
to c2 • According to philosophical consciencism, however, though 
the whole of this amount of mass is converted, it is not all of it 
which is converted to the emergent properties. In actual chemical 
changes, some ofit transpires as heat. 
It is this reality of categorial conversion which prompts philo­
sophical consciencism to assert not the sole reality ofmatter, but its 
primary reality. If higher categories are only surrogates of 
quantitative processes ofmatter, they are still not empty apparitions, 
but are quite real. 
It follows from this that in philosophical consciencism, matter is 
capable ofdialectic change, for ifnatural properties are nothing but 
surrogates ofquantitative dispositions of matter, then since natural 
properties change, matter must change in quantitative disposition. 
And matter, in being a plenum of forces in tension, already contains 
the incipient change in disposition which is necessary to bring 
about a change in quality or property. Force itself is the way in


--- PAGE 49 ---
90 91 CONSCIIlNCISM 
which particles of matter exist; it is their mathematical or quan­
titative constitution. is not a description of a particle of 
matter; it is not something which particles ofmatter wear on their 
face. Rather, it is internal to them. 
Since matter is a plenum of forces in tension, and since tension 
implies incipient change, matter must have the power of self­
motion original to it. Without self-motion, dialectical change 
would be impossible. 
Bya dialectical change, I mean the emergence ofa third factor of 
a higher logical type from the tension between two factors or two 
sets of factors of a lower logical type. Matter belongs to one 
logical type, properties and qualities of matter to a higher logical 
type, properties ofproperties to an even higher logical type. 
This appropriately raises questions of an epistemological nature 
about consciencism. Epistemological problems are those which 
concern the nature of knowledge, and its types, and also the 
avenues to them which are open to the mind. Consciencism, by 
avoiding the assertion of the sole reality of matter, prepares itself 
for the painless recognition of the objectivity of different types of 
being. Indeed, the conception of dialectic is itself connected with a 
recognition of different types of being. Types of being are logical 
types. If they form a scale ofbeing , it is not to be inferred that this 
scale is correlated with a scale ofvalue. The types are logical types, 
such that material objects form one logical type; those general 
terms, which can be applied in description only to material objects, 
form a higher logical type; those general terms which can be 
applied in description to general terms of the ftrst group form 
another logical type which is even higher. 
Material objects and their properties belong to different logical 
types, and so do material objects and mind. It is these differences 
type which make categorial absurdity possible. By a categorial 
absurdity, I mean that special absurdity which arises from coupling 
types ofterms which should not be coupled. Terms can be coupled 
only when they belong to the same type or belong to proximate 
types. Thus 'people' and 'independence' belong to proximate 
types, and may therefore be coupled as in the proposition 'we are 
CONSCIENCISM 
an independent people'. But the number two and 'red' neither 
belong to the same type nor belong to proximate types; hence, not 
unexpectedly, the proposition 'the number two is red', which 
couples them, does commit a categorial absurdity. 
In the same way, terms which can be coupled with philosophical 
surrogates in description of the latter cannot be coupled with the 
items which give rise to the surrogates, though there is nothing 
which is incapable of translation, without residue, to propositions 
about these items whose surrogates they are. 
Terms which can be coupled with philosophical surrogates in 
description of them cannot be coupled with the items which give 
rise to the surrogates, because if a term can be coupled with a 
philosophical surrogate, it must be of the same logical type as the 
philosophical surrogate, or, ifit is in description of it, must be ofa 
type higher than and proximate to that to which the surrogate 
belongs. Terms which can be coupled in description with a philo­
sophical surrogate must be one logical type higher than the surro­
gate, since such terms are always one type higher than their 
subjects. As such these terms are at least two types higher than the 
items which give rise to the surrogate. They cannot therefore be 
ascribed even by way of complement. One cannot say that the 
number two is a red thing (complement) any more than one can 
say that the number two is red (description). 
This epistemological consequence of philosophical consciencism 
provides an antecedent philosophicaljustiftcation for such pursuits 
as the investigation ofthe nature ofmind by the exclusive meallS of 
the investigation of the nature and functioning of brain. This is a 
great advantage, for as the mind is not subject to experimental 
exposure, ifall propositions about mind are in principle translatable 
without residue to propositions about the nervous system, which is 
subject to experimental exposure, then a great deal of mental 
research can be done in terms of neural research. In general, 
philosophical consciencism narrows down the extent of academic 
hermitage. It does this by making research into the nature of one 
category possible in terms of another category. 
There is a growing tendency among some philosophers who


--- PAGE 50 ---
92 93 CONSCIENCISM 
hold the view that when materialism has triumphed and has won 
victory over idealism, it must, like its victim, disappear or 'wither 
away' as a philosophy. It is envisaged that this will take place when 
the classless society is achieved. Marx and Engels regarded 
materialism as the true form ofscience and, indeed, held that with 
the final overthrow ofidealism, materialism must have science for 
its positive content. What is important is not so much that it may 
not be necessary to stress materialism as a philosophy when idealism 
is overthrown, but rather that the importance and correctness of 
materialism will not in any way be diminished in its hour of 
victory. Some philosophers expect that materialism will then 
disappear and give way to a philosophy of mind - and that philo­
sophical theory of the mind which is not explicitly prefaced by 
philosophical materialism will open the door to a new idealism. 
Thought without practice is empty, and philosophical con­
sciencism constantly exhibits areas ofpractical significance, like'the 
one above. If philosophical consciencism initially affIrms the 
absolute and independent existence ofmatter, and holds matter to 
be endowed with its pristine objective laws, then philosophical 
consciencism builds itself by becoming a reflection of the objecti­
vity, in conceptual terms, ofthe unfolding ofmatter. When a philo­
sophy so restricts itself to the reflection ofthe objective unfolding of 
matter, it also establishes a direct connection between knowledge 
and action. 
This idea ofa philosophy as the conceptual image ofnature is also 
found in Spinoza, and, indeed, it is a tenet ofrationalism in general. 
According to Spinoza, at least, the order and connection ofideas is 
the same as the order and connection ofnature. The mistake of the 
rationalists regarding the connection between philosophy and 
nature is in their treating philosophy as the blue-print, the strait­
jacket for nature, instead ofbeing content with a mere assertion of 
mutual reflection. If, however, the order and connection ofideas is 
the same as the order and connection ofnature, then according to 
Spinoza, knowledge ofthe one order and connection must be know­
ledge of the other order and connection. Indeed, it can be said that, 
according to Spinoza, mind is the idea ofthat whose body is nature. 
CONSCIENCISM 
To the extent that he allows action to be possible, knowledge ofthe 
mind can be the direct objective basis of an intervention in nature. 
I said earlier on that in spite of the profound cleavage between 
idealism and materialism, they did not present different in­
ventories of the world. This hardly means, however, that they 
share the same attitude to the world. They certainly differ in 
their conception of the nature of the connection between thought 
and action. In this field, idealism is jejtme and grotesquely in­
effectual. Materialism is, on the other hand, dynamic and constantly 
throws up areas ofpractical significance. 
But if philosophical consciencism connects knowledge with 
action, it is still necessary to inquire whether it conceives this 
connection as a purely mechanistic one, or whether it makes it 
susceptible ofethical influence and comment. 
It is evident at least that philosophical consciencism cannot issue 
in a closed set ofethical rules, a set ofmles which must apply in any 
society and at any time. Philosophical consciencism is incapable of 
this because it is itself based upon a view of matter, as caught in 
the grip of an inexorable dialectical evolution. 
To the extent that materialism issues in egalitarianism 011 the 
social plane, it issues ethics. Egalitarianism is not only political 
but also ethical; for it implies a certain range of human conduct 
which is alone acceptable to it. At the same time, because it 
conceives matter as a plenum of tensions giving rise to dialectical 
change, it Calmot freeze its ethical rules with changelessness. It 
would be wrong, however, to seek to infer from this that the 
ethical principles which philosophical consciencism sanctions are 
at anyone time gratuitous and devoid of objective grounding; for 
even when rules change, they can still be informed, still be governed 
by the same basic principles in the light of changing social con­
ditions. 
It is necessary to understand correctly the relationship between 
rules and principles. This relationship is similar to that between 
ideals and institutions and also to that between statutes and by­
laws. Statutes, ofcourse, state general principles, they do not make 
explicit those procedures by means of which they may be carried


--- PAGE 51 ---
94 95 CONSCIENCISM 
out and fulfilled. By-laws are an application ofsuch principles. It is 
obvious that when the conditions in which by-laws operate alter 
seriously, it could be necessary to amend the by-laws in order that 
the same statute should continue to be fulfilled. Statutes are not on 
the same level as by-laws, nor do they imply any particular by-laws. 
It is because they carry no specific implication of particular by­
laws, but can be subserved by anyone ofa whole spectrum ofsuch, 
that it is possible to amend by-laws, while the statute which they 
are meant to fulf:tl suffers no change. 
The relationship between ideals and institutions is a similar one. 
That circumstances change is a truism. For all that, it is significant. 
For it means that, if ideals must be pursued throughout the 
changing scenes of hfe, it may be necessary to modify or replace 
institutions in order that the same ideals should effectively be 
served. There are no particular institutions, which, irrespective of 
local circumstances, are uniquely tied to their ideals. Institutions 
should be shot through and through with pragmatism. 
It is in the same way that principles are related to rules even when 
they are ethical. The idea that ethical rules can change, and indeed 
need to change, is one which a httle reflection can confirm. 
Evidently, even when two societies share the same ethical 
principles, they may differ in the rules which make the principles 
effective. Asses were of such overwhelming importance in Israel 
that God found it necessary to regulate human relations by an 
ethical rule mentioning them specifically. Thou shalt not covet thy 
neighbour's ass. If God deigned to give us a similar rule today, he 
would no doubt forbid us to covet our neighbour's motor-car, 
hardly his ass. Here God would be giving a new ethical rule, 
designed at giving effect to an unchanging ethical principle, but 
taking full account of modern times. 
Progress in man's conquest and harnessing of the forces of 
nature has a profound effect on the content of ethical rules. Some 
ethical rules fall into abeyance, because the situations in which they 
take effect lose all hkehhood ofrecurrence; others give way to their 
opposite, as, for example, when a matriarchal society changes into a 
patriarchal one, for here many ethical rules arising from the 
CONSCIENCISM 
position ofthe woman will have to give way to those arising from 
the new position of the man. And yet, the principles standing 
behind these diverse dusters of ethical rules may remain constant, 
and identical as between society and society. 
According to philosophical consciencism, ethical rules are not 
permanent but depend on the stage reached in the historical 
evolution of a society, so however that cardinal principles of 
egalitarianism are conserved. 
A society does not change its ethics by merely changing its rules. 
To alter its ethics, its principles must be different. Thus, ifa capitalist 
society can become a socialist society, then a capitalist society will 
have changed its ethics. Any change of ethics constitutes a re­
volutionary change. 
Nevertheless, many times moral rules have changed so startlingly 
as to give the impression ofa revolution in ethics. For example, one 
can take that profound change in our attitude to offenders for 
which modern psychology is responsible. Modern psychology 
brings to our notice relevant facts of whose existence we have no 
inkling in our dreams. When these new facts change our 
attitude, moral rules have not necessarily changed. But application 
of them is withheld, for the new considerations provoke a re­
classification of the act involved, and, possibly, bring it under a 
different ethical rule. In that case, a different moral attitude could 
become relevant. 
Investigations into the psychology of delinquency are a case in 
point. Such investigations tend by their results to attenuate the 
acrimony of our moral attitude to delinquents, by compelling us, 
not admittedly to waive moral rules, but to re-classify delinquent 
acts. 
The cardinal ethical principle ofphilosophical consciencism is to 
treat each man as an end in himself and not merely as a means. This 
is fundamental to all socialist or humanist conceptions of man. It is 
true that Immanuel Kant also identified this as a cardinal principle 
ofethics, but whereas he regarded it as an immediate command of 
reason, we derive it from a materialist viewpoint. 
This derivation can be made by way ofthat egalitarianism which,


--- PAGE 52 ---
96 97 CONSCIENCISM 
we have seen, is the social reflection of materialism. Egalitarianism 
is based on the monistic thesis of materialism. Matter is one even 
in its different manifestations. If matter is one, it follows that 
there is a route connecting any two manifestations of matter. This 
does not mean that between any two manifestations of matter 
there is a route which does not pass through any third form; the 
route need not be direct, for it may take one back to the primary 
form of matter. Dialectical processes are not unilinear, they do not 
follow just one line, but are ramified. There is a route from any 
twig ofa tree to any other twig, such that the route never leaves the 
tree. But this does not mean that the twigs all have some one point 
in common, for it may be necessary to pass to the trunk and join 
another branch in order to pass from one twig to another. Never­
theless there is this route. The different manifestations ofmatter are 
all results of dialectical processes unfolding according to objective 
laws. There is a determinate process through which every mani­
festation is derived. 
In saying however that there is a route between any two forms 
of matter, I do not attach the implication that anyone form of 
matter can in fact be derived from any other form, for this may 
involve the reversal ofa process which is irreversible. The upshot of 
what I mean is the continuity of nature: though the dialectical 
evolution ofmatter may lead to culs-de-sac (like the vanished plants 
and animals ofpre-historic days), dialectical evolution contains no 
hiatuses. 
It is the basic unity of matter, despite its varying manifestations, 
which gives rise to egalitarianism. Basically, man is one, for all men 
have the same basis and arise from the same evolution according to 
materialism. This is the objective ground of egalitarianism. 
David Hume raised the question that ethical philosophies begin 
with statements of fact and suddenly seek to base statements of 
appraisal thereon, without explaining the legitimacy of their infer­
ence. If man is basically one, then if action is objectively attentive 
to this fact, it must be guided by principles. The guiding prin­
ciples can be stated with such generality that they become auton­
omous. That is to say, fIrSt, that if action is to conform to the 
CONSCIENCISM 
objectivity of human unity, then it must be guided by general 
principles which always keep this objectivity in view, principles 
which would prevent action from proceeding as if men were 
basically different. Second, these principles, because they relate to 
fact, can be stated boldly, as though they were autonomous, like 
the principle that an individual should not be treated by another 
merely as a means but always as an end. 
If ethical principles are founded on egalitarianism, they must be 
objective. If ethical principles arise from an egalitarian idea of the 
nature ofman, they must be generalizable, for according to such an 
idea man is basically one in the sense defined. It is to this non­
differential generalization that expression is given in the command 
to treat each man as an end in himself, and not merely as a means. 
Thatis, philosophical consciencism, though it has the same cardinal 
principle ofethics as Kant, differs from Kant in founding ethics on a 
philosophical idea ofthe nature ofman. This is what Kant describes 
as ethics based on anthropology. By anthropology Kant means any 
study of the nature of man, and he forbids ethics to be based on 
such a study. 
It is precisely this that philosophical consciencism does. It also 
agrees with the traditional African outlook on many points, and 
thus fulfils one ofthe conditions which it sets foritsel£ In particular, 
it agrees with the traditional African idea of the absolute and in­
dependent existence ofmatter, the idea ofits powers ofself-motion 
in the sense explained, the idea ofcategorial convertibility, and the 
idea of the grounding of cardinal principles of ethics in the nature 
of man. 
The traditional African standpoint, of course, accepts the 
absolute and independent idea of matter. If one takes the 
philosophy of the African, one fmds that in it the absolute 
and independent existence of matter is accepted. Further, matter 
is not just dead weight, but alive with forces in tension. Indeed, 
for the African, everything that exists, exists as a complex of 
forces in tension. In holding force in tension to be essential to 
whatever exists, he is, like Thales and like philosophical con­
sciencists, endowing matter with an original power ofself-motion,


--- PAGE 53 ---
98 99 CONSCIENCISM 
they were endowing it with what matter would need to initiate 
qualitative and substantial changes. 
When a plurality of men exist in society, and it is accepted that 
each man needs to be treated as an end in himself, not merely as a 
means, there transpires a transition from ethics to politics. Politics 
become actual, for institutions need to be created to regulate the 
behaviour and actions of the plurality of men in society in such a 
way as to conserve the fundamental ethical principle of the initial 
worthiness of each individual. Philosophical consciencism con­
sequently adumbrates a political theory and a social-political 
practice which together seek to ensure that the cardinal principles 
of ethics are effective. 
The social-political practice is directed at preventing the 
emergence or the solidifying of classes, for in the Marxist con­
ception ofclass structure, there is exploitation and the subjection of 
class to class. Exploitation and class-subjection are alike contrary to 
consciencism. By reason of its egalitarian tenet, philosophical 
consciencism seeks to promote individual development, but in 
such a way that the conditions for the development of all become 
the conditions for the development of each; that is, in such a way 
that the individual development does not introduce such diversities 
as to destroy the egalitarian basis. The social-political practice also 
seeks to co-ordinate social forces in such a way as to mobilize them 
logistically for the maximum development of society along true 
egalitarian lines. For this, planned development is essential. 
In its political aspect, philosophical consciencism is faced with 
the realities of colonialism, imperialism, disunity and lack of 
development. Singly and collectively these four militate against the 
realization of a social justice based on ideas of true equality. 
The first step is to liquidate colonialism wherever it is. In Towards 
Colonial Freedom I stated that it is the aim ofcolonial governments 
to treat their colonies as producers of raw materials, and at the 
same time as the dumping-ground of the manufactured goods of 
foreign industrialists and foreign capitalists. I have always believed 
that the basis of colonialism is economic, but the solution of the 
colonial problem lies in political action, in a fierce and constant 
CONSCIENCISM 
struggle for emancipation as an indispensable first step towards 
securing economic independence and integrity. 
I said earlier on that consciencism regards matter as a plenum of 
forces in tension; and that in its dialectical aspect, it holds categorial 
conversion to be possible by a critical disposition of matter. This 
gives us a clue how to analyse the fact of colonialism, not only in 
Africa, but indeed everywhere. It also gives us a clue how to defeat 
it. 
In a colonial situation, there are forces which tend to promote 
colonialism, to promote those political ties by means of which a 
colonialist country binds its colonies to itself with the primary 
object of furthering her economic advantages. Colonialism 
requires exertion, and much of that exertion is taken up by the 
combat of progressive forces, forces which seek to negate this 
oppressive enterprise ofgreedy individuals and classes by means of 
which an egotistical imposition of the strong is made upon the 
weak. 
Just as the placid appearance ofmatter only disguises the tension 
offorces underlying that appearance, like the bow ofHeraclitus, so 
in a colonial territory, an opposition of reactionary and revolu­
tionary forces can nevertheless give an impression of final and 
acquiescent subjugation. But just as a quality can be changed by 
quantitative (measurable) changes of a critical nature in matter, so 
this acquiescent impression can be obliterated by a change in the 
relation of the social forces. These opposing sets of forces are 
dynamic, in the sense that they seek and tend to establish some 
social condition. One may therefore refer to them by the name of 
action in order to make their dynamic nature explicit. In that case, 
one may say that in a colonial situation positive action and negative 
action can be discerned. Positive action will represent the sum of 
those forces seeking social justice in terms of the destruction of 
oligarchic exploitation and oppression. Negative action will 
correspondingly represent the sum of those forces tending to 
prolong colonial subjugation and exploitation. Positive action is 
revolutionary and negative action is reactionary. 
It ought to be recognized at the outset that the introduced terms


--- PAGE 54 ---
100 101 CONSCIENCISM 
ofpositive and negative action are abstractions. But the ground for 
them is in social reality. It is quite possible by means of statistical 
analysis to discover the ways in which positive action and negative 
action are related in any given society. The statistical analysis will 
be of such facts as production, distribution, income, etc. Any 
such analysis must reveal one of three possible situations. Positive 
action may exceed negative action, or negative action may exceed 
positive action, or they may form an unstable equilibrium. 
In a colonial situation, negative action undoubtedly outweighs 
positive action. In order that true independence should be won, it is 
necessary that positive action should come to overwhelm negative 
action. Admittedly, a semblance of true independence is possible 
without this specific relation. When this happens, we say that neo­
colonialism has set in, for neo-colonialism is a guise adopted by 
negative action in order to the impression that it has been over­
come by positive action. Neo-colonialism is negative action 
playing possum. 
In order to forestall this, it is necessary for positive action to 
be backed by a mass party, and qualitatively to improve this 
mass so that by education and an increase in its degree of con­
sciousness, its aptitude for positive action becomes heightened. We 
can therefore say that in a colonial territory, positive action must be 
backed by a mass party, complete with its instruments ofeducation. 
This was why the Convention People's Party of Ghana developed 
from an early stage its education wing, workers' wing, farmers' 
wing, youth wing, women's wing, etc. In this way, the people 
received constant political education, their self-awareness was 
increased and such a self-image was formed as ruthlessly excluded 
colonialism in all its guises. It is also in the backing of millions of 
members and supporters, united by a common radical purpose, that 
the revolutionary character of the Convention People's Party 
consists, and not merely in the piquancy of its programmes. Its 
mass and national support made it possible to think in realistic terms 
ofinstituting changes of a fundamental nature in the social hotch­
potch bequeathed by colonialism. 
A people's parliamentary democracy with a one-party system 
CONSCIENCISM 
is better able to express and satisfY the common aspirations of a 
nation as a whole, than a multiple-party parliamentary system, 
which is in fact only a ruse for perpetuating, and covers up, the 
inherent struggle between the 'haves' and the 'have-nots'. 
In order that a territory should acquire the nominal attributes of 
independence, it is of course not necessary that positive action 
should exceed negative action. When a colonialist country sees the 
advance of positive action, it unfailingly develops a policy of 
containment, a policy whereby it seeks to check this advance and 
limit it. This policy often takes the form of conferences and 
protracted constitutional reforms. 
Containment is, however, accepted by the colonialist country 
only as a second best. What it would really like to do is to roll back 
positive action. It is when it is assured ofthe impossibility ofrolling 
back the billows ofhistory that it applies the policy ofcontainment, 
that it tries to limit the achievement of progress by devising 
frivolous reforms. The colonialist country seeks to divert positive 
action into channels which are harmless to it. 
To do this it resorts to diverse subtle means. Having abandoned 
direct violence, the colonialist country imparts a deceptive 
orientation to the negative forces in its subject territory. These 
negative forces become the political wolf masquerading in sheep's 
clothing, tlley join the clamour for independence, and are accepted 
in goodfaith by the people. It is then that like a wasting disease they 
seek from the inside to infest, corrupt, pervert and thwart the 
aspirations of the people. 
The people, the body and the soul ofthe nation, the final sanction 
of political decisions, and the inheritors of sovereignty, cannot be 
fooled for long. Quick on the scent, they ferret out these Janus­
faced politicians who run with the hare and hunt with the hounds. 
They tum away from them. Once this colonialist subterfuge is 
exposed, and the minion accomplices discredited, the colonial 
power has no option but to acknowledge the independence of the 
people. By its very next act, however, it seeks without grace to 
neutralize this same independence by fomenting discontent and 
disunity; and, fmally, by arrant ingratiation and wheedling it


--- PAGE 55 ---
102 CONSCIENCISM 
attempts to disinherit the people and constitute itself their con­
science and their will, if not their voice and their arm. Political 
decisions, just as they were before independence was won, lose 
their reference to the of the people, and serve once again 
the well-being and security ofthe erstwhile colonial power and the 
ofself-centred politicians. 
Any oblique attempt ofa foreign power to thwart, balk, corrupt 
or otherwise pervert the true independence of a sovereign people is 
neo-colonialist. It is neo-colonialist because it seeks, notwithstand­
ing the acknowledged sovereignty ofa people, to subordinate their 
interests to those ofa foreign power. 
A colonialist co lIDtry can in fact offer independence to a people, 
not with the intention which such an act might be thoughtto imply, 
but in the hope that the positive and progressive forces thus 
appeased and quietened, the people might be exploited with 
greater serenity and comfort. 
Neo-colonialism is a danger to independent cOUlmies 
than is colonialism. Colonialism is crude, essentially overt, and apt 
to be overcome by a purposeful concert of national effort. In neo­
colonialism, however, the people are divided from their leaders 
and, instead of providing true leadership and guidance which is 
informed at every point by the ideal of the general welfare, leaders 
come to neglect the very people who put them in power 
incautiously become instruments of suppression on behalf of 
neo-colonialists. 
It is far easier for the proverbial camel to pass through the 
needle's eye, hump and all, than for an erstwhile colonial ad­
ministration to give sound and honest counsel ofapolitical nature to 
its liberated territory. To allow a foreign country, especially one 
which is loaded with economic interests in our continent, to tell us 
what political decisions to take, what political courses to follow, is 
indeed for us to hand back our independence to the oppressor on a 
silver platter. 
Likewise, since the motivation of colonialism, whatever protean 
forms it may take, is well and truly economic, colonialism itself 
being but the institution of political bonds fastening colonies to a 
CONSCIENCISM !O3 
colonialist country, with the primary object of the metropolitan 
economic advantages, it is essential that a liberated territory should 
not bind her economy to that ofthe ousted rulers. The liberation of 
a people institutes principles which enjoin the recognition and 
destruction of imperialistic domination, whether it is political, 
economic, social or cultural. To destroy imperialistic domination 
in these forms, political, economic, social and cultural action must 
always have reference to the needs and nature of the liberated 
territory, and it is from these needs and nature that the action 
must derive authenticity. Unless this self-reference is 
maintained, a liberated territory will welcome with open arms 
the foe which it has sought to destroy at cost of terrible 
suffering. 
The true welfare of a people does not admit of compromise. If 
we compromise on the true interest of our people, the people must 
one day judge us, for it is with their effort and their sacriflce, with 
their forbearance and their denial, that independence is won. 
Independence once won, it is possible to rule against the erstwhile 
colonial power, but it is not really possible to rule against the wish 
and interest of the people. 
The people are the backbone of positive action. It is by 
people's effort that colonialism is routed, it is by the sweat of the 
people's brow that nations are built. The people are the reality of 
national greatness. It is the people who suffer the depredations and 
indignities of colonialism, and the people must not be insulted by 
dangerous flirtations with neo-colonialism. 
There is a fundamental law of the evolution of matter to higher 
forms. This evolution is dialectical. And it is also the fundamental 
law ofsociety. It is out oftension that being is born. Becoming is a 
tension, and being is the child ofthat tension of opposed forces and 
tendencies. 
Just as in the physical universe, the moving object is always 
impressed upon by external forces, any motion is in fact a resultant, 
so in society every development, every progressive motion, is a 
resultant ofunharmonious forces, a resultant, a triumph of positive 
action over negative action.


--- PAGE 56 ---
10 4 CONSCIENCISM 
This triumph must be accompanied by knowledge. For in the 
way that the process of natural evolution can be aided by human 
intervention based upon knowledge, so social evolution can be 
helped along by political intervention based upon knowledge of 
the laws of social development. Political action aimed at speeding 
up social evolution is of the nature ofa catalyst. 
need for such a catalyst is created by the fact that natural 
evolution is always wasteful. It takes place at the cost of massive 
loss oflife and at the cost ofextreme anguish. Evolution speeded by 
scientific knowledge is prompter, and represents an economy of 
material. In the same way, the catalysis which political action 
introduces into social evolution represents an economy oftime, 
and talent. 
Without positive action, a colonial territory cannot be truly 
liberated. It is doomed to creep in its petty pace from day to day 
towards the attainment ofa sham independence that turns to dust, 
independence which is shot through and through with the supreme 
interest of an alien power. 'fo achieve true liberation, positive 
action must begin with an objective analysis ofthe situation which 
it seeks to change. Such an analysis I attempted in Towards Colonial 
Freedom. Positive action must, furthermore, seek an alignment of 
all the forces of progress and, by marshalling them, confront 
negative forces. It must at the same time anticipate and contain its 
own inner contradictions, for, though positive action unites those 
forces of a situation which are, in regard to a specific purpose, 
progressive, many ofthese forces will contain tendencies which are 
in other respects reactionary. 
Hence, when positive action resorts to an alignment of forces, it 
creates in itself seams at which this alignment might fall apart. It is 
essential that positive action should in its dialectical evolution 
anticipate this seminal disintegration and discover a way ofcontain­
ing the future schismatic tendencies, a way of nipping frag­
mentation in the bud as colonialism begins to reel and totter under 
frontal onslaught ofpositive action. 
But even with colonialism worsted, positive action cannot 
relent, for it is at about this time that the schismatic tendencies 
CONSCIENCISM 10 5 
referred to ripen. Besides, political independence, though worth 
while in itself, is still ouly a means to the fuller redemption and 
realization of a people. When independence has been gained, 
positive action requires a new orientation away from the sheer 
destruction of colonialism and towards national reconstruction. 
It is indeed in this address to national reconstruction that positive 
action faces its gravest dangers. The cajolement, the wheedlings, 
the seductions and the Trojan horses of neo-colonialism must be 
stoutly resisted, for neo-colonialism is a latter-day harpy, a monster 
which entices its victims with sweet music. 
In order to be able to carry out this resistance to neo-colonialism 
at every point, positive action requires to be armed with an 
ideology, all ideology which, vitalizing it and operating tl1.rough a 
mass party shall eqtrip it with a regenerative concept of the world 
and life, forge for it a strong continuing link with our past and 
offer to it an assured bond with our future. Under the searchlight of 
an ideology, every fact affecting the life of a people can be assessed 
and judged, and nco-colonialism's detrimental aspirations and 
sleights ofhand will constantly stand exposed. 
In order that this ideology should be comprehensive, in order 
should light up every aspect ofthe life ofour people, in order 
that it should affect the total interest of our society, establishing a 
continuity with our past, it must be socialist in form and in content 
be embraced by a mass party. 
And yet, socialism in Africa today tends to lose its objective 
content in favour of a distracting terminology and in favour of a 
general confusion. Discussion centres more on the various con­
ceivable types ofsocialism than upon the need for socialist develop­
ment. More is surely required than a mere reaction against a policy 
of domination. Independence is of the people; it is won by the 
people for the people. That independence is of the people is 
admitted by every enlightened theory of sovereignty. That it is 
won by the people is to be seen in the successes of mass movements 
everywhere. That it is won for the people follows from their 
ownership of sovereignty. The people have not mastered their 
independence until it has been given a national and social content


--- PAGE 57 ---
106 CONSCIENCISM 
and purpose that will generate their well-being and uplift. 
The socialism of a liberated territory is subject to a number of 
principles if independence is not to be alienated from the people. 
When socialism is true to its purpose, it seeks a connection with the 
egalitarian and humanist past of the people before their social 
evolution was ravaged by colonialism; it seeks from the results of 
colonialism those elements (like new methods of industrial 
production and economic organization) which can be adapted to 
serve the interest of the people; it seeks to contain and prevent the 
spread of those anomalies and domineering interests created by the 
capitalist habit of colonialism; it reclaims the psychology of the 
people, erasing the 'colonial mentality' from it; and it resolutely 
defends the independence and security of the people. In short, 
socialism recognizes dialectic, the possibility of creation from 
forces which are opposed to one another; it recognizes the 
creativity ofstruggle, and, indeed, the necessity of the operation of 
forces to any change. It also embraces materialism and translates 
this into social terms of equality. 
CHAPTER 5 
SET THEORETIC TERMS 
S
O ALERT can positive action be, alert to all negative possi­
bilities, and prompt under the guidance ofan ideology to deal 
with these possibilities, that the course of positive action can 
be mapped out in set theoretic terms. For this, a minimum number 
of initial symbols are necessary. 
Let Pa represent the positive action an individual 
Na "the negative action in an individual 
pa "the positive action in a society 
na "the negative action a society 
> "is greater than 
< "is less than 
g a territory " (na>pa)g a territory in which negative action is" greater than positive action 
(pa>na)g a territory in which positive action is" greater than negative action 
col.g g is a colony 
" lib.g g is liberated" (l1a) for all na" (pa) for all pa" (g) for allg " :I there is a" Gi a liberated territory " 
-,). if then" 
+-~ if and only if" D dialectical moment general. It defmes a " factor which changes the relation between 
pa and na, by converting pa greater than na 
to na greater than pa, or vice versa


--- PAGE 58 ---
109 108 CONSCIENCISM 
Let d a measure ofdialectical moment as defmed 
above 
)1 " on the increase 
" on the decrease 
"""m " philosophical materialism 
C " philosophical consciencism in general 
cg " philosophical consciencism as elaborated 
by the conditions ofg and the experience 
and consciousness ofits people 
0 " zero 
Lm " limit of 
f " a negligible quantity 
UGi " Gi is united 
" jointly with 
p " index of development 
" equal to 
rp " the relation offorces required for develop­
ment 
2: " sum of 
S " socialism in general 
Sg " socialism in the conditions ofg 
oc " an optimum zone for development 
Soc " socialism in the conditions of oc 
I have said that a colony is any territory in which tlle interests of 
people are alienated from them and subjected to those of a 
group distinct from the people ofthe territory itsel£ It follows that 
a colony may be externally or internally subjected. When the 
interests ofthe people are subjected to those of a group outside 
territory itself, it is said to be externally subjected. When 
interests a:re subjected to those ofa class in the sense ofMarx within 
the territory itself, it is said to be internally subjected. 
Union ofSouth Africa would be an example ofan internally 
subjected colony. It is obvious that such a colony enjoys the legal 
attrib utes of independence. 
Colony is an economic-political term, not a legal one. 
SET THEORETIC TERMS 
It is possible for the same territory to be both internally and 
externally subjected. Southern Rhodesia is such a colony. In either 
type ofcolony, however, negative action is essentially greater than 
positive action. Hence the symbolic representation of a territory g 
which is a colony is 
(i) col.g. +---+ (na>pa)g 
Since, according to philosophical consciencism in its embracing of 
philosophical dialectical materialism, a change can only result from 
an operation of forces, in order to liberate a colony a dialectical 
moment needs to be introduced in (tta> pa)g to transform it to 
(pa> na)g. Hence, a liberated territory arises under the condition 
(ii) lib.g -t----+ [D(tta> pa)g 	 (pa> tta)g] 
In this formula, it is also said that the dialectical moment must be 
sufficient for the transformation of (na> pa) to (pa> na). 
And since the intention of this dialectical moment is to produce 
the relation (pa> na), another formula arises thus: 
)1 
(iii) 	 D(tla> pa) -+ pa + na 
"""0 
)1 
Since D(na> pa) -+ pa na there is always a dialectical 
"""0 
moment such that 
(iv) d(na>pa)g -+ (pa>na)g 
This in its general form is 
(v) (pa)(na)(g):J d [d(na>pa)g -+ (pa> 
to give us an existence theorem. But, equally, the following 
obtain: 
)1 
(vi) D(pa> tta) -+ tW + pa 
"""0


--- PAGE 59 ---
III lIO CONSCIENCISM 
Hence there is always a dialectical moment such that 
(vii) d(pa>na)g -7- (na>pa)g 
This in turn can be universalized as 
(viii) (pa)(na)(g):3 d[d(pa>na)g -7- (na>pa)g] 
That is, in any territory, liberation can be won (v) or lost (viii). 
This is why every liberated territory must keep on increasing its 
positive action ifit would remain liberated. In particular, in order 
to thwart neo-colonialism, positive action requires to be main­
tained in preponderance over negative action. 
By successive instantiation, we obtain the following deductions: 
(pa)(na)(g) :3 d[d(na> pa)g -7- (pa>na)g] 
(na)(g):3 d[d(na> pa)g -7- (pa> na)g] 
(g)3 d [d(na> pa)g -7- (pa>na)g] 
:3 d[d(na> pa)g -7- (pa>na)g] 
It will be observed from the formula (iii) according to which 
7' 
D{na> pa) -7- pa na that the decrease of negative action 
~O 
secured by introducing a dialectical moment into (na> pa) 
approaches zero. But not even in the limit does na quite attain to 
~O 
zero, for according to philosophical consciencism every situation is 
a plenum of forces in tension. Hence, negative action cannot dis­
appear completely but could only become a negligible quantity. 
I therefore put down as 
7' 
(ix) LmD(na>pa) -7-pa + fna 
The above formulae are subject to a rule of substitution, which 
enables us to substitute constants on variables, and a rule of detach­
ment which enables us, granted an antecedent, to assert a conse­
quence. Thus, if b is the name of a colony, we can obtain the 
following derivation; 
SET THEORETIC TERMS 
col g -+-~ (na> pa)g ... (i) 
col b+---+ (na> pa)b ... rule of substitution 
By this rule, the general condition for a colony is applied to 
every individual colony. 
Again, we may obtain the following derivation: 
(pa)(na)(g) :3 d[d(na>pa)g -7- (pa>na)g] ... a 
(pa)(na) :3 d [d(na> pa)g -7- (pa> na)g] ... b 
:3 d[d(na> pa)g -7- (pa> tla)g] ... c 
:3 d[d(na>pa)g -7- (pa>na)g] ... d 
d(na>pa)g -7- (pa>na)g •.• e 
d(na>pa)g ... f 
(pa> na) rule of detachment .,. g. 
This derivation, according to rules analogous to those of the 
predicate calculus, shows that ifa freedom fighter can by increasing 
positive action introduce a sufficient dialectical moment in 
(na> pa)g, he can be sure of winning independence. 
Alternatively, 
(pa)(na)(g) :3 d [d(na>pa)g -7- (pa> na)g] (a) 
lib.g +---+ D(na>pa)g -7- (pa>na)g . .. (ii). (b) 
.'. [D(na> pa)g -7- (pa> na)g] lib.g . . . . .. (c)
-7­
from (ii), (iii), (iv) , (c) 
[d(na>pa)g -7- (pa>na)g] -7-lib.g ., (d) 
but from (a) (na)(g):3d[d(na>pa)g -7-(pa>na)g] (e) 
" ,,(e) (g):3 d [d(na>pa)g-7-(pa>na)g] (f) 
" ,,(f) :3 d [d(na>pa)g-7-(pa>na)g] (g) 
" " (g) d(na>pa)g -7- (pa>na)g 
from (d) and (h) lib.g. 
But independence does not automatically bring that unity of 
purpose required for maintain.ing it. Indeed, a reaction could 
quickly set in, for just as a liberated territory can be produced by 
the application of D(na> pa), so a neo-colonized territory can be 
produced by the application of D(pa> na). Further and sustained 
positive action is required to consolidate independence, and to raise


--- PAGE 60 ---
II2 CONS CIEN crSM 
a liberated territory to level of a united nation. Hence, 
J". 
(x) UGi +--* (pa + na) 
">40 Gi 
In a newly independent territory, though unity might be pro­
duced by this increase ofpositive action over negative action, this 
unity will not necessarily be secure from the ravages of negative 
action. On the contrary, reactionary forces plunge their battering 
ram into the heart of its foundations. In order to stem and reverse 
this advance ofreaction, a union ofliberated territories is called for. 
Let Gr to Gk represent liberated territories in a geographical 
zone; then a union ofGr to Gk, designated as UG 1. •• k is required 
to maintain this unity and preserve independence. To produce 
unity in a zone of liberated territories, Gr to Gk, positive action 
needs to be increased in them conjointly. Hence, 
(xi) UG k +-~ (pa 
J" 
na)
1... ">4 
o GI •.• k 
But a qualitative distinction needs to be introduced into 
formula (xi). A union ofliberated territories could unfortunately 
be formed for reactionary purposes, and for the aiding and abetting 
of neo-colonialist interests. Hence the progressive union of 
liberated territories, for example, a union of African States, might 
be better represented as 
(xii) U J" 
G1 ••. k +--* (pa nt 
OC 
I ... k 
SET THEORETIC TERMS II3 
or, more analytically 
)1 /
(xiii) U C k +-~ [(pa na) (pa na) + ... pa I •.. ">4 ">40GI 0G2 
)1 /
... + (pa na) (pa + na)Gk] 
">40G ">40 
k-I 
We have seen that for purposes of true development, a liberated 
territory must embrace philosophical consciencism. In its 
materialist aspect, philosophical consciencism preserves a humanist 
egalitarianism. The philosophical materialism which forms a part 
of consciencism accommodates dialectic, and holds it to be the 
efficient cause ofall change. In order that development may not be 
gibbous, philosophical consciencism insists that account must be 
taken of the material conditions of the territory involved, as 
account must also be taken of the experience and consciousness of 
the people whose redemption is sought. A people can only be 
redeemed by lifting themselves up, as it were, by the strings oftheir 
boots. In these circumstances development must be socialist. It is 
only a socialist scheme of devclopment which can ensure that a 
society is redeemed, that the general welfare is honestly pursued, 
that autonomy rests with the society as a whole and not in part, 
that the experience and consciousness ofthe people are not ravaged 
and raped. It is only a socialist scheme of development that can 
meet the passionate objectivity of philosophical consciencism. 
We may symbolize the relation of forces required for develop­
ment as <p. In that case we obtain a formula: 
(xiv) <p ~m C + D, 
such that <p is secured only in the presence ofphilosophical material­
ism, dialectic and consciencism. It will be seen at once that tlns 
formula contains a redundancy, for m is a part of C, and so is a 
belief in D. This redundant formulation has, however, a psycho­
logical aspect which is valuable in making the necessity for m and 
D both explicit and unmistakable. 
I


--- PAGE 61 ---
lI4 CONSCIENCISM 
I have argued that the condition for optimum development 
which shall be humanist is socialist through and through. If we 
make S represent socialism, then we can obtain an analytic formula 
as follows: 
(xv) S ~1> + VGi 
This short formula summarizes a number of weighty truths, 
namely, that there is socialism if and only if there is the conjoint 
presence ofphilosophical materialism, philosophical consciencism, 
dialectic and national unity, in a liberated territory. It is essential 
that socialism should include overriding regard to the experience 
and consciousness of a people, for if it does not do so, it will 
serving an idea and not a people. It will generate a contradiction. 
It will become dogmatic. It will shed its materialist and realist 
basis. It will become a fanaticism, an obscurantism, an alienator of 
human happiness. 
.When we talk of socialism in Africa, therefore, we really do 
intend to include as part of socialism an overriding regard to our 
actual material conditions, an overriding regard to our experience 
and our consciousness. 
Appropriately therefore a general formula arises thus: 
(xvi) S~m+ C+ D+ VGi 
Here, m is a constant, for the theses of philosophical materialism 
are constant. C, however, stands for philosophical consciencism in 
general and not for the actual content which it should have in a 
territory g if it is to pay attention to the material conditions of the 
territory, and the experience and consciousness of its people. D, 
too, stands for a dialectical moment in general, but the actual form 
and content ofthis moment depends on the situation which it seeks 
to change, and the resources which, in a particular case, it has for 
bringing about the desirable change. D is therefore a variable. 
VGi, because it is a ftmction of d, pa and na, is also a variable, 
because dependent. It is the variable nature of the parameters of 
formula (xv) which determines its generality. 
lISSET THEORETIC TERMS 
But the formula at the same time gives a due to the form it 
should take in any particular territory, g. The following formula 
results: 
(xvii) Sg ~m + cg d + V lib.g 
and for an optimum zone oc, it has the form: 
(xviii) Soc +--;0 m c oc + d + V lib. oc 
If bbe the name of a particular territory, then we obtain 
(xix) Sb ~m + Cb + d + V lib.b. 
Hence, in order that socialism should be applicable in a country, 
the country must be liberated; it must enjoy unity; it must embrace 
philosophical materialism; it must have a specific philosophical 
conscicl1cism holding its general nature in common, but expressing 
its individuality through the actual material conditions of the 
territory for which it is formulated, and through the experience 
and consciousness of the people of that territory; it must apply 
suitable and adequate dialectical moments, expressed through 
positive action,·wielded through a mass party. 
In order to liberate a territory, an increase ofpositive action over· 
negative action must be obtained by the introduction ofa dialectical 
moment. This dialectical moment can be introduced by joining 
together the forces of positive action in one mass political party, 
educating the people, explaining to them the evil nature of 
colonialism, that is, analysing their experience and giving them a 
greater awareness of this experience through workers' sections, 
farmers' sections, youth sections, women's sections, newspapers 
and other implements ofparty organization. To unite the liberated 
territory, the mass political party must be further developed to the 
size of a popular movement. The policies of development then 
need to accord with the theses of philosophical materialism, and 
they must be subject to philosophical consciencism, showing a 
sensitivity to the material conditions and experience of the people. 
The analytic form of (xvi) - (xix) reveals that socialism cannot


--- PAGE 62 ---
II6 CONSCIENCISM 
be dogmatic in its specific provisions, for it contains constant and 
variable elements. In principle, socialism remains the same and 
pure; in application it is realistic and scientific. 
Caution is supremely necessary here. A clever and unscrupulous 
neo-colonialism can pervert and corrupt this relativist aspect of 
specific socialism and use it in fact to re-colonize a people. It is 
essential that socialism in its specific form should at every point 
and every level be justified only by reference to socialist general 
principles. Specific socialism can only be an instantiation of the 
general formula, no more. people should therefore not be 
betrayed under the guise of relating socialism to their actual 
conditions. 
At tIus point, I shall give further elucidation to the concept of 
positive action. I have already pointed out that positive action as a 
lever towards independence is related to a mass party and the 
political education, unity of purpose and action which it can 
to a people. Positive action as a quantity could therefore 
vary with people, their degree of consciousness, and their degree 
ofmobilization for progress. The people are however not conscious 
or mobilized apart from the consciousness and mobilization of 
individuals. pa may therefore be said to be the sum of the positive 
action, Pa, contained in individuals associated with a mass organiza­
tion. Therefore, 
(xx) pa = Pal + Pa2 + ... + Pa k + Pak = EPa kI 1. .. 
Similarly, na represents the sum of the negative action, Na, of 
the individuals in a society to the extent that it is organized and 
concerted. Hence, 
(xxi) na = Nal Na2 +... +Na k I Nak =E ... k 
Thus, both pa and na are revealed as functions. 
Since all the steps taken towards a genuine development of a 
SET THEORETIC TERMS II7 
liberated territory involve a relation of positive action to negative 
action, the index ofdevelopment, p, may be defmed thus: 
(xxii) P na 
As nanever completely disappears, however closely it approaches 
0, p can never become infinite, but at its peak has the following 
equivalence: 
P 
tta 
P is therefore asymptotic towards infmity at its peak. It is increased 
by increasing pa and decreasing na. In practice, however, na is never 
negligible and t na is never attained. 
But though t tta is never achieved, the index of development 
can rise as pa rises and na decreases. Ifthis is what is required accord­
ing to the equation for the index of development, then it can be 
,;r 
. secured by the same leverage as brings about (pa + na). The intensi­
~O 
fication of the dialectical moment which produces independence 
will raise the index of development. A greater positive action 
therefore as the key to development along socialist lines. 
That is, socialist development, the socialist conscience of the 
people must enhanced through education and party activity. 
The forces positive action, political, economic and cultural, 
need to be mobilized and streamlined for progress. 
requires an increase in the number of people contributing 
to positive action and an improvement in the quality of their con­
tribution. This requires a greater space ex, achieved through 
positive unity as defined in formula (xiii), and it creates an optimum 
zone ofself-induced development. 
I should like at this point to revert to a general feature of philo­
sophical consciencism. Philosophical consciencism is a general


--- PAGE 63 ---
II8 SET THEORETIC TERMS 
philosophy which admits of application to any country. But it is 
especially applicable to colonies and newly independent and 
developing countries. In the case of Africa, by means of the fore­
going set theoretic methods the necessity ofa unio}1 ofindependent 
African states is established, a union integrated by socialism, 
without which our hard-won independence may yet be perverted 
and negated by a new colonialism. INDEX 
Addition, method of, 14 
African 12; history and 
culture 62-3; segments 
68, 78; classlessness of, 69; and 
capitalism, 74, experience 
and influence of Western Euro­
pean, Christian and Islamic 
thought on, 70, 78-9; outlook 
and standpoint of, 97-8; and 
socialism, II4 
Alexander the Great, 48 
Amo, Anthony William (African 
philosopher), 18, 87 
Anarchism, 39, 44 
Anaxagoras (Greek pl,i1osopher). 38-9 
Anaximander (Greek philosopher), 
21,35-6 
Apperception, 20, 84-5: see also 
Perception 
Aristotle (Greek philosopher), 44-9, 
50,84-5 
Art, African and European, 65 
Atheism, 9, 84 
Augustine, St, 12, 44 
Axioms, 25 
Berkeley. George (British philo­
sopher), 6, IS, 19. 5I-2 
'Boundless' (Anaximander's meory). 
2I 
Britain, 65 
Capitalism, 14, 49-50 passim, 57. 72­
5; evils of. 76-7 
Cartesianism: see Descartes, Rene, and 
Cartesianism 
Categories and categorial conversion, 
21-3.47.86--91 passim 
Causality. 7-II passim 
Change, chemical and physical, 2I 
Charlemagne (King of the Franks and 
Emperor), 43 
Christianity and the Christian church, 
II,46-7,5 0,52,53.68;influence 
on African society, 70, 79 
Civitas dei (St Augustine), 44 
Clan system, 69 
Class systems and structure, 69; 
Marxist conception of, 98 
me, 29, 36 
-oprrl,nn 60-2 passim, 65 
Cohesion, 65,68 
Colonialism, 
need for abolition of, 69-70, 
ro6; meories of Marx and 
on, 5: see also Neo-colonialislU 
Colonies, types of, ro8-9 
Commwlalism, 69. 73-4 
Concepts and objects. 23,38-9 
'Consciencism', philosophy of, 70, 
78ff, 
Consciousness and self-consciousness, 
20. 84-0 passim 
Constructionism, 2I-4 passim 
Conservatism. 75 
Containment in colonialist cOLUltries. 
101 
Convention People's Party (Ghana). 
100 
Cyclic meory of time, 9-10 
Decolonization, 12, 13 
De Humanae Mentis Apatheia (A. W. 
Amo),19


--- PAGE 64 ---
120 INDEX 
Delinquency, God, concepts of, 9-12 passim, 15, 16, 
methods of dealing with, 65-6; 17, 19 
psychology of, 95 Gods, in Thales' philosophy, 83 
Democracy, Greek, 30, 39, 41-3, 44 Goya y Lucientes, Francisco (Spanish 
Descartes, Rene (French philosopher), painter), 65 
and Cartesianism, 16, 17 52, 53, Gravity, theory of, 81 
85,86,87 Greek society and democracy, 30-3, 
Destiny, in theological speculation, 29 37-44 passim 
Development of liberated territories, 
12, II6-7 Happiness, defmition of, 76 
Disincarnation, 16 Heat, 24 
Dreams, 17 Hegel, Georg (German philosopher), 
Duality, Cartesian, 85 48, 62 
Heraclitus (Greek philosopher), 36-8, 
43
Education, 41, 55, 70, 100, II5 
 Herodotus (Greek historian), 63
Egalitarianism, 35-41 passim, 45-6, 49; 
 History, 62
materialism and, 75, 95-7; need 
 Hitler, Adolf, 48
for restitution of, 78; and ethics, Hobbes, Thomas {English93-8 passim; and consciencism, sopher),17II3 , Huet, Pierre (French scholar), 54
Einstein, Albert (German mathema­ Human Understal1ding, cOl1cemil1gtician), 88: see also Relativity, (John Locke), 81
Theory of Hum:mism, 50-1 
Empiricism, 14,30, 51-2 
 David (Scottish philosopher), Energy and matter, 20-4 passim, 89 
 14,67,9 6Engels, Friedrich (German philo­
sopher), 5, 34,92 Idealism, 14, IS, 19-21, 38, 43; and 
Epistemology, 90-1 
 oligarchy, 75-6; and AfricanEthics, 66; ethical rules, 94--'7 society, 76; compared withEugenics, Plato's theory of, 41 
 materialism, 93: see also Material-Evolution, 25-6; fundamental law of, 
15111
I03-4 Ideals and institutions, relationshipExistence, 9, 17 
 between, 94 
Extension, 19 
 Identity ofMeaning, Principle of, 79­
80 
Feudalism, 71-3 Ideologies, 34, 56 ff passim; in African 
Force, 89-90 society, 68 
Forces, opposition of, 37 Illusions and delusions, 17 
'Forms' (of Plato), 46 Independence for colonialist COUlltries, 
Foucher, Simon (French philosopher), 101-1I8 passim 
54 Individual, the, 16, 49, 52, 58; idealist 
Gottlob (German logician and materialist tendencies in, 75; 
and mathematician), 23, 80 and happiness, 76; as a means and 
Freud, SigmUlld (Austrian psycholo­ an end, 97; principle of initial 
gist), 58 wortlUness, 98 
INDEX 121 
Individualism, 44, 49-50 20-7 passim; inertia of, 80-4; 
Induction, 15 manifestations and unity of, 96-7 ; 
Inertia of matter, 80-4 passim African standpoint on, 97 
Infinity, 9-II Mazzini, Ginseppe (Italian political 
Instability, 37 writer), 56 
Intention, 82 Metaphysics, 23ff, 47 
'Intoxicated speculation' (Marxian John Stuart (British 
term),19 sopher),49 
Islam, influence of, on African society, Mind, philosophical concepts of, 19, 
68,7 0,78-9 20, 23; and matter, 20-7 passim 
Mind-body problem, 19, 86-7 
Jesuits, 53 Monads (of Leibniz), 52 
principle of, 35-6 Monisms,2I 
Monists, 21,35,36,38,39,75,96 
Kant, Immanuel (German Montaigne, Michel (French writer), 54 
sopher), 30, 47, 95, 97 Moralities, 58-9 
Kinds, evolution of, 25-6 Morality, 66-7 
Knowledge, 40, 51; necessary to Motion, principle of, 38,47, 80-4 
social development, I04 
Nature,LangQage, 19 
 concepts of, 3 off; and society, 70-1 ; Law,61; in theological speculation, 29 
 effect of man's conquest of forces "Leibniz, Gottfried (German philo­ of,94sopher), IS, 30, 52, 80 
 Neo-colonialism, 100-5 passim, IIO-12 
Libertins (French free-thinkers), 53 
 passim, II6: see also Colonial. Locke, John (British philosopher), 50, 
 ism 81 
 Newton, Sir Isaac (British scientist), Logic, 21; logical grammar, 23; 80, 81, 83 
logical types, 90 
 Nominalism, 22-5 passimLuther, Martin, 64 
 Nous (Anaxagoras' term), 38 
Numbers, critical, 24, 26 
Mach, Ernst (German mathematician), 
88 
Objects,Malebranche, Nicolas (Frencll writer), 
types of, 6; and concepts, 23, 38-9 
54 
 Occam, William of (English philo-Marx, Karl, and Marxism, 5, 13, 19, 
sopher), 85-6 
34,69,74,90,9 2 
Occultism, 82
Mass (in physics), 20, 23, 25, 89 
Oligarchy and idealism, 75-6 
Materialism, 14, 20, 23-8 passim, 38; 
 Original sin, 68
and egalitarianism, 75-7; as basis Otto I (Holy Roman Emperor), 43
of consciencism, 79 ff passim; 
compared with idealism, 92-3; 
and ethics, 93 Pantheism, 9, 84 
Mathematics, 24, 26 Papacy, the, 43 
Matter, 18-21, 79-88 passim; and Parallelism, 87 
energy, 12-23 passim; and mind, Pascal, Blaise (French writer), 54


--- PAGE 65 ---
122 INDEX 
Perception, IS-IS passim, 27: see also 
Apperception 
Philosophical alternatives, 75 
Philosophy, 
history of, 5-28; role of, 66--7 
Place, 47 
Plato (Greek philosopher) and Platon­
40-6 passim, 66, 80, 84 
plotinus (Greek philosopher), 42 
Positive and negative action against 
colonialism, 100-5; theoretic 
terms for, 107-18 
Practice: see Thought and practice 
Priests, power of, 31-3,43-4 
Progress, 75 
Prolegomena, 47 
Protagoras (Greek philosopher), 39 
Quality and 20, 26, 47, 87 
Quantum 
Rabelais, Fran<;ois (French wnter}. 50 
Radiation, 82 
Leopold von (German his­
torian), 64 
Rationalism, 14-1$ 
Reality, 20, 21, 30 
Reductionism, 21-5 passim 
Reform, 72-3: see also Revolution 
Relativity, Theory of, 27, 88-9 
Religion, 13, 29. 32, 64: see also 
Christianity; Islam 
Renaissance, the European, 30 • 50 
Republic, The (Plato), 41, 66 
Rest, 47, 81 
Revolution, 37, 53, 72-3: see also 
Reform 
Rilles and principles, relationship 
berween, 94-8 
Scepticism, 27 
'Seeds'. Anaxagoras' theory of, 38 
Sensation, 27 
Sense, 17, 30 
Slavery. 45-6, 71-4 
Socialism, 49. 50, 52, 72-7, 105-6, 
108, 114-8 passim 
Society, 
concepts of, 36 ff, 56 jJ; idealist 
and materialist streaks in, 74-5; 
politics and ethics in, 98 
Socrates (Greek philosopher), 32, 
36, 39-4 1,43 
Solipsism, 15-17. 39 
Sophists. 39 
Soul, concepts of, 29, 36, 40, 85: see 
also Spirit 
SOllth Africa, Union of, as a type of 
colony, 108 
Southern Rhodesia, as a type of 
colony, 109 
Soviet Union, 66 
Space-time. 27, 88 
Spinoza. Benedictus de (Dutch-Jewish 
philosopher and theologian). 92 
Spirit, 22, 82-3: see also Soul 
State, 
Statutes and by-laws, 93-4 
Stimillus and response, 20, 84-5 
Subjectivism. 39 
Sufficient Reason, Principle of, 7-9 
Tension, 37. 89,90, 103 
TIdes (Greek philosopher), 6, 2I, 
30-6 passim, 83-4.97 
Theism, 8 
Thought and practice. 78 
Thucydides (Greek historian), 63 
9-10,47 
Towards Colonial Freedom (K. Nkru­
mah). 55. 98, 104 
Truth, 46, 52-3 
Universe, philosophical concepts of 
the, 9-10, 18-28 
Verification Principle, 79 
Wave mechanics, 82 
Whitehead, Alfred (British philo­
sopher and mathematician), 81 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (Austrian 
philosopher), 1 I 
Xenophon (Greek historian), 31

