=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: cornelwestthecornelwestreaderbookos-z1-131123080100-phpapp01.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 549
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:50:50.091299
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---
The


--- PAGE 4 ---
CORNEL WEST
Reader
BOOKS ALSO BY CORN EL WEST
Prophesy Deliverance! An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity (1982)
Theology in the Americas: Detroit II (1982)
(Co-Editor)
Post-Analytic Philosophy (1985)
(Edited with john Rajchman)
Prophetic Fragments (1988)
The American Evasion of Philosophy (1989)
Out There: Margin alization and Contemporary Cultures (1990)
(Co-Editor)
The Ethical Dimensions of Marxist Thought (1991)
Breaking Bread (1991)
(with bell hooks)
Prophetic Thought in Postmodern Times (1993)
Prophetic Reflections (1993)
Race Matters (1993)
Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America (1993)
James Snead, White Screens, Black Images (1994)
(Edited with Colin McCabe)
Jews & Blacks : Let the Healing Begin (1995)
(with Michael Lerner)
The Future of the Race (1996)


--- PAGE 5 ---
(with Henry Louis Gates, -.)
Struggles in the Promised Land (1997)
(Edited with lack Salzman)
Restoring Hope (1997)
The War Against Parents (1998)
(with Sylvia Ann Hewlett)
The Future of American Progressivism (1998)
(with Roberto Mangabeira Unger)
The Courage to Hope: From Black Suffering to Human Redemption (1999)
(Edited with Quinton Hosford Dixie)


--- PAGE 6 ---



--- PAGE 7 ---
. . . WRITE ABOUT THIS YOUNG MAN SQUEEZING DROP BY DROP THE SLAVE OUT OF
HIMSELF AND WAKING ONE FINE MORNING FEELING THAT REAL HUMAN BLOOD, NOT
A SLAVE'S, IS FLOWING IN HIS VEINS.
-Anton Chekhov
To BE A MUSICIAN IS REALLY SOMETHING. IT GOES VERY, VERY DEEP. MY MUSIC IS


--- PAGE 8 ---
THE SPIRITUAL EXPRESSION OF WHAT I AM-MY FAITH, MY KNOWLEDGE, MY BEING. . .
. WHEN YOU BEGIN TO SEE THE POSSIBILITIES OF MUSIC, YOU DESIRE TO DO
SOMETHING REALLY GOOD FOR PEOPLE, TO HELP HUMANITY FREE ITSELF FROM ITS
HANG-UPS.
-John Coltrane
TO THE MEMORY AND LEGACY OF MY MODERN ARTISTIC SOUL MATES
John Coltrane
Federico Garcia Lorca
Franz Kafka
Paul Celan
T nnessee Williams
Giacomo Leopardi
Samuel Beckett
Sarah Vaughan
Muriel Rukeyser
Thomas Hardy
.Nikos Kazantzakis
Toni Morrison
AND ABOVE ALL
Anton Chekhov
Preface
 xiii
Introduction: To Be Human, Modern and American
 xv
I AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL PRELUDE
1 The Making of an American Radical Democrat of African Descent
 3


--- PAGE 9 ---
2 On My Intellectual Vocation
 19
3 Sing a Song
 34
II MODERNITY AND ITS DISCONTENTS
4 The Ignoble Paradox of Modernity
 51
5 Race and Modernity
 55
6 Black Strivings in a Twilight Civilization
 87
7 The New Cultural Politics of Difference
 119
III AMERICAN PRAGMATISM
8 Why Pragmatism?
 143
9 On Prophetic Pragmatism
 149
10 Pragmatism and the Sense of the Tragic
 174
11 The Limits of Neopragmatism
 183
12 Nietzsche's Prefiguration of Postmodern American Philosophy
 188
IV PROGRESSIVE MARXIST THEORY
13 The Indispensability Yet Insufficiency of Marxist Theory
 213
14 Fredric Jameson's American Marxism
 231
15 Race and Social Theory
 251
V RADICAL DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
16 The Role of Law in Progressive Politics
 269
17 The Political Intellectual
 278
18 A World of Ideas
 294
19 The Dilemma of the Black Intellectual
 302
20 American Progressivism Reoriented
 316
21 Parents and National Survival
 333


--- PAGE 10 ---
22 On the 1980s
 344
23 Michael Harrington, Democratic Socialist
 348
VI PROPHETIC CHRISTIAN THOUGHT
24 The Crisis in Contemporary American Religion
 357
25 The Historicist Turn in Philosophy of Religion
 360
26 Religion and the Left
 372
27 On Elisabeth Schiissler Fiorenza's In Memory of Her
 380
28 On Leszek Kolakowski
 387
29 On Liberation Theology: Segundo and Hinkelammert
 393
30 Christian Love and Heterosexism
 401
31 A Philosophical View of Easter
 415
32 On Gibson Winter's Ecological Ecumenism
 421
33 Prophetic Christian as Organic Intellectual: Martin Luther King, Jr.
 425
34 Subversive Joy and Revolutionary Patience in Black Christianity
 435
VII THE ARTS
35 Critical Reflections on Art
 443
36 Horace Pippin's Challenge to Art Criticism
 447
37 Race and Architecture
 456
38 The Spirituals as Lyrical Poetry
 463
39 In Memory of Marvin Gaye
 471
40 On Afro-American Music: From Bebop to Rap
 474
41 On Anna Deavere Smith's Fires in the Mirror
 485
42 On Walt Whitman
 489
VIII RACE AND DIFFERENCE


--- PAGE 11 ---
43 On Affirmative Action
 495
44 On Black-Brown Relations
 499
45 On Black Sexuality
 514
46 On Black Nationalism
 521
47 Tensions with Jewish Friends and Foes
 530
48 On Jackie Robinson
 536
49 On Julianne Malveaux
 539
50 Conversation with bell hooks
 541
IX POSTSCRIPT
51 Chekhov, Coltrane and Democracy
 551
Notes
 565
Index
 593
THE PRIMARY AIM OF this reader is to lay bare the basic structure of my intellectual work
and life. This reader takes the form of a variety of voices and an array of interests that focus on
two fundamental themes: the art of living and the expansion of democracy.
My painful quest for wisdom is an endless journey that tries to delve into the darkness of my
soul to create a more mature and compassionate person. My political project of deepening
democracy in the world is a perennial process of highlighting the plight of the wretched of the
earth and broadening the scope of human dignity.
This volume not only represents the progression of my thought but also consists of my
reflections on it. I chose these pieces rather than others from my corpus because they best
represent the crucial moments of an evolving whole. This whole-fraught with tensions and
contradictions-reflects my attempt to shatter my own parochial limits and provincial
shortcomings. My efforts to understand myself are inseparable from understanding what it means
to be human, modern, American, black, male and straight in global and local contexts. And since
this text was put together at a unique moment in my life-when Eros erupted and life quickened-it
marks a turning point in many ways.
This volume will, I hope, keep these ideas alive in the mind of the reader so that they may be
debated and refined. In my travels as a speaker, I continue to be struck by the persistence of


--- PAGE 12 ---
certain themes and concerns of my audiences. These include, of course, race but, more generally,
focus on questions of the good and how one might lead a meaningful life-a life in dialogue with
history, connected to community-without falling into despair. This reader should serve as a
reproach to easy despair and an inspiration to those who wish to travel with me on this quest.
I would like to thank my agent, Gloria Loomis, for her extraordinary care and support of my
work. I would like to acknowledge the visionary and superb editorial work of my friend and
brother Tim Bartlett. This book exists, in part, because of him. And I would like to thank my
friends and sisters Vanessa Mobley and Libby Garland for their excellent editorial assistance. It
was sheer fun to work with them. Finally, I would like to congratulate my dear mother upon
receiving a well-deserved recognition as an exemplary teacher and principal in the form of the
new Irene B. West Elementary School in Sacramento, California.
To BE HUMAN, MODERN AND AMERICAN
As WE APPROACH THE deathbed of this ghastly century, an uncanny sense of terror and hope
should haunt us. As at the sad funeral of a loved one, we remember the cruel circumstances and
heroic energies of those who are now the culinary delight of terrestrial worms. My own work
and life have always unfolded under the dark shadows of death, dread and despair in search of
love, dialogue and democracy. I am first and foremost a blues man in the world of ideas-a jazz
man in the life of the mind-committed to keeping alive the flickering candles of intellectual
humility, personal compassion and social hope while living in our barbaric century. I am
primarily a dramatist of philosophic notions and historical narratives that partake of blood-
drenched battles on a tear-soaked terrain in which our lives and deaths are at stake.
My work is a feeble attempt to understand and respond to the guttural cry that erupts from the
depths of the soul of each of us. The existential quest for meaning and the political struggle for
freedom sit at the center of my thought. My writings focus on the specific and contemporaneous
ways in which we grapple with concrete and universal issues of life and death, oppression and
resistance, joy and sorrow.
I am a Chekhovian Christian with deep democratic commitments. By this I mean that I am
obsessed with confronting the pervasive evil of unjustified suffering and unnecessary social
misery in our world. And I am determined to explore the intellectual sources and existential
resources that feed our courage to be, courage to love and courage to fight for democracy. Three
related and fundamental questions motivate my writings: What does it mean to be human? What
does it mean to be modern? What does it mean to be American?
My perennial wrestling with these overwhelming queries, which suffuses the essays in this
volume, is rooted in my terrifying experience and constant awareness of the radical contingency
and fragility of life. I find the incomparable works of Anton Chekhov-the best singular body by a
modern artist-to be the wisest and deepest interpretations of what human beings confront in their
daily struggles. His salutary yet sad portraits of the nearly eight thousand characters in his


--- PAGE 13 ---
stories and plays-comparable only to Shakespeare's variety of personages-provide the necessary
ground, the background noise, of any acceptable view of what it means to be human. His
magisterial depiction of the cold Cosmos, indifferent Nature, crushing Fate and the cruel
histories that circumscribe desperate, bored, confused and anxiety-ridden yet love-hungry
people, who try to endure against all odds, rings true for me. Furthermore, I find inspiration in
his refusal to escape from the pain and misery of life by indulging in dogmas, doctrines or
dreams as well as abstract systems, philosophic theodicies or political utopias.
In short, Chekhov provides exemplary tragicomic dramas, subject to multiple interpretations,
for serious thinking and wise living. His art yields the most intelligent reflection and depiction
of the limits of critical intelligence in confronting our worldly existence. Yet his acute sense of
the incongruity in our lives is grounded in a magnificent compassion for each of us. Chekhov
understands what drives the cynic without himself succumbing to cynicism. He appreciates the
childlike fantasies of the sentimentalist without yielding to the childishness of sentimentalism.
Like the best blues and jazz artists, he enacts melancholic yet melioristic indictments of misery
without concealing the wounds inflicted or promising permanent victory. He stays in touch with
the everyday realities of ordinary people and highlights our peculiar wrestlings with appearance
and reality, opinion and knowledge, illusion and truth-of beauty, love and the collective struggle
for a decent society. Like his literary ancestors Sophocles and Shakespeare and his twentieth-
century progeny Kafka and Beckett, Chekhov leads us through our contemporary inferno with
love and sorrow, but no cheap pity or promise of ultimate happiness.
I remain a Christian-despite Chekhov's agnosticism-primarily because the concrete example
of the love and compassion of Jesus rendered in the biblical Gospel narratives constitutes the
most absurd and alluring mode of being in the tragicomic world. In this way, I stand in the
skeptical Christian tradition of Montaigne, Pascal and Kierkegaard-figures in touch with (and
often tortured by) an inescapable demon of doubt inscribed within their humble faith. This
tradition enables me feebly to love my way through the absurdity of life and the darkness of
history. Their bold intellectual thought and courageous existential witness have little to do with
much or most of institutional Christianity or any organized religion. In fact, Erasmus is one of the
few towering Christian figures who could exemplify this thought and witness and remain in the
established church of his day.
My Chekhovian Christian conception of what it means to be human puts a premium on death
and courage. To be human is to suffer, shudder and struggle courageously in the face of
inevitable death. To think deeply and live wisely as a human being is to meditate on and prepare
for death. The quest for human wisdom requires us to learn how to die-penultimately in the daily
death of bad habits and cruel viewpoints and ultimately in the demise of our earthly and
temporal bodies. To be human, at the most profound level, is to encounter honestly the
inescapable circumstances that constrain us, yet muster the courage to struggle compassionately
for our own unique individualities and for more democratic and free societies. This courage
contains the seeds of lived history-of memory, maturity and melioration-in the face of no
guaranteed harvest. Hence, my view of what it means to be human is preeminently existential-a
focus on particular, singular, flesh-and-blood persons grappling with dire issues of death, dread,
despair, disease and disappointment. Yet I am not an existentialist like the early Sartre, who had


--- PAGE 14 ---
a systematic grasp of human existence. Instead, I am a Chekhovian Christian who banks his all
on radical-not rational-choice and on the courage to love enacted by a particular Palestinian Jew
named Jesus, who was crucified by the powers that be, betrayed by cowardly comrades and
misconstrued by corrupt churches that persist, and yet is remembered by those of us terrified and
mesmerized by the impossible possibility of his love.
My Chekhovian Christian viewpoint is idiosyncratic and iconoclastic. My sense of the
absurdity and incongruity of the world is closer to the Gnosticism of Valentinus, Luria or
Monoimos than that of historic religious orthodoxies-yet, unlike them, it retains a deep sense of
history. My intellectual lineage goes more through Schopenhauer, Tolstoy, Rilke, Melville,
Lorca, Kafka, Celan, Beckett, Soyinka, O'Neill, Kazantzakis, Morrison and, above all, Chekhov
(all great dramatic poets of death, courage and compassion) than most theologians and
philosophers. And, I should add, it reaches its highest expression in music-as in Brahms's
Requiem and Coltrane's A Love Supreme. Music at its best achieves this summit because it is
the grand archaeology into and transfiguration of our guttural cry, the great human effort to grasp
in time (with the most temporal of the arts) our deepest passions and yearnings as prisoners of
time. Profound music leads us-beyond language-to the dark roots of our scream and the celestial
heights of our silence.
To be modern is to have the courage to use one's critical intelligence to question and
challenge the prevailing authorities, powers and hierarchies of the world. Despite my
Chekhovian Christian conception of what it means to be human-a view that invokes premodern
biblical narratives-I am a quintessentially modern thinker in that I weave disparate narratives in
ways that result in novel forms of self-exploration and self-experimentation. To be modern is to
live dangerously and courageously in the face of relentless self-criticism and inescapable
fallibilism; it is to give up the all-too-human quest for certainty and indubitability owing to the
historicity of our claims. Yet to give in to sophomoric relativism ("Anything goes" or "All views
are equally valid") is a failure of nerve, and to succumb to wholesale skepticism ("There is no
truth") is a weakness of the will and imagination. Instead, the distinctive mark of modernity is to
pursue the treacherous trek of dialogue, to wager on the fecund yet potentially poisonous fruits of
fallible inquiry, which require communicative action, risk-ridden conversation, even intimate
relation.
My conception of what it means to be modern is shot through with a sense of the dialogical-
the free encounter of mind, soul and body that relates to others in order to be unsettled, unnerved
and unhoused. This experience of dialogue-the I-Thou relation with the uncontrolled other-may
result in a dizziness, vertigo or shudder that unhinges us from our moorings or yanks us from our
anchors. This thoroughly modern lightness of being-produced, in part, from the innovations of
modern science and technology or improvisations of modern music and the artsis both
frightening and energizing. This loss of our footing and gain of our freedom compel us to
acknowledge that the very meaning of being modern may be the lack of any meaning, that our
quest for such meaning may be the very meaning itself-without ever arriving at any fixed
meaning. In short, the hermeneutical circle in which we find ourselves, as historical beings in
search of meaning for ourselves, is virtuous, not vicious, because we never transcend or
complete the circle. Like Sisyphus, we go endlessly up and down with noble aims and


--- PAGE 15 ---
aspirations, but no ultimate harmony or achieved wholeness.
My Chekhovian Christian conception of what it means to be modern focuses on the night side
of modernity, the underside of our contemporary predicament. Therefore I highlight the forms of
self-making and self-creating of those whose suffering is often rendered invisible by the
Enlightenment discourse on the light of natural reason and the Romantic preoccupation with
imaginative transformation. Of course, to be deeply modern is to be critical of the blindness of
certain forms of critical intelligence and to imagine forms of transformation far beyond Romantic
versions of imaginative transformation. Therefore my critiques of modernity extend, refine and
expand modern consciousness and practice. Yet my Chekhovian Christian perspective of what it
means to be modern cuts even deeper. It gives up on the very possibility of arriving at a
definitive, definite-or dogmatic-end point of modernity. Instead, it stresses the very means by
which and procedures through which we pursue our aims. In short, it highlights the dialogical
process and democratic practices through which we pursue the very ends we cherish.
To be American is to be part of a dialogical and democratic operation that grapples with the
challenge of being human in an open-ended and experimental manner. Although America is a
romantic project in which a paradise, a land of dreams, is fanned and fueled with a religion of
vast possibility, it is, more fundamentally, a fragile experiment-precious yet precarious-of
dialogical and democratic human endeavor that yields forms of modern self-making and self-
creating unprecedented in human history. From Thomas Jefferson to Elijah Muhammad,
Geronimo to Dorothy Day, Jane Addams to Nathanael West, it holds out the possibility of self-
transformation and self-reliance to New World dwellers willing to start anew and recast
themselves for the purpose of deliverance and betterment. This purpose requires only a
restlessness, energy and boldness that galvanizes people to organize and mobilize themselves in
a way that makes new opportunities and possibilities credible and worth the effort.
To be American is to give ethical significance to the future by viewing the present as terrain
capable of transcending any past and thereby arriving at a new identity and community. From the
revolutionary hopes of European settlers on Amerindian land and bodies to millennial hopes of
Mormons and Baptists against Old World Protestant establishments, Americans give weight and
gravity to the possibility that future prospects can trump present troubles. From Emerson's Yes to
tomorrow against the defeat of today through Whitman's song of the open road given the weight
of the fixed form and ancient verse to James's and Dewey's obsession with fruits, consequences
and effects against Descartes's stress on origins, beginnings and starting points, American culture
accentuates what is to come, what is not yet as opposed to what is and what has been. Of course,
such a futuristic orientation often degenerates into an infantile, sentimental or melodramatic
propensity toward happy endings, so that dreams of betterment downplay the dark realities of
suffering in our midst. In this way, American discourses on innocence, deliverance or freedom
overlook the atrocities of violence, subjugation or slavery in our past or present. To be
American is to downplay history in the name of hope, to ignore memory in the cause of
possibility. Our great truthtellers-mainly artists-remind us that history will haunt us and memory
should keep us honest. Melville, Hawthorne, Twain, Faulkner, Fitzgerald, O'Neill, Tennessee
Williams, Theodore Dreiser, Toni Morrison, Thomas Pynchon, Lorraine Hansberry and others
spin out candid narratives and painful truths about our alltoo-human complicity with evil and


--- PAGE 16 ---
evasion of dark realities, which no country or social experiment can ignore without danger. My
Chekhovian Christian perspective tries to remain true to the heart-wrenching tales and truths of
such American artists. They remind us of the all-too-human forms of mendacity and hypocrisy
pervasive in American life.
To be American is to raise perennially the frightening democratic question: What does the
public interest have to do with the most vulnerable and disadvantaged in our society? This query
of democratic import goes back to Cleisthenes of 508 B.C. in Athens. Shouldn't democracy be a
form of plebodicy-not theodicy-that focuses our attention on the unjustified suffering and
unnecessary social misery of ordinary human beings here and abroad? And yet isn't American
democracy one in which arbitrary power is not fully curtailed and, hence, the political,
corporate and financial elites-unregulated by substantive public accountability-wield forms of
power that cause pain and grief for fellow citizens that need not be? Are not democratic
practices historically transgressive and even subversive actions of heroic citizens that transform
inherited forms such that their decency and dignity are recognized by elites? Is not the grand
paradox of American democracy at its inception that the people are distrusted and contained,
their power dispersed and diluted so that elites may prosper at the expense of workers' power,
women's power and especially black, brown, yellow and red power? Can America ever really
be truly America without a full-fledged multiracial and multi- gendered democracy-a democracy
that flourishes in the political, economic, cultural and even existential spheres? Can the dignity
of everyday people thrive in an oligarchic and plutocratic economy? Can American democracy
be true to its ideals without a nonracist and nonsexist culture and society? Does not pervasive
homophobia require a nonheterosexist social arrangement? These are the challenging questions
of Whitman, Dewey, Addams, Baldwin, Lorde and Martin Luther King, Jr.
Can America, the last grand empire of the twentieth century, meet such a challenge? Is a
multiracial and multisexual political democracy the best we-or humankind-can do? Is economic
democracy in a global economy a pipe dream? Is the globalization of democracy a fantasy in the
face of unaccountable multinational corporate power? Is the vision of existential democracy-of
Maurice Maeterlinck, Walt Whitman and Anton Chekhov-a mirage? Is it possible that democracy
can be a way of being in the world, not just a mode of governance circumscribed by corporate
power and monied interests? These are the great questions of the twenty-first century, the grand
challenges of the next wave of democratic possibility. Have we reached the limits of the
American religion of possibility? Do class, race and gender hierarchy have the last word on
how far democracy can go in our time? My Chekhovian Christian viewpoint says No! No! No!
But maybe. Indeed, surely, if we fail to speak our fallible truths about the social misery in our
midst here and abroad, if we fail to expose the vicious lies about our past and present and if we
fail to bear our imperfect yet courageous witness of love and democracy at the birth of our new
century! Let it be said of us centuries from now that we were bold and visionary in our efforts to
live with courage and compassion in the face of death, to pursue dialogue over and against the
overwhelming odds of misunderstanding and violence and to fight for old and new forms of
democracy at the beginning of a century that may well produce novel forms of barbarism and
bestiality if we fail to respond to the tests of our time.
The Chekhovian Christian perspective put forward in this reader is my testament of hope for


--- PAGE 17 ---
the twenty-first century. The words, sentences and paragraphs are but linguistic marks that track
my journey of blood, sweat and tears, which tries to achieve and enact the best of what it means
to be human, modern and American. These marks often fall far short of the high mark-and pale in
the face of good music-yet they point toward a certain kind of musical life that painfully pursues
a compassionate individuality and courageously struggles for a more free and democratic world.
This reader is my attempt to transfigure our guttural cry into a call to care-for causes bigger and
grander than our own precious cry.


--- PAGE 18 ---



--- PAGE 19 ---
T H E M A K I N G O F A N A M E R I C A N R A D I C A L 
DEMOCRAT OF AFRICAN DESCENT
My close friends and comrades Paul Sweezy and Harry Magdj the long distance runners of the
American Left-convinced me to publish a version of my philosophy dissertation in 1991. My
diligent and supportive editor, Susan Lowes, suggested that I write an autobiographical
introduction. I have yet to write a more probing and revealing piece about my personal and
intellectual development in order to situate myself and my work after the fall of Soviet
communism and the Velvet revolutions in Eastern Europe.
A WHOLESALE CRITICAL INVENTORY of ourselves and our communities of struggle is
neither self-indulgent autobiography nor self-righteous reminiscence. Rather, it is a historical
situating and locating of our choices, sufferings, anxieties and efforts in light of the
circumscribed options and alternatives available to us. We all are born into and build on
circumstances, traditions and situations not of our own choosing; yet we do make certain choices
that constitute who we are and how we live in light of these fluid circumstances, traditions and
situations.
The most significant stage-setting for my own life pilgrimage has been neither academic life
nor political organizations, but rather my closely knit family and overlapping communities of
church and friends. These pillars of civil society-my loving parents, siblings, and communities-
transmitted to me ideals and images of dignity, integrity, majesty and humility. These ideals and
images-couched within Christian narratives, symbols, rituals and, most importantly, concrete
moral examples-provided existential and ethical equipment with which to confront the crises,
terrors and horrors of life. The three major components of this equipment were a Christian ethic
of love-informed service to others, ego-deflating humility about oneself owing to the precious
yet fallible humanity of others, and politically engaged struggle for social betterment. This
Christian outlook, as exemplified in our time by Martin Luther King, Jr., serves as the basis for
my life vocation.
As a youth, I resonated with the sincere black militancy of Malcolm X, the defiant rage of the
Black Panther Party, and the livid black theology of James Cone. Yet I did not fully agree with
them. I always felt that they lacked the self-critical moment of humility I discerned in the grand
example of Martin Luther King, Jr. Such humility has always been a benchmark of genuine love
for, and gratitude to, ordinary people whose lives one is seeking to enhance. I witnessed this
same kind of integrity and dignity in the humble attitude to black folk of my early heroes: the
Godfather of Soul, James Brown; the legendary baseball player Willie Mays; my pastor, Rev.
Willie P. Cooke (of Shiloh Baptist Church in Sacramento, California); my grandfather, Rev. C.
L. West, of Metropolitan Baptist Church in Tulsa, Oklahoma; and my older brother, Clifton L.
West III, to me an exemplary human being. In this way, Martin Luther Kung, Jr.. has always been
not so much a model to imitate, but the touchstone for personal inspiration, moral wisdom and
existential insight. I heard him speak in person only once, when I was ten years old (1963), and I
remember not his words, but his humble spirit and sense of urgency.
My first noteworthy political action-besides marching with my family in a civil rights


--- PAGE 20 ---
demonstration in Sacramento-was the coordination of a citywide strike of students demanding
courses in black studies. At the time there were four black student body presidents in
Sacramento high schools (including myself). My good friend Glenn Jordan and I decided to
launch this effort during the 1969-1970 school year, and we had good results.
My critical self inventory highlights the fact that I was born eight years after the end of the
Age of Europe (1492-1945). Much of who and what we are has to do with where and with what
our immediate ancestors confronted the advent of modernity during the Age of Europe. And for
most of us there is no escape from the effects of European modernity in that, by the early
twentieth century, the handful of states located between the Atlantic Ocean and the Ural
mountains (in addition to the former British colony, the United States) controlled more than two-
thirds of the land and peoples on the globe. My perspective on the achievements and
deficiencies of this Age of Europe is shaped and colored by being a descendant of seven
generations of Africans in the Western Hemisphere, enslaved and exploited, devalued and
despised by Euro-Americans; and three generations of African-Americans, subordinated and
terrorized by legal racist practices in the South. Both of my parents were born in Jim (and Jane)
Crow Louisiana in the late 1920s and early 1930s. With the post-World War II decentering of
Europe, the dwarfing of European populations, the demystifying of European cultural hegemony,
the deconstruction of European philosophical systems and, most important, the decolonization of
the Third World, I came of age during the eclipse of one epoch and the emergence of another.
My early formative years were spent during what Henry Luce called the "American century"-a
period of unprecedented economic boom in the United States, the creation of a large middle
class, i.e., a prosperous working class with a bourgeois identity, and a mass culture primarily
based on African-American cultural products (music, style, etc.). I arrived on the scene just
when black, and some white, blood, sweat and tears broke the back of an apartheid-like rule of
law in the South and overturned discriminatory laws (though not de facto practices) in
employment, housing and education. In 1970, when I entered Harvard College, I became part of
the first generation of young black people to attend prestigious lily-white institutions of higher
learning in significant numbers-institutions still coping with the new wave of Jewish faculty and
students who had confronted an earlier tribal civility, snobbish gentility, and institutional loyalty
of primarily wellto-do white Anglo-Saxon Protestants. Owing to my family, church, and the
black social movements of the 1960s, I arrived at Harvard unashamed of my African, Christian,
and militant decolonized outlooks. More pointedly, I acknowledged and accented the
empowerment of my black styles, mannerisms, and viewpoints, my Christian values of service,
love, humility and struggle, and my anticolonial sense of self-determination for oppressed
people and nations around the world. But I soon discovered that this positive black identity,
these persuasive Christian values, and this deep commitment to struggles for freedom were not
enough. Given my privileged position (as a student-only about 18 percent of black young people
were enrolled in college at the time) and grand opportunities, I needed a more profound
understanding of history, a deeper grasp of the complex, conflictridden dynamics of societies
and cultures and a more flexible perspective on human life.
My passionate interest in philosophy was-and remains-primarily motivated by the radical
historical condilianedness of human existence and the ways in which possibilities and


--- PAGE 21 ---
potentialities are created, seized and missed by individuals and communities within this ever
changing conditionedness, including our inescapable death, illness and disappointment. This
attention to the historical character of all thought and action has led me to be suspicious of
intellectual quests for truth unwilling to be truthful about themselves, including my own. So
though I find delight in the life of the mind-inseparable from, yet not identical with, struggles for
freedom-I do not put primary value on intelligence or book knowledge. Rather, I believe we
have a moral obligation-for the quality of human life and protection of the environment-to be
wise, especially about the pitfalls and shortcomings of mere intelligence and book knowledge.
My three decisive years at Harvard College empowered me in a variety of ways. Although I
first majored in philosophy and then changed to Near Eastern languages and literature
(especially biblical Hebrew and Aramaic) in order to graduate a year early, my major focus was
on history and social thought. I learned much of the former from Samuel Beer, H. Stuart Hughes
and Martin Kilson; of the latter from Talcott Parsons, Hilary Putnam, Preston Williams, Terry
Irwin and John Rawls. My political involvement consisted of daily work (beginning at 6:00
A.M.) in the breakfast program in Jamaica Plain with left black friends like Steven Pitts, weekly
trips to Norfolk State Prison with fellow supporters like Valerie Hepburn, and campus activism
led by the Black Student Organization. The major action of this student group was the legendary
1972 takeover of Massachusetts Hall (including the president's office) to oppose Harvard's
investments in Gulf Oil and to support the anti-imperialist forces in Angola. Randall Robinson,
founder of TransAfrica but at that time a Harvard law student, played a crucial and courageous
leadership role, as did the chief undergraduate spokesman, Harvard Stephens. I could not go into
the building with my comrades because of trumped-up charges brought by the Cambridge Police
Department and two Hebrew tests I had to take in order to catch up with my class. Instead, I
joined the support work outside, which culminated in a march of 5,000 people on the first
weekend of the takeover.
In the early 1970s, varieties of black nationalism were predominant at Harvard. Imamu Amiri
Baraka's Congress of African People (CAP), Ron Karenga's early writings, the politics of the
Republic of New Africa (RNA) and, to some extent, the Nation of Islam were attractive to black
student activists. As a product of the black church I have always acknowledged some of the
tenets of black nationalism, namely, black intelligence, beauty, character and capacity, and their
subjection to vicious attack by white-supremacist practices. The fundamental issue of black
identity-the affirmation of African humanity and ability-is a precondition for any black
progressive politics. Yet my Christian universalist moral vision and my progressive
international political perspective-derived from my readings of Frantz Fanon, Kwame Nkrumah
and Karl Marx (promoted by the Black Panther Party over what Huey Newton called "porkchop
nationalism") -made me deeply suspicious of the politics of black nationalists. I worked with
them on antiracist issuesand we discussed, laughed and partied together weekly-but I always
staked out my Christian version of democratic socialist values and politics.
My conversations with Trotskyists-especially the provocative lectures given by Peter
Camejo-reinforced an anti-Stalinist stance I had already adopted, exposed me to a Leninist view
I remained unpersuaded of and promoted an appreciation of black nationalist insights within a
larger multiracial organization. I learned much from readings of Trotskyist intellectuals like


--- PAGE 22 ---
Leon Trotsky himself, C. L. R. James, Perry Anderson and others, but I was not convinced. At
this time, my major intellectual influences on political matters were the early Reinhold Niebuhr
(of Moral Man and Immoral Society), R. H. Tawney (especially The Acquisitive Society and
Equality), Julius K. Nyerere (Essays on Socialism), the early Leszek Kolakowski (Towards a
Marxist Humanism) and the dissenting Marxist humanists Markovic and Stojanovic I was most
excited by the powerful essays by Harold Cruse in Rebellion or Revolution, a book I much
preferred over his classic The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. Yet I remained critical of Cruse's
cultural nationalist followers at Harvard, most of whom were my close friends. At that time,
Martin Luther King, Jr., was a grand example of integrity and sacrifice but, in sharp contrast to
Malcolm X, not a distinct voice with a credible politics in our Harvard conversations. Malcolm
X's voice was as fresh as ever. We were all convinced that Malcolm X would hold our position
and have our politics if he were alive. We rarely if ever asked this question of King in those
days, even Christians like myself, principally owing to our blindness to his affirmation of
democratic socialist politics and our downplaying of (read: ignorance of) his anti-imperialist
(not just anti-Vietnam war) stance. King was for us the Great Man who died for us-but not yet
the voice we had to listen to, question, learn from and build on. This would change in the next
decade.
When I arrived at Princeton's philosophy department-by far the best in the country at the time-I
anticipated three basic intellectual challenges: the undermining of my Christian faith by the
powerful tools of analytical philosophy; the way in which the works of Ludwig Wittgenstein-my
philosophic hero at the time-were interpreted by Princeton's philosophy department; and how the
department's social philosophers might regard the Hegelian Marxist tradition, i.e., Georg Lukacs
and the Frankfurt School, whom I had recently been seduced by. I quickly discovered the first
issue was an irrelevant one for my teachers and peers. Nobody cared about religious faith-
though Walter Kaufmann and Richard Rorty regarded the issue with historic curiosity. So I kept
my Pascal, Kierkegaard, Montaigne, Thurman and Unamuno close to my heart and read Frege,
Carnap, Quine and Kuhn.
My eye-opening and horizon-broadening encounter with Richard Rorty made me an even
stronger Wittgensteinian, although with gestures toward Dewey. Rorty's historicist turn was like
music to my ears-nearly as sweet as the Dramatics, the Spinners, or the Main Ingredient, whom I
then listened to daily for sanity. My allegiance to the Hegelian Marxist tradition was deepened
by Sheldon Wolin-the major influence, along with Rorty and C. P. Macpherson-on my thought at
the time. It was during the two short years at Princeton that I became convinced that the values of
individuality-the sanctity and dignity of all individuals shaped in and by communities-and of
democracy, as a way of life and mode of being-in-the-world, not just a form of governance,
were most precious to me. This is why, when I returned to Harvard as a Du Bois Fellow to
write my dissertation, I turned first to T. H. Green, the British neo-Hegelian of the late nineteenth
century, and then to the ethical dimensions of Marxist thought. Marx's own debts to the
Romantics' preoccupation with many-sided personality and fullfledged individuality (as in
Friedrich Schiller's Letters on Aesthetic Education) and to the early socialists' focus on
universal suffrage, women's rights, abolitionism and workplace democracy intrigued me. I
became convinced that Marx's own intellectual development should be understood in terms of
this fascinating tension between the moral conviction of the flowering of individuality under


--- PAGE 23 ---
wholesale democratic socioeconomic and political conditions and the theoretical concern of
explaining scientifically the dynamics and tendencies of profit-driven capitalist societies that
foster a narrow individualism and a truncated political democracy.
This book, 7 'he Ethical Dimensicr .i of Marxist Thought, written over a decade ago when I
was in my mid-twenties, was my attempt to understand Marxist thought as one grand stream,
among others, of the larger modern articulation of historical consciousness, an articulation
fanned by Romantic quests for harmony and wholeness and fueled by concrete revolutionary and
reformist movements for freedom, equality and democracy. Such quests and movements may
result in aborted authoritarian arrangements or be crushed by powerful capitalist powers. Yet
the precious values of individuality and democracy that can guide and regulate such quests and
movements sit at the center of Marx's own thought. Hence I take the reader, step by step and text
by text, through Marx's own intellectual development in order to show how he incorporated
modern historical consciousness (as he constructed and understood it) in relation to his ethical
values of individuality and democracy, and how these values clashed with what he viewed as
the pernicious and vicious effects of the fundamental class-ridden capitalist processes of capital
accumulation and the commodification of labor. My brief examinations of subsequent Marxists,
like Friedrich Engels, Karl Kautsky and Georg Lukacs, try to show that their diverse conceptions
of modern historical consciousness in relation to ethical issues differ greatly from that of Marx.
The scope of this essay is limited, yet its focus on Marxist ethical reflection regarding
methodology and substance is timely. There is not only a paucity of highly detailed
interpretations of Marx's intellectual development, but also a need for more investigation of the
kind of turn toward history and social theory Marx made and how it contrasts with that of
subsequent noteworthy disciples and followers. And though I wrote Tlie American Evasion of
'Philosophy: A Genealogy of Pragmatism six years after my dissertation, there is no doubt that
my interpretation of Marxist thought is influenced by the works of John Dewey, the early Sidney
Hook and Richard Rorty. My basic claim is that Marx's turn toward history resembles the
antifoundationalist arguments of the American pragmatists, yet Marx wants to retain a warranted-
assertability status for social explanatory claims in order to understand and change the world.
Marx wisely shuns any epistemic skepticism (as promoted by the deconstructive critics of our
day) and explanatory agnosticism or nihilism (as intimated by those descriptivist anthropologists
and historians bitten by the bug of epistemic skepticism). Instead, Marx refuses to conflate
epistemic and methodological issues, philosophic and social theoretical ones, matters of
justification for the certain or absolute grounds for knowledge-claims and matters of explanation
that provide persuasive yet provisional (or revisable) accounts of social and historical
phenomena. Like so many critics today, Marx's immediate followers often made a "category
mistake" of collapsing epistemological concerns of justification in phi losophy into
methodological concerns of explanation in social theory. This unwarranted collapse is the basic
reason why antifoundationalists in epistemology became full-fledged skeptics and why
descriptivists in the social sciences shun subtle explanations of change and conflict in society
and culture. Needless to say, the complex relation of epistemic skepticism and explanatory
nihilism to the sense of political impotence and historical cynicism among such critics-even as
they monotonously invoke slogans that knowledge is culturally constructed, historically


--- PAGE 24 ---
constituted and politically laden-cries out for explanation. One major reason is that they are
reacting against narrow conceptions of social theory, especially positivistic, economistic and
reductionist versions of Marxism. This book shows that, despite the deep tensions in Marx's
thought, there are other and better versions of Marxism put forward by Marx himself in his best
moments. My point here is not that Marx's social theory fully accounts for all social and
historical phenomena; rather, it is that social theory wedded in a nuanced manner to concrete
historical analyses must be defended in our present moment of epistemic skepticism, explanatory
agnosticism, political impotence (among progressives) and historical cynicism.
So it is necessary to discredit the fashionable trashing of Marxist thought in the liberal
academy. Besides predictable caricatures of Marxist thought by conservatives, this trashing
principally proceeds from ironic skeptics and aesthetic historicists. The former shun any theory
that promotes political action with purpose; for them, any social project of transformation reeks
of authoritarian aims. The latter highlight wholesale contingency and indeterminacy, with little
concern for how and why change and conflict take place. So we have disciples of Jacques
Derrida and Michel Foucault who talk about the subtle relations of rhetoric, knowledge and
power, yet remain silent about concrete ways in which people are empowered to resist and what
can be gained by such resistance. In addition, we have the socalled new historicists,
preoccupied with "thick descriptions" of the relativity of cultural products, including those
formerly neglected by traditional bourgeois male critics-while thoroughly distrustful of social
explanatory accounts of cultural practices.
Needless to say, crude Marxist perspectives warrant scrutiny and rejection. Yet in these days
of Marxist bashing, it is often assumed that vulgar Marxist thought exhausts the Marxist tradition-
as if monocausal accounts of history, essentialist conceptions of society or reductionist readings
of culture are all Marxist thought has to offer. One wonders whether any such critics have read
Marx's Eighteenth Brumaire, Class Struggles in France or the Grundrisse.
Faddish ironic skepticism and aesthetic historicism are contemporary assaults on the twin
pillars of Marxist social theory: historically specific accounts of structures such as modes of
production, state apparatuses and bureaucracies and socially detailed analyses of how such
structures shape and are shaped by cultural agents. These pillars require that one's understanding
of history, society and culture highlight latent and manifest multifarious human struggles for
identity, power, status and resources. More pointedly, it demands that one bite the explanatory
bullet and give analytical priority to specific forms of struggle over others. For sophisticated
Marxists, this does not mean that class explains every major event in the past or present or that
economic struggles supersede all others. It simply suggests that in capitalist societies, the
dynamic processes of capital accumulation and the commodification of labor condition social
and cultural practices in an inescapable manner. How such practices are played out in various
countries and regions for different races, classes and genders in light of the fundamental
capitalist processes will be determined in an experimental and empirical manner. Like other
refined forms of historical sociology, Marxist theory proceeds within the boundaries of
warranted-assertable claims and rationally acceptable conclusions. Its assertions can be wrong
in part because they are believed to be right.


--- PAGE 25 ---
The high intellectual moments of Marxist theory-Marx's own historical and economic
analyses, Georg Lukacs's theory of reification and Antonio Gramsci's conceptions of hegemony-
are those that bring together explanatory power, analytical flexibility and a passion for social
freedom. Yet certain crucial phenomena of the modern world-nationalism, racism, gender
oppression, homophobia, ecological devastation-have not been adequately understood by
Marxist theorists. My rejoinder simply is that these complex phenomena cannot be grasped, or
changed, without the insights of Marxist theory, although we do need other theories to account
for them fully.
Efforts to link the fundamental capitalist processes of capital accumulation and the
commodification of labor to progressive traditions of ordinary people are not a call to revive
old debates about base and superstructure. Similar to the best work of Raymond Williams, W. E.
B. Du Bois, Eugene Genovese and Simone de Beauvoir, I am suggesting that we focus on the
oppositional cultures of oppressed peoples that extend far beyond their workplaces. In other
words, we need a serious Simmelian moment (as in Georg Simmel's The Philosophy of Money)
in Marxist theory that probes into the lived experiences of people in light of fundamental
capitalist processes. The aim here is not to reduce cultural efforts to ideological battles, but
rather to discern and determine the distinctive elements of the structures of feeling, structures of
meaning, ways of life and struggle under dynamic circumstances not of people's own choosing.
In this way, Marxist theory can give social substance and political content to postmodern themes
of otherness, difference and marginality. And limited epistemological debates about
foundationalism and skepticism, realism and pragmatism can give way to more fruitful
exchanges about clashing methodological, theoretical and political conceptions of how to
understand and change contemporary cultures and societies.
When I arrived as Assistant Professor of Philosophy of Religion at Union Theological
Seminary in New York City in 1977, one of my concerns was precisely this issue: defending
sophisticated Marxist theory as an indispensable-though by itself inadequate-intellectual weapon
in the struggle for individuality and democracy. I decided to teach at Union Seminary for three
reasons: It was (and still is) the center of' iberation theology in the country; it was one of the best
places for black theological education in the country; and it allowed me to teach and read widely
in philosophy, social theory, history, literary criticism and cultural thought. Union was the
perfect place to become a broadly engaged cultural critic with a strong grounding in the history
of philosophy and criticism. In fact, I received another education at Union from my supportive
colleagues-especially my closest friend, James Washington, Professor of Church History. My
faith was tested and deepened, my mind was stretched and refined, my soul was refreshed and
readied for battle.
After serious intellectual exchanges with James Cone, Beverly Harrison, Dorothea Solle,
Tom Driver, James Forbes, Jr., David Lotz, Milton Gatch and Donald Shriver-and trips to
Brazil, Jamaica, Costa Rica, Mexico, Europe and later South Africa-the incarnation of
progressive thought in concrete struggles for freedom was no mere dream. Despite a relative
quietism on the U.S. Left, I witnessed and participated in an intellectual and political ferment in
these places reminiscent of our 1960s. At home, the Theology in the Americas movement-the
major national progressive multiracial and religious activity in the country in the 1970s-


--- PAGE 26 ---
culminated in a historic gathering in Detroit. The results were published in 1982 by Orbis Press
in a volume entitled Theology in the Americas: Detroit II, coedited by Caridad Guidote (a
professor and Filipina nun), Margaret Coakley (a white American nun) and myself. The same
year I published Prophesy Deliverance! An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity
(Westminster Press), based in part on lectures I gave at Rev. Herbert Daughtry's House of the
Lord Pentecostal Church in Brooklyn, New York. Rev. Daughtry was the founder and then head
of the National Black United Front-one of the few progressive organized responses to the
conservative Reaganite policies of the early 1980s.
Two crucial encounters shaped the kind of democratic socialism I would promote: the intense
intellectual exchanges with Stanley Aronowitz and my membership in Michael Harrington's new
organization, Democratic Socialists of America (DSA). In addition to James Washington and to
my younger colleaguesMark RidleyThomas, Anders Stephanson, Farah Griffin, Jerry Watts,
Anthony Cook and Michael Dyson-I have never had a more enhancing intellectual interlocutor
than Stanley Aronowitz. We read voraciously and talked incessantly about the impasse of the
Left and the crisis of Marxism-he was then writing his important work The Crisis in Historical
Materialism. His leadership of Social Text-the major journal in which Marxism encountered
cultural politics in the 1980s and 1990s-pushed me toward a serious engagement with the works
and lives of Fredric Jameson, Antonio Gramsci, Raymond Williams, Cedric Robinson, Anders
Stephanson, Edward Said, Bertell Oilman, Barbara Fields, Stuart Hall, Ellen Willis, Andre
Lorde, Eric Foner, bell hooks, Rick Wolff, Sohnya Sayres and Michel Foucault. This
engagement still sets the framework for how I relate Marxist thought to the cultural politics of
difference, i.e., race, gender, sexual orientation, age. This framework is an integral part of my
work with the editorial collective of Boundary 2: An International Journal of Literature and
Culture-Paul Bove, Jonathan Arac, William Spanos, Michael Hayes, Daniel O'Hara, Donald
Pease, Joseph Buttigieg, Margaret Ferguson and Nancy Fraser.
Michael Harrington's DSA in 1982 was the first multiracial socialist organization close
enough to my kind of politics that I could join. I was then, and remain, a sharp critic and staunch
defender of DSA. After seven years on the national political committee-and many protracted
ideological struggles-I now serve as an honorary chairperson. My own Gramscian democratic
socialism is not in the mainstream of DSA, but it is an acceptable and legitimate perspective
within the organization, and one that is sharpened and refined by defenders of other versions of
democratic socialism.
I put forward my own critiques of the late Michael Harrington's conception of democratic
socialism in my book Prophetic Fragments (Africa World Press, 1988) and in my review of his
last book, Socialism: Past and Future, in the Nation (6-13 January 1990). Michael Harrington
meant much to me as a person and I learned tangible and intangible lessons from him as we
interacted in meetings and on trips together. We shared three fundamental points: the necessity of
rethinking and reinterpreting the insights of the Marxist tradition in the light of new
circumstances; the need for a national multiracial democratic socialist organization that puts a
premium on intellectual exchange and political relevance; and the necessity of articulating a
distinctive U.S. road to greater freedom, justice and equality. Harrington was, despite some
political faults and intellectual flaws, a masterful organic intellectual who held these three


--- PAGE 27 ---
points together in creative tension better than anyone else of his generation.
My friendships with Harry Magdoff and Paul Sweezy began just as I was moving from Union
to Yale Divinity School in 1984. In our work together on a special issue on religion and the Left
for Monthly Review July-August 1984), we realized that our versions of Marxist theory
overlapped in significant ways. Their critical allegiance to historical materialist analyses that
are magnanimously global in character yet meticulously specific in content fit well with my
Gramscian accounts that link the rule of capital-the powers of transnational corporations, banks
and political elites-to the race- and gender-skewed ill-fed, ill-housed and illclad. As the
caretakers of one of the oldest Marxist journals in the United States, they have defended and
updated Marxist theory while opening its pages to nonMarxist socialists like myself who share
their concern about the significance of Marxist theory as an indispensable intellectual weapon
for freedom fighters in the present.
I am a non-Marxist socialist in that, as a Christian, I recognize certain irreconcilable
differences between Marxists of whatever sort and Christians of whatever sort. Since my
conception of Christian faith is deeply, though not absolutely, historical, this disagreement is not
primarily a metaphysical issue; rather, it is a basic existential difference in the weight I put on
certain biblical narratives, symbols and rituals that generate sanity and meaning for me. My
Christian perspectivemediated by the rich traditions of the black church that produced and
sustains me-embraces depths of despair, layers of dread, encounters with the sheer absurdity of
the human condition and ungrounded leaps of faith alien to the Marxist tradition. Like so much of
black music, Christian insights speak on existential and visceral levels neglected by the Marxist
tradition. This is not so because the Marxist tradition is Eurocentric-for there are traditions and
figures in Europe that do speak to existential issues, e.g., Samuel Beckett, T. S. Eliot, Martin
Buber, Susanne Langer. Rather, the Marxist tradition is silent about the existential meaning of
death, suffering, love and friendship owing to its preoccupation with improving the social
circumstances under which people pursue love, revel in friendship and confront death. I share
this concern.
Yet like both Russian novelists and blues singers, I also stress the concrete lived experience
of despair and tragedy and the cultural equipment requisite for coping with the absurdities,
anxieties and frustrations as well as the joys, laughter and gaiety of life. In this deep sense,
Marxism is not and cannot serve as a religion. And if it is cast as a religion, it is a shallow
secular ideology of social change that fails to speak to us about the ultimate facts of human
existence. To put it charitably, Marxist thought does not purport to be existential wisdom-of how
to live one's life day by day. Rather, it claims to be a social theory of histories, societies and
cultures. Social theory is not the same as existential wisdom. Those theories that try to take the
place of wisdom disempower people on existential matters, just as those wisdoms that try to
shun theory usually subordinate people to the political powers that be.
My writings constitute a perennial struggle between my African and American identities, my
democratic socialist convictions and my Christian sense of the profound tragedy and possible
triumph in life and history. I am a prophetic Christian freedom fighter principally because of
distinctive Christian conceptions of what it is to be human, how we should act toward one


--- PAGE 28 ---
another and what we should hope for. These conceptions-put forward in a variety of diverse
streams and strains of the Christian tradition stretching back over centuries-have to do with the
indispensable yet never adequate capacities of human beings to create error-proof or problem-
free situations, theories or traditions-hence the strong antidogmatic or fallible character of
prophetic Christian thought and practice, which encourage relentless critical consciousness; the
moral claim to view each and every individual as having equal status, as warranting dignity,
respect and love, especially those who are denied such dignity, respect and love by individuals,
families, groups, social structures, economic systems or political regimes-hence the prophetic
Christian identification and solidarity with the downtrodden and disinherited, the degraded and
dispossessed; and lastly, the good news of Jesus Christ, which lures and links human struggles to
the coming of the kingdom-hence the warding off of disempowering responses to despair, dread,
disappointment and death.
Prophetic Christianity has a distinctive, though not exclusive, capacity to highlight critical,
historical and universal consciousness that yields a vigilant disposition toward prevailing forms
of individual and institutional evil, an unceasing suspicion of ossified and petrified forms of
dogmatism and a strong propensity to resist various types of cynicism and nihilism.
Prophetic Christian conceptions of what it is to be human, how we should act and what we
should hope for are neither rationally demonstrable nor empirically verifiable in a necessary and
universal manner. Rather, they are embedded and enacted in a form of life-a dynamic set of
communities that constitute a diverse tradition-that mediates how I interpret my experiences,
sufferings, joys and undertakings. There are indeed good reasons to accept prophetic Christian
claims, yet they are good not because they result from logical necessity or conform to
transcendental criteria. Rather, these reasons are good (persuasive to some, nonsense to others)
because they are rationally acceptable and existentially enabling for many self-critical finite and
fallible creatures who are condemned to choose traditions under circumstances not of their own
choosing. To choose a tradition (a version of it) is more than to be convinced by a set of
arguments; it is also to decide to live alongside the slippery edge of life's abyss with the support
of the dynamic stories, symbols, interpretations and insights bequeathed by communities that
came before.
I have always shunned the role of theologian because I have little interest in systematizing the
dogmas and doctrines, insights and intuitions of the Christian tradition. Nor do I think that they
can be rendered coherent and consistent. The theological task is a noteworthy endeavor-
especially for the life of the church-yet my vocation uses Christian resources, among others, to
speak to the multilayered crises of contemporary society and culture. So I am more a cultural
critic with philosophic training who works out of the Christian tradition than a theologian who
focuses on the systematic coherency or epistemic validity of Christian claims.
This vocation puts social theory, historiography, cultural criticism and political engagement at
the center of my prophetic Christian outlook. I do not believe that there are such things as
Christian social theory, Christian historiography, Christian cultural criticism or Christian
politics just as there are no such things as Christian mathematics, Christian physics or Christian
economics. Rather, there is prophetic Christian thought and practice informed by the best of


--- PAGE 29 ---
these disciplines that highlights and enhances the plight of the loveless, luckless, landless and
other victims of social structural arrangements. In this way, my prophetic vocation overlaps in
significant ways with those of such Marxists as Harry Magdoff and Paul Sweezy. In the present
methodological debate against ironic skeptics, aesthetic historicists, political cynics and
explanatory agnostics, we stand together in defense of Marxist theory and socialist politics-even
as we may disagree on how we conceive of Marxist theory or the kind of socialism we promote.
My move to Yale Divinity School in 1984 afforded me the opportunity to reflect on the crisis
in American philosophy-as in Post-Analytic Philosophy (1985), edited by my good friend John
Rajchman and myself, and in my book The American Evasion ofPhilosoply (1989). This
coincided with an intense campus drive for clerical unionism at Yale (one of the few labor
victories of the 1980s) and against Yale's investments in South African companies. Again, my
arrest and jail resulted. This action served as a fine example for my wonderful son, Clifton,
quickly approaching adolescence-an example he has followed as a progressive student body
president of his predominantly black middle school in Atlanta.
Partly owing to this action, my request for leave was denied and I was forced to teach a full
program at Yale (two courses) and the University of Paris VIII (three courses) in the spring of
1987. I commuted every five to seven days from New Haven to Paris from February to April. To
be on the same faculty with Gilles Deleuze (who retired that spring) and Jean-Francois Lyotard
was an honor. Yet I was amazed at the French students' ignorance of U.S. philosophy and the
hunger for Afro-American history and culture. In my graduate seminar on John Dewey, Hilary
Putnam, Stanley Cavell and Richard Rorty, brilliant students had never heard of Dewey-in fact,
one wanted to study with him (unaware he had died in 1952) ! My Afro-American intellectual
history course was scheduled for twenty, but over a hundred students (many from African and
Arab countries) enrolled. Student activism regarding educational reform was increasing at the
time, and I participated in many lively discussions and actions.
When I returned from Paris, I decided to leave Yale-for personal reasons linked with my
lovely African wife-to-be, Elleni Gebre Amlak-and went back to Union. But after a short year I
decided to go to Princeton University, to teach in the religion department and direct the Afro-
American studies program. My major motivation was to constitute a critical mass of black
scholars-with the great Toni Morrison at the center-although I also was eager to learn from other
superb scholars there.
At present, besides completing Breaking Bread, a book written with bell hooks on the black
crisis (including black male/female relations), a collection of essays (Prophetic Criticism) and a
work on David Hume (seven years in the making), my focus is twofold: the battle in the arts,
popular culture and the academy over Eurocentrism and multiculturalism, and the crisis in black
and progressive leadership. In 1990, I coedited (with Russell Ferguson, Martha Gever and Trinh
T. Minhha) Out There: Marginalization and Contemporary Cultures (MIT Press) for the New
Museum of Contemporary Art. This landmark text may set the framework for the debate between
conservatives like Allan Bloom, Africanist thinkers such as Leonard Jeffries, feminist theorists
countering patriarchal canons like Elaine Showalter, and democratic socialists of African
descent like myself. This battle will continue to rage well into the twenty-first century. My major


--- PAGE 30 ---
aim is to rescue the ambiguous legacy of the European age from conservatives, to accent the
racist, patriarchal and homophobic currents that still run through American intellectual and
cultural life while criticizing any separatist politics or parochial outlook and linking the new
cultural politics of difference to a democratic socialist perspective. My critical appreciation of
the hip-hop culture of American youth, especially black youth, reflects this dialectical reading of
our present moment. I applaud the spirit of resistance against racism, yet condemn its misogynist
and homophobic elements.
The crisis of leadership in black and progressive communities is symptomatic of the paucity
of credible strategies and tactics for social change in the United States. It also reflects the
relative inability of the Left to mobilize and organize over time and space. Needless to say, there
is no easy way out of this impasse.
The effort is more difficult due to the pervasive disarray of the progressive movement in the
United States. Never before in our history has the U.S. Left been so bereft of courageous leaders
of vision, intelligence and integrity. We simply do not have formidable figures that the public
identifies with progressive causes. Aside from those preoccupied with electoral politics and
admirable local activists with little national attention, there are no major leaders who articulate
in bold and defiant terms-with genuine passion and analytical clarity-the moral imperative to
address the maldistribution of resources, wealth and power, the escalating xenophobia,
ecological devastation, national decline and spiritual impoverishment we are facing. This crisis
of leadership adds to the balkanization of U.S. progressive politics-its fragmentation, isolation
and insularity. Given the power of big business and cultural conservatism, the U.S. Left has
potency primarily when strong leadership-rooted in extraparliamentary organizational activity-
energizes and galvanizes demoralized progressives and liberals across racial, class, regional,
age and gender lines. This usually does not last long-so the propitious moment must be seized.
We find it hard to seize this moment not only because of the establishment's strategies of
repression and incorporation, but also owing to the consumer cul ture-with its addictive
seductions and pacifying pastimes-which often saps and disperses our energies for collective
struggle. Market morality engulfs us in such a way that it is difficult to arrange our lives so that
communal activity supersedes personal pursuits. Market mentality makes it hard for us to believe
our sacrificial progressive efforts will make a real difference in our busy and short lives. And
since there can be no substantive progressive politics without oppositional subcultures,
institutions and networks, the predominant "market way of life" presents a-maybe the-major
challenge for progressive politics.
At the moment, the most explosive issues in U.S. society revolve around black bodies and
women's wombs-race and abortion. And, in a fundamental sense, the starting points-through not
landing grounds-for progressive politics in the 1990s may be enhancement of the poor,
especially those of color, and protection of women's rights. Yet reform measures such as
progressive taxation and appointment of liberal judges fall far short of what is required. We also
need a progressive cultural renaissance that reshapes our values, restructures how we live and
puts struggle and sacrifice closer to the center of what we think and do. Only then will our fight
to turn back a market-driven, conservative United States-already far down the road to social


--- PAGE 31 ---
chaos and self-destruction-be not only desirable, but also credible. The defense of the relevance
of Marxist thought, including its ethical dimensions, after the Cold War is an indispensable
weapon in this fight.
At the forefront of this fight stands Jesse Jackson. His historic presidential campaigns were
the major progressive responses to Reagan's conservative policies. His 1988 bid was the first
time since the last days of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Poor People's Campaign-with the grand
exception of Mayor Harold Washington's election in Chicago-that the nearly de, do segregation
in U.S. progressive politics was confronted and partly surmounted.
Yet Jackson's courageous leadership is problematic. His televisual style-a style too
preoccupied with TV cameras-relies on personal charisma at the expense of grassroots
organizing. His brilliance and energy sustain his public visibility at the expense of programmatic
follow-through. This style downplays people's participatory possibilities-at the level of
followership and leadership. More pointedly, it shuns democratic accountability. Pure
democracy must never be a fetish for progressives. Work must get done; decisions must be
made. But criticism and democratic practices are the lifeblood of any progressive organization
worthy of the name. Jackson's televisual style not only mitigates against this; it tends to preclude
it. So despite his salutary social democratic politics, Jackson's televisual style may be reaching
the point at which it undermines his crucial message.
This televisual style must give way to a collective model of progressive leadership that puts a
premium on grassroots organizing, criticism and democratic accountability. The future of U.S.
progressive politics lies with those engaged local activists who have made a difference, yet who
also have little interest in being in the national limelight. They engage in protracted organizing in
principled coalitions that bring power and pressure to bear on specific issues-especially issues
of jobs, housing, health and child care, education and ecological protection. Without such
activists there can be no progressive politics. Yet state, regional and national networks are also
necessary for an effective progressive politics. This is why locally based collective (and
especially multiracial and multigender) models of leadership are needed. These models must
shun the idea of one national progressive leader; they must highlight critical dialogue and
democratic accountability within and across organizations. These models of collective
leadership will more than likely not be part of the lethargic electoral system riddled with
decreasing revenues (i.e., debt), loss of public confidence, self-perpetuating mediocrity and
pervasive corruption. Rather, the future of U.S. progressive politics lies in the capacity of a
collective leadership to energize, mobilize and organize working and poor people. Democratic
socialists can play a crucial role in projecting an all-embracing moral vision of freedom, justice
and equality and making social analyses that connect and link activists together. In this way we
can be a socialist leaven in a larger progressive loaf. Yet this loaf will never get baked if we
remain separate, isolated, insular and fragmented. America's massive social breakdown requires
that we come together-for the sake of our lives, our children and our sacred honor.
Source: "Introduction: The Making of an American Democratic Socialist of African Descent," The
Ethical Dimeruiom ooJMarxict Thought (New York: Moodily Review Press, 1991), pp. xv-xxxiv.


--- PAGE 32 ---



--- PAGE 33 ---
ON MY INTELLECTUAL VOCATION
Although I was trained as a professional philosopher, I have never held a position in a
philosophy department. I have turned down a number of o#rs from philosophy departments,
because I cherish my intellectual freedom to teach and write about a vast array of subjects. I
have never aspired to be aprfessional academic or scholar. Instead, I have tried to be a man
ofletters in love with ideas in order to be a wiser and more loving person, hoping to leave the
world just a little better than Ifound it. I take great delight in the free play of the mind, and I
believe intellectual work is indispensable for social change. Yet, in the end, I place compassion
far above smartness and wisdom light-years ahead of cleverness. The quest for wisdom is
rooted in an erotic relation to the world-a deep desire to love and passion to know before one
dies. So I speak of my intellectual work and life as a calling, not a career; a vocation, not a
profession.
George Yancy is an American philosopher of African descent who interviewed black
philosophers for his celebrated book African-American Philosophers: 17 Conversations. The
book is a real treat.
George Yancy: When and where were you born?
Cornel West: In Tulsa, Oklahoma, June 2, 1953.
Yancy: Given that your father was a civilian air force administrator, your family moved around
quite a bit. How did eventually growing up in a segregated part of Sacramento, California, shape
your early consciousness?
West: Well, in one sense, of course, it was inescapable because it was segregated, Jim Crowed
in its own unique Californian way, but in another sense it meant that from early on whiteness
was really not a point of reference for me because the world was all black. So much of my life
was spent where I didn't interact with white brothers and sisters at all. And I think, in the end,
that was a very positive thing, because it gave me a chance to really revel in black humanity, and
when it became time to interact with white brothers and sisters, I could really see them just as
humans. I didn't have to either deify them or demonize them; I didn't have to put them on a
pedestal or put them in the gutter. I could just view them as human beings, and I think that was
quite a contribution of my own context.
Yancy: I see. So what was it specifically about your experience of the absurd, at the age of
thirteen or fourteen, that made the work of Soren Kierkegaard so attractive to you at such an
early age?
West: I think early on I was just in some sense seized by a certain kind of terror that struck me as
being at the heart of things human and a profound sadness and sorrow that struck me as being at
the core of the human condition. And so in reading Kierkegaard from the Bookmobile, and here
was someone who was seriously and substantively wrestling with a certain level of
melancholia, I was struck by his very honest and candid-I want to stress honest and candid-
encounter with what he understood to be this terror, this suffering and this sadness and sorrow. It


--- PAGE 34 ---
resonated deeply with me. Prosser Hall Frye used the wonderful phrase "the tragic qualm" to
describe this encounter. It is a kind of vertigo, a dizziness, a sense of being staggered by the
darkness that one sees in the human condition, the human predicament.
Yancy: And how did reading Kierkegaard at such an early age impact your later philosophical
development?
West: I think that it was decisive. It gave me a profoundly Kierkegaardian sensibility that
required then that philosophizing be linked to existentially concrete situations, wrestling with
decision, commitment, actualized possibility and realized potential. And so I tended then to have
a deep suspicion of what Arthur Schopenhauer calls "university philosophy" or "academic
philosophy," which tended to be so much concerned with abstract concepts and forms of
universalizing and always in track or pursuit of necessity as opposed to the concrete, the
particular, the existential, the suffering beings and the loving beings that we are and can be. You
have to realize that I was coming out of the church, and so there was always job sitting there,
Daniel sitting there, and even Christ, especially the Christ between Good Friday and Easter, the
Christ during that very dark Saturday, which struck me as highly illuminating of what it meant to
be human. How do you really struggle against the suffering in a loving way, to leave a legacy in
which people would be able to accent their own loving possibility in the midst of so much evil?
So in that sense I think that the black church and its profound stress on the concrete and the
particular-wrestling with limit situations, with death, dread, despair, disappointment, disease,
and so on-has been influential on my Kierkegaardian outlook.
Yancy: How influential were your parents in terms of your early intellectual development?
West: Fundamental. They gave the greatest gift I could receive-unconditional love. They also
exemplified such love in their dealings with others. They also encouraged my intellectual
curiosity and energy, yet always put it in a Christian perspective-understanding and changing the
world is but sounding brass and tinkling cymbal without genuine love and compassion.
Yancy: I've had the opportunity to see you teach at both Princeton and Harvard and there is often
this preacherly, although critical, style that you use. How has African American homiletics
shaped your pedagogical approach within the walls of academia?
West: Well, I've always wanted to be myself, and, of course, that is a perennial process. I did
not in any way want only an image of Union or Yale or Princeton or Harvard to shape me. I
wanted to shape my own image in those contexts, and to be myself meant to be involved,
engaged, passionate and so forth. I do think, though, that we have to make a very important
distinction between passionate rhetoric that tries to communicate and the sermonic or the
preacherly, because passionate rhetoric is simply a way of exemplifying a certain level of self-
involvement and selfinvestment in what one is talking about, and I think the sermonic or the
homiletic or the preacherly has no monopoly on that kind of selfinvolvement and self-investment.
It's true that the black homiletical tradition in certain forms (and there are homiletical forms, of
course, that are not passionate), particularly those forms coming out of Baptist and Pentecostal
churches, tends to be self-involved and self-invested. I am no doubt influenced by a number of
those styles, but, for me, it's much more just a question of acknowledging anytime you're engaged


--- PAGE 35 ---
in serious philosophical reflection that so much is at stake, your whole life, the structures of
meaning that you try to create, the structures of value that you hold, your mode of being in the
world. So, in questioning yourself at such a deep level and at such a fragile and delicate level, I
can't but help, at least in my case, overflow with passion.
Yancy: Although you switched to Near Eastern languages and literature at Harvard University,
talk about what led you to pursue philosophy proper.
West: Well, as I've said, I read Kierkegaard, but I also read Will Durant's The Story fPhilosophy
about five times, and I had read some other popular histories. For example, I was reading in and
out of Bertrand Russell's The History of Western Philosophy early on. When I went to Harvard, I
talked with Bob Nozick, who was my tutor and was actually quite wonderful, and I told him
what I was reading and he said, "Well, that's wonderful, Cornel, but we are going to introduce
you to some high-powered philosophy so you'll be able to build on what you've read." But it was
clear to me, I think, because I did have Sartre with me at the time, that I was being introduced to
analytical philosophy at Harvard. Analytical philosophy was very interesting. It always struck
me as being very interesting and full of tremendous intellectual curiosities. It is wonderful to see
the mind at work in such an intense manner, but, for me, it was still too far removed from my
own issues. There were such issues as the problem of evil, suffering, misery and how to engage
in struggle, how to talk about courage, how to talk about joy, etc. For me, such issues were much
more at the center of things. So even as an undergraduate, I was taking biblical Hebrew,
Aramaic, and Koine Greek, classical Greek, as a way of being able to read some of the religious
literary texts that were of interest to me. In that sense it was a kind of antidote to a lot of the
analytical philosophy.
Yancy: Who were some of the high-powered philosophers Nozick had in mind?
West: Oh, I would think beginning with Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell, Rudolf Carnap,
Willard Quine and then probably on to Burton Dreben and himself. There were some wonderful
folk at Harvard at the time. Harvard was experiencing a kind of golden age in philosophy. I was
really lucky to be there.
Yancy: Do you see yourself as a professional philosopher?
West: No, not at all. I think that my concern has always been just trying to make sense of the
world and trying to leave the world a little better than I found it. I think that if I were to call
myself anything it would be a man of letters who's deeply immersed in philosophical texts, in
literary texts, deeply concerned also with scientific texts, but science much more as one element
in the quest for wisdom rather than science as a way of gaining knowledge in order to dominate
nature. So, in that sense, I have an intellectual curiosity that is quite broad, but I've never viewed
myself as an academic or professional philosopher in a narrow sense.
Yancy: Would you say that departments of philosophy are just too limiting for your rather
variegated and broad intellectual project?
West: Well, not necessarily. You have to find someplace to gain a foothold. I could be in a


--- PAGE 36 ---
philosophy department and still do what I want to do. You know, my aim was always to teach at
Union Seminary, which I was able to do in '77. That was quite a breakthrough because Union
Seminary, for me, was the real institutional site that brought together all of my interests. It was a
Christian seminary, it was deeply shaped by progressive politics, Marxism, feminism,
antihomophobic thought and black liberation theology. It was in New York and it was where the
great Paul Tillich and Reinhold Niebuhr, who were two of my heroes early on, had spent so
much of their careers.
Yancy: If you had to trace your philosophical identity, provide a short list of names and texts.
West: That's a very good question. Well, with respect to the modern period, I would begin with
Pascal's Pensees, and from there I would go to Hume's "Skepticism with Regard to the Senses"
and "Skepticism with Regard to Reason." those two chapters in book one of his Treatise on
Human Nature. I would then go on to Kant's 1791 piece called On the Failure of All Modern
Philosophical Theodicies. It's an essay that is really pivotal. Now this essay goes hand in hand
with Schelling's 1809 treatise on the essence of freedom. Schelling lived another forty-five
years, but he never published anything else, which is quite interesting. I would then go to
Schopenhauer and Kierkegaard, two fundamental figures. From there, I would then go to
Nietzsche's The Genealogy of'Morals. I would then go to literary figures, both novelists and
playwrights, like Ibsen, Strindberg and Chekhov, Thomas Hardy, Tolstoy, and then Kafka,
Eugene O'Neill, The Iceman Cometh, Tennessee Williams's A Streetcar Named Desire and then
to Toni Morrison's Beloved. I think that there you would capture at least a crucial part of my
own intellectual lineage, as it were.
Yaney: Why is Kant's theodicy piece so pivotal?
West: Well, because it showed that the problem of evil could not be theoretically resolved at
all. It was a question of coping, he argued, with artistic wisdom and negative wisdom. It was
through the wrestling of a Kant, whom we associate with a kind of obsession with rationality and
autonomy, that I was able to see his other side, which is his artistic wisdom, his negative
wisdom, and his reading of the book of.job in that essay, which I think is quite fascinating, is
rarely talked about by scholars of Kant. The profound book of Job, of course, becomes linked to
the great tradition of modern drama that one sees in an O'Neill.
Yaney: Is there a black musical motif that shapes your writing? I'm thinking specifically of your
short story entitled "Sing a Song."
West: That short story was published in Prophetic Fragments. I had worked on novels and short
stories early on, over twenty years ago, but I've only published one short story. But it's true that
black music, especially the blues, is one fundamental source or creative lens through which I
view the world. There is no doubt about that. It's a profoundly tragic-comic, neither sentimental
nor cynical, stress on struggle. Keep keeping on, trying to hold the blues at arm's length by means
of singing the blues or enacting the blues. And most importantly, I think, always viewing oneself
as embedded and embodied and also indebted to those who came be fore. So there is that sense
of radical conditionedness on the one hand and, on the other, a sense of freedom, but still within
that context of radical conditionedness, especially to oneself. There is the sense of trying to


--- PAGE 37 ---
muster the courage to be oneself, the courage to wrestle with the truth about oneself, the truth
about America, the truth about the world and the courage to fight for justice. Those notions of
freedom, courage and joy would probably be the three fundamental motifs in my work, and I
think that they are probably best enacted in the best of the black musical tradition.
Yaney: What shapes your synoptic style of writing?
West: Part of it, for me, has to do with a sense of history, which is very important. Anytime you
have a sense of history, then you are always talking about the very complex relations of the
present to the past and ways in which futures are embedded in the present. And anytime you talk
about history, it usually takes some narrative form, there is some story likeness, and that tends to
be easier to follow oftentimes. I think that is probably one factor that shapes my synoptic style of
writing. Also, there is a certain kind of openness about one's own self such that people can see
that you're being self-critical and they can see how you are complicitous with some of the very
things that you talk about. In other words, it's not a matter of simply pointing fingers or calling
names, but really showing that you are in the very mess that you are trying to grasp. Moreover,
this tends to open people up a little bit. If you're willing to take a risk and become vulnerable,
then it tends to open others to take a risk and become vulnerable with regard to listening to what
you're saying.
Yaney: Is there anything that can be called "African American philosophy"?
West: So much would hinge upon what we mean by "philosophy." If we understand philosophy
as a type of autonomous discourse that somehow transcends history, I would say no, because I
don't think that there is such a thing in general. If, however, we understand it as a certain cultural
response to the world and trying to come up with holistic views, synoptic visions and synthetic
images of how things hang together, then certainly there is an Afro-American philosophical
tradition, I believe, most definitely. But also I tend to be rather Jamesian in my understanding of
philosophy. I think that philosophy is in one sense connected to certain temperaments and that we
see those temperaments through images of the world. In this case, the notion of an image has to
do with philosophical articulation, a Weltanschauung, a worldview and so forth. Art, for
example, can be viewed as an image of the world through which we see a certain temperament
of the artist. But I also believe that philosophy and art are really intimately interlinked, because
they have to do with the na ture of our articulation. The last line of Federico Garcia Lorca's play
entitled Blood Wedding is significant. That last line, "the dark root of the scream," is so very
important, for it is a question of how we take that scream, that guttural cry we make and
transform and transfigure that scream, that cry, into linguistic articulation, into a way of
understanding the world, a way of trying to make the world in some sense intelligible. I never
want to lose sight of that scream and that cry, because I think that really sits at the center of any
serious philosophy that's grappling with life.
Yaney: Why is there such a paucity of African American professional philosophers?
West: Well, we haven't reached a point where we've convinced enough young black brothers
and sisters that to engage in philosophical discourse in academic spaces is desirable, attractive,
appealing or just hip or cool. There is a great deal of philosophical reflection going on in black


--- PAGE 38 ---
America, no doubt about that, from barbershops to hip-hop music, to mainstream rhythm and
blues and so on. The singer Babyface has his own philosophical sensibility with his conceptions
of life and so on. Stevie Wonder certainly does. In academic philosophy we simply haven't made
it attractive enough. But it also has much to do with the image of a philosopher, which is
primarily dominated by the analytical philosopher, who is clever, sharp and good at drawing
distinctions, but who doesn't really relate it to history, struggle, engagement with suffering, how
we cope with suffering, how we overcome social misery, etc.
Yaney: So, one way of making philosophy attractive to African Americans is to link it to these
larger historical processes.
West: Absolutely right.
Yaney: What does the "black experience" have to offer American philosophy that is of
philosophical value?
West: A profound sense of the tragic and the comic rooted in heroic efforts to preserve human
dignity on the night side, the underside of modernity. In short, a deep blues sensibility that
highlights concrete existence, history, struggle, lived experience and joy.
Yancy: Do you think that African American philosophers have failed to fulfill the role of organic
intellectual?
West: I don't think that all of them should. I think we've got to have a variety of different
paradigms of philosophizing. For example, some might be linked to a community that would
involve overcoming the "gown-town" distinction and some would not. So, I don't think that there
has been a failure per se. I would like to see more, but I think we have to have a division of
labor, and we have to have a certain tolerance for plurality and diversity of roles and functions
among black philosophers.
Yaney: Talk about the specific impact of Richard Rorty's thought on your own philosophical
reflections.
West: It's on two levels. On the one hand, he is just a very good personal friend and colleague,
and as a young person it's so nice to have a figure to take interest in your work and your mind, to
be such a fascinating and challenging interlocutor and conversational partner. But that's a very
personal thing and that is what I encountered at Princeton in 1973, six years before he wrote
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature and became famous. He remains a very, very good friend
and colleague. On the other hand, intellectually, I think that Rorty was tremendously liberating
for me, because from my readings of Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Gadamer, Heidegger and the later
Wittgenstein, which I had read before I went to Princeton, I was already predisposed toward the
kind of antifoundationalism, contextualism and deep thoroughgoing historicism he was putting
forward. Now he couched it within a certain self-styled pragmatism, and I had already actually
been predisposed to pragmatism, having studied pragmatism under Israel Scheffler at Harvard.
But he was able to couch it in such a grand worldview that he could really show how things hang
together, and that is what I think I was able to acquire from him more than anything else. It was


--- PAGE 39 ---
this deep historicist sensibility of always trying to show how things hang together, along with
antifoundationalism and contextualism that he was putting forward. So in that regard, his work
was pivotal. There is no doubt about it, even given my disagreements, Rorty is pivotal, both at
the personal as well as the intellectual level.
Yancy: In a Transition essay, Rorty argues that you are "still enamored of the idea that your own
academic discipline, namely, philosophy, is somehow more closely linked to prophetic vision
than are, say, anthropology, literary criticism, or economics, or art history."
West: No, I don't think that is true. I think that brother Rorty makes such a claim because of my
own influences coming out of the Marxist tradition, where the role of social theory is
highlighted. I really do believe that we've got to be able to give some fallible yet persuasive
explanations of wealth, power and the state as weapons in our institutional and individual
struggles to overcome forms of social misery. But I don't think that philosophy is any closer. If I
were to go out on a limb, I would probably make a case for art, but I'm not sure that I want to go
that far. I think that Schelling and Schopenhauer make the strongest cases in the modern Western
philosophical tradition as to why art illuminates more than other forms of cultural production.
Actually, I think that there is something to that. I think that when you look at a Chekhov, a
Coltrane, a Tol stoy or a Toni Morrison, you actually see deep, deep, existentially deep, sea
diving taking place. That is not the case in most texts in anthropology, most texts in sociology
and so on. But, on the other hand, it is also true that there are some sociologists, like my own
favorite, Georg Simmel, who get very deep. They tend to be those who are highly suspicious of
their profession, but they are using certain insights of professional sociologists as springboards
to engage in deep-sea diving. Very much so.
Yancy: Again, in the same Tansition piece, Rorty argues that "it will be easier to encourage such
protest [where we're talking about social protest] if we toss aside the last remnants of Marxist
thought and in particular the desire for a general theory of oppression."
West: Well, I disagree with the first part and agree with the second part. I think that the Marxist
intellectual tradition remains indispensable in order to keep track of certain forms of social
misery, especially these days in terms of the oligopolies and monopolies that take the form of
transnational corporations with a disproportionate amount of wealth and power, not just in
America but around the world. You need some Marxist theoretical insights in order to keep track
of that. At the same time, I am against general theories of oppression, and therefore, for me, my
particular stand within the Marxist tradition is linked primarily to that of Gramsci, which always
places stress on historical specificity, on concrete circumstances and situations. This does not
require a general theory of oppression per se. And in that regard I think one can talk about a
Gramscian strand in the Marxist tradition that is suspicious of general theory, which resonates
with Rorty's suspicion of general theory, but it's still not a question of eliminating the remnants
of Marxism per se. Not at all. I don't see how, in fact, we can understand the market forces
around the world and the fundamental role of transnational corporations, the subordination of
working people, the tremendous class conflicts going on around the world at the marketplace
between management and labor without understanding some of the insights of the Marxist
tradition.


--- PAGE 40 ---
Yancy: In his controversial essay in the New Republic, Leon Wieseltier claims that you maintain
that the abolition of transcendence is necessary for religion and that you don't realize the dire
contradiction that you've created. What's your response?
West: I never knew what Leon was talking about. I've never rejected transcendence per se.
There are many, many different varieties and versions of transcendence. You can reject certain
forms of transcendence while you defend others. But I certainly would never want to reject
transcendence per se. Paul Ricoeur has taught us that you have to have some dis- tanciation,
some critical distance from an object of investigation in order even to engage in reflection, and
that is a certain kind of transcendence right there. And certainly anybody like myself who talks
about struggle, who comes out of a Christian tradition, which includes some kind of overcoming-
to use the Hegelian term, Aujhebung, which is a kind of transcendence-would never really want
to call into question transcendence per se. Also keep in mind that there are many Hegelian forms
of transcendence, but they're always involved in an interplay between transcendence and
immanence, with some verticality and some horizontality.
Yancy: Staying with the concept of transcendence, what does a "Westian," as it were, conception
of God look like?
West: Well, I don't think that we have such a thing as a "Westian" anything, really. There are
certain lenses through which I look at the world, but, for me, any God-talk is so inextricably
linked to talk about so many other things that it would have to do with the nature of the stories
and narratives where God is invoked as an agent in order to provide illuminations about what it
means to be human. And so I tend to side with those in the Christian tradition who put a high
premium on Christ. So I'm a kind of Christocentric thinker in that regard and therefore, following
Karl Barth, the greatest Christocentric thinker of the twentieth century, I think that our concrete
images of God are best rendered in the various narratives told about Christ as loving, struggling,
sacrificing, suffering and overcoming. And so in that regard, I probably would want to send
somebody to certain Barthian texts or make certain links to James Cone, who, of course, was a
very close student of Karl Barth.
Yancy: In terms of your Christocentric perspective, what value do you place on a priori and a
posteriori arguments for the existence of God?
West: I don't believe that any arguments for or against the existence of God have much weight
one way or the other. Not at all. I think that particular way of couching the question is already
impoverished, and it reflects a certain kind of ahistorical way of understanding God-talk of
which I am highly suspicious. I think it's interesting that there have been these fascinating
attempts-St. Augustine, St. Anselm and a whole host of others-though often misunderstood by we
moderns. But that strikes me as just a kind of cultural practice that is relatively impoverished in
terms of engaging in a form of God-talk that has played a certain role in philosophical reflection.
But I can't think that way at all. It is not my way of being oriented to understanding what it means
to be human in relationship to a religious tradition, or the Christian tradition in this case.
Yancy: Do you believe that there is a "salvific" role for you to play vis-a-vis blacks here in the
United States?


--- PAGE 41 ---
West: No. I never use the word "salvific" in that sense. I don't think that salvation is anything that
we humans have anything to do with. Certainly, I would use the language of betterment,
amelioration, breakthrough, progress, trying to overcome and trying to alleviate and attenuate the
hell that we are catching. I certainly want to play some role, but I think one plays one's role
whether one is a philosopher, carpenter, musician, mother, father or uncle. That's just a human
endeavor. It's really a question of trying to serve, and that is something that each and every
human being can do. For me, it's linked to my coming out of the Christian tradition, you know,
"Knowest ye the greatest among you will be your servant." In that regard, it is not salvific at all,
but it's certainly one of rendering service, which to me is the finest, the highest, honor that one
can have in relationship not just to black people, but human beings as a whole.
Yancy: Speaking of rendering service, Du Bois seems to add a gendered spin on this activity of
rendering service in terms of his belief that the Negro race, as he put it then, would be saved by
its exceptional men.
West: I think that we have to weaken the claim and say that to those to whom much is given,
much is required if they are willing to serve. And so those who have had a certain kind of
privilege, those who have been able to benefit from the struggles of so many other people, have
some obligation and duty to serve others, to make some contribution to a cause much bigger than
that of themselves or their own personal careers. I agree with that weaker version.
Unfortunately, Du Bois's claim was deeply ensconced within a profoundly elitist conception of
culture. He was actually following Matthew Arnold in so many ways. And one has to separate
the elitism from the honest acknowledgment that some people have more opportunities than
others, some people have more privileges than others. And the question becomes how you use,
deploy, those privileges, and how you use your privilege in such a way that it is in some way
enhancing and empowering for those who are less privileged than you. Du Bois would agree
with the weaker claim and there, I think, we would both be on common ground.
Yancy: Do you see the category of race as the dominating discourse in the United States?
West: Oh, absolutely. Whenever you have a civilization that is shaped by 244 years of chattel
slavery, enslavement of African people, and 81 years ofJim Crow, minstrels as the first national
pastime, jazz as its highest art form, you can't claim that race has not been a fundamental
construct that has shaped how we've gone about making sense of the world. And as constructed
as the concept of race is, its effects and consequences through culture have been immense and
will continue to be immense far into the twenty-first century.
Yaney: And, of course, you're also pushing for an emphasis on class, yes?
West: You can't talk about the vicious legacy of white supremacy without talking about the
legacies of economic inequality, class inequality and also the pernicious practices of male
supremacy and heterosexism, homophobia, ecological abuse, losing sight of the humanity of
disabled people and so forth. All of these have to be part and parcel of the various evils in
American civilization and ultimately, of course, evils in human civilization across the board in
modern times.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Yancy: Continuing with this issue of racism, as a postmodernist and historicist you are skeptical
of epistemological foundations. Therefore, how do you convince, let's say, a KKK member that
his or her respective racist ideology is false, that he or she has actually gotten the world wrong?
West: I think that your question is a good one, but I'm not sure that I am a postmodernist. I've
never really described myself that way. For me, Kierkegaard is about as antifoundationalist as
they come, and I would never call him a postmodernist. I would talk about John Dewey in the
same way. He is about as antifoundationalist as they come, but I would not call him a
postmodernist. I mean, we've got the most thoroughgoing antifoundationalists around and yet they
would not be considered postmodernists. And so I'm not so sure that I would want to accept that
adjective, though I do recognize that postmodernists do highlight antifoundationalism.
Yancy: But you do embrace a contextualist and revisionist thesis.
West: Absolutely! And I think that this is both Christian, coming out of Pascal and Kierkegaard,
and modern, coming out of Dewey and later Wittgenstein. However, I think your question is still
a good one. In terms of your question, it would have to do with context, it would have to do with
the language of the Ku Klux Klan member to whom I was speaking. When you want to constitute
a dialogue with the KKK or whomever, you have got to be able to communicate with them. First,
what sort of narratives are they using? Second, how do you engage in immanent critiques of their
narratives to get them to see that they're actually involved in a deep contradiction or a major
blindness by downplaying certain elements of those narratives and highlighting other elements of
those narratives?
Now if the KKK is, as more than likely, Christian, then you've got to wrestle over their
understandings, renderings or interpretations of cer tain Christian narratives and how in fact they
become tied to a whitesupremacist perspective. We know that modern Christianity is thoroughly
shot through with white supremacy like every other institution in modernity early on: science,
journalism, right across the board, churches, including mosques, synagogues and so on. White
supremacy cuts through, saturates and permeates every institutional nook and cranny of
modernity. Hence, how then do you muster resources based on the tradition out of which they
come, that serves as the basis for criticizing the white supremacy to which they are captive? It's
a question of how you weave narratives and how you reweave them in such a way that a person
would be open to a critique of white supremacy.
Now that's just the intellectual level. Then you've got the matter of certain interests. For
example, why is it that they're so invested in white supremacy? What are the wages of whiteness
that they accrue, given the investment? And that becomes psychocultural and psychosexual and
all of these different dimensions: the intellectual, the argument in relation to self-interest, the
psychocultural and psychosexual anxieties associated with black bodies or brown bodies or red
bodies. All of these elements must go into the conversation if you're trying to convince and
persuade a person that he or she is wrong. And at that point I don't think that it's at all a question
of epistemic skepticism or epistemic foundationalism. That is just an impoverished way of
posing the question, which, unfortunately, tends to be rather typical of many courses in morality.
They don't have that thicker historical context as part and parcel of the understanding of moral
discourse and ethical exchange. But even after all of this, of course, one may still be


--- PAGE 43 ---
unsuccessful.
Yancy: You commented that you would not describe yourself as a postmodernist. Would you
elaborate on this?
West: I am first and foremost a modern Christian person of African descent in America trying to
love my way through the darkness of an advanced capitalist global system and the thunder of
postmodern market-driven culture. The complex interplay of skepticism and hope, doubt and
faithin Pascal, Montaigne, Kierkegaard and Coltrane-is shot through my work. Yet the centrality
of compassion and love in my view locks me into premodern figures (like Jesus) and modern
writers (like Chekhov and Hardy). Postmodern is an adjective that highlights certain features of
our culture-it is not a school of thought or descriptive term for a philosophical position. In fact,
Pyrrho's skepticism is much more radical than Derrida's-at the existential level, which is where
late moderns like me begin and, if possible, linger.
Yancy: Was the New York Society of Black Philosophers instrumental in terms of helping to
create a critical mass of African American philosophers?
West: Well, for me, it was crucial. It was monumental in terms of facilitating a context in which
persons concerned with philosophical reflections of the black experience, all of whom were not
black, though large numbers were, could meet regularly at Al Prettyman's place there in New
York. Howard McGary, Lucius Outlaw and many others-I guess it must have been about ten or
twelve of us who met there all the time. Actually, David Dinkins [New York City's former
mayor] used to stop in every once in a while. He was a friend of Blumsberg's. There was also
Frank Kirkland, who came later on, and a host of other people. We gave papers, encouraged
reflection, gave each other encouragement and, most importantly, we took each other seriously,
which meant giving each and every one of us the benefit of being wrong. That, to me, is probably
the most enabling and ennobling form of support one can give another human being, whether an
intellectual or not. That's what we were able to do. We really constituted an intellectual
neighborhood, a real community of inquirers wrestling with the construct of race to
philosophical traditions. And though it is still active, I haven't been part of it for years.
However, I can't imagine myself without it.
At the same time, I was part of the Social text collective, Fredric Jameson, Stanley
Aronowitz, Rick Wolff, Steve Resnick and others. I was also part of the Boundary 2 collective,
Paul Bove, William Spanos, Joseph Buttigieg, Jonathan Arac, Donald Pease, Margaret Ferguson
and others. I was actually lucky to be part of a number of different high-powered, highly
engaging, highly challenging subcultures, really, that were far removed from the academy, but
were as intellectually challenging as anything in the academy.
Yancy: Out of all of the African American philosophers, you're the most visible.
West: That's true. Well, you know, part of it has to do with the fact that for twenty years I've
been lecturing almost 150 times a year. And so I get a chance to meet a lot of people, and a lot of
people get to hear me in so many different contexts. One becomes thoroughly multicontextual in
terms of one's language, in terms of how one communicates with people. And, of course, there is


--- PAGE 44 ---
television, which is another context that really projected my image. I've oftentimes been
misunderstood, but that's often the case with television. But I think that the multicontextualism,
the traveling, the engagement in so many different milieus more than anything else accounts for
my visibility.
Yancy: Before we conclude, briefly talk about how your opinion of Minister Louis Farrakhan
has changed since your audience with him.
West: Before I met him, of course, all I knew him by was his own deep commitment to black
freedom and his deep love for black people, both of which are expressed within his own very
limited vision of how you achieve black freedom. And I never had a chance to sit down with him
and break bread. After sitting down and breaking bread and exchanging over time this rather
intense dialogue, it was clear to me that he, like any other human being, is open to being
convinced, persuaded, and had his own views, arguments, perspectives, etc. And so from the
beginning, I approached him as I approach anybody, which is first an act of charity, to see in fact
what openness, what positive elements are part of his view where I can resonate with him, and
then of course to highlight the negative and highly objectionable ones. But, over time, I've
definitely seen a change in him, no doubt about it.
Yancy: What is your overall philosophical project?
West: It's hard to say. I think that fundamentally it has to do with wrestling with the problem of
evil in modernity, especially as it relates to people of African descent in particular. And all
human beings catch hell in general, but it has very much to do with the dark side, the underside
of the human predicament. That's why it cuts across, I think, so many disciplines. How do you
preserve some compassion in the face of the absurd, some sense of joy in the face of the nullity
and nothingness that characterizes so much of our human endeavors?
Yancy: As an African American intellectual, who is Cornel West?
West: I think that I'm just a brother who comes out of the black church on the block, trying to
make sense of the world, and making a blow for freedom in the short time that I'm here, and
having fun in the meantime. I would also say that I'm one-half of the person my brother is and
onethird of the person my father was, and then hope that I can actually resonate and keep alive in
some sense the depths of my mother, and the determination of my sisters!
SOURCE: From African American Philosophers: 17 Conversations, edited by George Yancy, pp. 32-
48. Copyright © 1998. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc.


--- PAGE 45 ---



--- PAGE 46 ---
SING A SONG
I returned to Harvard in fall 1975 after finishing my graduate course work and oral exams at
Princeton. My former Harvard mentors Martin Kilson and Preston Williams made it possible for
me to join the first class offellows at the W E. B. Du Bois Institute. 1 put my dissertation aside
and immersed myself in literature. I founded a literary group that read primarily Russian and
black classics, and attended courses on American poetry. Later that year, after aborted novels
and short stories, I finally wrote and submitted this autobiographical short story. I had hit on the
motif of my work to come-to sing in spoken word and written texts like Duke Ellington played
and Sarah Vaughan sang, to swing, to create an intellectual performance that had a blues
sensibility and jazzlike openness, to have the courage to be myself and find my voice in the
world of ideas and in the life of the academy.
For they who fashion songs must live too close to pain, Acquaint themselves too well with grief and
tears; Must make the slow, deep, throbbing pulse of years And their own heartbeats one; watch the
slow train Of passing autumns paint their scarlet stain Upon the hills, and learn that beauty sears, The
whole world's woe and heartbreak must be theirs, And theirs each vision smashed, each new dream
slain.
But sing again, oh you who have heart, Sweet songs as fragile as a passing breath. Although your
broken heartstrings make your lyre, And each pure strain must rend the soul apart; For it was ever
thus: to sing is death; And in your spirit flames your body's pyre.
-FRANK YERBY
I
I love music. I don't think it's in my genes, so it must have something to do with my upbringing.
As a youth, I went to nightclubs every weekend. I never understood the real significance of
this weekly routine until I left Harlem.
We moved from our place on Lenox Avenue not long ago. We lived across the street from
Harlem Hospital. Over the past months, my hearing has begun to fail me. My wife convinced me
that the almost constant sirens of the ambulances weren't helping matters. So we moved out to
Queens, nowhere near a hospital. It's a neighborhood without gang fights, shoot-outs, or loud
sirens. Better for my eardrums, but the quiet annoys me.
II
One night, while I slept, my hearing failed me for almost thirty minutes. I was furious-and
frightened. One whole episode in my dream was like a silent movie. No sound, just body


--- PAGE 47 ---
movements.
The next morning, Saturday morning, I made my biweekly trip back to Harlem to Johnny's
barbershop. I could see Jackson, Hook and Brother Will through the large front window.
Jackson was an old high-school classmate of mine. Now he has a good job with the city. He
drives a garbage truck-and makes almost twice as much money as my wife, who is a nurse.
Hook is a bona fide hustler. He makes money any way he can. And somehow he seems to have
a lot of it. I first met Hook two years ago at his brother's service station. His brother was sick at
the time, so Hook was managing the station. During the Arab boycott, just when all the other gas
stations were raising their prices, Hook started a gas war. His challenge lasted two days. He
made a mint during the challenge, though his middlemen cut off his gas supplies after the first
day. The next day Hook filled at least forty cars with a mixture of gas, water, Kool- Aid, and any
other fluid he could find. My car was one of those forty.
But it worked out well for me. When my car stalled on St. Nicholas Avenue, it was
demolished by another car-luckily, I was out of it. So my insurance and I bought a new car. And
believe me, the assistance was heaven-sent.
I really do like Hook, even aside from this selfish reason. I like him because of his
independence. He listens only to himself. The length of his jail record is the best testimony for
that. Hook believes in autonomy. Nobody tells him what to do, be it the police, his wife or his
best friend. He's unemployed right now-but living comfortably.
Brother Will is the pastor of Guiding Light Apostolic Church of God in Christ. My wife tells
me that he can drive the devil out of Satan himself by the sheer volume of his voice. I've known
Brother Will for over twenty years and still have no desire to hear him preach. I guess I've seen
too many of his sermons to take his oral ones seriously. But he's basically a good man, with a
quick mind and a quicker eye.
As I entered Johnny's, Brother Will, sitting in the high chair, said loudly, "Ah, look who the
wind blew in! That educated sinner, Zek!"
I must explain here that my real name is Ezekiel. Ezekiel Clifton Satterfield. My father gave
me this burden-bearing name. I never did like it; sounds too important. So I tell folks to call me
Zek. Just Zek.
Johnny exclaimed, "My man Zek, haven't seen ya' in a while! How's life on the island been
treatin' ya'?"
"Not too bad, Johnny," I replied, "Cain't complain at all."
Jackson and Hook exchanged similar greetings with me as I took my seat.
I grabbed the Amsterdam News and glanced at the headline. It read:


--- PAGE 48 ---
THE DUKE OF MUSIC IS GONE
I yelled, "Duke Ellington, the Duke, died? My,Jesus!"
Hook interjected, "Yeah, Zek. The Duke is gone, man. It's a shame."
Johnny mumbled, "Old Duke was the King. Our King. Cool, suave, and always down-to-earth.
We seem to be losing all our kings these days."
"Yeh, but is he really the King these days, Johnny?" asked Jackson.
"What'chu mean, man, `Is he really the King these days'? You know damn well he's the King!"
hollered Hook.
"Naw, I ain't sayin' he ain't the King. I'm sayin' that young folks today might not think he's the
King like we do," retorted Jackson.
"Well, shit. Oh, 'scuse me, Reb. Forget young folks, they ain't got no taste. Their James Brown
or Barry White cain't touch the Duke. Damn, don't let me get to talkin' 'bout the greatness of the
Duke 'cause I'll be here all night!" shouted Hook.
"Please watch your tongue," Brother Will remarked. "I cain't stand the truth to be put in such
unclean language."
"Glad ya' agree with me, Reb," said Hook, with a smile.
Brother Will continued, "Ya' know, that's what's wrong wit' the church today. The young folk
don't 'preciate the music of the past. They always want to jazz up the spirituals and gospels, like
they in some nightclub. I don't mind the guitars, but I cain't stand that fast, funky beat of those
boys who play the drums for that youth choir of ours. I truly believe that's the main reason why
the Holy Ghost don't come to Guidin' Light as much as it use' ta."
I remained silent. The death of the Duke had shaken me. My head sunk in sadness. My idol had
succumbed to Nature. His music from now on would be the spiritual extension of a man now but
dust. It frightened me. I was scared of losing my hearing. I realized then the power of music, its
sustaining and redeeming power. I wondered whether silence was a kind of death.
Jackson was still defensive. `Just like we think the Duke is King, so my kids think that James
Brown or Barry White is King. Who are we to say who's really the King or not? Times change.
We got to realize that."
Hook shouted back, "If change means goin' from the Duke to what young folks like, I ain't gon'
change! Change ain't just change, Jackson. There's change from bad to good and from good to
bad. Ya' gotta take your pick!"
Johnny added in support, "That's right Jackson. Ya' know that the Duke is King. Why make his
crown less worthy by lettin' anybody who young folks like wear it?"


--- PAGE 49 ---
"A-m-a-n!" said Brother Will. "That's like lettin' any man be Christ just 'cause some folks say
he is the Christ. Ya' see, there's true prophets and false prophets. And ya' know the false ones
when ya' see 'em! Just like I know that the true Christians love those old spirituals and gospels
and the false ones love that jazzedup stuff."
"Settle down, Reb, or ya' ain't gon' have no sideburns left. I cain't shape 'em when ya' get
excited like that!" cautioned Johnny.
Hook sat back in his chair and said, "Ya' need to stop bendin' the Holy Book your way, Reb.
'Cause singin' or listenin' to the spirituals or gospels ain't never made nobody no true Christian.
Christ in the flesh ain't never even heard 'em. I like 'em and I don't even believe in Christ outside
the flesh, wit' my hell-bound self. Respectin' good music ain't got nothin' to do wit' no religion. It
all comes down to a matter of 'preciation. Young folks don't 'preciate nothin', the spirituals, the
Duke, nothin'! They been spoiled rotten. I was down at City College the other day messin'
around. I asked this young brotha' what he was studyin' to be. He told me he wasn't even
interested in studyin.' He said he was just playin' along with the game. Then I asked him why in
the hell he was in college. He said, `That's your problem, old brotha', you still believe games are
played only on these petty streets in Harlem. Well, let me clue you in, these streets have only
low-level games, with everything to lose and hardly nothin' to gain. The real games are played
on different streets, like Wall Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.' Then I told him, `Well, since ya'
ain't studyin' nothin', it looks like ya' gon' be stayin' here wit' me playin' these low-level games
on these petty streets!"'
Hook went on, "I was about to go upside the little bastard's head, but it looked too hard to
knock some sense into! Ya' know, he really got me warm! Like I don't know that them big
corporations and the government are bloodsuckers. Shit, he ain't never even paid no taxes yet!"
Hook seemed delighted as usual to speak his mind on the young folks issue. His usual diatribe
against the young was one form of enjoyment for him. Since his last four-month stint in jail, he
frequently would air his hostility toward young folks, especially men under thirty. He
complained that they were soft. They had no courage. They succumbed to the wishes of their
friends and submitted to the rule of pseudoleaders.
As Brother Will stepped down from the high chair, Johnny said, "Come on, Hook! It's your
turn to get your beard trimmed and thank God it didn't rain yesterday on your conk, 'cause I ain't
in no mood to cook no hair today!"
When Hook was seated in the high chair, he turned to me and said, "Why ya' so quiet this
mornin', Zek? With your educated mind, I'm sure you got somethin' to say 'bout these issues."
I looked at Hook with a friendly frown. I had been following the conversation closely; I also
had glanced farther down in the newspaper article and observed that James Brown, Barry White
and many others publicly mourned the loss of the "late, great Duke of music."
So I said to Hook, "It's true that young folk don't 'preciate things like we do. I see it in my own
Bessie Mae. But there's no clear-cut reason for it. Jackson, you try to understand young folks, but


--- PAGE 50 ---
you lose your own views in the process. You act as if their ways are automatically worth
endorsin'. As if the mere march of time is the march of truth. Hook, you want everybody to be as
independent as you, but don't realize that most folks, young and old, just ain't like that. To be
independent is not only to be free, but also lonely. Most folks cain't stand loneliness. Only a
select few have the courage to endure such pain. To be independent is to be an outsider. Such
persons possibly enrich the lives of others, but they usually live self-destructive lives
themselves. To be truly free is to clearly see the true depths of life. This demands that you step
to the edge of a slippery cliff. Few avoid fallin' over and the bottom down below has no
cushion. I personally-"
"Wait a cotton-pickin' minute, brotha' Zek!" Hook said, politely interrupting me. "I know
you're educated and all that. And I respect ya' more for it 'cause you're a self learnet' man. But at
the moment I only wantcha' to answer the questions on the table, Is the Duke really the King for
all, young and old? And are young folks soft?"
I continued, "Oh, yeh. Duke is definitely the King. Young folks simply have no one who can
compare with him. Just as there is no one today who can compare with Ellison in writin' or Du
Bois in learnin'. Ya' see, the young folks today lack discipline-and ain't nothin' worthwhile been
produced without discipline. But discipline is based on authority, and what authority is worthy
of their loyalty? Corrupt governments, status-ridden churches, the suspicious media, adulterous
parents, manipulative peers? To whom or toward what can they turn? Solely to music. So they
have turned to music. Music has become the air they breathe, the very sunlight they absorb. They
imitate its rhythms in their walk, their talk. Yet they are soft, for they have never really suffered.
That's why so much of their music lacks depth."
I stopped and was quiet. I could hear Jackson snoring a bit. He had begun to doze sometime
after I separated the march of time from the march of truth. Aside from Jackson, the only noise in
the barbershop was the clicking of Johnny's scissors on Hook's mustache. As usual, no one
replied. It is assumed, for some odd reason, that I have the last word. I never knew whether this
custom arose out of deference or indifference to me. I did know in regard to Jackson, though.
When the time came for me to take my seat in the high chair, Brother Will, Jackson and Hook
had left. Two young men entered just as they walked out the door. After my haircut, I paid
Johnny and said good-bye. As I was leaving, Johnny scratched his head and said, "I tend to think
ya' spoke words of wisdom this mornin', Zek. But if what ya' said is true, then what happens to
young folks who can't hear no music? Ya' know, my sister Essie got a pretty little girl who can't
hear a word. She's deaf." Johnny looked perplexed and continued, "Well, I guess she probably
just reads, writes, or does somethin' else, but don't mind me, Zek. Take it slow, and tell Phyllis I
send my hello."
III
Whenever Phyllis stands with her hands on her hips on the front porch looking down the street
for my car, I know she's mad. Whenever she decides to attend the Saturday night meeting of the
church missionary society, I know she's upset.


--- PAGE 51 ---
She greeted me with a medium holler, "Ezekiel, I don't know why we have to go through this
every time you go to Johnny's. With all the things that need to be done 'round this house, you go
and spend the whole day there! I know all y'all doin' is talkin' trash!"
She became even madder when I didn't get mad.
"Well, I'm goin' to Motha' Hinton's for a missionary society meetin'. Tell Bessie Mae to warm
up that chicken in the oven," she said. "And there's some salad in the icebox," she added, in a
low and reluctant soft voice.
I knew she was mad, so I just let her release her steam, a technique that has worked well for
eighteen married years now. But as she left, I momentarily wondered why she was so upset.
I was really quite hungry, though I hadn't realized it until Phyllis mentioned that chicken in the
oven. When I entered the house, Bessie Mae shouted, "Is that you, Dad? I know you must be
starvin'. The food will be ready in a minute."
I must explain here that Phyllis and I had a little girl eighteen years ago. I named her Bessie,
after my favorite blues singer. Phyllis named her Mary, after her Savior's mother. So we
compromised and that's how Bessie Mae got her name.
Bessie Mae's voice was always like music to my ears. Not any particular words, but the soft
sweet tone of their sound. The legato style of her expression. The enchanting rhythm of her
delivery.
I walked into the kitchen mentally waltzing to syncopated thoughts.
Bessie Mae gave me a big hug and a kiss on the cheek.
I said jokingly, "Since when do I get all this good sugar! You must've broken up with
Raymond again, so that now I get all that surplus affection!"
She blushed. "Come on now, Dad, don't play like that. You know I've always been and always
will be your Bessie."
Though I could hardly hear her words, I chuckled in reply, "I'm just not used to that much
sugar from such a sweet young pretty girl!"
"By the way," she said, "Raymond will be over in a few minutes. He told me this morning he
wanted to talk to you about his job."
I would not have heard her remarks about Raymond had she not repeated them when I returned
to the kitchen with my high-powered hearing aid.
We sat silently, ate, and watched The Jefferson. In the middle of the program, Bessie turned to
me and asked, "Dad, why do you think black folks talk so loud? Not only on TV, but also in real
life. We always seem to shout or holler when we speak to one another. Why?"


--- PAGE 52 ---
"It's tension, honey. Nerves. We got a lot of tension to release."
The doorbell rang, and Raymond joined us in the kitchen. After the program, Raymond and I
retired to the den. He seemed a bit shy and began to speak in a low tone of voice.
"Mr. Satterfield, I've been wantin' to talk to you for a long time. I told Bessie it had to do with
my job, but it's really more than just that."
I interrupted, "You gotta talk a little louder, Raymond. My hearing's been fading on me lately."
"Oh, Okay," replied Raymond. "What I really want to talk about is you. Your life. Ya' see, I
ain't never had no man around the house, only women. You're kinda the first man I really respect
and look up to. Plus I'm thinkin' 'bout quittin' my job and maybe goin' back to school. And I know
you're a man of a lotta education. So first, how'd ya' ever get interested in learnin'?"
"I'm honored that ya' think so highly of me, really 'preciate it, son. To tell ya' the truth, I never
got interested in learnin', I just always was interested as far back as I can remember. It's like
tryin' to remember your first memory. Ya' see, my father was a Baptist preacher down South for
a while, so I had all kinds of religious books around. Since my mother died in childbirth, havin'
me that is, it was only me and Pops. After he quit preachin', he came on up to the city and got a
job at Penn Station downtown. When he came home from work, he taught me every thing he
knew. And believe me, that was a lot. We read and talked 'bout everything. Oh, how he loved
that story about Gilgamesh! Ya' know, his dream was to start a bookstore on 125th Street and
Seventh Avenue."
"I guess it never came true," said Raymond, with sympathy.
"Yeah, it was just a fantasy and he knew it. He knew wigs would be more popular than books
in Harlem for years to come. He used to always say, with a grin, `I may be educated, but I ain't
no fool!"'
"Why did he quit preachin'?"
"He quit 'cause he thought there was enough preachers around talkin'. He believed God had
sent him here to write. Pops thought that some preachers were called by God to speak and others
to write. In his last days, he became a kind of self-styled atheist. He said he couldn't believe in a
God that only called black preachers to speak and none to write. He came to believe that he
could be saved only by leaving volumes of books behind 'im. He longed for immortality, but
only in the form of the written word."
A beam of puzzling dismay flashed across Raymond's face. He asked, "What did he write?"
"Nothin'," I softly replied. "Not a word. He died an alcoholic, distressed over his failure to
gain his salvation. Ya' know, Pops could really speak, he was an absolute master of the spoken
word. But for some odd reason he hated his gift. He thought God had called him for another
mission, a mission for which he had no gift."


--- PAGE 53 ---
"Do you have this gift, Mr. Satterfield?"
"I'm not really sure. But let's not call it a gift. It's really a capacity. Ya' see, that's where I
think Pops was wrong. He had a gift for speaking, it came natural. It flowed like water from a
faucet. But writin' ain't no gift, it's a capacity. It takes time and long, lonely hours to develop this
capacity. Pops couldn't accept this, and that's what killed him in a sense. He hated solitude and
silence, but that's what you need to develop the capacity of writin'."
"Did you ever preach?" Raymond asked.
"Naw, naw. I'm not a religious person, though I value what religious folks are searchin' for.
What they and Pops try to find in religion, I find in music."
"Oh, so you're a musician or composer?"
"Yeah, I guess you can say that. But I've become one only within the past few weeks. That's
when I began to write. Ya' see, I believe writin' is a kind of music composed for those who no
longer hear the sweet music of persons, for those who live in silence. I write in order to sing for
those who live in this silence."
We heard a loud door slam in the next room.
"Bessie Mae, Ezekiel, where are you two?" called out Phyllis, as she entered the house out of
breath.
"Dad is talkin' to Raymond in the den. I'm here in the kitchen watchin' TV,
Momma," Bessie called back.
"Ya' know, Raymond," I said, "I don't know how we got on this tangent 'bout Pops, but let's
drop it and talk for a moment 'bout your future plans. Ya' say ya' might go back to school?"
"I'm really not sure, Mr. Satterfield. But I am sure that I want to be respected in the community
as an educated man, somethin' like yourself. Everybody wants to be respected for somethin'.
Folks in Harlem are respected for havin' fine women and cars, for bein' a good musician or
athlete. I'd like to be respected for my learnin'."
"Oh, I see. Ya' really want praise and fame. Ain't nothin' wrong with praise and fame if ya'
can find what ya' really need to enjoy 'em. And what ya' really need to enjoy 'em is peace of
mind. Without peace of mind, ain't nothin' worth nothin'! Ya' have peace of mind when ya' have
what ya' really need to enjoy what ya' really want, even if ya' never get what'chu really want.
And peace of mind ain't nothin' but being in harmony with yourself and others, like harmonious
notes in a melody."
Phyllis knocked on the door and whispered softly, "Ezekiel, it's almost ten o'clock."
"Thanks, darlin'. I 'preciate your concern-for your daughter," I replied, saying the last phrase


--- PAGE 54 ---
under my breath.
"I really should be goin', Mr. Satterfield. I enjoyed it, believe me," said Raymond, humbly and
with appreciation.
He and I went into the kitchen. Bessie and Phyllis were watching TV. Phyllis still seemed a
bit upset, though no longer mad. So I planted a juicy kiss on her big brown check. Just as I began
to relay to her Johnny's hello, the phone rang.
IV
"Brotha' Zek," said Hook, "they're havin' a special tribute to the Duke tonight down at Sam's
club. Some of the best jazz and blues singers in the country gon' jam there tonight. Like Count
Basle, Lionel Hampton, Billy Eckstine, Sarah Vaughan, Nancy Wilson. All the stars, man. Why
don't ya' meet me down there and we can pay our respects to the King together."
"Urn ... it does sound like it's gon' be quite a tribute. All those big folk gon' be at Sam's?"
"Yeh, man. It's a special Harlem tribute to the Duke. It's a private community tribute before the
press and media make their big splash at Carnegie Hall on Monday."
"All right, I'll meet'cha there, Hook."
"Where ya' goin' this time of night, Ezekiel?" asked Phyllis.
"Darlin', there's a special tribute to Duke Ellington tonight down at Sam's. You know how I
idolized the Duke and all. So I thought I'd go pay my respects."
"`Pay your respects'? At a nightclub? How can you pay your respects in a worldly nightclub to
someone whose soul is now being judged? I tell ya', I've been married to ya' for eighteen long
years and I don't understand your ways any more now than I did when we first got married!" she
exclaimed.
"I should be back around three or so. There's quite a slate of performers, like Eckstine,
Vaughan, Basic ......
"Ezekiel, you watch yourself now," she said, with a worried voice. "I've been feelin' funny
'bout 'cha since last night when ya' kept singin' that verse of Bessie Mac's record over and over
in your sleep.
You must have said those lines at least ten times last night. You seemed either to be dream
singin' or just unable to hear your own voice. I told ya' to hush three times but ya' totally ignored
me. I figured somethin' was wrong and I've been prayin' hard ever since."


--- PAGE 55 ---
"Don't worry, darlin'. That episode last night was a fluke. But I sure love ya' for lovin' me so
much. I could never do without your love and prayers."
I bent down and gave her a sentimental kiss. I then walked slowly into the bedroom. I was
frightened at her revelation, but I knew my false lack of concern would calm her down.
I had trouble choosing the appropriate clothes to wear to Sam's club. I hadn't gone to a
nightclub since my youth. My slacks were all cuffed. I was pretty sure the fashion had changed
from cuffed to uncuffed to bell-bottom cuffed. Well, at least I would be a little in style with my
cuffs. My shirts were all right. But my ties were ridiculous. They were all as thin as licorice and
as wrinkled as leprous skin. Even an iron was useless. So I threw on my old navy-blue sports
coat over a purple turtleneck, slipped into my black pimp socks, the only stylish part of my
outfit, tied my brown side-winding shoes and put on my dark hat. I was sharp! Or at least felt so.
And isn't feeling so what it's really all about?
V
I jumped into my car and headed toward the Harlem River. I love to drive along the Harlem
River, down Harlem River Drive, just to see the calmness of the water. As I approached the
river, I could see the glistening ripples of the strong current. Suddenly I realized I was still
wearing my high-powered hearing aid. For a moment, I decided to stop and take it off. But I
changed my mind. Since I wasn't going to the club to impress some beautiful young lady with my
sexy ear and since I wanted to hear the music of the great stars, I decided to keep it on. I took
one last look at the river, then went directly to the club.
I parked on 138th Street across from Harlem Hospital and a few blocks down from Sam's
club. After locking the car, I pulled out the only relic of my youthful nightclub days, my old
mauve-colored shades. I must have looked like a clown walking down the street with those
shades and my outdated clothes. I did hear a few brothers and sisters giggle as I passed. But it
was a giggle of acceptance and accommodation.
As I drew closer to the club, I could hear the syncopated beat of the drums and the up-tempo
of the guitar from the music inside. At the door of the club, the collective chant of the dancers
inside resounded in my ears.


--- PAGE 56 ---
Before entering, I noticed a sign on the door. It read:
For those who want to groove We got the music that moves and soothes!
At the door I was told the entertainment tonight was downstairs. On the way down the steep
stairs leading to the dance floor, I wondered whether the tribute was over, or if it just had not yet
begun.
The stairway was lined with curvacious females, consciously and unconsciously soliciting
lustful male glances. Young men, sporting the latest fashions and conked hair, posed as if for
portraits, their Kools dangling from their mouths. They stood staidly, partly blocking the
stairway.
As I worked my way past the line of women, I overheard a cute swarthy young lady whisper
to her friend, "Look at this old dude-he's as cool as he wants to be, with his old-time rags and
purple shades!"
Her friend giggled.
But from behind, I heard a familiar voice exclaim, "This brotha' is sho'nuff sharp tonight!
Good to see ya' made it, Brotha' Zek!"
It was Hook. We greeted each other with a rhythmic handshake.
"Come on, Zek. Let's push our way through this crowd and pay our respects to the Duke!"
As we forged ahead, Hook looked around and said, "I bet we're the only ones here who can
really 'preciate the Duke like he should be 'preciated."
By the time we reached the lower level, I had begun to believe him. There were no pictures of
the Duke, no signs of the tribute, and definitely no jazz band or blues singers providing the
music. It was undeniably a disco party.
I asked the bouncer whether there was to be a tribute for Duke Ellington. He replied indeed
there was. Tomorrow night. I turned and stared at Hook.
"That damn Jackson told me it was tonight!"
I said to myself, "Where the hell is Jackson? I see he's not around." I thought of turning back,
but the ensuing uphill battle discouraged me. I figured it would be easier to pay, have a quick
drink, and exit through one of the doors from the lower-level room. So I paid and went in. Hook
followed, but I sensed that our companionship for the night was over. He went his way and I
went mine.
The murky room was jam-packed. The music was loud yet overshadowed by vociferous
outcries and visceral shouts. Many of the dancers blew whistles which sounded like small
sirens. The clamorous crowd began to dance around in a ring and chant in cadence with the


--- PAGE 57 ---
offbeat,
The chant was ironic; there was no room to sit anywhere.
People of all sizes and shades of the Negroid spectrum filled the misty, sweltering room.
Flashing fluorescent multicolored lights shone just bright enough to see who was wearing what
and who was with whom. The floor was filled with banana-skin females dancing with jet black
men and chocolate-colored women dancing with paperbag-brown males.
The weekly routine of my youth had really not changed for these young people-or Hook, for
that matter. The Party still revolved exclusively around music. It was still a release of tension, of
nerves. A kind of cathartic ritual, the Party still served as a comforting place of retreat, a
precious secular sanctuary in which to lay one's burdens down. It remained a kind of
homecoming for people chasing after the carnal grail.
Watching the vivacious dancers, I could see my former Self. There I was, fingerpopping and
ass-twitching. But I also could see me now through my former Self. There I was, wall-flowering
and analyzing.
But just then the cute swarthy young lady asked me to dance. I was delighted. I did the
"Popcorn," a dance Bessie had taught me a few years ago. The young lady did something else.
But my backwardness was unimportant. We were both having great fun. I felt so good and even
racially proud as I watched this young lady move. You should have seen her! She was so
enchanting, so masterful in her movements, so graceful in her steps, so sexy with her hands.
Gradually I began to notice smoke coming from the room above. The disc jockey turned the
music up full blast to combat loud sirens outside and the small sirens inside. But the dancers
seemed to take little notice of the smoke.
They began to stomp on the floor and shout,


--- PAGE 58 ---
The collective chant must have sounded like voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted
wells. I'll never know. I could no longer listen.
The louder they shouted, the less I heard. The less I heard, the more pain I felt. And the deeper
the pain, the more I could see. Clearly see.
VI
I saw a dark, somber light in the midst of the fire-covered Party. Live corpses fell to the ground
and stretched their hands toward the dark light.
I said to the corpses, though I did not hear it, "Why persecutest thou thyselves so?"
They could not feel the grief in my heart or see the tears in my eyes. My words made them
tremble.
When I looked closer, I could see female apparitions resembling fading petals on a fiery
bough of darkness, gasping for breath in time with the fast, funky beat of male drummers. The
drummers were blind. They could not see the ghastly dancers or their gasps of exhaustion. They
beat the drums with dry human bones, as the sultry faces of the women ghosts became covered
with perspiration of blood. Yet the ghosts continued to dance and pointed to a crude poster
hanging over the drummers. It read:
Party! We don't need no music! Party! We got soul!
The apparitions had visible shadows of luscious female bodies. The few yolk-colored bodies
stood out clearest under the dark, somber light. My mauvecolored shades allowed me to detect
this. I also noticed that the shadows of the male drummers had no necks. There was no link
between their bodies and their heads.
VII
Hook never did attend the special tribute for the Duke at Sam's. Nor did Sam's ever hold the
special tribute for the Duke. Most of the club burned down that April night. Hook was one of the
many fatalities. It must have been one of Phyllis's prayers that spared me a similar fate.
But I am in Harlem Hospital, partially burned and permanently deaf. I no longer can hear loud
sirens, or Bessie's pleasant voice, or Duke's melodies. Yet I love music more than ever. In fact,
now I sing.


--- PAGE 59 ---
SOURCE: "Epilogue: Sing a Song," Prophetic Fragment, (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Win. B. Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 1988), pp. 281-294. Originally appeared in the black student journal of Williams
College in 1982.


--- PAGE 60 ---
THE IGNOBLE PARADOX OF MODERNITY
This briefpiece served as the foreword for the Spirits of the Passage exhibition of the earliest
slave ship ever recovered, the Henrietta Marie. Sponsored by the Mel Fisher Maritime Heritage
Society, this exhibition brought to national consciousness the international slave trade. We rarely
view modernity through the lens of the enslaved and their descendants yet we fail to do so at our
peril.
THE SPIRITUAL STRIVINGS OF New World Africans began on the treacherous voyages of
the transatlantic slave trade. These Dantesque journeys were the ignoble origins of Western
modernity and the criminal foundations of American democracy. They constituted the night side
of the Age of Enlightenment, the reality left unlit by the torch of natural reason. African slavery
sits at the center of the grand epoch of equality, liberty and fraternity, a center often concealed by
modern myths of progress and liberation. And black doings and sufferings remain burdened by
the unspeakable memories of the Middle Passage-the chamber of horrors enacted on slave ships
like the Henrietta Marie.
Like other indescribable evils of the recent past, the centuries-long slave trade forces us to
wrestle with levels of unjustified anguish and unmerited pain that are difficult to fathom. Most of
us would prefer to turn our heads and hearts from this ghastly past and dream of a better future.
Yet the pernicious effects and insidious consequences of New World slavery still linger in our
perceptions and inform our sensibilities in regard to black people. The vicious legacy of
institutionalized hatred of Africans is still with us (even if its raw forms are a bit out of fashion
at the moment).
Slavery is nearly as old as human civilization itself, but when the Henrietta Marie first landed
in Barbados on July 9, 1698, with 250 Africans aboard, the construct of "race" was hardly
formulated. The African slave trade was sustained by profithungry elites of all kinds: Christian,
Muslim, Jewish, European, Arab, African and American. Yet the distinctive feature of New
World slavery was its "racial" character. After a few decades of transracial slavery-in which
whites, blacks and reds were owned by whites-this ancient form of subjugation became an
exclusively black and white affair. This racialization of American slavery was rooted in
economic calculations and psychocultural anxieties that targeted black bodies.
Thus, the profitable sugar, tobacco and cotton plantations of the New World were housed and
husbanded by African labor, with the result that African men, women and children defined the
boundaries of European culture and civilization.
In fact, the human family was carved into modern "racial" pigeonholes-white, black, red,
brown, yellow-in order to control, confine, discipline and dishonor Africans. Racialized
persons and racist practices were systematized and canonized principally owing to the financial
interests and psychic needs that sustained the slave trade and New World slavery. The
fundamental meaning of this whitesupremacist ideology is this: New World Africans enter
European modernity cast as disposable pieces of property, as commodifiable bits of chattel
slavery subject to arbitrary acts of violent punishment and vicious put-down. In short, legalized
terror and institutionalized hatred, in the name of white supremacy and Western progress,


--- PAGE 61 ---
rendered black peoples economically exploited, politically oppressed and culturally degraded.
As Orlando Patterson noted in his magisterial work Slavery and Social Death, enslaved
Africans experienced social annihilation. With no legal status, social standing or public worth-
indeed, no foothold in the human family-black people were natally alienated; that is, they had no
claim to any of the rights that signified equality, liberty or fraternity in European modernity. This
meant, in part, that the glorious revolutions of 1776 in North America and 1789 in France were
rooted in and based on the economic profits and psychic wages extracted from enslaved
Africans. White supremacy is an integral component of European progress, with the evil of
African slavery a precondition of progressive breakthroughs in the modern world.
The great paradox of Western modernity is that democracy flourished for Europeans,
especially men of property, alongside the flowering of the transatlantic slave trade and New
World slavery. Global capitalism and nascent nationalisms were predicated initially on terrors
and horrors visited on enslaved Africans on the way to, or in, the New World. This tragic
springboard of modernity, in which good and evil are inextricably interlocked, still plagues us.
The repercussions and ramifications of this paradox still confine and circumscribe us-in our
fantasies and dreams, our perceptions and practices-in these catastrophic times.
Yet the "natural" state of American society is to deny this paradox and downplay the grave
consequences of its past and present reality. Instead, race is reduced to specks on our cultural
lens to be cleansed in order to be "color-blind" (after more than three centuries of African
slavery and seventy years ofJim Crow). Or it is recast as ethnicity, so that we all become
immigrants who rejoiced upon landing in America (even if black people's right to vote was
delayed for nearly two hundred years after 1776). In other words, America's historical amnesia
about black humiliation and black suffering is seen as a basic prerequisite for a better American
future of racial harmony. Yet history-the past as history and the present as history-will not let us
off so easily. The lofty claims of American exceptionalism that hold this country to be somehow
outside the iron laws of history ring now more hollow than ever. No civilization fails to reap
what it sows. No nation escapes the poison of its ignoble paradox.
The first death knell was heard in the barbaric Civil War, in which over 600,000 human
beings died by murder or disease. In this instance, the poison returned with a vengeance. And
although the Abraham Lincoln-led Union won the war, the white-supremacist South won the
peace-after a grand but brief interlude of multiracial democratic experimentation. The second
death knell was sounded in the turbulent 1960s, during which over 330 uprisings in 257 cities
shook the foundations of American society. And although the Martin Luther King-led black
freedom movement won precious civil and voting rights, conservative elites triumphed in the
economic sphere. Hence joblessness and job ceilings still constrained most black Americans.
Presently, the racially coded discourses about welfare reform, affirmative action, public
schools, public health care, prisons, criminal punishment, suburbanization and immigration still
bespeak the weight of the paradox.
The great irony of black striving in America is that the ignoble paradox of modernity has
yielded deep black allegiance to the promises of American democracy. The primeval screams
and silent tears of enslaved Africans, the victims of American democracy, have been


--- PAGE 62 ---
transfigured into the complex art of jazz, the most democratic of art forms. The terrors and
horrors of black life have been fought against in the name of a fairer and freer American
democracy. The best of the black freedom struggle-men and women like Ida B. Wells-Barnett,
A. Philip Randolph, Fannie Lou Hamer and Martin Luther King, Jr.-has been America at its best.
And yet the promises of American democracy, under the gravity of its underlying paradox,
remain unfulfilled for most black people in America.
In this sense, the horrible realities and unbearable memories evoked by the Henrietta Marie
still haunt us. The American government-the mouthpiece of the American people-has not yet
even acknowledged the impact of slavery on the present. It has erected no monuments, admitted
no memory, made no reparations, accepted no responsibility for the lives lost, wasted and
stunted by the ugly legacy symbolized by the Henrietta Marie. The dominant American tradition
of myopic denial, evasion and avoidance of its root paradox still encourages us to turn our backs
on the spirits of the Africans who suffered, unacknowledged, during and after the Middle
Passage-and on the spirits of their descendants.
Thomas Jefferson trembled when he reflected on the price America may pay for its denial.
Herman Melville wrote with heartfelt fear about the consequences in Benito Cereno. And Toni
Morrison laid bare the human costs-for all of us-in Beloved. Can we, as a people and as
individuals, muster the vision and courage to grapple honestly with this ignoble paradox of
American democracy before we become as shipwrecked as the Henrietta Marie, overcome by
lashing winds and rain in the deadly Florida straits, caught between the Dry Tortugas and the
Marquesas Keys?
SOURCE: "The Ignoble Paradox of Western Modernity," Foreword from Spirits of'the Passage: The
Tansatlantic Slave lade in the Seventeenth Century, by Madeleine Burnside, edited by Rosemarie
Robo- tham (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), pp. 8-10.


--- PAGE 63 ---
RACE AND M O D E R N I T Y
Of all my books, Prophesy Deliverance! remains my favorite. Written in my twenties, the work
of a young writer trying to catch a vast array offish with a variety of conceptual nets, it is wide-
ranging, political and outrageously ambitious. I could not have written it anywhere but at Union
Theological Seminary in New York City. The influence of my late friend and brother Professor
James Melvin Washington is pervasive. My debts to the theology of Professor James Cone, the
ethics of PrJessor Beverly Harrison and the wisdom of Professor James Forbes, Jr, are deep.
The impact of Foucault in light of dialogue with my brothers Professors Edward Said and Paul
Bove at Columbia and especially Professor Stanley 1ronowitz (then) at Columbia is immense.
The intellectual ferment in New York in those days is worth a memoir! How wonderfully intense
it was!
AMERICAN AFRICANS I N CONFLICT: ALIENATION I N A N INSECURE CULTURE
MODERNITY, COLONIAL PROVINCIALITY, LOCALISM
The Age of Enlightenment, from 1688 to 1789-roughly from the Glorious Revolution in England
to the tumultuous French Revolution-constitutes the emergence of European modernity.' This
occurred within an embryonic capitalist global economy that supported absolutist monarchies. It
throve, mostly because of black slavery in the Western Hemisphere and the exploitation of
working men, women and children in the rural household industry of western Europe. The most
populous European country, France, was the chief industrial center. Holland, especially the
vivacious city of Amsterdam, maintained its two-century dominance in commerce and shipping
as the major financial center in Europe.
The basic features of early modern European culture were the increasing acceptance of the
authority of science, the appearance of a new kind of pagan neoclassicism and the subjectivist
turn in philosophy. The intellectual defense and institutional support of the practices of scientists
became more and more persuasive to the literate population. These practices were guided by an
adherence to a new paradigm of knowledge, an experimental method that attempted to test
hypothe ses and yield objective conclusions by appealing to evidence and observation. The
increasing acceptance of the authority of science resulted in assaults on the authority of the
church and on its theology and religious practices.
This Enlightenment revolt against the prestige of the church was part of a search for models of
uncensored criticism. It led to a recovery of classical antiquity and especially a deep
appreciation and appropriation of the artistic and cultural heritage of ancient Greece. This
classical revival-or neoclassical movement in eighteenth-century Europe-was partly the result of
a four-hundred-year European love affair with Greece and Rome. This affair began in the Early
Renaissance (1300-1500), intensified in the High Renaissance (1500-1530), cooled in the
Mannerist era (1530-1600) and appeared again in full force during the Baroque period (1600-
1750). In short, early modern European culture promoted a new, modem type of paganism.
The emergence of European modernity also witnessed a subjectivist turn in philosophy. This
quest, initiated by Descartes, gave first place to concepts of the subject, the ego or the self and


--- PAGE 64 ---
preeminence to the notion of representative knowledge. The subject, ego or self constituted the
starting point for philosophical inquiry, and mental representations by the subject, ego or self
supplied the principal means for subjects to make contact with objects, ideas to copy things or
concepts to correspond to the external world. Philosophy became the queen of the emerging
scientific disciplines within this new paradigm as a metadiscipline that provided objective and
valid grounds for knowledge claims put forward in the newer disciplines, especially physics.
This turn in philosophy granted science a monopoly on truth in the marketplace of ideas, to the
dismay of both artists and theologians. As Hans-Georg Gadamer has noted in our own time, this
monopoly on truth entails a prejudice against prejudice, a supposed transcendence of prejudice
through objectivity.
Immanuel Kant deepened Descartes's subjectivism by erecting new formal foundations upon a
transcendental subject, which constitutes an objective world by means of a universal conceptual
scheme. In one grand stroke, he thus legitimated Newtonian science, vindicated Protestant
morality and set art in a realm of its own. The ultimate consequence of this architectonic
endeavor was to isolate early modern European culture into separate spheres of goodness, truth
and beauty-and morality, science and art-reinforcing meanwhile the role of philosophy as a
tribunal of pure reason for the claims of culture.
Between 1776 and 1782 texts appeared and events occurred that were representative of this
early modern period. These included Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations (1776), Edward
Gibbon's The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776), the American
Revolution (1776), David Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (1779), Gotthold
Lessing's Nathan the Wise (1779), Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Ream (1781) and the first
part of jean Jacques Rousseau's Confes sions (1781). In these are the intellectual agenda of the
period: the rise of the bourgeois capitalist order, the struggle between Christianity and
neoclassical paganism, the widening gaps between philosophy, ethics and art and the increasing
alienation of the individual.
The end of this period was marked by the birth of the United States, the first new nation,
through a colonial, not a social revolution. After a century and a half of the reconciling of self-
imposed exile with a well-developed European social and political consciousness, the problem
of provinciality had become central in the development of American culture.2 It resulted
primarily from the geographical displacement of European peoples from that European
civilization whose superiority they openly acknowledged. Adding to this, an antagonism to the
indigenous American peoples and an unwillingness to mingle with unchristian African slaves
created an alienated, intensely self-conscious and deeply anxiety-ridden society.
The first stage of American culture was thus saturated with colonial provinciality. The first
Americans looked to their parent civilization for intellectual and cultural resources, applying
these to very un-European conditions principally by means of crude imitation. The most
provocative commentators on the problematic of provinciality in American culture have been
Alexis de Tocqueville, George Santayana and Van Wyck Brooks.3 In de Tocqueville's view,
American culture smothered intellectual life in pursuit of democracy and equality, thereby
vitiating the aristocratic requisites for cultural vitality. To Santayana, the agonized conscience of


--- PAGE 65 ---
Calvinism and the metaphysical comfort of transcendentalism weighted like a genteel incubus
upon the American mind, partly explaining the odd American juxtaposition of intellectual
conservatism with technological inventiveness. For Van Wyck Brooks, American vacillation
between Puritan purity and vulgar materialism, echoing William James's "angelic impulses" and
"predatory lusts," fragmented the intellectual tradition and generated an unrestrained quest for
wealth.4
Colonial provinciality reached its zenith in the first major figure of the Genteel tradition,
Jonathan Edwards. The most profound of European-American thinkers, he constructed his
defense of Calvinism from a sophisticated blend of the empiricism of Locke, the determinism of
Newton and the idealism of Plato.
Edwards's valorizing of Newton bespoke his attitude toward the authority of science, an
attitude close to that of his own lesser contemporary and rival, Cad- wallader Colden.5 Yet
Edwards distinguished the domain of science from the special arena of religious knowledge, the
intuitive realm where the sixth sense, that of the heart, reserved for the elect, reigns. His fierce
struggle against the voluntaristic Arminians likewise defended complex versions of original sin
and predestination familiar from European Calvinism.
The Enlightenment left a comparable European stamp on the area of political thought.
Jefferson's doctrine of natural rights and theory of moral sentiments re vealed his debts both to
classical antiquity and to Locke, Shaftesbury and Frances Hutchinson.66 The anticlericalism of
Thomas Paine, and its concomitant defense of the freedom of conscience and speech, further
exemplified the critical spirit of the European Enlightenment in America. Lastly, the radical
environmentalism of Benjamin Rush and his humanitarian advocacy of the abolition of slavery
and the rehabilitation of criminals revealed an Enlightenment belief in the unlimited possibilities
of individuals in society when guided by reason.
American culture during the provincial period culminated in the Calvinist pietism,
Enlightenment rationalism and liberal republicanism of William Ellery Channing.7 The vernal
American Schleiermacher, Channing is the pivotal figure of the Genteel tradition in its transition
from Calvinism to transcendentalism, at the turning point between the colonial provinciality and
the postcolonial provinciality in American culture. His revolutionary humanitarianism,
bordering on utopian socialism, condemned slavery, bigotry and pagan worldliness. He
proposed to overcome these through Christian pietism, moral use of scientific knowledge and the
perfection of human nature through self-realization in democratic communities.
Channing's humanitarianism unfortunately did not serve either as guide or as norm for
American practice toward Africans during the provincial period. The non-Christianity and black
skin color of the dark pagan peoples threatened the self-identity of Puritan colonists inextricably
bound to Christianity.8 Since the absence of or even novel interpretation of Christian beliefs
could often bring about mistreatment or banishment, the growing idea of white supremacy
legitimated still harsher treatment for Africans.
In The Souls of Black Folk (1903), W. E. B. Du Bois eloquently described a double
consciousness in black Americans, a dual lens through which they saw them- selves.9 For Du


--- PAGE 66 ---
Bois, the dialectic of black self-recognition oscillated between being in America but not of it,
from being black natives to black aliens. Yet Du Bois overlooked the broader dialectic of being
American yet feeling European, of being provincial but yearning for British cosmopolitanism, of
being at once incompletely civilized and materially prosperous, a genteel Brahmin amid uncouth
conditions. Black Americans labored rather under the burden of a triple crisis of self-
recognition. Their cultural predicament was composed of African appearance and unconscious
cultural mores, involuntary displacement to America without American status, and American
alienation from the European ethos complicated through domination by incompletely European
Americans.
This predicament was qualitatively different from that of other Africans in the diaspora, in the
Caribbean, Canada and Central and South America. Africans in the United States confronted a
dominant Protestant European population whose own self-identity suffered from an anxiety-
ridden provinciality. The black Ameri can struggle for self-identity has always contributed
constructively to the American struggle for self-identity, though the latter has only exacerbated
and complicated it in return.
During the colonial provincial stage of American culture, Africans were worse than slaves;
they were also denuded proto-Americans in search of identity, systematically stripped of their
African heritage and effectively and intentionally excluded from American culture and its roots
in European modernity. Their search for identity focused principally on indigenous African
practices, rituals, religions and worldviews they had somehow retained.1'
The process of cultural syncretism that combined indigenous African practices and provincial
American culture generated a unique variant of American life, one far removed from, yet still
tied to, European modernity. Added ingredients in this were the distinctly antimodern values and
sensibilities of the southern United States, the geographic cradle of black America.
The first stage of African practice in America was neither barbarian nor provincial. Africans
valued human life and sustained in their alien environment a religious cosmology that gave
meaning to human existence. And it was not provincial, because it worshiped neither at the altar
of British nor at the altar of American cultural superiority. Black people were relatively
uninformed about British culture and not yet fully American. More pointedly, they had not yet
arrived at a synthetic Afro-American identity.
THE HEYDAY OF MODERNITY, POSTCOLONIAL PROVINCIALITY, CHRISTIAN
PRACTICES
The heyday of modernity, the golden age of the modern period, fell roughly between 1789 and
1871-that is, from the French Revolution to the unification of the German empire. During it, early
modern European culture took root and flowered in the authority of science, in modern paganism
and in the historicizing of philosophical subjectivism. The industrializing capitalist world order
consolidated at this time, and nation-states emerged, both phenomena enjoying the confidence of
the new bourgeoisie. The dominated classes-factory workers and the rural labor force-began to
grumble, but since they had limited organization and vision, this yielded minimal results.


--- PAGE 67 ---
This was, above all, the German Age, and the year 1807 alone witnessed the completion of
Hegel's The Phenomenology of Spirit, Goethe's Faust, Part I, and Beethoven's Fifth Symphony.
Yet despite the romantic reply to the bland universality, glib generality and monotonous
uniformity of the Enlightenment, the authority of science emerged with flying colors.
Romanticism attacked scientific arrogance and pretense, yet the brunt of its assault fell not on
science per se, but rather on the crudely mechanistic model of Newton's popular imitators. The
conceptions of the mind and the world characteristic of this model repelled the Romantics.
Disgusted with superficial distinctions, they relegated the dissective power of the mind to the
understanding (Verstand) and its integrative activities to reason (Vernunft), replacing
mechanistic models with organic ones."
The Romantics venerated a reason very different from that of the Enlightenment, which
appealed ultimately to the experimental method and aimed to keep the imagination at bay.
Romantic reason, on the other hand, is the epitome of a free creative imagination transcending
the limits of the world of sense.
The Romantic movement, the golden age of European modernity, conveyed a sense of
novelty.12 The French Revolution, which in one stroke replaced feudal institutions with
bourgeois capitalism, embodied the possibilities of social reconstruction and revolutionary
transformation. The European exploration of other cultures and societies likewise buttressed
curiosity about the unknown and brought to light distinctive features of its own emerging
constituent national cultures. Lastly, widespread technological innovation and the increase of
wealth in the early stages of the Industrial Revolution reinforced belief in the capacity of
humankind to master nature and enjoy its fruits.
With Napoleon, the Romantic dream of transforming the social order mellowed to temperate
efforts at self-realization.13 The fascination with exotic and primitive peoples illustrated by the
popular myth of the noble savage persisted, yet it soon revealed the repressive imperialist
regimes that often evolve in interaction with foreigners. The tremendous energies generated by
the early Industrial Revolution continued, but alienations and the formation of new class
antagonisms revealed unforeseen instabilities in bourgeois capitalism.
Hegel's historicizing of subjectivism cast would-be academic philosophers into the social,
political and cultural struggles of the period. His grand project took, in some sense, however,
the form of a Christian Christology gone mad. In place of Kant's presupposed subject of
knowledge, Hegel put a transindividual subject that externalized itself in the world and
progressively evolved within it in a dialectical fashion. This development can be discerned, of
course, only by the most adroit philosopher, namely, Hegel himself. This development is
simultaneously the freedom march of humankind and the progressive self-consciousness of that
transindividual subject, what Hegel called the Weltgeist, or World Spirit.
The year 1859 was momentous for cultural works that portrayed the central themes and
concerns of the golden age: Darwin's The Origin ofthe Species, Mill's On Liberty, Marx's
Critique fPolitical Economy, Wagner's Tristan and Isolde, George Eliot's Adam Bede, Dickens's
A Tale oo -Two Cities, Meredith's The Ordeal ofRichard Feverel, Tennyson's The Idylls of the


--- PAGE 68 ---
King, FitzGerald's Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam and Turgenev's A Nest of Gentlefolk. The
dominant themes and concerns in these are the historical and evolutionary character of human
existence, the scope of freedom and democracy in the prevailing order and the emerging
sentiments of European nationalism and of racism and sexism.
European hegemony over the life of the mind proved to be a major preoccupation of American
culture during its provincial period. American artists and writers strove consciously to establish
an autonomous national culture no longer dependent on that of Europe. American ought to sing its
own songs, write its own poems, novels and philosophy. America must look deep down within
itself without using the lens of the parent civilization to do so.
The most important product of this self-absorptive mood in America was Ralph Waldo
Emerson. In his famous lecture of 1837, "The American Scholar," Emerson portrayed Europe as
the symbol of the dead past. The present task of American thinkers was to liberate themselves
from slavish dependence on Europe. His message of self-reliance was not merely a reflection of
a democratic and intuitive philosophy or a Jeffersonian vision of the self-sufficient yeoman
farmer, but an attack on the prevailing provincialism of America in his day. Of course, without
the idealism of Plato, the natural-law theory of the Stoics and the romanticism of Coleridge and
Carlyle, there was little of intellectual substance left to "the sage of Concord," save his energetic
spirit, charismatic style and piercing wit. The postcolonial agenda of American culture called
for homespun originality and indigenous inventiveness, despite the eclecticism and pretense this
might entail.
Eclecticism and pretentiousness mark the most significant literary products of the American
renaissance, as seen in the major works of Edgar Allan Poe, James Fenimore Cooper, Walt
Whitman, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Herman Melville, Emily Dickinson and Henry David Thoreau.
" It is not that the works are artistic failures, but rather that they are products of a culture under
the grip of provincialism, of a culture proud yet not solidified, boastful but not self-confident,
eager to flex its muscles but without agile flexibility.
Edgar Allan Poe, for example, with his English childhood and Parisian sensibilities, cared
neither to imitate English literary models nor to write an authentic American tale. Instead, he
created fantasies in which European aristocracy roamed about in bone-chilling German castles.
James Fenimore Cooper's mythology loomed too large and his debt to the Scottish Sir Walter
Scott was too pronounced. Walt Whitman, the effervescent American Goethe, was penetrating
and provocative but hardly profound, a master of rhythmic and colorful language never able to
attain a natural or comfortable idiom of expression. Though Whitman was, without a doubt, the
most influential American poet of the period, his songs of himself and his democratic vistas of
America seem too fabricated-or simply fail to ring true at all.
Postcolonial American culture's preoccupation with breaking away from Europe was far
removed from the situation among Africans in the United States at the time. The initial tenacity
with which Africans held on to their indigenous practices and the reluctance of many Southern
white slaveholders to teach Christianity to the slaves limited the Christianizing process in the
early period. Even the Great Awakening of the 1740s, which swept the country like a hurricane,
failed to reach the masses of slaves. Only with the Great Western Revival at the turn of the


--- PAGE 69 ---
nineteenth century did the Christianizing process gain a significant foothold among black
people.15
The central questions at this juncture are: Why did large numbers of American black people
become Christians? What features of Protestant Christianity persuaded them to become
Christians?
The Baptist separatists and the Methodists, religious dissenters in American religious culture,
gained the attention of the majority of slaves in the Christianizing process. The evangelical
outlook of these denominations stressed individual experience, equality before God and
institutional autonomy. Baptism by immersion, practiced by the Baptists, may indeed have
reminded slaves from Nigeria and Dahomey of African river cults, but this fails fully to explain
the success of the Christianizing process among Africans. I
Black people became Christians for intellectual, existential and political reasons. Christianity
is, as Friedrich Nietzsche has taught us and liberation theologians remind us, a religion
especially fitted to the oppressed. It looks at the world from the perspective of those below. The
African slaves' search for identity could find historical purpose in the exodus of Israel out of
slavery and personal meaning in the bold identification of Jesus Christ with the lowly and
downtrodden. Christianity also is first and foremost a theodicy, a triumphant account of good
over evil. The intellectual life of the African slaves in the United States-like that of all
oppressed peoples-consisted primarily of reckoning with the dominant form of evil in their
lives. The Christian emphasis on against-the-evidence hope for triumph over evil struck deep
among many of them.
The existential appeal of Christianity to black people was the stress of Protestant
evangelicalism on individual experience, and especially the conversion experience. The "holy
dance" of Protestant evangelical conversion experiences closely resembled the "ring shout" of
West African novitiate rites: Both are religious forms of ecstatic bodily behavior in which
everyday time is infused with meaning and value through unrestrained rejoicing."
The conversion experience played a central role in the Christianizing process. It not only
created deep bonds of fellowship and a reference point for self-assurance during times of doubt
and distress; it also democratized and equalized the status of all before God. The conversion
experience initiated a profoundly personal relationship with God, which gave slaves a special
self-identity and self-esteem in stark contrast with the roles imposed upon them by American
society.
The primary political appeal of the Methodists and especially of the Baptists for black people
was their church polity and organizational form, free from hierarchical control, open and easy
access to leadership roles and relatively loose, uncomplicated requirements for membership.
The adoption of the Baptist polity by a majority of Christian slaves marked a turning point in the
Afro-American experience.
On the one hand, the major organization among black Americans, the Christian churches,
followed a polity farthest removed from modern bureaucratic and hierarchical forms of


--- PAGE 70 ---
organization. I" In this sense, the organizational form of most Afro-American churches,
charismatic and often autocratic in leadership, neither promoted nor encouraged widespread
respect for and acquisition of bureaucratic skills requisite for accountable leadership and
institutional longevity. In short, the Christian churches' organizational form imposed
considerable constraints on the administrative capabilities and institutional capacities of black
people.
On the other hand, this organizational form ensured autonomous control over the central
institution in the Afro-American community, which set blacks in the United States apart from
other Africans in the diaspora. Independent control over their churches promoted the
proliferation of African styles and manners within the black Christian tradition and liturgy. It
also produced community-minded political leaders, polished orators and activist journalists and
scholars. In fact, the unique variant of American life that we call Afro-American culture
germinated in the bosom of this Afro-Christianity, in the Afro-Christian church congregations.
THE DECLINE OF MODERNITY, INDUSTRIAL PROVINCIALITY, INCLUSIONARY
PRACTICES
The decline of European modernity between 1871 and 1950-from the unification of the German
empire to the emergence of the United States as the unquestioned supreme world power-
occurred within the political and socioeconomic contours of an increasingly crisis-ridden
monopoly-capitalist world economy. This yielded devastating world wars, holocaust-producing
fascist regimes and sharp reaction against repressive Communist governments. The dominated
classes in industrial nations-including victims of racist and sexist oppression-flexed their
political muscles more in this period and embarked on various courses toward inclusion in and
ineffective opposition to the liberal capitalist order. The proliferation of mass culture,
especially luxury consumer goods, effected a prolonged entree of significant segments of the
dominated classes into the bourgeois world of educational and occupational opportunities,
middlebrow culture and comfortable living.
In this modernist period, it seemed as if, for the West, "things fell apart; the center could not
hold," to revise William Butler Yeats, the greatest English-language poet of the period. For
science, a crisis set in. Janos Bolyai, N. I. Lobachevski, Karl F. Gauss and Bernhard Riemann
had already called into question the omnipres ence of Euclidean geometry by discovering three-
dimensional space and thereby making possible new, non-Euclidean geometries. Einstein's
theory of special relativity undermined the prevailing Newtonian physics. Niels Bohr and
Werner Heisenberg promoted the indeterministic character of quantum phenomena, which
subsequently threatened classical laws of logic such as the law of distribution. Kurt Godel
demonstrated the incompleteness of mathematics, and L. E. J. Brouwer rejected two-value logic
and the law of excluded middle, hence paving the way for intuitionist mathematics.
For modern paganism, despair also set in. This revealed itself most clearly in 1922. That
year, the modernist year par excellence, witnessed within twelve months the appearance of some
of the most profound and probing works in the history of the modern West. These included T. S.
Eliot's The Wasteland, James Joyce's Ulysses, Hermann Hesse's Siddharta, Osip Mandelstam's
Tristia, Eugene O'Neill's Anna Christie, Bertolt Brecht's Baal, e. e. cummings's The Enormous


--- PAGE 71 ---
Room, Sinclair Lewis's Babbitt, Jean Toomer's "Song of the Sun," Wallace Stevens's "The
Comedian as the Letter C," Max Weber's Economy and Society, I. A. Richards's Foundations of
Aesthetics (with C. K. Ogden and James Wood) and Sigmund Freud's essay on jealousy,
paranoia and homosexuality. These were published in the same year that Mussolini's Blackshirts
marched on Rome, and less than a year after Lenin and Trotsky's suppression of the Kronstadt
rebellion, a suppression that soured the hopes of many sympathizers of the Russian Revolution.
In philosophy during the modernist period, major attacks were also made upon the primacy of
the subject. Despite Hegel's historicizing of the subjectivist turn in philosophy, academic
philosophers managed to overthrow Hegelianism and replace it either with analytical realism in
Britain, neo-Kantianism in Germany or phenomenology in France, themselves later attacked by
structuralism, existentialism and analytical behaviorism.
During the decline of European modernity the most precious ideals of science, politics,
philosophy and the arts were radically called into question. This period was thus well disposed
toward apocalyptic, crisis-centered views of history, which stressed shock, the violation of
expected continuities and a deep sense of futility. Lionel Trilling-with his Arnoldian outlook and
tactful candor-suggests that the modernist element signifies nihilism, "a bitter line of hostility to
civilization," "a disenchantment with culture itself." 19
This modernist temper projects the sense of an abrupt break with all tradition, a radical
disruption from the past, which implies not so much a revolution, but rather a devolution or
dissolution. Virginia Woolf reflected this modernist temper when she wrote, "On or about
December 1910 human character changed."20
The industrial provincial stage of American culture neither escaped nor engulfed the
modernist temper.2' New attempts appeared to extend the Genteel tradition-or provide
metaphysical comfort for agonized consciences-in the form of highly sophisticated idealist
philosophical systems, as in the works of Borden Parker Bowne, James Edwin Creighton and,
above all, Josiah Royce. The monumental literary achievement of the expatriate Henry James
subjected the Genteel tradition to close scrutiny and detailed analysis, appraising it as a mere
interesting habit of mind among a host of others. The Genteel tradition no longer survived as a
holistic worldview, but rather as a subterranean sensibility upon which to build anew.22
During the modernist period, industrial provincial American culture presented clear-cut
alternatives to its artists: either indigenize or become European. This dilemma was illustrated
most graphically by the two exemplary American literary artists of the era, the seminal Mark
Twain and the supercilious T. S. Eliot. For Twain, the aim was neither to resort to the eclectic
strategies of Whitman or Melville nor to imitate the models and manners of Europe. Rather, it
was to create the first genuine American idiom in literature. Similar to his colleague and fellow
critic Ezra Pound, Eliot did not imitate Europeans, but rather became one. Although he
expatriated to London, he had Paris on his mind and wrote his mature poetry under the influence
of French symbolists and the classical European tradition of Homer, Ovid, Virgil and Dante. In
this sense, Eliot was no longer from St. Louis and Pound no longer from Idaho. Both rested
outside the gravity of industrial provincial American culture, not simply because they removed
themselves from it, but rather because they discarded it.


--- PAGE 72 ---
On the philosophical front, this either-or dilemma took the form of a choice between warmed-
over idealism and indigenous pragmatism, between updating the Genteel tradition and promoting
a new reformist orientation.23 Just as a dialogue between the Twain and Eliot streams never
materialized, so a debate between Royce and Dewey never occurred. Both streams avoided each
other, partly because of the divergent roads they chose and possibly because of their fundamental
incompatibility.
The either-or dilemma of industrial provincial American culture is found only in the trained
and talented artists and intellectuals of the rising Afro-American petite bourgeoisie, such as
Alexander Crummell, W. E. B. Du Bois, Jean Toomer, Henry Ossawa Tanner, Alain Locke,
Richard Wright, Laura Wheeler Waring, and others. The almost exclusive priority of African
practices in the United States in this period was to gain inclusion within the rapidly expanding
American capitalist order. With the increase of xenophobic sentiments and movements, the
escalation of crypto-fascist terror in the southern part of the United States, and the vast
immigration of eastern and southern European laborers to urban centers in the northern section of
the United States, achieving Afro-American inclusion within the mainstream of American society
proved difficult.
Public discourse within the Afro-American community concerning this inclusion was shaped
by the debate that took place between the early W. E. B. Du Bois and Booker T. Washington-the
two major spokesmen of the Afro-American petite bourgeoisie." There were, of course, other
interlocutors in the debate, including William Monroe Trotter of the Niagara Movement, Ida B.
Wells-Barnett of Chicago, Rev. James Bowen of the Methodist Episcopal clergy, and Rev.
George Washington Woodbey of the Socialist Party, but the privileged positions and voices of
Du Bois and Washington drowned them out.
For both Du Bois and Washington, the pressing issues were neither impractical ones such as
the redistribution of wealth, a more humane mode of production or opposition to American
imperialism (in Puerto Rico and the Philippines) nor impertinent ones such as the undesirability
of miscegenation or the removal of the Christian taint on Afro-American culture. Rather, these
two petit bourgeois leaders directed their attention to the form and content of Afro-American
inclusion in American society.
Both agreed on the form: nonviolent reform within the legal, political and economic channels
of American life. They differed on the content: Washington favored self-help initiatives in the
economic sphere and promoted a slow agrarian proletarianization process tied to increased
Afro-American property holdings and wealth acquisition, whereas Du Bois opted for upward
mobility in the social and political spheres and supported a protest movement that would
achieve equal legal, social and political status for Afro-Americans in American society. They
violently clashed, not simply because of their divergent viewpoints but, more important, because
their limited access to resources and talent forced them to struggle for power on overlapping
terrain.
The Du Bois-Washington debate set the framework for inclusionary African practices in the
United States in this century. The numerous black ideological battles between integrationism and
nationalism, accommodationism and separatism are but versions and variations of the Du Bois-


--- PAGE 73 ---
Washington debate.25 For example, Marcus Garvey, the great Jamaican leader of the first mass
movement among Africans in the United States, simply gave Washington's self-help orientation a
nationalist slant and back-to-Africa twist; his personal admiration of Washington is indisputable.
The first minor attempt to burst out of the framework of the Du Bois-Washington debate was
the socialist viewpoint set forth in the pages of The Messenger, edited by the Young Turks
Chandler Owen and A. Phillip Randolph.26 This perspective, which echoed George Washington
Woodbey's position more than a decade earlier, not only called into question the procapitalist
assumption circumscribing the Du Bois-Washington debate, but also linked the enhancement of
Afro-Americans to the radical elements of the labor movement. This valuable addition proved to
be premature at the time, especially given the racist character of the labor movement. But in
decades to come, this perspective proved to be portentous. Randolph's long and distinguished
yet flawed career bears out the depths of his foresight. In short, he was the pioneer on the
frontier of Afro-American labor relations.
A second minor attempt to step outside the confines of the Du Bois-Washington debate
consisted of the African Blood Brotherhood's amalgam of revolutionary black nationalism and
scientific socialism.27 Its principal figures-Cyril Briggs, Richard B. Moore, W. A. Domingo,
Harry Haywood-were the first African Communists in the United States. Their major
contribution was that they put imperialist issues on the agenda of the Afro-American liberation
movement. Yet such issuesalong with untimely revolutionary rhetoric-remained on the back
burner for petit bourgeois intellectuals and entrepreneurs, proletarian preachers and parishioners
in urban centers and sharecroppers, tenant farmers and day laborers in rural areas throughout
Afro-America.
The major vehicles by which black progress occurred in this period were patronage
relationships with white elites and bosses in city machines, organized protest and boycott efforts
(usually church-based) against discrimination, labor shortages during the two world wars,
participation in the progressive labor movement (especially in the unionization of industrial
workers) and achievements in athletics and entertainment. These diverse means of Afro-
American upward social mobility constituted ad lioc measures that presupposed political
oppression, economic exploitation and social degradation as the prevailing realities and posited
inclusion within the American liberal capitalist order as the desirable goal. Such inclusionary
measures signified the Afro-American encounter with the modern world on a significant scale
for the first time; they revealed the difficulties presented by racist American society, the
desperation of a bastard people in hostile circumstances and the determination of Africans in the
United States, despite limited organization and vision, to be free.
THE END OF MODERNITY, POSTINDUSTRIAL COSMOPOLITANISM, DISPERSIVE
PRACTICES
We live now three decades after the end of European modernity. The very term postmodernism
reflects fear of the future; it is a backward-looking term. We witness the nuclear and ideological
standoff between the capitalist (not necessarily free) United States and the Communist (definitely
unfree) Soviet Union, both imperialist powers suffering immense internal decay. The dominated
classes in industrial and postindustrial nations have accelerated the speed of their inclusion


--- PAGE 74 ---
within the liberal capitalist regimes, accompanied by widespread tranquilizing and
depoliticizing by mass culture. Poor, developing nations have launched successful political,
anticolonial revolutions, yet often lapse into a neocolonial dependence on developed capitalist
countries. A few developing nations even have had successful social revolutions, though they
usually fall into the neocolonial Soviet orbit.
The recent stirrings of postmodernism can be illustrated in the following ways:
First, the crisis in science that emerged in European modernism is now becoming a more
widespread crisis in the authority f science, in many ways similar to the crisis in the authority of
the church in the Age of Enlightenment. This rudimentary state of demythologizing science
relegates scientific descriptions and theories of the self, world and God alongside rather than
above religious, artistic and moral descriptions and theories of the self, world and God. This
demythologizing process is promoted (usually unintentionally) by major figures in the
philosophy of science, such as N. R. Hanson, Michael Polanyi, Thomas Kuhn, Imre Lakatos and,
above all, Paul Feyerabend.28 This process signifies a deep authority crisis in knowledge, a
kind of demonopo- lizing of science on truth and reality in the marketplace of ideas. It raises the
prospect of a possible plurality of epistemic authorities on truth and reality as well as a
frightening full-blown relativism or laissez-faire policy regarding access to truth and reality.
Second, the despair of modern paganism during the European modernist period has
degenerated into various forms of cynicism, fatalism, hedonism and narcissism in the lowbrow,
middlebrow and highbrow cultures f postmodernism. These attitudes and sensibilities-recently
studied by Ihab Hassan, Raymond Olderman, Christopher Lasch, Heinz Kohut, Jerome
Klinkowitz, and others-can be glimpsed in mass-consumer culture, in popular movies, in
television programs and through disco records.29 Postmodernist sentiments also can be found in
such literary works as Jorge Borges's Labyrinths (1964), William Burroughs's Naked Lunch
(1962), Donald Barthelme's Snow White (1967), Ishmael Reed's The Free-Lance Pallbearers
(1967), John Barth's Lost in the Funhouse (1968), Ronald Sukenick's The Death of the Novel
(1969), Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.'s Slaughterhouse-Five (1969), Raymond Federman's Double or
Nothing (1972), Thomas Pynchon's Gravity's Rainbow (1973) and Philip K. Dick's A Scanner
Darkly (1977). This degeneration-in mass culture and sophisticated literary textsreveals, to a
certain extent, the dead end to which modern paganism has come: impotent irony, barren
skepticism and paralyzing self-parody.
Third, philosophical attacks on the primacy of the subject are deepened and extended in
postmodernism. In short, postmodernism is an accentuation and acceleration of the major
developments and processes in European modernism. It is a deepening of the decline of
modernity, with little sense of what is to follow, if anything at all. It bears the birth pains of slow
epoch transition, the ironic excesses of prolonged historical suspension and the ecstatic
anticipations of a new, though not necessarily better, era.
The postindustrial cosmopolitan stage of American culture-the prevailing situation with its
avant-garde domesticated by absorption into the marketable mainstream, its artists as professors,
academic critics as artists and philosophers as technicians-witnesses the emergence of the
United States as the cultural vanguard in postmodernism. For the first time, European audiences


--- PAGE 75 ---
look to the United States for artistic and cultural leadership. This leadership is not simply a
result of the hegemony of U.S. world power or its supreme nuclear capacity. More important is
the fact that it is an effect of a nation that has steadily gained cultural self-confidence while other
leading European countries flounder in either self-pity (Germany), self defeat (England) or self-
obsession (France).
The point is not so much that the United States has come of age, but rather that the United
States has seized Western cultural leadership in a declining and decadent age.30 Of course, the
United States has no Jean-Paul Sartre or Martin Heidegger, no Samuel Beckett or even Gabriel
Garcia Marquez. Yet cultural leadership in the West no longer requires such stellar figures;
productive academic figures now suffice.
In postindustrial cosmopolitan American culture, the either-or dilemma of the previous period
evaporates. Taking their cues from William Faulkner-without the size of his canvass, the
complexity of his vision and the depths of his talentpostmodern American artists are able to
learn from Europe without a feeling of inferiority, digging deep into American life without a
sense of provinciality. In philosophy, the choice is no longer between the last of the Genteel
tradition and the reformist orientation-idealism or pragmatism, Royce or Dewey-or even
between the reformist orientation and the new realism. The very framework of such a choice has
been eclipsed by the linguistic turn in philosophy, with its analytical rigor and technical
argumentation.31 Philosophy in the United States is no longer an arena in which comprehensive
worldviews are adopted and intellectual attitudes cultivated, but rather a professional field of
study where intricate puzzlelike problems are solved, resolved or dissolved.
The professionalization and specialization at work in postindustrial cosmopolitan American
culture find their counterparts in the process of differentiation currently proceeding in the Afro-
American experience. This differentiation generates dispersive practices among Afro-
Americans; heretofore untouched intellectual territories, secular outlooks, business ventures,
occupational positions, geographic locations and even sexual experimentations are now being
discovered and enacted by Afro-Americans. This differentiation-though an index of progress-has
rendered the collective enhancement of Afro-Americans even more problematic.
The paradox of Afro-American history is that Afro-Americans fully enter the modern world
precisely when the postmodern period commences; that AfroAmericans gain a foothold in the
industrial order just as the postindustrial order begins; and that Afro-Americans procure skills,
values and mores efficacious for survival and sustenance in modernity as the decline of
modernity sets in, deepens and yearns to give birth to a new era and epoch. The members of the
Afro-American petite bourgeoisie make significant gains in such circumstances, but even they
have a fragile economic position and vulnerable political status, and they experience cultural
atrophy. At the same time, the Afro American underclass and the poor working class exhibit the
indelible traces of their oppression in modernity and their dispensability in postmodernity:
relative political powerlessness and perennial socioeconomic depression, cultural deterioration
reinforced by devastated families and prefabricated mass culture, and subversive subcultures
dominated by drugs and handguns, which surface as civil terrorism in black ghettos and
American cities.


--- PAGE 76 ---
A GENEALOGY OF MODERN RACISM
The notion that black people are human beings is a relatively new discovery in the modern West.
The idea of black equality in beauty, culture and intellectual capacity remains problematic and
controversial within prestigious halls of learning and sophisticated intellectual circles. The
Afro-American encounter with the modern world has been shaped first and foremost by the
doctrine of white supremacy, which is embodied in institutional practices and enacted in
everyday folkways under varying circumstances and evolving conditions.32
My aim in this section is to give a brief account of the way in which the idea of white
supremacy was constituted as an object of modern discourse in the West, without simply
appealing to the objective demands of the prevailing mode of production, the political interests
of the slaveholding class or the psychological needs of the dominant white racial group. Despite
the indispensable role these factors would play in a full-blown explanatory model to account for
the emergence and sustenance of modern racism in the West, I try to hold these factors constant
and focus solely on a neglected variable in past explanatory models-namely, the way in which
the very structure of modern discourse at its inception produced forms of rationality, scientificity
and objectivity as well as aesthetic and cultural ideals that require the constitution of the idea of
white supremacy.
This requirement follows from a logic endemic to the very structure of modern discourse.
This logic is manifest in the way in which the controlling metaphors, notions and categories of
modem discourse produce and prohibit, develop and delimit specific conceptions of truth and
knowledge, beauty and character, so that certain ideas are rendered incomprehensible and
unintelligible. I suggest that one such idea that cannot be brought within the epistemological field
of the initial modern discourse is that of black equality in beauty, culture and intellectual
capacity. This act of discursive exclusion, of relegating this idea to silence, does not simply
correspond to (or is not only reflective of) the relative powerlessness of black people at the
time. It also reveals the evolving internal dynamics of the structure of modern discourse in the
late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in western Europe-or during the Enlightenment. The
concrete effects of this exclusion and the intellectual traces of this silence continue to haunt the
modern West: on the nondiscursive level, in ghetto streets, and on the discursive level, in
methodological assumptions in the disciplines of the humanities.
I shall argue that the initial structure of modern discourse in the West "secretes" the idea of
white supremacy. I call this "secretion"-the underside of modern discourse-a particular logical
consequence of the quest for truth and knowledge in the modern West. To put it crudely, my
argument is that the authority of science, undergirded by a modern philosophical discourse
guided by Greek ocular metaphors and Cartesian notions, promotes and encourages the activities
of observing, comparing, measuring and ordering the physical characteristics of human bodies.
Given the renewed appreciation and appropriation of classical antiquity, these activities are
regulated by classical aesthetic and cultural norms. The creative fusion of scientific
investigation, Cartesian epistemology and classical ideals produced forms of rationality,
scientificity and objectivity that, though efficacious in the quest for truth and knowledge,
prohibited the intelligibility and legitimacy of the idea of black equality in beauty, culture and


--- PAGE 77 ---
intellectual capacity. In fact, to "think" such an idea was to be deemed irrational, barbaric or
mad.
THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS: THE GENEALOGICAL APPROACH
I call this inquiry a "genealogy" because, following the works of Friedrich Nietzsche and Michel
Foucault, I am interested in the emergence (Entstelaung), or the "moment of arising," of the idea
of white supremacy within the modern discourse in the West.33 This genealogy tries to address
the following questions: What are the discursive conditions for the possibility of the
intelligibility and legitimacy of the idea of white supremacy in modern discourse? How is this
idea constituted within the epistemological field of modern discourse? What is the complex
configuration of metaphors, notions, categories and norms that produces and promotes such an
object of modern discourse?
My genealogical approach subscribes to a conception of power that is based neither simply
on individual subjects, e.g., heroes or great personages as in traditional historiography, nor on
collective subjects, e.g., groups, elites or classes as in revisionist and vulgar Marxist
historiography. Therefore I do not believe that the emergence of the idea of white supremacy in
the modern West can be fully accounted for in terms of the psychological needs of white
individuals and groups or the political and economic interests of a ruling class. I will try to
show that the idea of white supremacy emerges partly because of the powers within the structure
of modern discourse-powers to produce and prohibit, develop and delimit forms of rationality,
scientificity and objectivity that set perimeters and draw boundaries for the intelligibility,
availability and legitimacy of certain ideas.
These powers are subjectless-that is, they are the indirect products of the praxis of human
subjects. They have a life and logic of their own, not in a transhistorical realm but within history
alongside, yet not reducible to, demands of an economic system, interests of a class or needs of a
group. What I am suggesting is not a history without a subject propagated by the structuralist
Marxist Louis Althusser, but rather a history made by the praxis of human subjects, which often
results in complex structures of discourses that have relative autonomy from (or are not fully
accountable in terms of) the intentions, aims, needs, interests and objectives of human
subjects.34
I am further suggesting that there is no direct correspondence between nondiscursive
structures, such as a system of production (or, in Marxist terms, an economic base), and
discursive structures, such as theoretical formations (or, in Marxist terms, an ideological
superstructure). Rather, there are powers immanent in nondiscursive structures and discursive
structures.35 Traditional, revisionist and vulgar Marxist types of historiography focus primarily
on powers within nondiscursive structures, e.g., powers of kings, presidents, elites or classes,
and reduce the powers within discursive structures to mere means for achieving the intentions,
aims, needs, interests and objectives of subjects in nondiscursive structures. This reductionism
is not wrong; it is simply inadequate. It rightly acknowledges noteworthy concrete effects
generated by the relationship between powers in discursive structures and those in
nondiscursive structures, but it wrongly denies the relative autonomy of the powers in discursive
structures and hence reduces the complexity of cultural phenomena.


--- PAGE 78 ---
The primary motivation behind such reductionism (such as personalistic analyses of race
prejudice or orthodox Marxist accounts of racism) is to ensure an easy resolution of a highly
complex problem, without calling into question certain fundamental assumptions that inform such
resolutions. These fundamental assumptions, such as the subject-based conception of power, and
easy resolutions, such as the elimination of race prejudice by knowledge or the abolition of
racism under socialism, preclude theoretical alternatives and strategic options. In this way, these
fundamental assumptions and hypothetical resolutions illustrate the effects of the powers
immanent in certain liberal and Marxist discourses.
THE STRUCTURE OF MODERN DISCOURSE
I understand "the structure of modern discourse" to be the controlling metaphors, notions,
categories and norms that shape the predominant conceptions of truth and knowledge in the
modern West. These metaphors, notions, categories and norms are circumscribed and
determined by three major historical processes: the scientific revolution, the Cartesian
transformation of philosophy and the classical revival.36
The scientific revolution is usually associated with the pioneering breakthroughs of
Copernicus and Kepler in astronomy, Galileo and Newton in physics, and Descartes and Leibniz
in mathematics. These breakthroughs were pre-Enlightenment, most of them occurring during the
seventeenth century, the so-called Age of Genius. The scientific revolution is noteworthy (to say
the least) primarily because it signified the authority of science. This authority justified new
modes of knowledge and new conceptions of truth and reality; it set the framework for the advent
of modernity.
The originating figures of the scientific revolution went beyond the Renaissance problematic-
of finding a compromise formula that reconciled Christian and classical modes of thinking and
living-yet stopped short of drawing thoroughly secular conclusions from their breakthroughs, that
is, of waging intellectual war on natural religion and dogmatic theology. Galileo's Platonism and
Newton's Socinianism illustrate this peculiar protomodern worldview of making peace between
science and religion.37
For our purposes, the scientific revolution is significant because it highlights two fundamental
ideas: observation and evidence. These two ideas have played, in an isolated manner, a role in
previous paradigms of knowledge in the West (since the times of Aristotle and Aristarchus). But
the scientific revolution brought these ideas together in such a way that they have become the
two foci around which much of modern discourse evolves. The modern concepts of hypothesis,
fact, inference, validation, confirmation and verification cluster around the ideas of observation
and evidence.
The major proponents of the scientific revolution, or, more specifically, of the authority of
science, were two philosophers, Frances Bacon and Rene Descartes. Bacon is noteworthy
primarily because of his metaphilosophical honesty. For him, the aim of philosophy was to give
humankind mastery over nature by means of scientific discoveries and inventions. He then
promoted the philosophical importance of the inductive method as a means of arriving at general
laws to facilitate this human mastery. Despite Bacon's acceptance of orthodox religion, his


--- PAGE 79 ---
rejection of Copernican theory, and his lack of acquaintance with some of the major scientific
discoveries of his time-e.g., the work of Andreas Vesalius on modern anatomy, William Gilbert
on magnetism or William Harvey (Bacon's own medical attendant) on the circulation of blood-
Bacon's writings, especially The Advancement of Learning, did much to promote the authority of
science.38
Descartes is highly significant because his thought provided the controlling notions of modern
discourse: the primacy oJ'the subject and the preeminence of representation. Descartes is widely
regarded as the founder of modern philosophy not simply because his philosophical outlook was
profoundly affected by the scientific revolution, but, more important, because he associated the
scientific aim of predicting and explaining the world with the philosophical aim of picturing and
representing the world. In this view, the fruits of scientific research do not merely provide more
useful ways for human beings to cope with reality; such research also yields a true copy of
reality. Descartes's conception of philosophy as a tortuous move from the subject to objects,
from the veil of ideas to the external world, from immediate awareness to extended substances,
from self-consciousness to things in space and ultimately from doubt to certainty was motivated
primarily by an attempt to provide a theoretical basis for the legitimacy of modern science.
Martin Heidegger made this crucial connection between Cartesian philosophy and modern
science in his famous essay "The Age of the World View":
We are reflecting on the nature of modern science in order to find its metaphysical basis. What
conception of the existent and what concept of truth cause science to become research?
Understanding as research holds the existent to account on the question of how and how far it can
be put at the disposal of available "representation." Research has the existent at its disposal if it
can either calculate it in advance, in its future course, or calculate it afterwards as past. Nature
and history become the object of expository representation....
This objectification of the existent takes place in a re-presentation which aims at presenting
whatever exists to itself in such a way that the calculating person can be secure, that is, certain
of the existent. Science as research is produced when and only when truth has been transformed
into such certainty of representation. In the metaphysics of Descartes the existent was defined for
the first time as objectivity of representation, and truth as certainty of representation.39
Bacon and Descartes had basic differences: Bacon held the inductive orientation and
Descartes the deductive viewpoint, Bacon the empiricist outlook and Descartes the rationalist
(mathematical) perspective. Despite these differences, both of these propagandists of modern
science agreed that scientific method provides a new paradigm of knowledge and that
observation and evidence are at the center of scientific method. In The .New Organon, Bacon
likened his ideal natural philosopher to the bee, which collects "its material from the flowers of
the garden and of the field" and digests it "by a power of its own." In his Discourse on Method,
Descartes set forth as a rule that "observations" become "the more necessary the further we
advance in knowledge." And, as D'Alembert acknowledged in The Encyclopedia, both Bacon
and Descartes "introduced the spirit of experimental sci- ence."40
The last major historical process that circumscribed and determined the metaphors, notions,


--- PAGE 80 ---
categories and norms of modern discourse was the classical revival. This classical revival-in
response to medieval mediocrity and religious dogmatism-was initiated in the Early
Renaissance (1300-1500), principally with humanist studies in Roman art and Latin literature,
such as Giotto in painting, Petrarch in letters and Dufay in music. This revival intensified during
the High Re naissance (1500-1530), with Da Vinci, Raphael, Bramante and the early
Michelangelo in the arts; Ariosto, Rabelais and Erasmus in literature; andJosquin and Lassus in
music. The revival mellowed in the Mannerist era (1530-1600), as illustrated by El Greco,
Tintoretto and the later Michelangelo in the arts; Montaigne, Cervantes and Shakespeare in
literature; and Marenzio, Gabrieli and Frescobaldi in music. The revival was strengthened in the
Baroque period (1600-1750), as seen in the works of Velasquez and Rembrandt in the arts;
Racine, Milton and Vondel in literature; and Bach and Handel in music. The classical revival
culminated in the neoclassical movement in the middle of the eighteenth century, with the
paintings of David and Ingres, the lyrics of Holderlin, the tragedies of Alfieri, the verse and
prose of Landor and the music of Haydn and Mozart. The Enlightenment revolt against the
authority of the church and the search for models of unrestrained criticism led to a highly
charged recovery of classical antiquity, and especially to a new appreciation and appropriation
of the artistic and cultural heritage of ancient Greece.
For our purposes, the classical revival is important because it infuses Greek ocular metaphors
and classical ideals of beauty, proportion and moderation into the beginnings of modern
discourse. Greek ocular metaphors-Eye of the Mind, Mind as Mirror of Nature, Mind as Inner
Arena with its Inner Observer-dominate modern discourse in the West.`t' Coupled with the
Cartesian notion of knowledge as inner representation, modern philosophical inquiry is saddled
with the epistemological model of intellect (formerly Plato's and Aristotle's Nous, now
Descartes's Inner Eye) inspecting entities modeled on retinal images, with the Eye of the Mind
viewing representations in order to find some characteristic that would testify to their fidelity.
The creative fusion of scientific investigation, Cartesian philosop y, Greek ocular metaphors
and classical aesthetic and cultural ideals constitutes the essential elements of modern discourse
in the West. In short, modern discourse rests upon a conception of truth and knowledge governed
by an ideal value-free subject engaged in observing, comparing, ordering and measuring in order
to arrive at evidence sufficient to make valid inferences, confirm speculative hypotheses, deduce
error-proof conclusions and verify true representations of reality.
THE EMERGENCE OF MODERN RACISM: THE FIRST STAGE
The recovery of classical antiquity in the modern West produced what I shall call a "normative
gaze," namely, an ideal from which to order and compare observations. This ideal was drawn
primarily from classical aesthetic values of beauty, proportion and human form and classical
cultural standards of moderation, selfcontrol and harmony.42 The role of classical aesthetic and
cultural norms in the emergence of the idea of white supremacy as an object of modern discourse
cannot be underestimated.
These norms were consciously projected and promoted by many influential Enlightenment
writers, artists and scholars, of whom the most famous was J. J. Winckelmann. In his widely
read book, History of Ancient Art, Winckelmann portrayed ancient Greece as a world of


--- PAGE 81 ---
beautiful bodies. He laid down rules-in art and aesthetics-that should govern the size of eyes and
eyebrows, of collarbones, hands, feet and especially noses. He defined beauty as noble
simplicity and quiet grandeur. In a celebrated passage he wrote:
As the depth of the ocean always remains calm however much the surface may be agitated, so
does the expression in the figures of the Greeks reveal a great and composed soul in the midst of
passions.43
Although Winckelmann was murdered in middle life, never set foot in Greece and saw almost
no original Greek art (only one exhibition of Greek art in Munich), he viewed Greek beauty and
culture as the ideal or standard against which to measure other peoples and cultures.
Winthrop Jordan and Thomas Gossett have shown that there are noteworthy premodern racist
viewpoints aimed directly and indirectly at nonwhite, especially black, people.44 For example,
in 1520 Paracelsus held that black and primitive peoples had a separate origin from Europeans.
In 1591, Giordano Bruno made a similar claim, but had in mind principally Jews and
Ethiopians. And Lucilio Vanini posited that Ethiopians had apes for ancestors and had once
walked on all fours. Since theories of the separate origin of races were in disagreement with the
Roman Catholic church, Bruno and Vanini underwent similar punishment: Both were burned at
the stake. Of course, biblically based accounts of racial inferiority flourished, but the authority
of the church prohibited the proliferation of nonreligious, that is, protomodern, accounts of racial
inferiority.
What is distinctive about the role of classical aesthetic and cultural norms at the advent of
modernity is that they provided an acceptable authority for the idea of white supremacy, an
acceptable authority that was closely linked with the major authority on truth and knowledge in
the modern world, namely, the institution ofscience. In order to see how this linkage took place,
let us examine the categories and aims of the major discipline that promoted this authority, that
is, those of natural history.
The principal aim of natural history is to observe, compare, measure and order animals and
human bodies (or classes of animals and human bodies) based on visible, especiallyphysical,
characteristics. These characteristics permit one to discern identity and difference, equality and
inequality, beauty and ugliness among animals and human bodies.
The governing categories of natural history are preeminently classcatory cate gories-that is,
they consist of various taxonomies in the form of tables, catalogs, indexes and inventories which
impose some degree of order or representational schema on a broad field of visible
characteristics. Observation and dJerentness are the essential guiding notions in natural history.
Foucault wrote:
Natural history has as a condition of its possibility the common affinity of things and language
with representation; but it exists as a task only in so far as things and language happen to be
separate. It must therefore reduce this distance between them so as to bring language as close as
possible to the observing gaze, and the things observed as close as possible to words. Natural
history is nothing more than the nomination of the visible....


--- PAGE 82 ---
Natural history ... covers a series of complex operations that introduce the possibility of a
constant order into a totality of representations. It constitutes a whole domain of empiricity as at
the same time describable and orderable.45
The initial basis for the idea of white supremacy is to be found in the classificatory categories
and the descriptive, representational, order-imposing aims of natural history. The captivity of
natural history to what I have called the "normative gaze" signifies the first stage of the
emergence of the idea of white supremacy as an object of modern discourse. More specifically
(and as Ashley Montagu has tirelessly argued), the genealogy of racism in the modern West is
inseparable from the appearance of the classificatory category of race in natural history.
The category of race-denoting primarily skin color-was first employed as a means of
classifying human bodies by Francois Bernier, a French physician, in 1684. He divided
humankind into basically four races: Europeans, Africans, Orientals, and Lapps.`'' The first
authoritative racial division of humankind is found in the influential Natural System (1735) of
the most preeminent naturalist of the eighteenth century, Carolus Linnaeus. For Linnaeus, species
were fixed in number and kind; they were immutable prototypes. Varieties, however, were
members of a species that might change in appearance. The members of a species produced
fertile offspring; interfertility was the test for the division of species. There were variations of
kind within a species; the races were a prime example. For Linnaeus, there were four races:
Homo Europaeus, Homo Asiaticus, Homo Afer, and Homo Americanus.
Winthrop Jordan has argued that Linnaeus did not subscribe to a hierarchical ranking of races,
but rather to "one chain of universal being." Jordan states:
It was one thing to classify all living creation and altogether another to arrange it in a single
great hierarchy; and when Linnaeus undertook the first of these tasks he was not thereby forced
to attempt the latter. In the many editions of the Systema Naturae he duly catalogued the various
kinds of men, yet never in a hierarchic manner.41
Yet it is quite apparent that Linnaeus implicitly evaluated the observable characteristics of the
racial classes of people, especially those pertaining to character and disposition. For example,
compare Linnaeus's description of the European with the African:
European. White, Sanguine, Brawny. Hair abundantly flowing. Eyes blue. Gentle, acute,
inventive. Covered with close vestments. Governed by customs.
African. Black, Phlegmatic, Relaxed. Hair black, frizzled. Skin silky. Nose flat. Lips tumid.
Women's bosom a matter of modesty. Breasts give milk abundantly. Crafty, indolent. Negligent.
Anoints himself with grease. Governed by caprice.48
Linnaeus's use of evaluative terms revealed, at the least, an implicit hierarchy by means of
personal preference. It also is important to note that he included some remarks about the African
woman, but that he said nothing about the European woman (nor the American and Asiatic
woman). It also is significant that in the 1750s when he first acknowledged that hybridization of
species occurs, he chose black people and apes as the probable candidates, while restricting


--- PAGE 83 ---
such unions to black women and male apes.
Georges Louis Leclerc de Buffon accepted hybridization without question in his famous
.Natural History of Mau (1778). Although Buffon, like Linnaeus, viewed races as mere chance
variations, he held that white was "the real and natural color of man." Black people and other
races were variations of this natural color, yet somehow not members of a different species. He
remained uncertain about the objective reality of species. Buffon believed that black skin was
caused by hot climate and would change if the climate became colder. Although he was a fervent
antislavery advocate, he claimed that black people had "little genius" and then added, "The
unfortunate negroes are endowed with excellent hearts, and possess the seeds of every human
virtue.." t~I
THE EMERGENCE OF MODERN RACISM: THE SECOND STAGE
In the works of Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, one of the founders of modern anthropology, the
aesthetic criteria and cultural ideals of Greece began to come to the forefront. Like Linnaeus and
Buffon, Blumenbach held that all human beings belonged to the same species and that races were
merely varieties. Yet contrary to the claims by Winthrop Jordan, Ashley Montagu, and Thomas
Gossett concern ing Blumenbach's opposition to hierarchic racial ranking or irritation at those
who use aesthetic standards for such ranking, Blumenbach praised the symmetrical face as the
most beautiful of human faces precisely because it approximated the "divine" works of Greek
art, and specifically the proper anatomical proportions found in Greek sculpture.50 Applying the
classical ideal of moderation, he claimed that the more moderate the climate, the more beautiful
the face. The net result was that since black people were farthest from the Greek ideal and
located in extremely hot climates, they were, by implication, inferior in beauty to Europeans.
The second stage of the emergence of the idea of white supremacy as an object of modern
discourse primarily occurred in the rise of phrenology (the reading of skulls) and physiognomy
(the reading of faces). These new disciplines-closely connected with anthropology-served as an
open platform for the propagation of the idea of white supremacy not principally because they
were pseudosciences, but, more important, because these disciplines acknowledged the
European valueladen character of their observations. This European value-laden character was
based on classical aesthetic and cultural ideals.
Pieter Camper, the Dutch anatomist, made aesthetic criteria the pillar of his chief discovery:
the famous "facial angle." Camper claimed that the "facial angle"-a measure of prognathism-
permitted a comparison of heads of human bodies by way of cranial and facial measurements.
For Camper, the ideal "facial angle" was a 100-degree angle which was achieved only by the
ancient Greeks. He openly admitted that this ideal conformed to Winckelmann's classical ideal
of beauty. Following Winckelmann, Camper held that Greek proportions and stature exemplified
beauty and embodied perfection. Camper further held that a beautiful face, beautiful body,
beautiful nature, beautiful character and beautiful soul were inseparable. He tried to show that
the "facial angle" of Europeans measured about 97 degrees and those of black people between
60 and 70 degrees, closer to the measurements of apes and dogs than to human beings.
Although many anthropologists readily accepted the "facial angle" as a scientific notion,51


--- PAGE 84 ---
Camper made it clear that his aim was not simply to contribute to the new discipline of
anthropology, but also to promote the love of classical antiquity to young artists and sculptors.
As George Mosse has noted, historians of race theories often overlook the fact that Camper and
many subsequent theoreticians of race and racism were trained as artists and writers. Camper
was a painter by training and, in fact, won the gold medal of the Amsterdam School of Art two
years before he published his work on the "facial angle.."52
Johann Kaspar Lavater, the father of physiognomy, explicitly acknowledged that the art of
painting was the mother of his new discipline. Moreau, an early editor of Lavater's work, clearly
noted that the true language of physiognomy was painting, because it spoke through images,
equally to the eye and to the spirit.53 This new discipline linked particular visible
characteristics of human bodies, especially those of the face, to the character and capacities of
human beings. This discipline openly articulated what many of the early naturalists and
anthropologists tacitly assumed: The classical ideals of beauty, proportion and moderation
regulated the classing and ranking of groups of human bodies. In short, physiognomy brought the
"normative gaze" into daylight.
Lavater believed that the Greek statues were the models of beauty. His description of the
desirable specimen-blue eyes, horizontal forehead, bent back, round chin and short brown hair-
resembled the beautiful person preferred by Camper. The common Greek ideals of beauty,
though slightly distorted (to say the least), were the principal source of this "normative gaze."
Lavater's new discipline was highly influential among scientists-for example, Jean Baptiste
Porta and Christian Meiners-and artists. His close friend, the famous Goethe, aided him in
editing and publishing his physiognomic formulations and findings, and Sir Walter Scott, among
others, popularized them in his novels.
Lavater's promotion of what I call the "normative gaze" consisted no longer of detailed
measurements, as was the case with the naturalists, but rather of the visual glance. He wrote:
"Trust your first quick impression, for it is worth more than what is usually called
observation.."54 Therefore it is not surprising that Lavater put forth an elaborate theory of noses,
the most striking member of the face. Neither is it surprising that subsequent classifications of
noses, based on Lavater's formulations, associate Roman and Greek noses with conquerors and
persons of refinement and taste.
The next and last step we shall consider in this genealogy of racism in lateseventeenth- and
eighteenth-century Europe is the advent of phrenology, the new discipline holding that human
character could be read through the shape of the human head. Franz Joseph Gall, a highly
regarded German physician, argued in 1796 that the inner workings of the brain could be
determined by the shape of the skull. For example, he associated an arched forehead with a
penchant for metaphysical speculation, a skull arched at the rear with love of fame and a skull
large at the base with a criminal disposition. In the nineteenth century, when racist ideology was
systematized, this new discipline took on a life of its own with Johann Kaspar Spurzheim,
Anders Retzius, Carl Gustav Carus and others; it also aided in allying modem racism with
nationalism and repressed sexuality in bourgeois morality.
THEORETICAL CONSEQUENCES: RESTRICTIVE POWERS IN MODERN


--- PAGE 85 ---
DISCOURSE
A major example of the way in which the restrictive powers of modem discourse delimit
theoretical alternatives and strategic options in regard to the idea of white supremacy is seen in
writings of radical environmentalists of the period-those one would expect to be open to the idea
of black equality in beauty, culture and intellectual capacity. Yet even these progressive
antislavery advocates remain captive to the "normative gaze."
The major opponent of predominant forms of a hierarchic ranking of races and the outspoken
proponent of intermarriage in the United States during this era, Samuel Stanhope Smith,
illustrates this captivity. In his day Smith stood at the pinnacle of American academia. He was
president of Princeton University and an honorary member of the American Philosophical
Society. He was awarded honorary degrees from Harvard and Yale. In his well-known Essays
of 1787 (and revised in 1810) Smith argued that humankind constituted one species and that
human variations could be accounted for in reference to three natural causes: "climate," "state of
society" and "habits of living." He believed "that colour may be justly considered as an
universal freckle."15
The "normative gaze" operative in Smith's viewpoint is located, as in Buffon, in the
assumption that physical, especially racial, variations are always degenerate ones from an ideal
state. For Smith, this ideal state consisted of highly civilized white people. As Winthrop Jordan
notes, "Smith treated the complexion and physiognomy of the white man not merely as indication
of superiority but as the hallmark of civilization.."5' Smith justified this ideal standard and
legitimized his "normative gaze" by appealing to the classical ideals of beauty. In a patriotic
footnote he wrote:
It may perhaps gratify my countrymen to reflect that the United States occupy those latitudes that
have ever been most favourable to the beauty of the human form. When time shall have
accommodated the constitution of its new state, and cultivation shall have meliorated the
climate, the beauties of Greece and Circasia may be renewed in America; as there are not a few
already who rival those of any quarter of the globe.57
Smith's radical environmentalism (along with his adherence to Greek aesthetic ideals) led him
to adopt the most progressive and sympathetic alternative for promoting the welfare of black
people permissible within the structure of modern discourse: integration, which upljiis black
people, assimilation, which civilizes black people and intermarriage, which ensures less
Negroid features in the next generation. For example, Smith wrote:
The great difference between the domestic and field slaves gives reason to believe that, if they
were perfectly free, enjoyed property, and were admitted to a liberal participation of the society
rank and privileges of their masters, they would change their African peculiarities much
faster.58
This theoretical alternative was taken to its logical consequence by the distinguished
American antislavery advocate, publicizer of talented black writers, and eminent physician
Benjamin Rush. This logical consequence was the elimination of the skin color of black people.


--- PAGE 86 ---
In a paper entitled "Observations Intended to Favour a Supposition that the Black Color (As it is
called) of the Negroes is Derived From the Leprosy," Rush denounced the idea of white
supremacy, then stated: "Is the color of Negroes a disease? Then let science and humanity
combine their efforts and endeavor to discover a remedy for it." In one bold stroke, Rush
provided grounds for promoting abolitionism, opposing intermarriage (who wants to marry
diseased persons!) and supporting the Christian unity of humankind. In his opinion, his viewpoint
also maximized the happiness of black and white people:
To encourage attempts to cure this disease of the skin in Negroes, let us recollect that by
succeeding in them, we shall produce a large portion of happiness in the world....
Secondly, we shall add greatly to their happiness, for however well they appear to be satisfied
with their color, there are many proofs of their preferring that of the white people.60
RACISM IN THE ENLIGHTENMENT
The intellectual legitimacy of the idea of white supremacy, though grounded in what we now
consider marginal disciplines (especially in its second stage), was pervasive. This legitimacy
can be illustrated by the extent to which racism permeated the writings of the major figures of the
Enlightenment. It is important to note that the idea of white supremacy not only was accepted by
these figures, but, more important, it was accepted by them without their having to put forward
their own arguments to just it. Montesquieu and Voltaire of the French Enlightenment, Hume and
Jefferson of the Scotch and the American Enlightenment, and Kant of the German Enlightenment
not merely held racist views; they also uncriticallyduring this age of criticism-believed that the
authority for these views rested in the domain of naturalists, anthropologists, physiognomists and
phrenologists.
Montesquieu's satirical remarks in Spirit of the Laws about black people (and his many
revisions of these remarks) may seem to suggest an equivocal disposition toward the idea of
white supremacy. Yet his conclusion leaned toward support of the idea:
It is impossible for us to suppose that these beings should be men; because if we supposed them
to be men, one would begin to believe we ourselves were not Christians."
Voltaire's endorsement of the idea of white supremacy was unequivocal. In his essay "The
People of America," he claimed that black people (and Indians) were distinct species from
Europeans:
The Negro race is a species of men as different from ours as the breed of spaniels is from that of
greyhounds. The mucous membrane, or network, which nature has spread between the muscles
and the skin, is white in us and black or coppercolored in them....
If their understanding is not of a different nature from ours, it is at least greatly inferior. They are
not capable of any great application or association of ideas, and seemed formed neither for the
advantages nor the abuses of philosophy-62


--- PAGE 87 ---
Hume's racism was notorious; it served as a major source of proslavery arguments and
antiblack education propaganda. In his famous footnote to his essay "Of National Characters," he
stated:
I am apt to suspect the negroes, and in general all the other species of men (for there are four or
five different kinds) to be naturally inferior to the whites. There never was a civilized nation of
any other complexion than white, nor even any individual eminent either in action or speculation.
No ingenious manufactures amongst them, no arts, no sciences...
In Jamaica indeed they talk of one negroe as a man of learning; but 'tis likely he is admired for
very slender accomplishments, like a parrot, who speaks a few words plainly.s;
Jefferson arrived at mildly similar conclusions in his Notes on Virginia. Regarding the
intellectual capacities of black people, he wrote:
Comparing them by their faculties of memory, reason, and imagination, it appears to me, that in
memory they are equal to the whites; in reason much inferior ... and that in imagination they are
dull, tasteless and anomalous.... Never yet could I find that a black had uttered a thought above
the level of plain narration; never see even an elementary trait of painting or sculpture.64
Finally, Kant, whose views were based heavily on Hume's claims, held that "the negroes of
Africa have by nature no feeling that rises above the trifling." In his Observations on the Feeling
of the Beautiful and Sublime, Kant noted:
Mr. Hume challenges anyone to cite a simple example in which a negro has shown talents, and
asserts that among the hundreds of thousands of blacks who are transported elsewhere from their
countries, although many of them have even been set free, still not a single one was ever found
who presented anything great in art or science or any other praiseworthy quality, even though
among the whites some continually rise aloft from the lowest rabble, and through superior gifts
earn respect in the world. So fundamental is the difference between the two races of man, and it
appears to be as great in regard to mental capacities as in color.65
Kant further revealed his racist views when, in reply to advice that a black person gave to
Father Labat, he wrote,
And it might be that there was something in this which perhaps deserved to be considered; but in
short, this fellow was quite black from head to foot, a clear proof that what he said was
stupid.66
THE EMERGENCE OF MODERN RACISM: INEVITABLE OR CONTINGENT?
The emergence of the idea of white supremacy as an object of modern discourse seems
inevitable in that, besides the practical need to justify nonwhite domination (especially in the
early nineteenth century), the only available theoretical alternative for the unhampered search for
truth and knowledge in the modern West consisted of detailed observation, measurement,
comparison and ordering of the natural and human kingdom by autonomous subjects in the light


--- PAGE 88 ---
of the aesthetic and cultural ideals of classical antiquity. Given the Enlightenment obsession with
criticism, especially criticism of the church and religion, the past was divided into four major
epochs:
[T]he great river civilizations of the Near East; Ancient Greece and Rome; the Christian
millennium; and modern times, beginning with the "revival of letters." These four epochs were
rhythmically related to each other: the first and third were paired off as ages of myth, belief and
superstition, while the second and fourth were ages of rationality, science and Enlightenment.67
The implications of Frank Snowden's thesis in his book Blacks in Antiquity: Ethiopians in the
Greco-Roman Experience call into question the notion that the Enlightenment recovery of
classical antiquity-its aesthetic and cultural ideals-inevitably required, on the discursive level,
the emergence of the idea of white supremacy as an object of modern discourse. Snowden's
thesis is that racial prejudice did not exist in classical antiquity. He claims that in the first major
encounter in European records of black people in a predominantly white society the idea of
black equality in beauty, culture and intellectual capacity was seriously entertained. In regard to
ideals of beauty, he notes that Herodotus called Ethiopians the most handsome people on earth;
Philostratus spoke of charming Ethiopians with their strange color; Pseudo-Callisthenes held the
black Queen of Meroe (visited by Alexander the Great) to be of wondrous beauty; and the poet
Martial, though pursued by a woman whiter than snow, sought a "super-black" woman.68
Snowden goes as far as to state: "On the whole ... the number of expressed preferences for
blackness and whiteness in classical literature is approximately equal.."60
If Snowden's viewpoint is correct, two noteworthy issues arise. First, it permits us to accent
the crucial role that the advent of modern science played in highlighting the physical
appearances ofpeople in relation to what it is to be human, beautiful, cultured and intelligent. In
this regard, the primacy of observation-the "gaze" character of scientific knowledge-may be as
important as the classical ideals latent in such observations at the inception of modern discourse.
Second, Snowden's claims require that I provide an account of why the Enlightenment revival of
classical antiquity ignored or excluded black statues and the proportions and measurements of
black figures as part of classical aesthetic ideals.
Snowden's thesis is highly plausible and extremely provocative, but I find it neither
persuasive nor convincing. His claims are too exorbitant, but they do contain kernels of truth.
Race indeed mattered much less in classical antiquity than it does in modern times. But race did
matter in classical antiquity, as can be seen from the evidence meticulously gathered by
Snowden, Sikes, Westermann and others.70 The crucial difference seems to be that racial
differences were justified on cultural grounds in classical antiquity, whereas at the inception of
modern discourse, racial differences are often grounded in nature, that is, ontology and later
biology.
And even if race prejudice did not exist in classical antiquity, the minority status of black
people in Greece and Rome still rendered black statues, proportions and measurements marginal
to cultural life. Hence, the black presence, though tolerated and at times venerated, was never an
integral part of the classical ideals of beauty.


--- PAGE 89 ---
The emergence of the idea of white supremacy as an object of modern discourse seems
contingent, in that there was no iron necessity at work in the complex configuration of metaphors,
notions, categories and norms that produce and promote this idea. There is an accidental
character to the discursive emergence of modern racism, a kind of free play of discursive
powers that produce and prohibit, develop and delimit the legitimacy and intelligibility of
certain ideas within a discursive space circumscribed by the attractiveness of classical
antiquity.
Yet even such claims about the contingency of the emergence of the idea of white supremacy
in the modern West warrant suspicion. This is so because, as we noted earlier, this genealogical
approach does not purport to be an explanation of the rise of modern racism, but rather a
theoretical inquiry into a particular neglected variable, i.e., the discursive factor, within a larger
explanatory model. This variable is significant because it not only precludes reductionist
treatments of modern racism; it also highlights the cultural and aesthetic impact of the idea of
white supremacy on black people. This inquiry accents the fact that the everyday life of black
people is shaped not simply by the exploitative (oligopolistic) capitalist system of production,
but also by cultural attitudes and sensibilities, including alienating ideals of beauty.
The idea of white supremacy is a major bowel unleashed by the structure of modern
discourse, a significant secretion generated from the creative fusion of scientific investigation,
Cartesian philosophy and classical aesthetic and cultural norms. Needless to say, the odor of this
bowel and the fumes of this secretion continue to pollute the air of our postmodern times.
Source: "American Africans in Conflict: Alienation in an Insecure Culture" and "A Genealogy of
Modern Racism," from Prophesy Deliverance: An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity, pp. 27-
65, 154-162. Copyright © 1982 by Cornel West. Used by permission of Westminster John Knox
Press.


--- PAGE 90 ---
BLACK S T R I V I N G S I N A T W I L I G H T 
C I V I L I Z A T I O N
If all of my writings but one had to disappear, this essay is the one piece I hope would survive.
Its fundamental point of the basic full fledged humanity of black people continuous with that of
others and Du Bois c lifelong effort to convince the West of'this basic truth are at the core of my
work and life. Needless to say, this essay is my first and only sustained encounter with the
greatest fall black intellectuals-Du Bois. Yet he and I are birds of very dfferent feathers. My
freestyle, California spirit stands in stark contrast to his austere, New England soul. My
Chekhovian Christian sensibilities rooted in gut-bucket blues and jazz dispositions violently
clash with his Enlightenment and Victorian sentiments based on his Fisk, Harvard, Berlin,
Atlanta and New York experiences. T put it bluntly, I am much closer and proudly so) to the funk
of'a James Brown or George Clinton, the soul Y 'a Curtis Mayfield, Richard Pryor or Aretha
Franklin than he. Yet we remain soul mates in our struggle for oppressed peoples, especially
black humanity. I thank my close friend and brother Skip Gates for suggesting I write this essay
on Du Bois and modernity.
In memory of my beloved father, Clifton L. West (1928-1994)
How shall Integrity face Oppression? What shall Honesty do in the face of Deception, Decency in the
face of Insult, Self-Defense before Blows? How shall Desert and Accomplishment meet Despising,
Detraction and Lies? What shall Virtue do to meet Brute Force?
-W. E. B. Du Bois
The hatred and contempt of the oppressed masses are increasing, and the physical and moral forces of
the wealthy are weakening; the deception on which everything depends is wearing out, and the
wealthy classes have nothing to console themselves with in this mortal danger. T return to the old
ways is not possible; only one thing is left fr those who do not wish to change their way of life, and
that is to hope that "things will last my time "-after that let happen what may. That is what the blind
crowd of the rich are doing, but the danger is ever growing and the terrible catastrophe draws near.
-LEO TOLSTOY
What we need are books that hit us like a most pailful misfortune, like the death of someone we loved
more than we love ourselves, that make us feel as though we had been banished to the woods, far
from any human presence, like a suicide. A book must be the ax for the frozen sea within us.
-FRANZ KAFKA
SpeakBut keep yes and no unsplit. And give your say this meaning: Give it the shade.
-PAUL CELAN
W. E. B. Du Bois is the towering black scholar of the twentieth century. The scope of his
interests, the depth of his insights and the sheer majesty of his prolific writings bespeak a level


--- PAGE 91 ---
of genius unequaled among modem black intellectuals. Yet, like all of us, Du Bois was a child of
his age. He was shaped by the prevailing presuppositions and prejudices of modem Euro-
American civilization. And despite his lifelong struggle-marked by great courage and sacrifice-
against white supremacy and for the advancement of Africans around the world, he was, in style
and substance, a proud black man of letters primarily influenced by nineteenthcentury Euro-
American traditions.
For those of us interested in the relation of white supremacy to modernity (African slavery in
the New World and European imperial domination of most of the rest of the world) or the
consequences of the construct of "race" during the Age of Europe (1492-1945), the scholarly and
literary works of Du Bois are indispensable. For those of us obsessed with alleviating black
social misery, the political texts of Du Bois are insightful and inspiring. In this sense, Du Bois is
the brook of fire through which we all must pass in order to gain access to the intellectual and
political weaponry needed to sustain the radical democratic tradition in our time.
Yet even this great titan of black emancipation falls short of the mark. This is not to deny the
remarkable subtlety of his mind or the undeniable sincerity of his heart. The grand example of
Du Bois remains problematic principally owing to his inadequate interpretation of the human
condition and his inability to immerse himself fully in the rich cultural currents of black
everyday life. His famous notion of the Talented Tenth-including his revised version-reveals this
philosophic inadequacy and personal inability.
What does it mean to claim that Du Bois put forward an inadequate interpretation of the human
condition or that he failed to immerse himself fully in the cultural depths of black everyday life?
Are these simply rhetorical claims devoid of content-too abstract to yield conclusions and too
general to evaluate? Are some interpretations of the human condition and cultural ways of life
really better than others? If so, why? These crucial questions sit at the center of my critique of
Du Bois, because they take us to the heart of black life in the profoundly decadent American
civilization at the end of the twentieth century-a ghastly century whose levels of barbarity,
bestiality and brutality are unparalleled in human history.
My assessment of Du Bois primarily concerns his response to the problem of evil-to
undeserved harm, unjustified suffering and unmerited pain. Do his evolving worldview, social
analysis and moral vision enable us to understand and endure this "first century of world wars"
(Muriel Rukeyser's apt phrase),' in which nearly 200 million fellow human beings have been
murdered in the name of some pernicious ideology? Does his work contain the necessary
intellectual and existential resources enabling us to confront the indescribable agony and
unnameable anguish likely to be unleashed in the twenty-first century-the first century involving a
systemic gangsterization of everyday life, shot through with revitalized tribalisms-under the
aegis of an uncontested, fast-paced global capitalism? As with any great figure, to grapple with
Du Bois is to wrestle with who we are, why we are what we are and what we are to do about it.
Du Bois was first and foremost a black New England Victorian seduced by the Enlightenment
ethos and enchanted with the American Dream. His interpretation of the human condition-that is,
in part, his idea of who he was and could be-was based on his experiences and, most
importantly, on his understanding of those experiences through the medium of an Enlightenment


--- PAGE 92 ---
zoorldview that promoted Victorian strategies in order to realize an American optimism;
throughout this essay, I shall probe these three basic foundations of his perspective. Like many of
the brilliant and ambitious young men of his time, he breathed the intoxicating fumes of
"advanced" intellectual and political culture. Yet in the face of entrenched evil and demonic
power, Du Bois often found himself either shipwrecked in the depths of his soul or barely afloat
with less and less wind in his existential sails.
My fundamental problem with Du Bois is his inadequate grasp of the tragicomic sense of life-
a refusal candidly to confront the sheer absurdity of the human condition. This tragicomic sense-
tragicomic rather than simply "tragic," because even ultimate purpose and objective order are
called into question-propels us toward suicide or madness unless we are buffered by ritual,
cushioned by community or sustained by art. Du Bois's inability to immerse himself in black
everyday life precluded his access to the distinctive black tragicomic sense and black encounter
with the absurd. He certainly saw, analyzed and empathized with black sadness, sorrow and
suffering. But he didn't feel it in his bones deeply enough, nor was he intellectually open enough
to position himself alongside the sorrowful, suffering, yet striving ordinary black folk.2 Instead,
his own personal and intellectual distance lifted him above them even as he addressed their
plight in his progressive writings. Du Bois was never alienated by black people-he lived in
black communities where he received great respect and admiration. But there seemed to be
something in him that alienated ordinary black people. In short, he was reluctant to learn
fundamental lessons about life-and about himself-from them. Such lessons would have required
that he-at least momentarily-believe that they were or might be as wise, insightful and
"advanced" as he; and this he could not do.
Du Bois's Enlightenment worldview-his first foundation-prohibited this kind of understanding.
Instead, he adopted a mild elitism that underestimated the capacity of everyday people to "know"
about life. In "The Talented Tenth," he claims, "knowledge of life and its wider meaning, has
been the point of the Negro's deepest ignorance."3 In his classic book The Souls of Black Folk,
there are eighteen references to "black, backward, and ungraceful" folk, including a statement of
his intent "to scatter civilization among a people whose ignorance was not simply of letters, but
of life itself."4
My aim is not to romanticize those whom Sly Stone calls "everyday people" or to cast them as
the sole source of wisdom. The myths of the noble savage and the wise commoner are simply the
flip sides of the Enlightenment attempts to degrade and devalue everyday people. Yet Du Bois-
owing to his Puritan New England origins and Enlightenment values-found it difficult not to
view common black folk as some degraded "other" or "alien"-no matter how hard he resisted.
His honest response to a church service in the backwoods of Tennessee at a "Southern Negro
Revival" bears this out:
A sort of suppressed terror hung in the air and seemed to seize us,-a pythian madness, a
demoniac possession, that lent terrible reality to song and word. The black and massive form of
the preacher swayed and quivered as the words crowded to his lips and flew at us in singular
eloquence. The people moaned and fluttered, and then the gaunt-cheeked brown woman beside
me suddenly leaped straight into the air and shrieked like a lost soul, while round about came


--- PAGE 93 ---
wail and groan and outcry, and a scene of human passion such as I had never conceived before.
Those who have not thus witnessed the frenzy of a Negro revival in the untouched backwoods of
the South can but dimly realize the religious feeling of the slave; as described, such scenes
appear grotesque and funny, but as seen they are awful.5
Du Bois's intriguing description reminds one of an anthropologist visiting some strange and
exotic people whose rituals suggest not only the sublime, but also the satanic.'' The "awfulness"
of this black church service, similar to that of my own black Baptist tradition, signifies for him
both dread and fear, anxiety and disgust. In short, a black ritualistic explosion of energy
frightened this black rationalist. It did so not simply because the folk seem so coarse and
uncouth, but also because they are out of control, overpowered by something bigger than
themselves. This clearly posed a threat to him.
Like a good Enlightenment philosophe, Du Bois pits autonomy against authority, self-mastery
against tradition. Autonomy and self-mastery connote selfconsciousness and self-criticism;
authority and tradition suggest blind deference and subordination. Self-consciousness and self-
criticism yield cosmopolitanism and highbrow culture. Authority and tradition reinforce
provincialism and lowbrow culture. The educated and chattering class-the Talented Tenth-are
the agents of sophistication and mastery, while the uneducated and moaning classthe backward
masses-remain locked in tradition; the basic role of the Talented Tenth is to civilize and refine,
uplift and elevate the benighted masses.?
For Du Bois, education was the key. Ignorance was the major obstacle-black ignorance and
white ignorance. If the black masses were educated-in order to acquire skills and culture-black
America would thrive. If white elites and masses were enlightened, they would not hate and fear
black folk. Hence America-black and white-could be true to its democratic ideals. "The Negro
Problem was in my mind a matter of systematic investigation and intelligent understanding. The
world was thinking wrong about race, because it did not know. The ultimate evil was stupidity.
The cure for it was knowledge based on scientific investigation."8
This Enlightenment naivete-not only in regard to white supremacy, but with respect to any
form of personal and institutional evil-was momentarily shaken by a particular case involving
that most peculiar American institution-lynching.
At the very time when my studies were most successful, there cut across this plan which I had as
a scientist, a red ray which could not be ignored. I remember when it first, as it were, startled
me to my feet: a poor Negro in central Georgia, Sam Hose, had killed his landlord's wife. I
wrote out a careful and reasoned statement concerning the evident facts and started down to the
Atlanta Constitution office.... I did not get there. On the way news met me: Sam Hose had been
lynched, and they said that his knuckles were on exhibition at a grocery store farther down on
Mitchell Street, along which I was walking. I turned back to the university. I began to turn aside
from my work....
Two considerations thereafter broke in upon my work and eventually disrupted it: first, one
could not be a calm, cool, and detached scientist while Negroes were lynched, murdered and


--- PAGE 94 ---
starved; and secondly, there was no such definite demand for scientific work of the sort that I
was doing....
Then, in the very next month, Du Bois lost his eighteen-month-old son, Burghardt, to
diphtheria.10 If ever Du Bois was forced to confront the tragedy of life and the absurdity of
existence, it was in the aftermath of this loss, which he describes in his most moving piece of
writing, "Of the Passing of the First-Born," in The Souls of Black Folk. In this powerful elegiac
essay, Du Bois not only mourns his son, but speaks directly to death itself-as Prometheus to Zeus
or Jesus to his Heavenly Father."
But hearken, 0 Death! Is not this my life hard enough,-is not that dull land that stretches its
sneering web about me cold enough,-is not all the world beyond these four little walls pitiless
enough, but that thou must needs enter here,-thou, 0 Death? About my head the thundering storm
beat like a heartless voice, and the crazy forest pulsed with the curses of the weak; but what
cared I, within my home beside my wife and baby boy? Wast thou so jealous of one little coign
of happiness that thou must needs enter there,-thou, 0 Death?12
This existential gall to go face-to-face and toe-to-toe with death in order to muster some hope
against hope is echoed in his most tragic characterization of the black sojourn in white-
supremacist America:
Within the Veil was he born, said I; and there within shall he live,-a Negro and a Negro's son.
Holding in that little head-ah, bitterly!-the unbowed pride of a hunted race, clinging with that tiny
dimpled hand-ah, wearily!-to a hope not hopeless but unhopeful, and seeing with those bright
wondering eyes that peer into my soul a land whose freedom is to us a mockery and whose
liberty a lie.13
What is most revealing in this most poignant of moments is Du Bois's refusal to linger with the
sheer tragedy of his son's death (a natural, not a social, evil)-with- out casting his son as an
emblem of the race or a symbol of a black deliverance to come.'4 Despite the deep sadness in
this beautiful piece of writing, Du Bois sidesteps Dostoyevsky's challenge to wrestle in a
sustained way with the irrevocable fact of an innocent child's death. Du Bois's rationalism
prevents him from wading in such frightening existential waters. Instead, Du Bois rushes to glib
theodicy, weak allegory and superficial symbolism. In other words, his Enlightenment
worldview falters in the face of death-the deaths of Sam Hose and Burghardt. The deep despair
that lurks around the corner is held at arm's length by rational attempts to boost his flagging
spirit.
Du Bois's principal intellectual response to the limits of his Enlightenment worldview was to
incorporate certain insights of Marx and Freud. Yet Marx's powerful critique of the unequal
relations of power between capitalists and the proletariat in the workplace and Freud's
penetrating attempt to exercise rational control over the irrational forces at work in self and
society only deepened Du Bois's commitment to the Enlightenment ethos. And though particular
features of this ethos are essential to any kind of intellectual integrity and democratic
visionfeatures such as self-criticism and self-development, suspicion of illegitimate authority
and suffocating tradition-the Enlightenment worldview held by Du Bois is ultimately inadequate,


--- PAGE 95 ---
and in many ways antiquated, for our time. The tragic plight and absurd predicament of Africans
here and abroad requires a more profound interpretation of the human condition-one that goes far
beyond the false dichotomies of expert knowledge versus mass ignorance, individual autonomy
versus dogmatic authority and self-mastery versus intolerant tradition. Our tragicomic times
require more democratic concepts of knowledge and leadership that highlight human fallibility
and mutual accountability, notions of individuality and contested authority that stress dynamic
traditions and ideals of self-realization within participatory communities.
The second fundamental pillar of Du Bois's intellectual project is his Victorian strategies-
namely, the ways in which his Enlightenment worldview can be translated into action. They rest
upon three basic assumptions. First, that the self-appointed agents of Enlightenment constitute a
sacrificial cultural elite engaged in service on behalf of the impulsive and irrational masses.
Second, that this service consists of shaping and molding the values and viewpoints of the
masses by managing educational and political bureaucracies (e.g., schools and political parties).
Third, that the effective management of these bureaucracies by the educated few for the benefit
of the pathetic many promotes material and spiritual progress. These assumptions form the
terrain upon which the Talented Tenth are to operate.
In fact, Du Bois's notion of the Talented Tenth is a descendant of those cultural and political
elites conceived by the major Victorian critics during the heyday of the British empire in its
industrial phase.15 S. T. Coleridge's secular clerisy, Thomas Carlyle's strong heroes and
Matthew Arnold's disinterested aliens all shun the superficial vulgarity of materialism and the
cheap thrills of hedonism in order to preserve and promote highbrow culture and to civilize and
contain the lowbrow masses. The resounding first and last sentences of Du Bois's essay "The
Talented Tenth" not only echo the "truths" of Victorian social criticism, they also bestow upon
the educated few a salvific role. "The Negro race, like all races, is going to be saved by its
exceptional men.."1e This bold statement is descriptive, prescriptive and predictive. It assumes
that the exceptional men of other races have saved their "race" (Gladstone in Britain, Menelik in
Ethiopia, Bismarck in Germany, Napoleon in France, Peter in Russia?). Here Du Bois claims
that exceptional black men ought to save their "race" and asserts that if any "race"-es- pecially
black people-is to be saved, exceptional men will do it. The patriarchal sensibilities speak for
themselves." They are unargued for, hence unacceptable.
Like a good Victorian critic, Du Bois argues on rational grounds for the legitimacy of his
cultural elite. They are worthy of leadership because they are educated and trained, refined and
civilized, disciplined and determined. Most important, they have "honesty of heart" and "purity
of motive." Contrast Matthew Arnold's disinterested aliens, "who are mainly led, not by their
class spirit, but by a general humane spirit, by the love of human perfection," in Culture and
Anarchy (1869) with Du Bois's Talented Tenth:
The men of culture are the true apostles of equality. The great men of culture are those who have
had a passion for diffusing, for making prevail, for carrying from one end of society to the other,
the best knowledge, the best ideas of their time, who have laboured to divest knowledge of all
that was harsh, uncouth, difficult, abstract, professional, exclusive; to humanize it, to make it
efficient outside the clique of the cultivated and learned, yet still remaining the best knowledge


--- PAGE 96 ---
and thought of the time, and a true source, therefore, of sweetness and light.'R
Who are to-day guiding the work of the Negro people? The "exceptions" of course.... A saving
remnant continually survives and persists, continually aspires, continually shows itself in thrift
and ability and character...
Can the masses of the Negro people be in any possible way more quickly raised than by the
effort and example of this aristocracy of talent and character? Was there ever a nation on God's
fair earth civilized from the bottom upward? Never; it is, ever was and ever will be from the top
downward that culture filters. The Talented Tenth rises and pulls all that are worth the saving up
to their vantage ground. This is the history of human progress; and the two historic mistakes
which have hindered that progress were the thinking first that no more could ever rise save the
few already risen; or second, that it would better the unrisen to pull the risen down.19
Just as Arnold seeks to carve out discursive space and a political mission for the educated
elite in the British empire somewhere between the arrogance and complacency of the aristocracy
and the vulgarity and anarchy of the working classes, Du Bois wants to create a new vocabulary
and social vocation for the black educated elite in America somewhere between the hatred and
scorn of the white-supremacist majority and the crudity and illiteracy of the black agrarian
masses. Yet his gallant efforts suffer from intellectual defects and historical misconceptions.
Let us begin with the latter. Is it true that in 1903 the educated elite were guiding the work of
the Negro people? Yes and no. Certainly the most visible national black leaders tended to be
educated black men, such as the ubiquitous Booker T. Washington and, of course, Du Bois
himself. Yet the two most effective political forms of organizing and mobilizing among black
people were the black women's club movement led by Ida B. Wells-Barnett and the migration
movement guided by Benjamin "Pap" Singleton, A. A. Bradley and Richard H. Cain.LO Both
movements were based in black civil society-that is, black civic associations like churches,
lodges, fraternal orders and sororities. Their fundamental goals were neither civil rights nor
social equality, but rather respect and dignity, land and selfdetermination. How astonishing-and
limiting-that Du Bois fails to mention and analyze these movements that will result in the great
Mary McLeod Bethune's educational crusade and the inimitable Marcus Garvey's Back-to-
Africa movement in a decade or so!
Regarding the intellectual defects of Du Bois's noble endeavor: First, he assumes that
highbrow culture is inherently humanizing, and that exposure to and immersion in great works
produce good people. Yet we have little reason to believe that people who delight in the works
of geniuses like Mozart and Beethoven or Goethe and Wordsworth are any more or less humane
than those who dance in the barnyards to the banjo plucking of nameless rural folk in Tennessee.
Certainly those fervent white supremacists who worship the Greek and Roman classics and
revel in the plays of the incomparable Shakespeare weaken his case.2' Second, Du Bois holds
that the educated elite can more easily transcend their individual and class interests and more
readily act on behalf of the common good than the uneducated masses. But is this so? Are they
not just as prone to corruption and graft, envy and jealousy, self-destructive passion and ruthless
ambition as everyone else? Were not Carlyle's great heroes, Cromwell and Napoleon, tyrants?
Was it not Arnold's disinterested aliens who promoted and implemented the inhumane policies


--- PAGE 97 ---
of the imperial British bureaucracies in India and Africa? Was not Du Bois himself both villain
and victim in petty political games as well as in the all-too-familiar social exclusions of the
educated elite?
Du Bois wisely acknowledges this problem in his 1948 revision of "The Talented Tenth":
When I came out of college into the world of work, I realized that it was quite possible that my
plan of training a talented tenth might put in control and power, a group of selfish, self-indulgent,
well-to-do men, whose basic interest in solving the Negro Problem was personal; personal
freedom and unhampered enjoyment and use of the world, without any real care, or certainly no
arousing care, as to what became of the mass of American Negroes, or of the mass of any
people. My Talented Tenth, I could see, might result in a sort of interracial free-for-all, with the
devil taking the hindmost and the foremost taking anything they could lay hands on.22
He then notes the influence of Marx on his thinking and adds that the Talented Tenth must not
only be talented, but have "expert knowledge" of modern economics, be willing to sacrifice and
plan effectively to institute socialist measures. Yet there is still no emphatic call for
accountability from below, or any grappling with the evil that lurks in the hearts of all of us. He
recognizes human selfishness as a problem without putting forward adequate philosophical
responses to it or institutional mechanisms to alleviate it. In the end, he throws up his hands and
gives us a grand either/or option. "But we must have honest men or we die. We must have
unselfish, far-seeing leadership or we fail."23
Victorian social criticism contains elements indispensable to future critical thought about
freedom and democracy in the twenty-first century. Most important, it elevates the role of public
intellectuals who put forward overarching visions and broad analyses based on a keen sense of
history and a subtle grasp of the way the world is going in the present. The rich tradition of
Victorian criticsThomas Carlyle, John Ruskin, Matthew Arnold, John Morley, William Morris,
and, in our own century, L. T. Hobhouse, J. A. Hobson, C. F. G. Masterman, R. H. Tawney,
Raymond Williams, E. P. Thompson, and others-stands shoulders above the parochial
professionalism of much of the academy today. In our era, scholarship is often divorced from
public engagement, and shoddy journalism often settles for the sensational and superficial
aspects of prevailing crises.24 As the distinguished European man of letters George Steiner
notes in regard to the academy:
Specialization has reached moronic vehemence. Learned lives are expended on reiterative
minutiae. Academic rewards go to the narrow scholiast, to the blinkered. Men and women in the
learned professions proclaim themselves experts on one author, in one brief historical period, in
one aesthetic medium. They look with contempt (and dank worry) on the "Generalist." ... It may
be that cows have fields. The geography of consciousness should be that of unfenced errance,
Montaigne's comely word.25
Yet the Victorian strategies of Du Bois require not piecemeal revision, but wholesale
reconstruction. A fuller understanding of the human condition should lead us far beyond any
notions of free-floating elites, suspicious of the tainted masses-elites who worship at the altar of
highbrow culture while ignoring the barbarity and bestiality in their own ranks. The fundamental


--- PAGE 98 ---
role of the public intellectual-distinct from, yet building on, the indispensable work of
academics, experts, analysts and pundits-is to create and sustain high-quality public discourse
addressing urgent public problems that enlightens and energizes fellow citizens, prompting them
to take public action. This role requires a deep commitment to the life of the mind-a perennial
attempt to clear our minds of cant (to use Samuel Johnson's famous formulation) -which serves
to shape the public destiny of a people. Intellectual and political leadership should be neither
elitist, nor populist; rather it ought to be democratic, in that each of us stands in public space,
without humiliation, to put forward our best visions and views for the sake of the public interest.
And these arguments are presented in an atmosphere of mutual respect and civic trust.
The last pillar of Du Bois's project is his American optimism. Like most intellectuals of the
New World, he was preoccupied with progress. And given his genuine commitment to black
advancement, this preoccupation is understandable. Yet, writing as he was in the early stages of
the consolidation of the American empire (some eight million people of color had been
incorporated after the SpanishAmerican War), when the United States itself was undergoing
geographical and economic expansion and millions of "new" Americans were being admitted
from eastern Europe, Du Bois tended to assume that U.S. expansionism was a sign of probable
American progress. In this sense, in his early and middle years, he was not only a progressivist,
but also a kind of American exceptionalist.213 It must be said, to be sure, that unlike most
American exceptionalists of his day, he considered the color line the major litmus test for the
country. Yet he remained optimistic about a multiracial democratic America.
Du Bois never fully grasped the deeply pessimistic view of American democracy behind the
Garvey movement.27 In fact, he never fully understood or appreciated the strong-though not
central-black nationalist strain in the black freedom movement. As much as he hated white
supremacy in America, he could never bring himself to identify intimately with the harsh words
of the great performing artist Josephine Baker, who noted in response to the East St. Louis riot of
July 1917, which left over two hundred black people dead and over six thousand homeless, "The
very idea of America makes me shake and tremble and gives me nightmares." Baker lived most
of her life in exile in France. Even when Du Bois left for Africa in 1961-as a member of a
moribund Communist Party-his attitude toward America was not that of an Elijah Muhammad or
a Malcolm X. He was still, in a significant sense, disappointed with America, and there is no
disappointment without some dream deferred. Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X were not
disappointed with America. As bona fide black nationalists, they had no expectations of a white-
supremacist civilization; they adhered neither to American optimism nor to exceptionalism.
Black nationalism is a complex tradition of thought and action, a tradition best expressed in
the numerous insightful texts of black public intellectuals like Maulana Karenga, Imamu Amiri
Baraka, Haki R. Madhubuti, Marimba Ani, and Molefi Asante. Black nationalists usually call
upon black people to close ranks, to distrust most whites (since the reliable whites are few and
relatively powerless in the face of white supremacy) and to promote forms of black self-love,
self-defense and self-determination. It views white supremacy as the definitive systemic
constraint on black cultural, political and economic development. More pointedly, black
nationalists claim that American democracy is a modern form of tyranny on the part of the white
majority over the black minority. For them, black sanity and freedom require that America not


--- PAGE 99 ---
serve as the major framework in which to understand the future of black people. Instead,
American civilization-like all civilizations-rises and falls, ebbs and flows. And owing to its
deep-seated racism, this society does not warrant black allegiance or loyalty. White supremacy
dictates the limits of the operation of American democracy-with black folk the indispensable
sacrificial lamb vital to its sustenance. Hence black subordination constitutes the necessary
condition for the flourishing of American democracy, the tragic prerequisite for America itself.
This is, in part, what Richard Wright meant when he noted, "The Negro is America's metaphor."
The most courageous and consistent of twentieth-century black nationalistsMarcus Garvey and
Elijah Muhammad-adamantly rejected any form of American optimism or exceptionalism. Du
Bois feared that if they were right, he would be left in a state of paralyzing despair, a kind of
despair that results not only when all credible options for black freedom in America are closed,
but also when the very framework needed to understand and cope with that despair is shattered.
The black nationalist challenge to Du Bois cuts much deeper than the rational and political
possibilities for change-it resides at the visceral and existential levels of what to do about "what
is" or when "what ought to be done" seems undoable. This frightening sense of foreboding
pervades much of black America today-a sense that fans and fuels black nationalism.
Du Bois's American optimism screened him from this dark night of the soul. His American
exceptionalism guarded him from that gray twilight between "nothing to be done" and "I can't go
on like this"-a Beckett-like dilemma in which the wait and search for Godot, or for freedom,
seem endless. This militant despair about the black condition is expressed in that most arresting
of black nationalist speeches by Rev. Henry Highland Garnet in 1843: "If we must bleed, let it
come all at once-rather die freemen than live to be slaves. It is impossible like the children of
Israel, to make a grand Exodus from the land of bondage. The pharaoh's on both sides of the
blood-red waters!"28
Du Bois's response to such despair is to say "we surely must do something"for such rebellion
is suicidal and the notion of a separate black nation quixotic. So, he seems to say, let us continue
to wait and search for Godot in America-even if it seems, with our luck, that all we get is
"Pozzo" (new forms of disrespect, disregard, degradation and defamation).
American optimism couched within the ideals of the American experiment contains crucial
components for any desirable form of black self-determination or modern nationhood: precious
standards of constitutional democracy, the rule of law, individual liberties and the dignity of
common folk. Yet American optimismin the ugly face of American white-supremacist practices-
warrants, if not outright rejection, at least vast attenuation. The twenty-first century will almost
certainly not be a time in which American exceptionalism will flower in the world or American
optimism will flourish among people of African descent.
If there are any historical parallels between black Americans at the end of the twentieth
century and other peoples in earlier times, two candidates loom large: Tolstoy's Russia and
Kafka's Prague-soul-starved Russians a generation after the emancipation of the serfs in 1861
and anxiety-ridden central European Jews a generation before the European Holocaust in the
1940s. Indeed, my major intellectual disappointment with the great Du Bois lies in the fact that
there are hardly any traces in his work of any serious grappling with the profound thinkers and


--- PAGE 100 ---
spiritual wrestlers in the modern West from these two groups-major figures obsessed with the
problem of evil in their time.
We see in Du Bois no engagement with Leo Tolstoy, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Ivan Turgenev,
Alexander Herzen, Lev Shestov and Anton Chekhov or Franz Kafka, Max Brod, Kurt Tucholsky,
Hermann Broch, Hugo Bergmann and Karl Kraus. These omissions are glaring because the
towering figures in both groups were struggling with political and existential issues similar to
those facing black people in America. For example, the Russian situation involved the humanity
of degraded impoverished peasants, the fragile stability of an identity-seeking empire and the
alienation of superfluous intellectuals; the central European Jewish circumstance, the humanity
of devalued middle-class Jews, the imminent collapse of a decadent empire and the militant
despair of self-hating intellectuals. The intellectual response on the part of the Russian authors
was what Hegel would call "world-historical"-they wrote many of the world's greatest novels,
short stories, essays and plays. The writers I cite put forward profound interpretations of the
human condition that rejected any Enlightenment worldview, Victorian strategy or worldly
optimism. And although the central Europeanjewish authors are often overlooked by
contemporary intellectuals-owing to a tendency to focus on western Europe-their intellectual
response was monumental. They composed many of this century's most probing and penetrating
novels, short stories, autobiographies and letters.
Both Russian and central European Jewish writers share deep elective affinities that underlie
their distinctive voices: the "wind of the wing of madness" (to use Baudelaire's phrase) beats
incessantly on their souls. The fear of impending social doom and dread of inevitable death
haunt them, and they search for a precious individuality in the face of a terror-ridden society and
a seductive (yet doubtful) nationalist option.' In short, fruitful comparisons may be made
between the Russian sense of the tragic and the central European Jewish sense of the absurd and
the black intellectual response to the African American predicament. Tolstoy's War and Peace
(1869), The Death ofIvan Ilych (1886) and "How Much Land Does a Man Need?" (1886) and
Chekhov's Three Sisters (1901)-the greatest novel, short story, brief tale and play in modern
Europe-and Kafka's "The Judgment" (1913), "The Metamorphosis" (1915), "In the Penal
Colony" (1919) and "The Burrow" (1923)-some of the grandest fictive portraits of twentieth-
century Europe-constitute the highest moments and most ominous murmurings in Europe before it
entered the ugly and fiery inferno of totalitarianism. Similarly, the intellectual response of
highbrow black artists-most of whom are musicians and often of plebeian origins-probe the
depths of a black sense of the tragic and absurd which yields a subversive joy and sublime
melancholia unknown to most in the New World. The form and content of Louis Armstrong's
"West End Blues," Duke Ellington's "Mood Indigo," John Coltrane's "Alabama" and Sarah
Vaughan's "Send in the Clowns" are a few of the peaks of the black cultural iceberg-towering
examples of soul-making and spiritual wrestling that crystallize the most powerful
interpretations of the human condition in black life. This is why the best of the black musical
tradition in the twentieth century is the most profound and poignant body of artistic works in our
time.
Like their Russian and central European Jewish counterparts, the black artists grapple with
madness and melancholia, doom and death, terror and horror, individuality and identity. Unlike


--- PAGE 101 ---
them, the black artists do so against the background of an African heritage that puts a premium on
voice and body, sound and silence, and the foreground is occupied by an American tradition that
highlights mobility and novelty, individuality and democracy. The explosive products of this
multilayered cultural hybridity-with its new diasporic notions of time and space, place and face-
take us far beyond Du Bois's enlightened optimism. Instead, the profound black cultural efforts to
express the truth of modern tragic existence and build on the ruins of modern absurd experiences
at the core of American culture take us to the end of this dreadful century. These black artistic
endeavors prefigure and pose the most fundamental and formidable challenges to a twilight
civilization-an American empire adrift on turbulent seas in a dark fog. William Faulkner, Mark
Twain, Thomas Pynchon and, above all, the incomparable Herman Melville-the only great Euro-
American novelists to be spoken of in the same breath as Tolstoy and Kafka, Armstrong and
Coltrane-grasp crucial aspects of this black condition, just as Richard Wright, Ralph Ellison,
James Baldwin and, preeminently, Toni Morrison guide us through the tragedies and absurdities
within the Veil (or behind the color curtain) to disclose on the page what is best revealed in
black song, speech, sermon, bodily performance and the eloquence of black silence. Yet despite
his shortcomings, the great Du Bois remains the springboard for any examination of black
strivings in American civilization.
ON BLACK STRIVINGS
Black strivings are the creative and complex products of the terrifying African encounter with
the absurd in America-and the absurd as America. Like any other group of human beings, black
people forged ways of life and ways of struggle under circumstances not of their own choosing.
They constructed structures of meaning and structures of feeling in the face of the fundamental
facts of human existence-death, dread, despair, disease and disappointment. Yet the specificity
of black culture-namely, those features that distinguish black culture from other cultures-lies in
both the African and American character of black people's attempts to sustain their mental sanity
and spiritual health, social life and political struggle in the midst of a slaveholding, white-
supremacist civilization that viewed itself as the most enlightened, free, tolerant and democratic
experiment in human history.
Any serious examination of black culture should begin with what W. E. B. Du Bois dubbed, in
Faustian terms, the "spiritual strivings" of black people-the dogged determination to survive and
subsist, the tenacious will to persevere, persist and maybe even prevail.30 These "strivings"
occur within the whirlwind of white supremacy-that is, as responses to the vicious attacks on
black beauty, black intelligence, black moral character, black capability and black possibility.
To put it bluntly, every major institution in American society-churches, universities, courts,
academies of science, governments, economies, newspapers, magazines, television, film and
others-attempted to exclude black people from the human family in the name of white-
supremacist ideology. This unrelenting assault on black humanity produced the fundamental
condition of black culture-that of black invisibility and namelessness.
This basic predicament exists on at least four levels-existential, social, political and
economic. The existential level is the most relevant here because it has to do with what it means
to be a person and live a life under the horrifying realities of racist assault. To be a black human


--- PAGE 102 ---
being under circumstances in which one's humanity is questioned is not only to face a difficult
challenge, but also to exercise a demanding discipline.
The sheer absurdity of being a black human being whose black body is viewed as an
abomination, whose black thoughts and ideas are perceived as debased and whose black pain
and grief are rendered invisible on the human and moral scale is the New World context in
which black culture emerged. Black people are first and foremost an African people, in that the
cultural baggage they brought with them to the New World was grounded in their earlier
responses to African conditions. Yet the rich African traditions-including the kinetic orality,
passionate physicality, improvisational intellectuality and combative spirituality-would undergo
creative transformation when brought into contact with European languages and rituals in the
context of the New World. For example, there would be no jazz without New World Africans
with European languages and instruments.
On the crucial existential level relating to black invisibility and namelessness, the first
difficult challenge and demanding discipline is to ward off madness and discredit suicide as a
desirable option. A central preoccupation of black culture is that of confronting candidly the
ontological wounds, psychic scars and existential bruises of black people while fending off
insanity and self-annihilation. Black culture consists of black modes of being-in-the-world
obsessed with black sadness and sorrow, black agony and anguish, black heartache and
heartbreak without fully succumbing to the numbing effects of such misery-to never allow such
misery to have the last word. This is why the "ur-text" of black culture is neither a word nor a
book, not an architectural monument or a legal brief. Instead, it is a guttural cry and a wrenching
moan-a cry not so much for help as for home, a moan less out of complaint than for recognition.
The most profound black cultural products John Coltrane's saxophone solos, James Cleveland's
gut gospels, Billie Holiday's vocal leaps, Rev. Gardner Taylor's rhapsodic sermons, James
Baldwin's poignant essays, Alvin Ailey's graceful dances, Toni Morrison's dissonant novels-
transform and transfigure in artistic form this cry and moan. The deep black meaning of this cry
and moan goes back to the indescribable cries of Africans on the slave ships during the cruel
transatlantic voyages to America and the indecipherable moans of enslaved Afro-Americans on
Wednesday nights or Sunday mornings near godforsaken creeks or on wooden benches at prayer
meetings in makeshift black churches. This fragile existential arsenal-rooted in silent tears and
weary lament-supports black endurance against madness and suicide. The primal black cries and
moans lay bare the profoundly tragicomic character of black life. Ironically, they also embody
the life-preserving content of black styles-creative ways of fashioning power and strength
through the body and language which yield black joy and ecstasy.
Du Bois captures one such primal scene of black culture at the beginning of The Souls of
Black Folk (1903), in chapter 1, "Of Our Spiritual Strivings." He starts with thirteen lines from
the poem "The Crying of Water" by Arthur Symons, the English symbolist critic and decadent
poet who went mad a few years after writing the poem. The hearts of human beings in a heartless
slave trade cry out like the sea: "All life long crying without avail, / As the water all night long
is crying to me."31
This metaphorical association of black hearts, black people and black culture with water (the


--- PAGE 103 ---
sea or a river) runs deep in black artistic expression-as in Langston Hughes's recurring refrain,
"My soul has grown deep like the rivers," in "The Negro Speaks of Rivers." Black striving
resides primarily in movement and motion, resilience and resistance against the paralysis of
madness and the stillness of death. As it is for Jim in Mark Twain's The Adventures
ofHuckleberry Finn (1885), the river-a road that moves-is the means by which black people can
flee from a menacing racist society.
Du Bois continues with the musical bars of the Negro spiritual "Nobody Knows the Trouble
I've Seen." This spiritual is known not simply for its plaintive melody, but also for its
inexplicable lyrical reversal:
This exemplary shift from a mournful brooding to a joyful praising is the product of courageous
efforts to look life's abyss in the face and keep "keepin' on." This struggle is sustained primarily
by the integrity of style, song and spirituality in a beloved community (e.g., Jesus' proclamation
of the Kingdom). It is rather like Ishmael's tragicomic "free and easy sort of genial, desperado
philosophy" in Moby-Dick, but it is intensified by the fiery art of Aretha Franklin's majestic
shouts for joy.
The first of Du Bois's own words in the text completes the primal scene of black culture:
Between me and the other world there is ever an unasked question: unasked by some through
feelings of delicacy; by others through the difficulty of rightly framing it. All, nevertheless,
flutter round it. They approach me in a half-hesitant sort of way, eye me curiously or
compassionately, and then, instead of saying directly, How does it feel to be a problem? they
say, I know an excellent colored man in my town; or, I fought at Mechanicsville; or, Do not these
Southern outrages make your blood boil'? At these I smile, or am interested, or reduce the
boiling to a simmer, as the occasion may require. To the real question, How does it feel to be a
problem? I answer seldom a word.
And yet, being a problem is a strange experience,-peculiar even for one who has never been
anything else, save perhaps in babyhood . . . . 33
This seminal passage spells out the basic components of black invisibility and namelessness:
black people as a problem people rather than people with problems; black people as
abstractions and objects rather than individuals and persons; black and white worlds divided by


--- PAGE 104 ---
a thick wall (or a "Veil') that requires role-playing and mask-wearing rather than genuine
humane interaction; black rage, anger andfury concealed in order to assuage white fear and
anxiety; and black people rootless and homeless on a perennial journey to discover who they are
in a society content to see blacks remain the permanent underdog.
To view black people as a "problem people" is to view them as an undifferentiated blob, a
homogeneous bloc or a monolithic conglomerate. Each black person is interchangeable,
indistinguishable or substitutable, since all black people are believed to have the same views
and values, sentiments and sensibilities. Hence one set of negative stereotypes holds for all of
them, no matter how high certain blacks may ascend in the white world (e.g., "savages in a suit
or suite"). And the mere presence of black bodies in a white context generates white unease and
discomfort, even among whites of goodwill.
This problematizing of black humanity deprives black people of individuality, diversity and
heterogeneity. It reduces black folk to abstractions and objects born of white fantasies and
insecurities-as exotic or transgressive entities, as hypersexual or criminal animals.3 t The
celebrated opening passage of Ralph Ellison's classic novel, Invisible Man (1952), highlights
this reduction:
I am an invisible man. No, I am not a spook like those who haunted Edgar Allan Poe; nor am I
one of your Hollywood-movie ectoplasms. I am a man of substance, of flesh and bone, fiber and
liquids-and I might even be said to possess a mind. I am invisible, understand, simply because
people refuse to see me. Like the bodiless heads you see sometimes in circus sideshows, it is as
though I have been surrounded by mirrors of hard, distorting glass. When they approach me they
see only my surroundings, themselves, or figments of their imagination-indeed, everything and
anything except me.35
This distorted perception-the failure to see the humanity and individuality of black people-has
its source in the historic "Veil" (slavery, Jim Crow, and segregation) that separates the black and
white worlds. Ironically, this refusal to see a people whose epidermis is most visible exists
alongside a need to keep tight surveillance over these people. This Veil not only precludes
honest communication between blacks and whites; it also forces blacks to live in two worlds in
order to survive. Whites need not understand or live in the black world in order to thrive. But
blacks must grapple with the painful "double-consciousness" that may result in "an almost
morbid sense of personality and a moral hesitancy which is fatal to self-confidence.."31' Du
Bois notes:
The worlds within and without the Veil of Color are changing, and changing rapidly, but not at
the same rate, not in the same way; and this must produce a peculiar wrenching of the soul, a
peculiar sense of doubt and bewilderment. Such a double life, with double thoughts, double
duties, and double social classes, must give rise to double words and double ideals, and tempt
the mind to pretence or to revolt, to hypocrisy or to radicalism.37
Echoing Paul Laurence Dunbar's famous poem "We Wear the Mask," Du Bois proclaims that
"the price of culture is a Lie.."38 Why? Because black people will not succeed in American
society if they are fully and freely themselves. Instead, they must "endure petty insults with a


--- PAGE 105 ---
smile, shut [their] eyes to wrong."39 They must not be too frank and outspoken and must never
fail to flatter and be pleasant in order to lessen white unease and discomfort. Needless to say,
this is not the raw stuff for healthy relations between black and white people.
Yet this suppression of black rage-the reducing "the boiling to a simmer"-back- fires in the
end. It reinforces a black obsession with the psychic scars, ontological wounds and existential
bruises that tend to reduce the tragic to the pathetic. Instead of exercising agency or engaging in
action against the odds, one may wallow in self-pity, acknowledging the sheer absurdity of it all.
After playing the role and wearing the mask in the white world, one may accept the white
world's view of one's self. As Du Bois writes: "It is a peculiar sensation, this double-
consciousness, this sense of always looking at one's self through the eyes of others, of measuring
one's soul by the tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity."411
Toni Morrison explores this dilemma of black culture through her moving portrayal of the
character of Sweet Home-a place that functions like a person (echoes of Thomas Hardy's Heath)
in her profound novel Beloved (1987), similar to Jean Toomer's Karintha and Fern in his
marvelous and magical text Cane (1923): "For the sadness was at her center, the desolated
center where the self that was no self made its home.."4'
This theme of black rootlessness and homelessness is inseparable from black namelessness.
When James Baldwin writes about these issues in Nobody Knows My Name (1961) and No
Name in the Street (1972), he is trying to explore effective ways to resist the white-supremacist
imposition of subordinate roles, stations and identities on blacks. He is attempting to devise
some set of existential strategies against the overwhelming onslaught of white dehumanization,
devaluation and degradation. The search for black space (home), black place (roots) and black
face (name) is a flight from the visceral effects of white supremacy. Toni Morrison characterizes
these efforts as products of a process of "dirtying you": "That anybody white could take your
whole self for anything that came to mind. Not just work, kill, or maim you, but dirty you. Dirty
you so bad you couldn't like yourself anymore. Dirty you so bad you forgot who you were and
couldn't think it up.."42
Toni Morrison's monumental novel holds a privileged place in black culture and modernity
precisely because she takes this dilemma to its logical conclusionthat black flight from white
supremacy (a chamber of horrors for black people) may lead to the murder of those loved ones
who are candidates for the "dirtying" process. The black mother, Sethe, kills her daughter,
Beloved, because she loved her so, "to outhurt the hurter," as an act of resistance against the
"dirtying" process.
And though she and others lived through and got over it, she could never let it happen to her
own. The best thing she was, was her children. Whites might dirty her all right, but not her best
thing, her beautiful, magical best thing-the part of her that was clean. No undreamable dreams
about whether the headless, feetless torso hanging in the tree with a sign on it was her husband
or Paul A; whether the bubbling-hot girls in the colored-school fire set by patriots included her
daughter; whether a gang of whites invaded her daughter's private parts, soiled her daughter's
thighs and threw her daughter out of the wagon. She might have to work the slaughterhouse yard,
but not her daughter.


--- PAGE 106 ---
And no one, nobody on this earth, would list her daughter's characteristics on the animal side of
the paper. No. Oh no.... Sethe had refused-and refused still....
What she had done was right because it came from true love.43
Is death the only black space (home), place (roots) and face (name) safe from a pervasive white
supremacy? Toni Morrison's Sethe echoes Du Bois's own voice upon the painful passing of his
firstborn. For Sethe, as for Tolstoy's Ivan, Chekhov's Bishop Pyotr, Kafka's Josephine,
Hawthorne's Goodman Brown, Hardy's Jude, Bfchner's Woyzeck, Dreiser's Hurstwood and
Shakespeare's Lear, death is the great liberator from suffering and evil.
But Love sat beside his cradle, and in his ear Wisdom waited to speak. Perhaps now he knows
the All-love, and needs not to be wise. Sleep, then, child,-sleep till I sleep and waken to a baby
voice and the ceaseless patter of little feet-above the Veil. }4
The most effective and enduring black responses to invisibility and namelessness are those
forms of individual and collective black resistance predicated on a deep and abiding black love.
These responses take the shape of prophetic thought and action: bold, fearless, courageous
attempts to tell the truth about and bear witness to black suffering and to keep faith with a vision
of black redemption. Like the "ur-texts" of the guttural cry and wrenching moan-enacted in
Charlie Parker's bebop sound, Dinah Washington's cool voice, Richard Pryor's comic
performances and James Brown's inimitable funk-the prophetic utterance that focuses on black
suffering and sustains a hope-against-hope for black freedom constitutes the heights of black
culture. The spiritual depths (the how and what) of Martin Luther King's visionary orations, Nat
King Cole's silky soul, August Wit son's probing plays, Martin Puryear's unique sculpture,
Harold and Fayard Nicholas's existential acrobatics, Jacob Lawrence's powerful paintings,
Marvin Gaye's risky falsettos, Fannie Lou Hamer's fighting songs and, above all, John Coltrane's
A Love Supreme exemplify such heights. Two of the greatest moments in black literature also
enact such high-quality performances. First, James Baldwin's great self-descriptive visionary
passage in Go Yell It on the Mountain (1953):
Yes, their parts were all cut off, they were dishonored, their very names were nothing more than
dust blown disdainfully across the field of time-to fall where, to blossom where, bringing forth
what fruit hereafter, where?-their very names were not their own. Behind them was the darkness,
nothing but the darkness, and all around them destruction, and before them nothing but the fire-a
bastard people, far from God, singing and crying in the wilderness!
Yet, most strangely, and from deeps not before discovered, his faith looked up; before the
wickedness that he saw, the wickedness from which he fled, he yet beheld, like a flaming
standard in the middle of the air, that power of redemption to which he must, till death, bear
witness; which, though it crush him utterly, he could not deny; though none among the living
might ever behold it, he had beheld it, and must keep the faith. '5
For Baldwin, the seemingly impossible flight from white supremacy takes the form of a
Chekhovian effort to endure lovingly and compassionately, guided by a vision of freedom and
empowered by a tradition of black love and faith.}'' To be a bastard people-wrenched from


--- PAGE 107 ---
Africa and in, but never fully of, America-is to be a people of highly limited options, if any at
all. To bear witness is to make and remake, invent and reinvent oneself as a person and people
by keeping faith with the best of such earlier efforts, yet also to acknowledge that the very new
selves and peoples to emerge will never fully find a space, place or face in American society-or
Africa. This perennial process of self-making and self inventing is propelled by a self-loving
and self-trusting made possible by overcoming a colonized mind, body and soul.
This is precisely what Toni Morrison describes in the great litany of black love in Baby
Suggs's prayer and sermon of laughter, dance, tears and silence in "a wide-open place cut deep
in the woods nobody knew for what at the end of a path known only to deer and whoever cleared
the land in the first place." On those hot Saturday afternoons, Baby Suggs "offered up to them her
great big heart."
She told them that the only grace they could have was the grace they could imagine. That if they
could not see it, they would not have it.
"Here," she said, "in this here place, we flesh; flesh that weeps, laughs; flesh that dances on bare
feet in grass. Love it. Love it hard. Yonder they do not love your flesh. They despise it. They
don't love your eyes; they'd just as soon pick em out. No more do they love the skin on your
back. Yonder they flay it. And O my people they do not love your hands. Those they only use,
tie, bind, chop off and leave empty. Love your hands! Love them. Raise them up and kiss them.
Touch others with them, pat them together, stroke them on your face 'cause they don't love that
either. You got to love it, you! And no, they ain't in love with your mouth. Yonder, out there, they
will see it broken and break it again. What you say out of it they will not heed. What you scream
from it they do not hear. What you put into it to nourish your body they will snatch away and give
you leavins instead. No, they don't love your mouth. You got to love it. This is flesh I'm talking
about here. Flesh that needs to be loved. Feet that need to rest and to dance; backs that need
support; shoulders that need arms, strong arms I'm telling you. And 0 my people, out yonder, hear
me, they do not love your neck unnoosed and straight. So love your neck; put a hand on it, grace
it, stroke it and hold it up. And all your inside parts that they'd just as soon slop for hogs, you got
to love them. The dark, dark liver-love it, love it, and the beat and beating heart, love that too.
More than eyes or feet. More than lungs that have yet to draw free air. More than your life-
holding womb and your life-giving private parts, hear me now, love your heart. For this is the
prize." Saying no more, she stood up then and danced with her twisted hip the rest of what her
heart had to say while the others opened their mouths and gave her the music. Long notes held
until the four-part harmony was perfect enough for their deeply loved flesh.47
In this powerful passage, Toni Morrison depicts in a concrete and graphic way the enactment
and expression of black love, black joy, black community and black faith that bears witness to
black suffering and keeps alive a vision of black hope. Black bonds of affection, black networks
of support, black ties of empathy and black harmonies of spiritual camaraderie provide the
grounds for the fragile existential weaponry with which to combat black invisibility and
namelessness.
Yet these forceful strategies in black culture still have not successfully come to terms with the
problem. The black collective quest for a name that designates black people in the United States


--- PAGE 108 ---
continues-from colored, Negro, black, AfroAmerican, Abyssinian, Ethiopian, Nubian, Bilalian,
American African, American, African to African American. The black individual quest for
names goes on, with unique new ones for children-e.g., Signithia, Tarsell, Jewayne-designed to
set them apart from all others for the purpose of accenting their individuality and offsetting their
invisibility. And most important, black rage proliferates-sometimes unabated.
Of all the hidden injuries of blackness in American civilization, black rage is the most deadly,
the most lethal. Although black culture is in no way reducible to or identical with black rage, it
is inseparable from black rage. Du Bois's renowned eulogy for Alexander Crummell, the
greatest nineteenth-century black intellectual, is one of the most penetrating analyses of black
rage. Du Bois begins his treatment with a virtually generic description of black childhood-a
description that would hold for Arthur Ashe or Ice Cube, Kathleen Battle or Queen Latifah:
This is the history of a human heart,-the tale of a black boy who many long years ago began to
struggle with life that he might know the world and know himself. Three temptations he met on
those dark dunes that lay gray and dismal before the wonder-eyes of the child: the Temptation of
Hate, that stood out against the red dawn; the Temptation of Despair, that darkened noonday; and
the Temptation of Doubt, that ever steals along with twilight. Above all, you must hear of the
vales he crossed,-the Valley of Humiliation and the Valley of the Shadow of Death.48
Black self-hatred and hatred of others parallels that of all human beings, who must gain some
sense of themselves and the world. But the tremendous weight of white supremacy makes this
human struggle for mature black selfhood even more difficult. As black children come to view
themselves more and more as the degraded other, the temptation of hate grows, "gliding
stealthily into [their] laughter, fading into [their] play, and seizing [their] dreams by day and
night with rough, rude turbulence. So [they ask] of sky and sun and flower the never-answered
Why? and love, as [they grow], neither the world nor the world's rough ways.."49
The two major choices in black culture (or any culture) facing those who succumb to the
temptation of hate are a self-hatred that leads to self-destruction or a hatred of others-degraded
others-that leads to vengeance of some sort. These options often represent two sides of the same
coin. The case of Bigger Thomas, portrayed by Richard Wright in his great novel Native Son
(1940), is exemplary in this regard:
Bigger's face was metallically black in the strong sunlight. There was in his eyes a pensive,
brooding amusement, as of a man who had been long confronted and tantalized by a riddle
whose answer seemed always just on the verge of escaping him, but prodding him irresistibly on
to seek its solution. The silence irked Bigger: he was anxious to do something to evade looking
so squarely at this prob- lem.50
The riddle Bigger seeks an answer to is the riddle of his black existence in America-and he
evades it in part because the pain, fear, silence and hatred cut so deep. Like the "huge black rat"
that appears at the beginning of the novel, Bigger reacts to his circumstances instinctually. Yet
his instinct to survive is intertwined with his cognitive perception that white supremacy is out to
get him like the evil that targets job in the Hebrew Bible. To make himself and invent himself as
a black person in America is to strike out against white supremacy-out of pain, fear, silence and


--- PAGE 109 ---
hatred. The result is psychic terror and physical violence-committed against black Bessie and
white Mary.
Bigger rose and went to the window. His hands caught the cold steel bars in a hard grip. He
knew as he stood there that he could never tell why he had killed. It was not that he did not really
want to tell, but the telling of it would have involved an explanation of his entire life. The actual
killing of Mary and Bessie was not what concerned him most; it was knowing and feeling that he
could never make anybody know what had driven him to it. His crimes were known, but what he
had felt before he committed them would never be known. He would have gladly admitted his
guilt if he had thought that in doing so he could have also given in the same breath a sense of the
deep, choking hate that had been his life, a hate that he had not wanted to have, but could not help
having. How could he do that? The impulsion to try to tell was as deep as had been the urge to
kill.''
The temptation to hate is a double-edged sword. Bigger's own self-hatred not only leads him to
hate other blacks, but also to deny the humanity of whites. Yet he can overcome this self-hatred
only when he views himself as a self-determining agent who is willing to take responsibility for
his actions and acknowledge his connection with others. Although Wright has often been
criticized for casting Bigger as a pitiful victim, subhuman monster and isolated individualist-as
in James Baldwin's "Everybody's Protest Novel" and "Many Thousands Gone" in .Notes of a
Native Son (1955)-Wright presents brief moments in which Bigger sees the need for
transcending his victim status and rapacious individualism. When his family visits him in jail,
Bigger responds to their tears and anger:
Bigger wanted to comfort them in the presence of the white folks, but did not know how.
Desperately, he cast about for something to say. Hate and shame boiled in him against the people
behind his back; he tried to think of words that would defy them, words that would let them
know that he had a world and life of his own in spite of them.52
Wright does not disclose the internal dynamics of this black world of Bigger's own, but Bigger
does acknowledge that he is part of this world. For example, his actions had dire consequences
for his sister, Vera.
"Bigger," his mother sobbed, trying to talk through her tears. "Bigger, honey, she won't go to
school no more. She says the other girls look at her and make her 'shamed...."
He had lived and acted on the assumption that he was alone, and now he saw that he had not
been. What he had done made others suffer. No matter how much he would long for them to
forget him, they would not be able to. His family was a part of him, not only in blood, but in
spirit. He sat on the cot and his mother knelt at his feet. Her face was lifted to his; her eyes were
empty, eyes that looked upward when the last hope of earth had failed.53
Yet even this family connection fails to undercut the layers of hate Bigger feels for himself
and them. It is only when Bigger receives unconditional support and affirmation across racial
lines that his self-hatred and hatred of others subsidesfor a moment, from white Jan, the
boyfriend of the slain Mary.


--- PAGE 110 ---
He looked at Jan and saw a white face, but an honest face. This white man believed in him, and
the moment he felt that belief he felt guilty again; but in a different sense now. Suddenly, this
white man had come up to him, flung aside the curtain and walked into the room of his life. Jan
had spoken a declaration of friendship that would make other white men hate him: a particle of
white rock had detached itself from that looming mountain of white hate and had rolled down the
slope, stopping still at his feet. The word had become flesh. For the first time in his life a white
man became a human being to him; and the reality of Jan's humanity came in a stab of remorse:
he had killed what this man loved and had hurt him. He saw Jan as though someone had
performed an operation upon his eyes, or as though someone had snatched a deforming mask
from Jan's face.55
In both instances, Bigger lurches slightly beyond the temptation of hate when he perceives
himself as an agent and subject accountable for the consequences of his actions-such as the
victimization of his own black sister and a white person. Yet the depths of his self-hatred-his
deep-seated colonized mind-permit only a glimpse of self-transformation when the friendship of
a white fellow victim is offered to him.
Similar to Bigger Thomas, Alexander Crummell was inspired by a white significant other-
Beriah Green. This sort of sympathetic connection makes the temptation of hate grow "fainter
and less sinister. It did not wholly fade away, but diffused itself and lingered thick at the
edges."55 Through both Bigger Thomas and Alexander Crummell we see the tremendous pull of
the white world and the tragic need for white recognition and affirmation among so many black
people.
The temptation of despair is the second element of black rage in Du Bois's analysis. This
temptation looms large when black folk conclude that "the way of the world is closed to me."
This conclusion yields two options-nihilism and hedonism. Again, two sides of the same coin.
This sense of feeling imprisoned, bound, constrained and circumscribed is a dominant motif in
black cultural ex- pressions.515 Again, Wright captures this predicament well with Bigger
Thomas:
"Goddammit!"
"What's the matter?"
"They don't let us do nothing."
"Who?"
"The white folks."
"You talk like you just now finding that out," Gus said.
"Naw. But I just can't get used to it," Bigger said. "I swear to God I can't. I know I oughtn't think
about it, but I can't help it. Every time I think about it I feel like somebody's poking a red-hot iron
down my throat. Goddammit, look! We live here and they live there. We black and they white.


--- PAGE 111 ---
They got things and we ain't. They do things and we can't. It's just like living in jail. Half the time
I feel like I'm on the outside of the world peeping in through a knot-hole in the fence."57
The temptation of despair is predicated on a world with no room for black space, place or face.
It feeds on a black futurelessness and black hopelessness-a situation in which visions and
dreams of possibility have dried up like raisins in the sun. This nihilism leads to lives of drift,
lives in which any pleasure, especially instant gratification, is the primary means of feeling
alive. Anger and aggression usually surface in such lives. Bigger says: "I hurt folks 'cause I felt I
had to; that's all. They was crowding me too close; they wouldn't give me no room.... I thought
they was hard and I acted hard.... I'll be feeling and thinking that they didn't see me and I didn't
see them.."58
The major black cultural response to the temptation of despair has been the black Christian
tradition-a tradition dominated by music in song, prayer and sermon. The unique role of this
tradition is often noted. Du Bois writes: "That the Negro church antedates the Negro home, leads
to an explanation of much that is paradoxical in this communistic institution and in the morals of
its members. But especially it leads us to regard this institution as peculiarly the expression of
the inner ethical life of a people in a sense seldom true elsewhere.."59
Even Bigger Thomas-the most cynical and secular of rebels in the black literary tradition-is
captivated by the power of black church music, the major caressing artistic flow in the black
Sittlichkeit (ethical life).
The singing from the church vibrated through him, suffusing him with a mood of sensitive
sorrow. He tried not to listen, but it seeped into his feelings, whis pering of another way of life
and death.... The singing filled his ears; it was complete, self-contained, and it mocked his fear
and loneliness, his deep yearning for a sense of wholeness. Its fulness contrasted so sharply with
his hunger, its richness with his emptiness, that he recoiled from it while answering it.60
The black church tradition-along with the rich musical tradition it spawned-generates a sense of
movement, motion and momentum that keeps despair at bay. As with any collective project or
performance that puts a premium on change, transformation, conversion and future possibility,
the temptation of despair is not eliminated, but attenuated. In this sense, the black church
tradition has made ritual art and communal bonds out of black invisibility and namelessness.
Ralph Ellison updates and secularizes this endeavor when he writes,
Perhaps I like Louis Armstrong because he's made poetry out of being invisible. I think it must
be because he's unaware that he is invisible. And my own grasp of invisibility aids me to
understand his music.... Invisibility, let me explain, gives one a slightly different sense of time,
you're never quite on the beat. Sometimes you're ahead and sometimes behind. Instead of the
swift and imperceptible flowing of time, you are aware of its nodes, those points where time
stands still or from which it leaps ahead. And you slip into the breaks and look around. That's
what you hear vaguely in Louis' music."
The temptation of doubt is the most persistent of the three temptations. White supremacy
drums deeply into the hearts, minds and souls of black people, causing them to expect little of


--- PAGE 112 ---
one another and themselves. This black insecurity and self-doubt produce a debilitating black
jealousy in the face of black "success"-a black jealousy that often takes the form of what
Eldridge Cleaver called "nigger rituals"-namely, a vicious trashing of black "success" or a black
"battle royal" for white spectators. Understandably, under conditions of invisibility and
namelessness, most of those blacks with "visibility" and a "name" in the white world are often
the object of black scorn and contempt. Such sad, self-fulfilling prophecies of black cowardice
make the temptation of doubt especially seductive-one that fans and fuels the flames of black
rage. Du Bois states:
Of all the three temptations, this one struck the deepest. Hate? He had outgrown so childish a
thing. Despair? He had steeled his right arm against it, and fought it with the vigor of
determination. But to doubt the worth of his life-work,-to doubt the destiny and capability of the
race his soul loved because it was his; to find listless squalor instead of eager endeavor; to hear
his own lips whispering, "They do not care; they cannot know; they are dumb driven cattle,-why
cast your pearls before swine?"-this, this seemed more than man could bear; and he closed the
door, and sank upon the steps of the chancel, and cast his robe upon the floor and writhed.sz
The two principal options for action after one yields to the temptation of doubt in black
culture are: authoritarian subordination of the "ignorant" masses or individual escape from these
masses into the white mainstream. These two options are not two sides of the same coin-though
they often flow from a common source: an elitist vision that shuns democratic accountability.
And although this elitist vision-that of the Exceptional Negro and Talented Tenth who are "better
than those other blacks"-is found more readily among the black educated and middle class, some
of the black working poor and very poor subscribe to it too. Even Bigger Thomas.
As he rode, looking at the black people on the sidewalks, he felt that one way to end fear and
shame was to make all those black people act together, rule them, tell them what to do, and make
them do it.... But he felt that such would never happen to him and his black people, and he hated
them and wanted to wave his hand and blot them out. Yet, he still hoped, vaguely. Of late he had
liked to hear tell of men who could rule others, for in actions such as these he felt that there was
a way to escape from this tight morass of fear and shame that sapped at the base of his life. He
liked to hear of how Japan was conquering China; of how Hitler was running Jews to the ground;
of how Mussolini was invading Spain. He was not concerned with whether these acts were right
or wrong; they simply appealed to him as possible avenues of escape. He felt that some day
there would be a black man who would whip the black people into a tight band and together they
would act and end fear and shame. He never thought of this in precise mental images; he felt it;
he would feel it for a while and then forget. But hope was always waiting somewhere deep
down in him.1'3
This hope for black unity and action was based on a profound doubt concerning the ability of
black people to think for themselves and act on principles they had examined, scrutinized and
deliberately chosen. Ironically, this same elitist logic is at work among those who uncritically
enter the white mainstream and accuse black people of lacking discipline and determination.
Alexander Crummell overcame the difficult challenge of self-doubt and the doubt of other black
folk by moving to Africa and later returning to America to fight for and "among his own, the low,


--- PAGE 113 ---
the grasping, and the wicked, with that unbending righteousness which is the sword of the just.
1164
In the end, for Du Bois, Alexander Crummell triumphed over hate, despair and doubt owing to
"that full power within, that mighty inspiration" s' within the Veil. He was able to direct his
black rage through moral channels sustained pri marily by black bonds of affection, black
networks of support and black ties of empathy. Yet few today know his name and work,
principally due to the thick Veil of color then and now. "His name today, in this broad land,
means little, and comes to fifty million ears laden with no incense of memory or emulation. And
herein lies the tragedy of the age: not that men are poor,-all men know something of poverty; not
that men are wicked,-who is good? not that men are igno- rant.-what is Truth? Nay, but that men
know so little of men.."66
For Du Bois, "the problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color- line"67 largely
because of the relative lack of communication across the Veil of color. For Du Bois, the vicious
legacy of white supremacy contributes to the arrested development of democracy. And since
communication is the lifeblood of a democracy-the very measure of the vitality of its public life-
we either come to terms with race and hang together, or ignore it and hang separately. This is
why every examination of black strivings is an important part of understanding the prevailing
crisis in American society.
A TWILIGHT CIVILIZATION
In our time-at the end of the twentieth century-the crisis of race in America is still raging. The
problem of black invisibility and namelessness, however, remains marginal to the dominant
accounts of our past and present and is relatively absent from our pictures of the future. In this
age of globalization, with its impressive scientific and technological innovations in information,
communication and applied biology, a focus on the lingering effects of racism seems outdated
and antiquated. The global cultural bazaar of entertainment and enjoyment, the global shopping
mall of advertising and marketing, the global workplace of blue-collar and whitecollar
employment and the global financial network of computerized transactions and megacorporate
mergers appear to render any talk about race irrelevant.68
Yet with the collapse of the Soviet empire, the end of the Cold War and the rise of Japan,
corrupt and top-heavy nation-states are being eclipsed by imperial corporations as public life
deteriorates due to class polarization, racial balkanization and especially a predatory market
culture."9 With the vast erosion of civic networks that nurture and care for citizens-such as
families, neighborhoods and schools-and with what might be called the gangsterization of
everyday life, characterized by the escalating fear of violent attack, vicious assault or cruel
insult, we are witnessing a pervasive cultural decay in American civilization. Even public
discourse has degenerated into petty name-calling and finger-pointing-with little room for mutual
respect and empathetic exchange. Increasing suicides and homicides, alcoholism and drug
addiction, distrust and disloyalty, coldheartedness and mean-spiritedness, isolation and
loneliness, cheap sexual thrills and cowardly patriarchal violence are still other symptoms of
this decay. Yet race-in the coded lan guage of welfare reform, immigration policy, criminal
punishment, affirmative action and suburban privatization-remains a central signifier in the


--- PAGE 114 ---
political debate.
As in late nineteenth-century Russia and early twentieth-century central Europe, the ruling
political Right and center hide and conceal the privilege and wealth of the few (the 1 percent
who own 48 percent of the net financial wealth, the top 10 percent who own 86 percent, the top
20 percent who have 94 percent!) and pits the downwardly mobile middlers against the
downtrodden poor.70 This age-old strategy of scapegoating the most vulnerable, frightening the
most insecure and supporting the most comfortable constitutes a kind of iron law signaling the
decline of modern civilizations, as in Tolstoy's Russia and Kafka's central Europe: chaotic and
inchoate rebellion from below, withdrawal and retreat from public life from above and a
desperate search for authoritarian law and order, at any cost, from the middle. In America, this
suggests not so much a European style of fascism, but rather a homespun brand of authoritarian
democracy-the systemic stigmatizing, regulating and policing of the degraded "others"-women,
gays, lesbians, Latinos, Jews, Asians, American Indians and especially black people. As
Sinclair Lewis warned over a half century ago, fascism, American-style, can happen here.
Welfare reform means, on the ground, poor people (disproportionately black) with no means
of support. Criminal punishment means hundreds of thousands of black men in crowded prisons-
many in there forever. And suburban privatization means black urban poor citizens locked into
decrepit public schools, dilapidated housing, inadequate health care and unavailable child care.
Furthermore, the lowest priorities on the global corporate agenda of the political Right-the low
quantity of jobs with a living wage and the low quality of life for children-have the gravest
consequences for the survival of any civilization. Instead, we have generational layers of
unemployed and underemployed people (often uncounted in our national statistics) and
increasing numbers of hedonistic and nihilistic young people (of all classes, races, genders and
regions) with little interest in public life and with little sense of moral purpose.
This is the classic portrait of a twilight civilization whose dangerous rumblings-now
intermittent in much of America, but rampant in most of black urban America-will more than
likely explode in the twenty-first century if we stay on the present conservative course. In such a
bleak scenario-given the dominant tendencies of our day-Du Bois's heralded Talented Tenth will
by and large procure a stronger foothold in the well-paid professional managerial sectors of the
global economy and more and more will become intoxicated with the felicities of a parvenu
bourgeois existence. The heroic few will attempt to tell unpleasant truths about our plight and
bear prophetic witness to our predicament as well as try to organize and mobilize (and be
organized and mobilized by) the economically dev astated, culturally degraded and politically
marginalized black working poor and very poor. Since a multiracial alliance of progressive
middlers, liberal slices of the corporate elite and subversive energy from below is the only
vehicle by which some form of radical democratic accountability can redistribute resources and
wealth and restructure the economy and government so that all benefit, the significant secondary
efforts of the black Talented Tenth alone in the twenty-first century will be woefully inadequate
and thoroughly frustrating. Yet even progressive social change-though desirable and necessary-
may not turn back the deeper and deadly processes of cultural decay in late twentieth-century
America.


--- PAGE 115 ---
As this Talented Tenth comes to he viewed more and more with disdain and disgust by the
black working poor and very poor, not only class envy, but class hatred in black America will
escalate-in the midst of a more isolated and insulated black America. This will deepen the
identity crisis of the black Talented Tenth-a crisis of survivor's guilt and cultural rootlessness.
As the glass ceilings (limited promotions) and golden cuffs (big position and good pay with little
or no power) remain in place for most, though not all, blacks in corporate America, we will see
anguish and hedonism intensify among much of the Talented Tenth. The conservative wing of
black elites will climb on the bandwagon of the political Right-some for sincere reasons, most
for opportunistic ones-as the black working poor and very poor try to cope with the realities of
death, disease and destruction. The progressive wing of the black elite will split into a
vociferous (primarily male-led) black nationalist camp that opts for self-help at the lower and
middle levels of the entrepreneurial sectors of the global economy and a visionary
(disproportionately woman-led) radical democratic camp that works assiduously to keep alive a
hope-maybe the last hope-for a twilight civilization that once saw itself as the "last best hope of
earth."
After ninety-three years of the most courageous and unflagging devotion to black freedom
witnessed in the twentieth century, W. E. B. Du Bois not only left America for Africa, but
concluded: "I just cannot take any more of this country's treatment. We leave for Ghana October
5th and I set no date for return.... Chin up, and fight on, but realize that American Negroes can't
win.."7'
In the end, Du Bois's Enlightenment worldview, Victorian strategies and American optimism
failed him. He left America in militant despair-the very despair he had avoided earlier-and
mistakenly hoped for the rise of a strong postcolonial and united Africa. Echoing Tolstoy's claim
that "It's intolerable to live in Russia.... I've decided to emigrate to England forever"72 (though
he never followed through) and Kafka's dream to leave Prague and live in Palestine (though he
died before he could do so),73 Du Bois concluded that black strivings in a twilight civilization
were unbearable for him, yet still imperative for others-even if he could not envision black
freedom in America as realizable.
For those of us who stand on his broad shoulders, let us begin where he ended-with his
militant despair; let us look candidly at the tragicomic and absurd character of black life in
America in the spirit of John Coltrane and Toni Morrison; let us continue to strive with genuine
compassion, personal integrity and human decency to fight for radical democracy in the face of
the frightening abyss-or terrifying inferno-of the twenty-first century, clinging to "a hope not
hopeless but unhopeful."
SOURCE: From The Future of the Race, by Henry Louis Gates and Cornel West (New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 1996), pp. 53-112, 180-196.


--- PAGE 116 ---



--- PAGE 117 ---
THE NEW CULTURAL POLITICS OF 
D I F F E R E N C E
This synthetic and synoptic essay was written as the theoretical lead piece for a volume entitled
Out There (1991), for the New Museum of Contemporary Art. I coedited this work with a
marvelous group of artists and critics-Russell Ferguson, Martha Gever and Trinh T Minh-ha. We
met regularly over eighteen months choosing essays, revising frameworks and discussing
contemporary art. It is one of the few signature pieces I have written.
IN THESE LAST FEW years of the twentieth century, there is emerging a significant shift in the
sensibilities and outlooks of critics and artists. In fact, I would go so far as to claim that a new
kind of cultural worker is in the making, associated with a new politics of difference. These new
forms of intellectual consciousness advance reconceptions of the vocation of critic and artist,
attempting to undermine the prevailing disciplinary divisions of labor in the academy, museum,
mass media and gallery networks, while preserving modes of critique within the ubiquitous
commodification of culture in the global village. Distinctive features of the new cultural politics
of difference are to trash the monolithic and homogeneous in the name of diversity, multiplicity
and heterogeneity; to reject the abstract, general and universal in light of the concrete, specific
and particular; and to historicize, contextualize and pluralize by highlighting the contingent,
provisional, variable, tentative, shifting and changing.
Needless to say, these gestures are not new in the history of criticism or art, yet what makes
them novel-along with the cultural politics they produce-is how and what constitutes difference,
the weight and gravity it is given in representation and the way in which highlighting issues like
exterminism, empire, class, race, gender, sexual orientation, age, nation, nature and region at this
historical moment acknowledges some discontinuity and disruption from previous forms of
cultural critique. To put it bluntly, the new cultural politics of difference consists of creative
responses to the precise circumstances of our present moment-especially those of marginalized
First World agents who shun degraded self-representations, articulating instead their sense of the
flow of history in light of the contemporary terrors, anxieties and fears of highly commercialized
North Atlantic capitalist cultures (with their escalating xenophobias against people of color,
Jews, women, gays, lesbians and the elderly). The thawing, yet still rigid, Second World ex-
Communist cultures (with increasing nationalist revolts against the legacy of hegemonic party
henchmen) and the diverse cultures of the majority of inhabitants on the globe smothered by
international communication cartels and repressive postcolonial elites (sometimes in the name of
communism, as was the case in Ethiopia) or starved by austere World Bank and IMF politics
that subordinate them to the North (as in free-market capitalism in Chile) also locate vital areas
of analysis in this new cultural terrain.
The new cultural politics of difference is neither simply oppositional in contesting the
mainstream (or malestream) for inclusion, nor transgressive in the avant-gardist sense of
shocking conventional bourgeois audiences. It embraces the distinct articulations of talented
(and usually privileged) contributors to culture who desire to align themselves with
demoralized, demobilized, depoliticized and disorganized people in order to empower and
enable social action and, if possible, to enlist collective insurgency for the expansion of


--- PAGE 118 ---
freedom, democracy and individuality. This perspective impels these cultural critics and artists
to reveal, as an integral component of their production, the very operations of power within their
immediate work contexts (academy, museum, gallery, mass media). This strategy, however, also
puts them in an inescapable double bind-while linking their activities to the fundamental,
structural overhaul of these institutions, they often remain financially dependent on them (so
much for "independent" creation). For these critics of culture, theirs is a gesture that is
simultaneously progressive and co-opted. Yet without social movement or political pressure
from outside these institutions (extraparliamentary and extracurricular actions like the social
movements of the recent past), transformation degenerates into mere accommodation or sheer
stagnation, and the role of the "co-opted progressive"-no matter how fervent one's subversive
rhetoric-is rendered more difficult. There can be no artistic breakthrough or social progress
without some form of crisis in civilization-a crisis usually generated by organizations or
collectivities that convince ordinary people to put their bodies and lives on the line. There is, of
course, no guarantee that such pressure will yield the result one wants, but there is a guarantee
that the status quo will remain or regress if no pressure is applied at all.
The new cultural politics of difference faces three basic challenges-intellectual, existential
and political. The intellectual challenge-usually cast as methodological debate in these days in
which academicist forms of expression have a monopoly on intellectual life-is how to think
about representational practices in terms of history, culture and society. How does one
understand, analyze and enact such practices today? An adequate answer to this question can be
attempted only after one comes to terms with the insights and blindnesses of earlier attempts to
grapple with the question in light of the evolving crisis in different histories, cultures and
societies. I shall sketch a brief genealogy-a history that highlights the contingent origins and often
ignoble outcomes-of exemplary critical responses to the question. This genealogy sets forth a
historical framework that characterizes the rich yet deeply flawed Eurocentric traditions that the
new cultural politics of difference builds upon yet goes beyond.
THE INTELLECTUAL CHALLENGE
An appropriate starting point is the ambiguous legacy of the Age of Europe. Between 1492 and
1945, European breakthroughs in oceanic transportation, agricultural production, state
consolidation, bureaucratization, industrialization, urbanization and imperial dominion shaped
the makings of the modern world. Precious ideals like the dignity of persons (individuality) or
the popular accountability of institutions (democracy) were unleashed around the world.
Powerful critiques of illegitimate authorities-of the Protestant Reformation against the Roman
Catholic church, the Enlightenment against state churches, liberal movements against absolutist
states and feudal guild constraints, workers against managerial subordination, women against
sexist practices, people of color and Jews against white and gentile supremacist decrees, gays
and lesbians against homophobic sanctions-were fanned and fueled by these precious ideals
refined within the crucible of the Age of Europe. Yet the discrepancy between sterling rhetoric
and lived reality, glowing principles and actual practices, loomed large.
By the last European century-the last epoch in which European domination of most of the
globe was uncontested and unchallenged in a substantive way-a new world seemed to be


--- PAGE 119 ---
stirring. At the height of England's reign as the major imperial European power, its exemplary
cultural critic, Matthew Arnold, painfully observed in his "Stanzas from the Grand Chartreuse"
that he felt some sense of "wandering between two worlds, one dead / the other powerless to be
born" Following his Burkean sensibilities of cautious reform and fear of anarchy, Arnold
acknowledged that the old glue-religion-that had tenuously and often unsuccessfully held together
the ailing European regimes could not do so in the mid-nineteenth century. Like Alexis de
Tocqueville in France, Arnold saw that the democratic temper was the wave of the future. So he
proposed a new conception of culture-a secular, humanistic one-that could play an integrative
role in cementing and stabilizing an emerging bourgeois civil society and imperial state. His
famous castigation of the immobilizing materialism of the declining aristocracy, the vulgar
philistinism of the emerging middle classes and the latent explosiveness of the working-class
majority was motivated by a desire to create new forms of cultural legitimacy, authority and
order in a rapidly changing moment in nineteenth-century Europe.
For Arnold (in Culture and Anarchy, 1869), this new conception of culture seeks to do away
with classes; to make the best that has been thought and known in the world current everywhere;
to make all men live in an atmosphere of sweetness and light....
This is the social idea and the men of culture are the true apostles of equality. The great men of
culture are those who have had a passion for diffusing, for making prevail, for carrying from one
end of society to the other, the best knowledge, the best ideas of their time, who have laboured to
divest knowledge of all that was harsh, uncouth, difficult, abstract, professional, exclusive; to
humanize it, to make it efficient outside the clique of the cultivated and learned, yet still
remaining the best knowledge and thought of the time, and a true source, therefore, of sweetness
and light.
As an organic intellectual of an emergent middle class-as the inspector of schools in an
expanding educational bureaucracy, Professor of Poetry at Oxford (the first noncleric and the
first to lecture in English, rather than Latin) and an active participant in a thriving magazine
network-Arnold defined and defended a new secular culture of critical discourse. For him, this
discursive strategy would be lodged in the educational and periodical apparatuses of modern
societies as they contained and incorporated the frightening threats of an arrogant aristocracy and
especially of an "anarchic" working-class majority. His ideals of disinterested, dispassionate
and objective inquiry would regulate this new secular cultural production, and his justifications
for the use of state power to quell any threats to the survival and security of this culture were
widely accepted. He aptly noted, "Through culture seems to lie our way, not only to perfection,
but even to safety."
This sentence is revealing in two ways. First, it refers to "our way" without explicitly
acknowledging who constitutes the "we." This move is symptomatic among many bourgeois,
male, Eurocentric critics whose universalizing gestures exclude (by guarding a silence around)
or explicitly degrade women and people of color. Second, the sentence links culture to safety-
presumably the safety of the "we" against the barbaric threats of the "them," that is, those viewed
as different in some debased manner. Needless to say, Arnold's negative attitudes toward British
working-class people, women and especially Indians and Jamaicans in the empire clarify why


--- PAGE 120 ---
he conceives of culture as, in part, a weapon for bourgeois, male, European "safety."
For Arnold, the best of the Age of Europe-modeled on a mythological melange of Periclean
Athens, late Republican/early Imperial Rome and Elizabethan England-could be promoted only
if there was an interlocking affiliation among the emerging middle classes, a homogenizing of
cultural discourse in the educational and university networks and a state advanced enough in its
policing techniques to safeguard it. The candidates for participation and legitimation in this
grand endeavor of cultural renewal and revision would be detached intellectuals willing to shed
their parochialism, provincialism and class-bound identities for Arnold's middle class skewed
project: "Aliens, if we may so call them-persons who are mainly led, not by their class spirit,
but by a general humane spirit, by the love of human perfection." Needless to say, this Arnoldian
perspective still informs much of the academic practices and secular cultural attitudes today-
dominant views about the canon, admission procedures and collective self-definitions of
intellectuals. Yet Arnold's project was disrupted by the collapse of nineteenth-century Europe-
World War I. This unprecedented war brought to the surface the crucial role and violent
potential not of the masses Arnold feared, but of the state he heralded. Upon the ashes of this
wasteland of human carnage-some of it the civilian European population-T. S. Eliot emerged as
the grand cultural spokesman.
Eliot's project of reconstituting and reconceiving European highbrow cultureand thereby
regulating critical and artistic practices-after the internal collapse of imperial Europe can be
viewed as a response to the probing question posed by Paul Valery in "The Crisis of the Spirit"
after World War I: "This Europe, will it become what it is in reality, i.e., a little cape of the
Asiatic continent? or will this Europe remain rather what it seems, i.e., the priceless part of the
whole earth, the pearl of the globe, the brain of a vast body?"
Eliot's image of Europe as a wasteland, a culture of fragments with no cementing center,
predominated in postwar Europe. And though his early poetic practices were more radical, open
and international than his Eurocentric criticism, Eliot posed a return to and revision of tradition
as the only way of regaining European cultural order and political stability. For Eliot,
contemporary history had become, as James Joyce's Stephen declared in Ulysses (1922), "a
nightmare from which I am trying to awake"-"an immense panorama of futility and anarchy" as
Eliot put it in his renowned review of Joyce's modernist masterpiece. In his influential essay
"Tradition and the Individual Talent" (1919) Eliot stated:
Yet if the only form of tradition, of handing down, consisted in following the ways of the
immediate generation before us in a blind or timid adherence to its successes, "tradition" should
positively be discouraged. We have seen many such simple currents soon lost in the sand; and
novelty is better than repetition. Tradition is a matter of much wider significance. It cannot be
inherited, and if you want it you must attain it by great labour.
Eliot's fecund notion of tradition is significant in that it promotes a historicist sensibility in
artistic practice and cultural reflection. This historicist sensibilityregulated in Eliot's case by a
reactionary politics-produced a powerful assault on existing literary canons (in which, for
example, Romantic poets were displaced by the Metaphysical and Symbolist ones) and
unrelenting attacks on modern Western civilization (such as the liberal ideas of democracy,


--- PAGE 121 ---
equality and freedom). Like Arnold's notion of culture, Eliot's idea of tradition was part of his
intellectual arsenal, to be used in the battles raging in European cultures and societies.
Eliot found this tradition in the Church of England, to which he converted in 1927. Here was a
tradition that left room for his Catholic cast of mind, Calvinistic heritage, puritanical
temperament and ebullient patriotism for the old American South (the place of his upbringing).
Like Arnold, Eliot was obsessed with the idea of civilization and the horror of barbarism
(echoes of Joseph Conrad's Kurtz in Heart of Darkness) or more pointedly the notion of the
decline and decay of European civilization. With the advent of World War II, Eliot's obsession
became a reality. Again unprecedented human carnage (fifty million dead) -including an
undescribable genocidal attack on Jewish people-throughout Europe as well as around the globe
put the last nail in the coffin of the Age of Europe. After 1945, Europe consisted of a devastated
and divided continent, crippled by a humiliating dependency on and deference to the United
States and the Soviet Union.
The second historical coordinate of my genealogy is the emergence of the United States as the
world power. The United States was unprepared for worldpower status. However, with the
recovery of Stalin's Russia (after losing twenty million lives), the United States felt compelled
to make its presence felt around the globe. Then with the Marshall Plan to strengthen Europe
against Russian influence (and provide new markets for U.S. products), the 1948 Russian
takeover of Czechoslovakia, the 1948 Berlin blockade, the 1950 beginning of the Korean War
and the 1952 establishment of NATO forces in Europe, it seemed clear that there was no escape
from world-power obligations.
The post-World War II era in the United States, or the first decades of what Henry Luce
envisioned as "The American Century" was not only a period of incredible economic expansion,
but one of active cultural ferment. In the classical Fordist formula, mass production required
mass consumption. With unchallenged hegemony in the capitalist world, the United States took
economic growth for granted. Next to exercising its crude, anticommunist, McCarthyist
obsessions, buying commodities became the primary act of civic virtue for many American
citizens at this time. The creation of a mass middle class-a prosperous working class with a
bourgeois identity-was countered by the first major emergence of subcultures of American non-
WASP intellectuals: the so-called New York intellectuals in criticism, the Abstract
Expressionists in painting and the bebop artists in jazz music. This emergence signaled a vital
challenge to an American, male, WASP elite loyal to an older and eroding European culture.
The first significant blow was dealt when assimilated Jewish Americans entered the higher
echelons of the cultural apparatus (academy, museums, galleries, mass media). Lionel Trilling is
an emblematic figure. This Jewish entree into the antiSemitic and patriarchal critical discourse
of the exclusivistic institutions of American culture initiated the slow but sure undoing of the
male WASP cultural he gemony and homogeneity. Lionel Trilling's project was to appropriate
Matthew Arnold for his own political and cultural purposes-thereby unraveling the old male
WASP consensus, while erecting a new post-World War II liberal academic consensus around
Cold War, anticommunist renditions of the values of complexity, difficulty, variousness and
modulation. In addition, the postwar boom laid the basis for intense professionalization and


--- PAGE 122 ---
specialization in expanding institutions of higher education-especially in the natural sciences,
which were compelled to respond somehow to Russia's successful ventures in space.
Humanistic scholars found themselves searching for new methodologies that could buttress self-
images of rigor and scientific seriousness. For example, the close reading techniques of New
Criticism (severed from their conservative, organicist, anti-industrialist ideological roots), the
logical precision of reasoning in analytic philosophy, and the jargon of Parsonian structural-
functionalism in sociology helped create such selfimages. Yet towering cultural critics like C.
Wright Mills, W. E. B. Du Bois, Richard Hofstadter, Margaret Mead and Dwight Macdonald
bucked the tide. This suspicion of the academicization of knowledge is expressed in Trilling's
wellknown essay "On the Teaching of Modern Literature":
Can we not say that, when modern literature is brought into the classroom, the subject being
taught is betrayed by the pedagogy of the subject? We have to ask ourselves whether in our day
too much does not come within the purview of the academy. More and more, as the universities
liberalize themselves, turn their beneficent imperialistic gaze upon what is called life itself, the
feeling grows among our educated classes that little can be experienced unless it is validated by
some established intellectual discipline.
Trilling laments the fact that university instruction often quiets and domesticates radical and
subversive works of art, turning them into objects "of merely habitual regard." This process of
"the socialization of the anti-social, or the acculturation of the anti-cultural, or the legitimization
of the subversive" leads Trilling to "question whether in our culture the study of literature is any
longer a suitable means for developing and refining the intelligence." Trilling asks this question
not in the spirit of denigrating and devaluing the academy, but rather in the spirit of highlighting
the possible failure of an Arnoldian conception of culture to contain what he perceives as the
philistine and anarchic alternatives becoming more and more available to students of the 1960s-
namely, mass culture and radical politics.
This threat is partly associated with the third historical coordinate of my genealogy-the
decolonization of the Third World. It is crucial to recognize the importance of this world-
historical process if one wants to grasp the significance of the end of the Age of Europe and the
emergence of the United States as a world power. With the first defeat of a Western nation by a
non-Western nation-in Japan's victory over Russia (1905)-and with revolutions in Persia
(1905), Turkey (1908), China (1912) and Mexico (1911-1912), and much later the independence
of India (1947) and China (1949) and the triumph of Ghana (1957), the actuality of a
decolonized globe loomed large. Born of violent struggle, consciousnessraising and the
reconstruction of identities, decolonization simultaneously brings with it new perspectives on
that long-festering underside of the Age of Europe (of which colonial domination represents the
costs of "progress," "order" and "culture"), as well as requiring new readings of the economic
boom in the United States (wherein the black, brown, yellow, red, female, elderly, gay, lesbian,
and white working class live the same costs as cheap labor at home in addition to U.S.-
dominated Latin American and Pacific Rim markets).
The impetuous ferocity and moral outrage that motors the decolonization process is best
captured by Frantz Fanon in The Wretched of the Earth (1961):


--- PAGE 123 ---
Decolonization, which sets out to change the order of the world, is obviously a program of
complete disorder.... Decolonization is the meeting of two forces, opposed to each other by their
very nature, which in fact owe their originality to that sort of substantification which results from
and is nourished by the situation in the colonies. Their first encounter was marked by violence
and their existence together-that is to say the exploitation of the native by the settler-was carried
on by dint of a great array of bayonets and cannons....
In decolonization, there is therefore the need of a complete calling in question of the colonial
situation. If we wish to describe it precisely, we might find it in the well-known words: "The
last shall be first and the first last." Decolonization is the putting into practice of this sentence.
The naked truth of decolonization evokes for us the searing bullets and bloodstained knives
which emanate from it. For if the last shall be first, this will only come to pass after a murderous
and decisive struggle between the two protagonists.
Fanon's strong words, though excessively Manichaean, still describe the feelings and thoughts
between the occupying British army and colonized Irish in Northern Ireland, the occupying
Israeli army and subjugated Palestinians on the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the South African
army and oppressed black South Africans in the townships, the Japanese police and Koreans
living in Japan. His words also partly invoke the sense many black Americans have toward
police departments in urban centers. In other words, Fanon is articulating century-long heartfelt
human responses to being degraded and despised, hated and haunted, oppressed and exploited,
marginalized and dehumanized at the hands of powerful, xenophobic, European, American,
Russian and Japanese imperial countries.
During the late 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s in the United States, these decolonized
sensibilities fanned and fueled the civil rights and black power movements, as well as the
student antiwar, feminist, gray, brown, gay and lesbian movements. In this period we witnessed
the shattering of male, WASP cultural homogeneity and the collapse of the short-lived liberal
consensus. The inclusion of African Americans, Latino/a Americans, Asian Americans, Native
Americans and American women into the culture of critical discourse yielded intense
intellectual polemics and inescapable ideological polarization that focused principally on the
exclusions, silences and blindnesses of male, WASP cultural homogeneity and its concomitant
Arnoldian notions of the canon.
In addition, these critiques promoted three crucial processes that affected intellectual life in
the country. First is the appropriation of the theories of postwar Europe-especially the work of
the Frankfurt school (Marcuse, Adorno, Horkheimer), French/Italian Marxisms (Sartre,
Althusser, Lefebvre, Gramsci), structuralisms (Levi-Strauss, Todorov) and poststructuralisms
(Deleuze, Derrida, Foucault). These diverse and disparate theories-all preoccupied with
keeping alive radical projects after the end of the Age of Europe-tend to fuse versions of
transgressive European modernisms with Marxist or post-Marxist left politics and unanimously
shun the term "postmodernism." Second, there is the recovery and revisioning of American
history in light of the struggles of white male workers, women, African Americans, Native
Americans, Latino/a Americans, gays and lesbians. Third is the impact of forms of popular
culture, such as television, film, music videos and even sports, on highbrow literate culture. The


--- PAGE 124 ---
black-based hiphop culture of youth around the world is one grand example.
After 1973, with the crisis in the international world economy, America's slump in
productivity, the challenge of OPEC nations to the North Atlantic monopoly of oil production,
the increasing competition in hi-tech sectors of the economy from Japan and West Germany and
the growing fragility of the international debt structure, the United States entered a period of
waning self-confidence (compounded by Watergate) and a nearly contracting economy. As the
standards of living for the middle classes declined, owing to runaway inflation, and the quality
of living fell for most, due to escalating unemployment, underemployment and crime, religious
and secular neoconservatism emerged with power and potency. This fusion of fervent
neonationalism, traditional cultural values and "free market" policies served as the groundwork
for the Reagan-Bush era.
The ambiguous legacies of the European Age, American preeminence and decolonization
continue to haunt our postmodern moment as we come to terms with both the European,
American, Japanese, Soviet and Third World crimes against and contributions to humanity. The
plight of Africans in the New World can be instructive in this regard.
By 1914 European maritime empires had dominion over more than half of the land and a third
of the peoples in the world-almost 72 million square kilometers of territory and more than 560
million people under colonial rule. Needless to say, this European control included brutal
enslavement, institutional terrorism and cultural degradation of black diasporan people. The
death of countless millions of Africans during the centuries-long transatlantic slave trade is but
one reminder, among others, of the assault on black humanity. The black diasporan condition of
New World servitude-in which blacks were viewed as mere commodities with production
value, who had no proper legal status, social standing or public worth-can be characterized as,
following Orlando Patterson, natal alienation. This state of perpetual and inheritable domination
that diasporan Africans had at birth produced the modern black diasporan problematic of
invisibility and namelessness. White-supremacist practices-enacted under the auspices of the
prestigious cultural authorities of the churches, printed media and scientific academics-promoted
black inferiority and constituted the European background against which black diasporan
struggles for identity, dignity (self-confidence, self-respect, selfesteem) and material resources
took place.
An inescapable aspect of this struggle was that the black diasporan peoples' quest for
validation and recognition occurred on the ideological, social and cultural terrains of other
nonblack peoples. White-supremacist assaults on black intelligence, ability, beauty and
character required persistent black efforts to hold self-doubt, self-contempt and even self-hatred
at bay. Selective appropriation, incorporation and rearticulation of European ideologies,
cultures and institutions alongside an African heritage-a heritage more or less confined to
linguistic innovation in rhetorical practices, stylizations of the body in forms of occupying an
alien social space (hairstyles, ways of walking, standing, hand expressions, talking) and means
of constituting and sustaining camaraderie and community (e.g., antiphonal, call-and-response
styles, rhythmic repetition, risk-ridden syncopation in spectacular modes in musical and
rhetorical expressions) -were some of the strategies employed.


--- PAGE 125 ---
The modern black diasporan problematic of invisibility and namelessness can be understood
as the condition of blacks' relative lack o (power to represent themselves to themselves and
others as complex human beings, and thereby to contest the bombardment of negative, degrading
stereotypes put forward by white-supremacist ideologies. The initial black response to being
caught in this whirlwind of Europeanization was to resist the misrepresentation and caricature of
the terms set by uncontested nonblack norms and models, and to fight for self-representation and
recognition. Every modern black person, especially cultural disseminators, encounters this
problematic of invisibility and namelessness. The initial black diasporan response was a mode
of resistance that was moralistic in content and communal in character. That is, the fight for
representation and recognition highlighted moral judgments regarding black "positive" images
over and against white-supremacist stereotypes. These images "re-presented" monolithic and
homogeneous black communities, in a way that could displace past misrepresentations of these
communities. Stuart Hall has talked about these responses as attempts to change "the relations of
representation..
These courageous yet limited black efforts to combat racist cultural practices uncritically
accepted nonblack conventions and standards in two ways. First, they proceeded in an
assimilatimaist manner that set out to show that black people were really like white people-
thereby eliding differences (in history, culture) between whites and blacks. Black specificity and
particularity was thus banished in order to gain white acceptance and approval. Second, these
black responses rested upon a homogenizing impulse that assumed that all black people were
really alike-hence obliterating differences (class, gender, region, sexual orientation) between
black peoples. I submit that there are elements of truth in both claims, yet the conclusions are
unwarranted owing to the basic fact that nonblack paradigms set the terms of the replies.
The insight in the first claim is that blacks and whites are in some important sense alike-that
is, in their positive capacities for human sympathy, moral sacrifice, service to others,
intelligence and beauty, or negatively, in their capacity for cruelty. Yet the common humanity
they share is jettisoned when the claim is cast in an assimilationist manner that subordinates
black particularity to a false universalism, that is, nonblack rubrics or prototypes. Similarly, the
insight in the second claim is that all blacks are in some significant sense "in the same boat"-that
is, subject to white-supremacist abuse. Yet this common condition is stretched too far when
viewed in a homogenizing way that overlooks how racist treatment vastly differs owing to class,
gender, sexual orientation, nation, region, hue and age.
The moralistic and communal aspects of the initial black diasporan responses to social and
psychic erasure were not simply cast into simplistic binary oppositions of positive-negative,
good-bad images that privileged the first term in light of a white norm so that black efforts
remained inscribed within the very logic that dehumanized them. They were further complicated
by the fact that these responses were also advanced principally by anxiety-ridden, middle-class
black intellectuals (predominantly male and heterosexual), grappling with their sense of double-
consciousness-namely their own crisis of identity, agency and audiencecaught between a quest
for white approval and acceptance and an endeavor to overcome the internalized association of
blackness with inferiority. And I suggest that these complex anxieties of modern black diasporan
intellectuals partly motivate the two major arguments that ground the assimilationist moralism


--- PAGE 126 ---
and homogeneous communalism just outlined.
Kobena Mercer has talked about these two arguments as the reflectionist and the social
engineering arguments. The reflectionist argument holds that the fight for black representation
and recognition must reflect or mirror the real black community, not simply the negative and
depressing representations of it. The social engineering argument claims that since any form of
representation is constructed-that is, selective in light of broader aims-black representation
(especially given the difficulty of blacks gaining access to positions of power to produce any
black imagery) should offer positive images of themselves in order to inspire achievement
among young black people, thereby countering racist stereotypes. The hidden assumption of both
arguments is that we have unmediated access to what the "real black community" is and what
"positive images" are. In short, these arguments presuppose the very phenomena to be
interrogated, and thereby foreclose the very issues that should serve as the subject matter to be
investigated.
Any notions of the "real black community" and "positive images" are valueladen, socially
loaded and ideologically charged. To pursue this discussion is to call into question the
possibility of such an uncontested consensus regarding them. Stuart Hall has rightly called this
encounter "the end of innocence or the end of the innocent notion of the essential Black subject ...
the recognition that `Black' is essentially a politically and culturally constructed category." This
recognition-more and more pervasive among the postmodern black diasporan intelligentsia-is
facilitated in part by the slow but sure dissolution of the European Age's maritime empires, and
the unleashing of new political possibilities and cultural articulations among formerly
colonialized peoples across the globe.
One crucial lesson of this decolonization process remains the manner in which most Third
World, authoritarian, bureaucratic elites deploy essentialist rhetorics about "homogeneous
national communities" and "positive images" in order to repress and regiment their diverse and
heterogeneous populations. Yet in the diaspora, especially among First World countries, this
critique has emerged not so much from the black male component of the Left as from the black
women's movement. The decisive push of postmodern black intellectuals toward a new cultural
politics of difference has been made by the powerful critiques and constructive explorations of
black diasporan women (for instance, Toni Morrison). The coffin used to bury the innocent
notion of the essential black subject was nailed shut with the termination of the black male
monopoly on the construction of the black subject. In this regard, the black diasporan womanist
critique has had a greater impact than the critiques that highlight exclusively class, empire, age,
sexual orientation or nature.
This decisive push toward the end of black innocence-though prefigured in various degrees in
the best moments of W. E. B. Du Bois, Alma Cooper, C. L. R. James, James Baldwin, Claudia
Jones, the later Malcolm X, Frantz Fanon, Amiri Baraka and others-forces black diasporan
cultural workers to encounter what Hall has called the "politics of representation." The main aim
now is not simply access to representation in order to produce positive images of homogeneous
communities-though broader access remains a practical and political problem. Nor is the
primary goal here that of contesting stereotypes-though contestation remains a significant though


--- PAGE 127 ---
limited venture. Following the model of the black diasporan traditions of music, athletics and
rhetoric, black cultural workers must constitute and sustain discursive and institutional networks
that deconstruct earlier modern black strategies for identity formation, demystify power relations
that incorporate class, patriarchal and homophobic biases and construct more multivalent and
multidimensional responses that articulate the complexity and diversity of black practices in the
modern and postmodern world.
Furthermore, black cultural workers must investigate and interrogate the Other of blackness-
whiteness. One cannot deconstruct the binary oppositional logic of images of blackness without
extending it to the contrary condition of blacknesswhiteness itself. However, a mere dismantling
will not do-for the very notion of a deconstructive social theory is oxymoronic. Yet social theory
is what is needed to examine and explain the historically specific ways in which "whiteness" is
a politically constructed category parasitic on "blackness," and thereby to conceive of the
profoundly hybrid character of what we mean by "race," "ethnicity" and "nationality." For
instance, European immigrants arrived on American shores perceiving themselves as "Irish,"
"Sicilian," "Lithuanian" and so on. They had to learn that they were "white" principally by
adopting an American discourse of positively valued whiteness and negatively charged
blackness. This process by which people define themselves physically, socially, sexually and
even politically in terms of whiteness or blackness has much bearing not only on constructed
notions of race and ethnicity, but also on how we understand the changing character of U.S.
nationalities. And given the Americanization of the world, especially in the sphere of mass
culture, such inquiries-encouraged by the new cultural politics of difference-raise critical issues
of "hybridity," "exilic status" and "identity" on an international scale. Needless to say, these
inquiries must traverse those of "male-female," "colonizer-colonized," "heterosexual-
homosexual" and others as well.
In light of this brief sketch of the emergence of our present crisis-and the turn toward history
and difference in cultural work-four major historicist forms of theoretical activity provide
resources for how we understand, analyze and enact our representational practices:
Heideggerian destruction of the Western metaphysical tradition, Derridean deconstruction of the
Western philosophical tradition, Rortian demythologization of the Western intellectual tradition
and Marxist, Foucaultian, feminist, antiracist or antihomophobic demystfcation of Western
cultural and artistic conventions.
Despite his abominable association with the Nazis, Martin Heidegger's project is useful in
that it discloses the suppression of temporality and historicity in the dominant metaphysical
systems of the West from Plato to Rudolf Carnap. This is noteworthy in that it forces one to
understand philosophy's representational discourses as thoroughly historical phenomena. Hence,
they should be viewed with skepticism, as they are often flights from the specific, concrete,
practical and particular. The major problem with Heidegger's project-as noted by his neo-
Marxist student Herbert Marcuse-is that he views history in terms of fate, heritage and destiny.
He dramatizes the past and present as if it were a Greek tragedy with no tools of social analysis
to relate cultural work to institutions and structures or antecedent forms and styles.
Jacques Derrida's version of deconstruction is one of the most influential schools of thought


--- PAGE 128 ---
among young academic critics. It is salutary in that it focuses on the political power of rhetorical
operations-of tropes and metaphors in binary oppositions like white/black, good/bad,
male/female, machine/nature, ruler/ruled, reality/appearance-showing how these operations
sustain hierarchical worldviews by devaluing the second terms as something subsumed under the
first. Most of the controversy about Derrida's project revolves around this austere epistemic
doubt that both unsettles binary oppositions while it undermines any determinate meaning of a
text, that is, book, art object, performance, building. Yet, his views about skepticism are no more
alarming than those of David Hume, Ludwig Wittgenstein or Stanley Cavell. He simply revels in
it for transgressive purposes, whereas others provide us with ways to dissolve, sidestep or cope
with skepticism. None, however, slide down the slippery, crypto-Nietzschean slope of
sophomoric relativism as alleged by old-style humanists, be they Platonists, Kantians or
Arnoldians.
The major shortcoming of Derrida's deconstructive project is that it puts a premium on a
sophisticated ironic consciousness that tends to preclude and foreclose analyses that guide
action with purpose. And given Derrida's own status as an Algerian-born, Jewish leftist
marginalized by a hostile French academic establishment (quite different from his reception by
the youth in the American academic establishment), the sense of political impotence and
hesitation regarding the efficacy of moral action is understandable-but not justifiable. His works
and those of his followers too often become rather monotonous, Johnny-one-note rhetorical
readings that disassemble texts with little attention to the effects and consequences these
dismandings have in relation to the operations of military, economic and social powers.
Richard Rorty's neopragmatic project of demythologization is insightful in that it provides
descriptive mappings of the transient metaphors-especially the ocular and specular ones-that
regulate some of the fundamental dynamics in the construction of self-descriptions dominant in
highbrow European and American philosophy. His perspective is instructive because it
discloses the crucial role of narrative as the background for rational exchange and critical
conversation. To put it crudely, Rorty shows why we should speak not of History, but histories,
not of Reason, but historically constituted forms of rationality, not of Criticism or Art, but of
socially constructed notions of criticism and art-all linked, but not reducible to political
purposes, material interests and cultural prejudices.
Rorty's project nonetheless leaves one wanting, owing to its distrust of socialanalytical
explanation. Similar to the dazzling new historicism of Stephen Greenblatt, Louis Montrose and
Catherine Gallagher-inspired by the subtle symboliccum-textual anthropology of Clifford Geertz
and the powerful discursive materialism of Michel Foucault-Rorty's work gives us mappings
and descriptions with no explanatory accounts for change and conflict. In this way, it gives us an
aestheticized version of historicism in which the provisional and variable are celebrated at the
expense of highlighting who gains, loses or bears what costs.
Demystification is the most illuminating mode of theoretical inquiry for those who promote the
new cultural politics of difference. Social structural analyses of empire, exterminism, class,
race, gender, nature, age, sexual orientation, nation and region are the springboards-though not
landing grounds-for the most desirable forms of critical practice that take history (and herstory)


--- PAGE 129 ---
seriously. Demystification tries to keep track of the complex dynamics of institutional and other
related power structures in order to disclose options and alternatives for transformative praxis;
it also attempts to grasp the way in which representational strategies are creative responses to
novel circumstances and conditions. In this way, the central role of human agency (always
enacted under circumstances not of one's choosing)-be it in the critic, artist or constituency and
audience-is accented.
I call demystificatory criticism "prophetic criticism"-the approach appropriate for the new
cultural politics of difference-because although it begins with social structural analyses, it also
makes explicit its moral and political aims. It is partisan, partial, engaged and crisis-centered,
yet always keeps open a skeptical eye to avoid dogmatic traps, premature closures, formulaic
formulations or rigid conclusions. In addition to social structural analyses, moral and political
judgments and sheer critical consciousness, there indeed is evaluation. Yet the aim of this
evaluation is neither to pit art objects against one another like racehorses nor to create eternal
canons that dull, discourage or even dwarf contemporary achievements. We listen to Ludwig van
Beethoven, Charlie Parker, Luciano Pavarotti, Laurie Anderson, Sarah Vaughn, Stevie Wonder
or Kathleen Battle, read William Shakespeare, Anton Chekhov, Ralph Ellison, Doris Lessing,
Thomas Pynchon, Toni Morrison or Gabriel Garcia Marquez, see works of Pablo Picasso,
Ingmar Bergman, Le Corbusier, Martin Puryear, Barbara Kruger, Spike Lee, Frank Gehry or
Howardena Pindell-not in order to undergird bureaucratic assents or enliven cocktail party
conversations, but rather to be summoned by the styles they deploy for their profound insight,
pleasures and challenges. Yet all evaluation-including a delight in Eliot's poetry despite his
reactionary politics or a love of Zora Neale Hurston's novels despite her Republican party
affiliations-is inseparable from, though not identical or reducible to, social structural analyses,
moral and political judgments and the workings of a curious critical consciousness.
The deadly traps of demystification-and any form of prophetic criticism-are those of
reductionism, be it of the sociological, psychological or historical sort. By reductionism I mean
either one-factor analyses (that is, crude Marxisms, feminisms, racialisms, etc.) that yield a one-
dimensional functionalism, or a hypersub- tle analytical perspective that loses touch with the
specificity of an artwork's form and the context of its reception. Few cultural workers of
whatever stripe can walk the tightrope between the Scylla of reductionism and the Charybdis of
aestheticism-yet demystificatory (or prophetic) critics must.
THE EXISTENTIAL CHALLENGE
The existential challenge to the new cultural politics of difference can be stated simply: How
does one acquire the resources to survive and the cultural capital to thrive as a critic or artist?
By cultural capital (Pierre Bourdieu's term), I mean not only the high-quality skills required to
engage in critical practices but, more important, the self-confidence, discipline and
perseverance necessary for success without an undue reliance on the mainstream for approval
and acceptance. This challenge holds for all prophetic critics, yet it is especially difficult for
those of color. The widespread, modern, European denial of the intelligence, ability, beauty and
character of people of color puts a tremendous burden on critics and artists of color to "prove"
themselves in light of norms and models set by white elites whose own heritage devalued and


--- PAGE 130 ---
dehumanized them. In short, in the court of criticism and art-or any matters regarding the life of
the mind-people of color are guilty, that is, not expected to meet standards of intellectual
achievement, until "proven" innocent, that is, acceptable to "us."
This is more a structural dilemma than a matter of personal attitudes. The profoundly racist
and sexist heritage of the European Age has bequeathed to us a set of deeply ingrained
perceptions about people of color, including, of course, the self-perceptions that people of color
bring. It is not surprising that most intellectuals of color in the past exerted much of their
energies and efforts to gain acceptance from and approval by "white normative gazes." The new
cultural politics of difference advises critics and artists of color to put aside this mode of mental
bondage, thereby freeing themselves to both interrogate the ways in which they are bound by
certain conventions and to learn from and build on these very norms and models. One hallmark
of wisdom in the context of any struggle is to avoid knee-jerk rejection and uncritical
acceptance.
Self-confidence, discipline and perseverance are not ends in themselves. Rather they are the
necessary stuff of which enabling criticism and self-criticism are made. Notwithstanding
inescapable jealousies, insecurities and anxieties, one telling characteristic of critics and artists
of color linked to the new prophetic criticism should be their capacity for and promotion of
relentless criticism and selfcriticism-be it the normative paradigms of their white colleagues that
tend to leave out considerations of empire, race, gender and sexual orientation, or the damaging
dogmas about the homogeneous character of communities of color.
There are four basic options for people of color interested in representation-if they are to
survive and thrive as serious practitioners of their craft. First, there is the Booker T. Temptation,
namely, the individual preoccupation with the mainstream and its legitimizing power. Most
critics and artists of color try to bite this bait. It is nearly unavoidable, yet few succeed in a
substantive manner. It is no accident that the most creative and profound among them-especially
those with staying power beyond mere flashes in the pan to satisfy faddish tokenism-are usually
marginal to the mainstream. Even the pervasive professionalization of cultural practitioners of
color in the past few decades has not produced towering figures who reside within the
established white patronage system, which bestows the rewards and prestige for chosen
contributions to American society.
It certainly helps to have some trustworthy allies within this system, yet most of those who
enter and remain tend to lose much of their creativity, diffuse their prophetic energy and dilute
their critiques. Still, it is unrealistic for creative people of color to think they can sidestep the
white patronage system. And though there are indeed some white allies conscious of the
tremendous need to rethink politics, it's naive to think that being comfortably nested within this
very same systemeven if one can be a patron to others-does not affect one's work, one's outlook
and, most important, one's soul.
The second option is the Talented Tenth Seduction, namely, a move toward arrogant group
insularity. This alternative has a limited function-to preserve one's sanity and sense of self as
one copes with the mainstream. Yet it is, at best, a transitional and transient activity. If it
becomes a permanent option, it is self-defeating in that it usually reinforces the very inferiority


--- PAGE 131 ---
complexes promoted by the subtly racist mainstream. Hence it tends to revel in a parochialism
and encourage a narrow racialist and chauvinistic outlook.
The third strategy is the Go It Alone Option. This is an extreme rejectionist perspective that
shuns the mainstream and group insularity. Almost every critic and artist of color contemplates
or enacts this option at some time in their pilgrimage. It is healthy in that it reflects the presence
of independent, critical and skeptical sensibilities toward perceived constraints on one's
creativity. Yet it is, in the end, difficult if not impossible to sustain if one is to grow, develop
and mature intellectually, as some semblance of dialogue with a community is necessary for
almost any creative practice.
The most desirable option for people of color who promote the new cultural politics of
difference is to be a Critical Organic Catalyst. By this I mean a person who stays attuned to the
best of what the mainstream has to offer-its paradigms, viewpoints and methods-yet maintains a
grounding in affirming and enabling subcultures of criticism. Prophetic critics and artists of
color should be exemplars of what it means to be intellectual freedom fighters, that is, cultural
workers who simultaneously position themselves within (or alongside) the mainstream while
clearly aligned with groups who vow to keep alive potent traditions of critique and resistance.
In this regard, one can take clues from the great musicians or preachers of color who are open to
the best of what other traditions offer, yet are rooted in nourishing subcultures that build on the
grand achievements of a vital heritage. Openness to others-including the mainstream-does not
entail wholesale co-optation, and group autonomy is not group insularity. Louis Armstrong, W.
E. B. Du Bois, Ella Baker, Jose Carlos Mariategui, M. M. Thomas, Wynton Marsalis, Martin
Luther King, Jr., and Ronald Takaki have understood this well.
The new cultural politics of difference can thrive only if there are communities, groups,
organizations, institutions, subcultures and networks of people of color who cultivate critical
sensibilities and personal accountability-without inhibiting individual expressions, curiosities
and idiosyncrasies. This is especially needed given the escalating racial hostility, violence and
polarization in the United States. Yet this critical coming together must not be a narrow closing
ranks. Rather, it is a strengthening and nurturing endeavor that can forge more solid alliances and
coalitions. In this way, prophetic criticism-with its stress on historical specificity and artistic
complexity-directly addresses the intellectual challenge. The cultural capital of people of color-
with its emphasis on self-confidence, discipline, perseverance and subcultures of criticism-also
tries to meet the existential requirement. Both are mutually reinforcing. Both are motivated by a
deep commitment to individuality and democracy-the moral and political ideals that guide the
creative response to the political challenge.
THE POLITICAL CHALLENGE
Adequate rejoinders to intellectual and existential challenges equip the practitioners of the new
cultural politics of difference to meet the political ones. This challenge principally consists of
forging solid and reliable alliances of people of color and white progressives guided by a moral
and political vision of greater democracy and individual freedom in communities, states and
transnational enterprises, for instance, corporations and information and communications
conglomerates.


--- PAGE 132 ---
Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition is a gallant yet flawed effort in this regardgallant due to
the tremendous energy, vision and courage of its leader and followers, yet flawed because of its
failure to take seriously critical and democratic sensibilities within its own operations. In fact,
Jackson's attempt to gain power at the national level is a symptom of the weakness of U.S.
progressive politics, and a sign that the capacity to generate extraparliamentary social motion or
movements has waned. Yet given the present organizational weakness and intellectual timidity of
left politics in the United States, the major option is that of multiracial grassroots citizens'
participation in credible projects in which people see that their efforts can make a difference.
The salutary revolutionary developments in Eastern Europe are encouraging and inspiring in this
regard. Ordinary people organized can change societies.
The most significant theme of the new cultural politics of difference is the agency, capacity
and ability of human beings who have been culturally degraded, politically oppressed and
economically exploited by bourgeois liberal and Communist illiberal status quos. This theme
neither romanticizes nor idealizes marginalized peoples. Rather, it accentuates their humanity
and tries to attenuate the institutional constraints on their life-chances for surviving and thriving.
In this way, the new cultural politics of difference shuns narrow particularisms, parochialisms
and separatisms, just as it rejects false universalisms and homogeneous totalisms. Instead, the
new cultural politics of difference affirms the perennial quest for the precious ideals of
individuality and democracy by digging deep into the depths of human particularities and social
specificities in order to construct new kinds of connections, affinities and communities across
empire, nation, region, race, gender, age and sexual orientation.
The major impediments of the radical libertarian and democratic projects of the new cultural
politics are threefold: the pervasive processes of objectification, rationalization and
commodification throughout the world. The first process-best highlighted in Georg Simmel's The
Philosophy of Money (1900)-consists of transforming human beings into manipulable objects. It
promotes the notion that people's actions have no impact on the world, that we are but spectators
not participants in making and remaking ourselves and the larger society. The second process-
initially examined in the seminal works of Max Weber-expands bureaucratic hierarchies that
impose impersonal rules and regulations in order to increase efficiency, be they defined in terms
of better service or better surveillance. This process leads to disenchantment with past
mythologies of deadening, flat, banal ways of life. The third and most important process-best
examined in the works of Karl Marx, Georg Lukacs and Walter Benjamin-augments market
forces in the form of oligopolies and monopolies that centralize resources and powers and
promote cultures of consumption that view people as mere spectatorial consumers and passive
citizens.
These processes cannot be eliminated, but their pernicious effects can be substantially
alleviated. The audacious attempt to lessen their impact-to preserve people's agency, increase
the scope of their freedom and expand the operations of democracy-is the fundamental aim of the
new cultural politics of difference. This is why the crucial questions become: What is the moral
content of one's cultural identity? And what are the political consequences of this moral content
and cultural identity?


--- PAGE 133 ---
In the recent past, the dominant cultural identities have been circumscribed by immoral
patriarchal, imperial, jingoistic and xenophobic constraints. The political consequences have
been principally a public sphere regulated by and for well-todo, white males in the name of
freedom and democracy. The new cultural criticism exposes and explodes the exclusions,
blindnesses and silences of this past, calling from it radical libertarian and democratic projects
that will create a better present and future. The new cultural politics of difference is neither an
ahistorical Jacobin program that discards tradition and ushers in new self-righteous
authoritarianisms, nor a guilt-ridden, leveling, anti-imperialist liberalism that celebrates token
pluralism for smooth inclusion. Rather, it acknowledges the uphill struggle of fundamentally
transforming highly objectified, rationalized and commodified societies and cultures in the name
of individuality and democracy. This means locating the structural causes of unnecessary forms
of social misery (without reducing all such human suffering to historical causes), depicting the
plight and predicaments of demoralized and depoliticized citizens caught in market-driven
cycles of therapeutic release-drugs, alcoholism, consumerism-and projecting alternative visions,
analyses and actions that proceed from particularities and arrive at moral and political
connectedness. This connectedness does not signal a homogeneous unity or monolithic totality,
but rather a contingent, fragile coalition building in an effort to pursue common radical
libertarian and democratic goals that overlap.
In a world in which most of the resources, wealth and power are centered in huge
corporations and supportive political elites, the new cultural politics of difference may appear
to be solely visionary, utopian and fanciful. The recent cutbacks of social service programs,
business takebacks at the negotiation tables of workers and management, speedups at the
workplace and buildups of military budgets reinforce this perception. And surely the growing
disintegration and decomposition of civil society-of shattered families, neighborhoods and
schoolsadds to this perception. Can a civilization that evolves more and more around market
activity, more and more around the buying and selling of commodities, expand the scope of
freedom and democracy? Can we simply bear witness to its slow decay and doom-a painful
denouement prefigured already in many poor black and brown communities and rapidly
embracing all of us? These haunting questions remain unanswered, yet the challenge they pose
must not remain unmet. The new cultural politics of difference tries to confront these enormous
and urgent challenges. It will require all the imagination, intelligence, courage, sacrifice, care
and laughter we can muster.
The time has come for critics and artists of the new cultural politics of difference to cast their
nets widely, flex their muscles broadly and thereby refuse to limit their visions, analyses and
praxis to their particular terrains. The aim is to dare to recast, redefine and revise the very
notions of "modernity," "mainstream," "margins," "difference," "otherness." We have now
reached a new stage in the perennial struggle for freedom and dignity. And although much of the
First World intelligentsia adopts retrospective and conservative outlooks that defend the
crisisridden present, we promote a prospective and prophetic vision with a sense of possibility
and potential, especially for those who bear the social costs of the present. We look to the past
for strength, not solace; we look at the present and see people perishing, not profits mounting;
we look toward the future and vow to make it different and better.


--- PAGE 134 ---
To put it boldly, the new kind of critic and artist associated with the new cultural politics of
difference consists of an energetic breed of New World bricoleurs with improvisational and
flexible sensibilities that sidestep mere opportunism and mindless eclecticism; persons from all
countries, cultures, genders, sexual orientations, ages and regions with protean identities who
avoid ethnic chauvinism and faceless universalism; intellectual and political freedom fighters
with partisan passion, international perspectives and, thank God, a sense of humor that combats
the ever present absurdity that forever threatens our democratic and libertarian projects and
dampens the fire that fuels our will to struggle. Yet we will struggle and stay, as those brothers
and sisters on the block say, "out there"-with intellectual rigor, existential dignity, moral vision,
political courage and soulful style.
SOURCE: From Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America, by Cornel West, pp. 3-32.
Copyright O' 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc. Originally appeared in Russell
Ferguson, Martha Gever, Trinh T. Minh-ha and Cornet West, eds., Out There: Marginaluation and
Contemporary Cultures (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1990).


--- PAGE 135 ---



--- PAGE 136 ---
WHY PRAGMATISM?
In 1977 I wrote an essay in which I predicted that Richard Rorty's then circulating manuscript,
which would soon be published as Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, would produce a
pragmatist renaissance. We read this manuscript in his Princeton seminar in the mid-1970s. In
the mid-1980s I wrote a first draft of my pragmatism book, which began with Ralph Waldo
Emerson and ended with Rorty. After reading the manuscript Rorty sent me a note in Paris
praising the book yet advising that I omit the section on Quine and himself. He suggested I end
with my own work, not his. This advice exempls his modesty and his steadfast support for my
work over the last twenty-five years. This introduction to my book gives readers some idea of
why pragmatism makes a difference in our thought and life.
A SMALL-SCALE INTELLECTUAL renascence is occurring under the broad banner of
pragmatism. The controversial works of Richard Rorty-aided by the differing views of fellow
pragmatists such as Hilary Putnam, Ian Hacking and Richard Bernstein-have unsettled academic
philosophy. Literary critics of the pragmatist persuasion like Frank Lentricchia and Stanley Fish
have upset traditional humanists. Creative interpreters of John Dewey-like Sheldon Wolin,
Michael Walzer and Benjamin Barber-who have updated radical democratic thinking now
challenge liberal political theory. And pragmatist thinkers such as Jeffrey Stout are reshaping
prevailing conceptions of religious thought.
Three basic issues underlie this recent renascence. First, there is a widespread
disenchantment with the traditional image of philosophy as a transcendental mode of inquiry, a
tribunal of reason that grounds claims about Truth, Goodness and Beauty. The professional
discipline of philosophy is presently caught in an interregnum; mindful of the dead ends of
analytical modes of philosophizing, it is yet unwilling to move into the frightening wilderness of
pragmatism and historicism with their concomitant concerns in social theory, cultural criticism
and historiography. This situation has left the discipline with an excess of academic rigor, yet
bereft of substantive intellectual vigor and uncertain of a legitimate subject matter. The
unwillingness of many philosophers to tread in the wilderness results from adherence to
professional boundaries and academic self-understandings. To put it crudely, most philosophers
are neither trained to converse with literary crit ics, historians and social theorists nor ready to
give up the secure self-image of academicians engaged in "serious" philosophical research.
Second, the disenchantment with transcendental conceptions of philosophy has led to a
preoccupation with the relation of knowledge and power, cognition and control, discourse and
politics. No longer are humanistic scholars content with a historicizing of science, morality and
art that shuns the ways in which sciences, moralities and the arts are inextricably linked to
structures of domination and subordination. This preoccupation with the materiality of language-
such as the ways in which styles of rationality and scientificity or identities and subjectivities
are socially constructed and historically constituted-has focused cultural investigations on the
production, distribution and circulation of forms of powers, be they rhetorical, economic or
military powers.
Third, this focus on powers has returned humanistic studies to the primal stuff of human


--- PAGE 137 ---
history, that is, structured and circumscribed human agency in all its various manifestations.
Gone is the once fashionable poststructuralist claim to eliminate the subject. Yet also gone is the
old humanist view that elevates the human agency of elite cultural creators and ignores social
structural constraints, constraints that reinforce and reproduce hierarchies based on class, race,
gender and sexual orientation.
It is no accident that American pragmatism once again rises to the surface of North Atlantic
intellectual life at the present moment, for its major themes of evading epistemology-centered
philosophy, accenting human powers and transforming antiquated modes of social hierarchies in
light of religious and/or ethical ideals make it relevant and attractive. The distinctive appeal of
American pragmatism in our postmodern moment is its unashamedly moral emphasis and its
unequivocally ameliorative impulse. In this world-weary period of pervasive cynicisms,
nihilisms, terrorisms and possible extermination, there is a longing for norms and values that can
make a difference, a yearning for principled resistance and struggle that can change our
desperate plight.
The irony of the contemporary intellectual scene in North America is that after an obsession
with European theories and philosophies, we are discovering some of what is needed in the
American heritage. This intellectual turn to our heritage ought to be neither a simplistic pro-
Americanism in the life of the mind nor a naive parochialism that shuns international outlooks.
But this turn is a symptom of just how blinded we often are to certain riches in the American
intellectual and political past. Needless to say, we approach this past better equipped owing to
European products such as Marxism, structuralism and poststructuralism. But we also
acknowledge the shortcomings of these products, that is, their ultimate inability to come to terms
with the specificity of our contemporary predicament. The turn to the American heritage-and
especially American pragmatism-is neither a panacea for our ills nor a solution to our problems.
Rather, it should be an attempt to reinvigorate our moribund academic life, our lethargic
political life, our decadent cultural life and our chaotic personal lives for the flowering of
manysided personalities and the flourishing of more democracy and freedom.
My basic aim in this book is to chart the emergence, development, decline and resurgence of
American pragmatism. I understand American pragmatism as a specific historical and cultural
product of American civilization, a particular set of social practices that articulate certain
American desires, values and responses and that are elaborated in institutional apparatuses
principally controlled by a significant slice of the American middle class.
American pragmatism emerges with profound insights and myopic blindnesses, enabling
strengths and debilitating weaknesses, all resulting from distinctive features of American
civilization: its revolutionary beginning combined with a slavebased economy and subordination
of American Indians; its elastic liberal rule of law combined with an entrenched business-
dominated status quo; its hybrid culture in combination with a collective self-definition as
homogeneously AngloAmerican; its obsession with mobility, contingency and pecuniary
liquidity combined with a deep moralistic impulse; and its impatience with theories and
philosophies alongside ingenious technological innovation, political strategies of compromise
and personal devices for comfort and convenience. This "hotel civilization" (to use Henry


--- PAGE 138 ---
James's apt phrase), with its fusion of the uncertainty of the capitalist market with the quest for
security of the home, yielded an indigenous mode of thought that subordinates knowledge to
power, tradition to invention, instruction to provocation, community to personality and
immediate problems to utopian possibilities.
American pragmatism is a diverse and heterogeneous tradition. But its common denominator
consists of a future-oriented instrumentalism that tries to deploy thought as a weapon to enable
more effective action. Its basic impulse is a plebeian radicalism that fuels an antipatrician
rebelliousness for the moral aim of enriching individuals and expanding democracy. This
rebelliousness, rooted in the anticolonial heritage of the country, is severely restricted by an
ethnocentrism and a patriotism cognizant of the exclusion of peoples of color, certain
immigrants, women, gays and lesbians, yet fearful of the subversive demands these excluded
peoples might make and enact.
The fundamental argument of this book is that the evasion of epistemologycentered
philosophy-from Emerson to Rorty-results in a conception of philosophy as a form of cultural
criticism in which the meaning of America is put forward by intellectuals in response to distinct
social and cultural crises. In this sense, American pragmatism is less a philosophical tradition
putting forward solutions to perennial problems in the Western philosophical conversation
initiated by Plato and more a continuous cultural commentary or set of interpretations that
attempt to explain America to itself at a particular historical moment.
The pragmatists' preoccupation with power, provocation and personality-in contrast, say, to
grounding knowledge, regulating instruction and promoting tradition-signifies an intellectual
calling to administer to a confused populace caught in the whirlwinds of societal crisis, the
cross fires of ideological polemics and the storms of class, racial and gender conflicts. This
deep intellectual vocation, quite different from our sense of the emasculation of the academic
profession, impels the major American pragmatists to be organic intellectuals of some sort; that
is, participants in the life of the mind who revel in ideas and relate ideas to action by means of
creating, constituting or consolidating constituencies for moral aims and political purposes. It is
no accident that the major figures of American pragmatism use the language of crisis-hence the
centrality of critical consciousness in their work-and exude urgency as they search for strategies
and tactics to facilitate their exercise of intellectual and moral leadership for their constituency.
And on a deeper level, these figures grapple with the problem of evil, producing ever changing
yet definite ideological constructions of an American theodicy.
This book does not purport to be a comprehensive account of American pragmatism. Rather, it
is a highly selective interpretation of American pragmatism in light of the present state (or my
reading) of American society and culture. For instance, the omission of George Herbert Mead or
C. I. Lewis is not a negative comment on their significant intellectual contributions to American
pragmatism. Similarly, my focus on John Dewey at the expense of Charles Peirce and William
James does not reflect my deep respect for the latter two. Rather, it expresses my sense that the
thoroughgoing historical consciousness and emphasis on social and political matters found in
Dewey speaks more to my purposes than the preoccupations with logic in Peirce and the
obsessions with individuality in James. I consider Peirce and James as profound pioneering


--- PAGE 139 ---
figures standing, in part, on the shoulders of Emerson. Yet I believe that it is with Dewey that
American pragmatism achieves intellectual maturity, historical scope and political engagement.
In this sense, my genealogy of American pragmatism is an explicitly political interpretation
without, I hope, being pejoratively ideological.
My emphasis on the political and moral side of American pragmatism permits me to make a
case for the familiar, but rarely argued, claim that Emerson is the appropriate starting point for
the pragmatist tradition. Furthermore, by including treatments of a historian (Du Bois),
theologian (Niebuhr), sociologist (C. Wright Mills), and literary critic (Trilling), I try to show
the way in which Emersonian sensibilities and pragmatist progeny cut across the modem
disciplinary division of knowledge.
In regard to method, this work is a social history of ideas. It conceives of the intellectual
sphere of history as distinct, unique and personal sets of cultural practices intimately connected
with concomitant developments in the larger society and culture. On the one hand, this book
benefits from the groundbreaking re search of social historians who delve into the institutional
constraints on and agency of exploited and oppressed peoples, yet the book focuses principally
on how the complex formulations and arguments of American pragmatists shape and are shaped
by the social structures that exploit and oppress. On the other hand, this text learns from-without
endorsing-the grand tradition of idealist historiography in that it tries to get inside the
formulations and arguments of American pragmatists so that the social roles and functions of
ideas do not exhaust their existence or curb intellectual curiosity. This fusion of the intrinsic
interest (or hedonistic effect) and the instrumental interest (or political use) of American
pragmatism is the goal of this social history of ideas.
This book also attempts to address the crisis of the American Left. It does this primarily by
providing an interpretation of a progressive tradition that can inspire and instruct contemporary
efforts to remake and reform American society and culture. My own conception of prophetic
pragmatism-a phrase I hope is not oxymoronic to readers after elucidation and illustration-
serves as the culmination of the American pragmatist tradition; that is, it is a perspective and
project that speaks to the major impediments to a wider role for pragmatism in American
thought.
I began this work as an exercise in critical self-inventory, as a historical, social and
existential situating of my own work as an intellectual, activist and human being. I wanted to
make clear to myself my own contradictions and tensions, faults and foibles as one shaped by, in
part, the tradition of American pragmatism. My first book, Prophesy Deliverance! An Afro-
American Revolutionary Christianity (1982), attempted to lay bare the oppositional potential of
prophetic Christianity-especially as filtered through the best of the black church tradition.
Prophetic Fragments (1988) followed in the same vein. My critical acceptance of certain
elements of Marxist analysis linked me to the worldwide Christian anti-imperialist and
anticapitalist movement often referred to as liberation theology. Yet my promotion of American
pragmatism as both a persuasive philosophical perspective and an indigenous source of left
politics in America perplexed many people. So just as my earlier texts emerged out of my own
political praxis in and my identity with prophetic Christianity, this book consists of my attempt


--- PAGE 140 ---
to come to terms with my philosophic allegiances in light of my participation in the U.S.
democratic socialist movement (Democratic Socialists of America), my particular role in the
American academy (Princeton University) and my existence on the margins of the black church
(as a lay preacher).
This book is principally motivated by my own disenchantment with intellectual life in
America and my own demoralization regarding the political and cultural state of the country. For
example, I am disturbed by the transformation of highly intelligent liberal intellectuals into
tendentious neoconservatives owing to crude ethnic identity-based allegiances and vulgar
neonationalist sentiments. I am dis appointed with the professional incorporation of former New
Left activists who now often thrive on a self-serving careerism while espousing rhetorics of
oppositional politics of little seriousness and integrity. More important, I am depressed about
the concrete nihilism in working-class and underclass American communities-the pervasive drug
addiction, suicides, alcoholism, male violence against women, "straight" violence against gays
and lesbians, white violence against black, yellow and brown people and the black criminality
against others, especially other black people. I have written this text convinced that a thorough
reexamination of American pragmatism, stripping it of its myths, caricatures and stereotypes and
viewing it as a component of a new and novel form of indigenous American oppositional thought
and action, may be a first step toward fundamental change and transformation in America and the
world. Like Raymond Williams's Culture and Society and Fredric Jameson's Marxism and Form,
this book is, among other things, a political act.
I write as one who intends to deepen and enrich American pragmatism while bringing
trenchant critique to bear on it. I consider myself deeply shaped by American civilization, but
not fully a part of it. I am convinced that the best of the American pragmatist tradition is the best
America has to offer itself and the world, yet I am willing to concede that this best may not be
good enough, given the depths of the international and domestic crises we now face. But though
this slim and slight possibility may make my efforts no more than an impotent moral gesture,
nonetheless, in the heat of battle, we have no other choice but to fight.
SOURCE: "Introduction," The American Evasion ofPhilosophy, pp. 3-8. Copyright © 1989.
Reprinted by permission of The University of Wisconsin Press.


--- PAGE 141 ---
O N P R O P H E T I C P R A G M A T I S M
This section of the last chapter oj'The American Evasion of Philosophy lays bare my attempt to
learn from and go beyond earlier forms of pragmatism. My text takes readers through Emerson,
Peirce, James, Dewey, Hook, Mills, Du Bois, Niebuhr, Trilling, Quine and Rorty. I then situate
two major thinkers injluenced by pragmatism-Roberto Unger and Michel Foucault-who present
alternatives to my prophetic pragmatism. My subsequent book with Unger, The Future of
American Progressivism (1998), exemplifies our rapprochement, despite lingering tensions over
my Chekhovian Christian sensibilities and his High Romantic sentiments.
At the level of theory the philosophy of praxis cannot be confounded with or reduced to any other
philosophy. Its originality lies not only in its transcending of previous philosophies but also and
above all in that it opens up a completely new road, renewing from head to toe the whole way of
conceiving philosophy itself ... the whole way of conceiving philosophy has been "historicised," that
is to say a new way of philosophising which is more concrete and historical than what went before it
has begun to come into existence.
-ANTONIO GRAMSCI
THE MOVE FROM RORTY's model of fluid conversation to that of the multileveled operations
of power leads us back to Ralph Waldo Emerson. Like Friedrich Nietzsche, Emerson is first and
foremost a cultural critic obsessed with ways to generate forms of power. For Rorty, these forms
are understood as activities of conversation for the primary purpose of producing new human
self-descriptions. But for Emerson, conversation is but one minor instance of the myriad of
possible transactions for the enhancement of human powers and personalities. Ironically, Rorty's
adoption of Michael Oakeshott's metaphor of "conversation" reflects the dominant ideal of the
very professionalism he criticizes. This ideal indeed is more a public affair than are Emerson's
preferred ideal transactions, e.g., gardening, walking, reading, and yet it also is more genteel and
bourgeois.
The tradition of pragmatism-the most influential stream in American thought-is in need of an
explicit political mode of cultural criticism that refines and revises Emerson's concerns with
power, provocation and personality in light of Dewey's stress on historical consciousness and
Du Bois's focus on the plight of the wretched of the earth. This political mode of cultural
criticism must recapture Emerson's sense of vision-his utopian impulse-yet rechannel it through
Dewey's conception of creative democracy and Du Bois's social structural analysis of the limits
of capitalist democracy. Furthermore, this new kind of cultural criticism-we can call it prophetic
pragmatism-must confront candidly the tragic sense found in Hook and Trilling, the religious
version of the Jamesian strenuous mood in Niebuhr and the tortuous grappling with the vocation
of the intellectual in Mills. Prophetic pragmatism, with its roots in the American heritage and its
hopes for the wretched of the earth, constitutes the best chance of promoting an Emersontan
culture of creative democracy by means of critical intelligence and social action.
The first step is to define what an Emersonian culture of creative democracy would look like,


--- PAGE 142 ---
or at least give some sense of the process by which it can be created. In retrospect, it is
important to note that Emerson's swerve from philosophy was not simply a rejection of the
Cartesian and Kantian models of epistemology; it also was an assertion of the primacy of
power-laden people's opinion (doxa) over value-free philosophers' knowledge (episteme).
Emerson's swerve was a democratic leveling of the subordination of common sense to Reason.
Emerson realized that when philosophers "substitute Reason for common sense, they tend to
view the sense of commoners to be nonsense."I Emerson's suspicion of philosophy was not
simply that it bewitched thinkers by means of language but, more important, that it had deep
antidemocratic consequences. For Emerson, reason, formal thought, foundations, certainty were
not only far removed from the dynamism of human experience; they also were human creations
appearing as detached abstractions that command their creators and thereby constrain their
creators' freedom. This consequence is both antilibertarian and antidemocratic in that human
potential and participation are suppressed in the name of philosophic truth and knowledge.
Emerson's sensibilities are echoed in our own time by Benjamin Barber:
In conquering the muddled uncertainties of politics and suborning reasonableness to rationality,
they [philosophers] have served the ideal of enlightenment better than they have informed our
political judgment.... Rights get philosophically vindicated but only as abstractions that
undermine the democratic communities that breathe life into rights; justice is given an
unimpeachable credential in epistemology without giving it a firm hold on action or the
deliberative processes from which political action stems; talk is revivified as the heart of a
political process and then recommended to citizens, but in a form that answers to the constraints
not of citizenship but of philosophy; civility is celebrated, but construed as incompatible with
the sorts of collective human choice and communal purposes that give civility its political
meaning.2
To speak then of an Emersonian culture of creative democracy is to speak of a society and
culture where politically adjudicated forms of knowledge are produced in which human
participation is encouraged and for which human personalities are enhanced. Social
experimentation is the basic norm, yet it is operative only when those who must suffer the
consequences have effective control over the institutions that yield the consequences, i.e., access
to decision-making processes. In this sense, the Emersonian swerve from epistemology is
inseparable from an Emersonian culture of creative democracy; that is, there is political
motivation and political substance to the American evasion of philosophy. "Politics is what men
do when metaphysics fails.... It is the forging of common actuality in the absence of abstract
independent standards. It entails dynamic, ongoing, common deliberation and action and it is
feasible only when individuals are transformed by social interaction into citizens."3
The political motivation of the American evasion of philosophy is not ideological in the
vulgar sense; that is, the claim here is not that philosophy is a mere cloak that conceals the
material interests of a class or group. Rather, the claim is that once one gives up on the search
for foundations and the quest for certainty, human inquiry into truth and knowledge shifts to the
social and communal circumstances under which persons can communicate and cooperate in the
process of acquiring knowledge. What was once purely epistemological now highlights the
values and operations of power requisite for the human production of truth and knowledge.


--- PAGE 143 ---
The political substance of the American evasion of philosophy is that what was the
prerogative of philosophers, i.e., rational deliberation, is now that of the people-and the
populace deliberating is creative democracy in the making. Needless to say, this view is not a
license for eliminating or opposing all professional elites, but it does hold them to account.
Similarly, the populace deliberating is neither mob rule nor mass prejudice. Rather, it is the
citizenry in action, with its civil consciousness molded by participation in public-interest-
centered and individualrights-regarding democracy.
Prophetic pragmatism makes this political motivation and political substance of the American
evasion of philosophy explicit. Like Dewey, it understands pragmatism as a political form of
cultural criticism and locates politics in the everyday experiences of ordinary people. Unlike
Dewey, prophetic pragmatism promotes a more direct encounter with the Marxist tradition of
social analysis. The emancipatory- social experimentalism that sits at the center of prophetic
pragmatic politics closely resembles the radical democratic elements of Marxist theory, yet its
flexibility shuns any dogmatic, a priori or monistic pronouncements.
The encounter of prophetic pragmatism with Marxist theory can be best illustrated by an
examination of the most significant and elaborate effort to put forward a Marxist-informed
(though not Marxist) democratic social vision: namely, that found in Roberto Unger's
multivolume work Politics. Unger is not a prophetic pragmatist-yet there are deep elective
affinities between Unger's work and prophetic pragmatism. To put it crudely, both are
noteworthy exemplars of thirdwave left romanticism.
ROBERTO UNGER AND THIRD-WAVE LEFT ROMANTICISM
Roberto Unger's distinctive contribution to contemporary social thought is to deepen and sharpen
in a radical manner John Dewey's notion of social experimentation in light of the crisis of
Marxist theory and praxis. Unger's fundamental aim is to free Marxist conceptions of human
society-making from evolutionary, deterministic and economistic encumbrances by means of
Deweyan concerns with the plethora of historically specific social arrangements and the often
overlooked politics of personal relations between unique and purposeful individuals. The basic
result of Unger's fascinating efforts is to stake out new discursive space on the contemporary
political and ideological spectrum. Prophetic pragmatism occupies this same space. This space
is neither simply left nor liberal, Marxist nor Lockean, anarchist nor Kantian. Rather, Unger's
perspective is both post-Marxist and postliberal; that is, it consists of an emancipatory
experimentalism that promotes permanent social transformation and perennial self-development
for the purposes of ever increasing democracy and individual freedom. Yet, in contrast to most
significant social thinkers, Unger is motivated by explicit religious concerns, such as a kinship
with nature as seen in romantic love, or transcendence of nature as manifest in the hope for
eternal life. In this way, Unger highlights the radical existential insufficiency of his emancipatory
experimentalism, which speaks best to human penultimate matters. For Unger, human ultimate
concerns are inseparable from yet not reducible to the never ending quest for social
transformation and self-development.
I shall argue three claims regarding Unger's project. First, I shall suggest that his viewpoint
can be best characterized as the most elaborate articulation of a third wave left romanticism now


--- PAGE 144 ---
sweeping across significant segments of principally the First World progressive intelligentsia
(or what is left of this progressive intelligentsia!). Second, I will show that this third-wave left
romanticism-like prophetic pragmatism-is discursively situated betweenJohn Dewey's radical
liberal version of socialism and Antonio Gramsci's absolute historicist conception of Marxism.
Third, I shall highlight the ways in which this provocative project, though an advance beyond
much of contemporary social thought, remains inscribed within a Eurocentric and patriarchal
discourse that not simply fails to theoretically consider racial and gender forms of subjugation,
but also remains silent on the antiracist and feminist dimensions of concrete progressive
political struggles.
The most striking impression one gets from reading Unger's work is his unabashedly
pronounced romanticism. By romanticism here I mean quite simply the preoccupation with
Promethean human powers, the recognition of the contingency of the self and society and the
audacious projection of desires and hopes in the form of regulative emancipatory ideals for
which one lives and dies. In these postmodern times of cynicism and negativism-after the
unimaginable atrocities of Hitler, Stalin, Tito, Mussolini and Franco and the often forgotten
barbarities committed in Asia, Africa and Latin America under European and American
imperialist auspices; and during the present period of Khomeini, Pinochet, Moi and Mengistu in
the Third World, bureaucratic henchmen ruling the Second World and Reagan, Thatcher, Kohl
and Chirac setting the pace in the First World- Unger's romanticism is both refreshing and
disturbing.
The ameliorative energies and utopian impulses that inform Unger's work are refreshing in
that so many of us now "lack any ready way to imagine transfor- mation."4 We feel trapped in a
world with no realizable oppositional options, no actualizable credible alternatives. This sense
of political impotence-"this experience of acquiescence without commitment"'-yields three basic
forms of politics: sporadic terrorism for impatient, angry and nihilistic radicals; professional
reformism for comfortable, cultivated and concerned liberals; and evangelical nationalism for
frightened, paranoid and accusatory conservatives. Unger's romantic sense that the future can and
should be fundamentally different from and better than the present not only leads him to reject
these three predominant kinds of politics, but also impels him to answer in the negative to "the
great political question of our day: Is social democracy the best that we can reasonably hope
for?"'' Unger believes we can and must do better.
Yet Unger's third-wave left romanticism is disturbing in that we have witnessed-and are often
reminded of-the deleterious consequences and dehumanizing effects of the first two waves of left
romanticism in the modern world. The first wave-best seen in the American and French
Revolutions-unleashed unprecedented human energies and powers, significantly transformed
selves and societies and directed immense human desires and hopes toward the grand moral and
credible political ideals of democracy and freedom, equality and fraternity. Two exemplary
figures of this first wave-Thomas Jefferson and Jean Jacques Rousseau-would undoubtedly
affirm the three basic elements of Unger's conception of human activity: the contextual or
conditional quality of all human activity; the possibility of breaking through all contexts of
practical or conceptual activity; and the need to distinguish between context-preserving, i.e.,
routinized, and context-breaking, i.e., transgressive, activities.'


--- PAGE 145 ---
Furthermore, both Jefferson and Rousseau would agree with Unger's romantic conception of
imagination as a human power that conceives of social reality from the vantage point of change
and for the purposes of transformation.8 In this regard, Unger is deeply within the North Atlantic
romantic grain. Why, then, ought we to be disturbed? Despite the great human advances initiated
and promoted by first-wave left romanticism, its historical and social embodiments reinforced
and reproduced barbaric practices: white-supremacist practices associated with African slavery
and imperial conquest over indigenous and Mexican peoples; male-supremacist practices
inscribed in familial relations, cultural mores and societal restrictions; and excessive business
control and influence over the public interest as seen in low wages, laws against unions and
government support of select business endeavors, e.g., railroads. These noteworthy instances of
the underside of first-wave left romanticism should be disturbing not because all efforts to
change the status quo in a progressive direction are undesirable, but rather because any attempt
to valorize historically specific forms of human powers must be cognizant of and cautious
concerning who will be subjected to those human powers.
The second wave of left romanticism, following upon the heels of profound disillusionment
and dissatisfaction with the American and French Revolutions, is manifest in the two great
prophetic and prefigurative North Atlantic figures Ralph Waldo Emerson and Karl Marx. Both
were obsessed with the problem of revolution, that is, the specifying and creating of conditions
for the transformation of context-preserving activities into context-breaking ones. Both had a
profound faith in the capacity of human beings to remake themselves and society in more free
and democratic ways. And both looked toward science-the new cultural authority on knowledge,
reality and truth-as an indispensable instrument for this remaking and betterment.
Emersonian themes of the centrality of the self's morally laden transformative vocation, the
necessity of experimentation to achieve the self's aims of self-mastery and kinship with nature
and the importance of self-creation and self-authorization loom large in Unger's work. In fact, the
penultimate paragraph of volume 1 of Al- itics reads as if it comes right out of Emerson's
Nature:
In their better and saner moments men and women have always wanted to live as the originals
that they all feel themselves to be and to cement practical and passionate attachments that respect
this truth rather than submerge it. As soon as they have understood their social worlds to be
made up and pasted together, they have also wanted to become the co-makers of these worlds.
Some modern doctrines tell us that we already live in societies in which we can fully satisfy
these desires while others urge us to give them up as unrealistic. But the first piece of advice is
hard to believe, and the second is hard to practice.'
Similarly, Marxist motifs of the centrality of value-laden political struggle, the necessity for
transformation of present-day societies and for control over nature and, most pointedly, the
ability of human powers to reshape human societies against constraints always already in place
play fundamental roles in Unger's project. Indeed, the last paragraph of volume 1 of Politics
invokes the same metaphors, passions and aims as Marx's 1844 Manuscripts and 1848
Manifesto:
The constraints of society, echoed, reinforced, and amplified by the illusions of social thought,


--- PAGE 146 ---
have often led people to bear the stigma of longing under the mask of worldliness and
resignation. An anti-naturalistic social theory does not strike down the constraints but it dispels
the illusions that prevent us from attacking them. Theoretical insight and prophetic vision have
joined ravenous selfinterest and heartless conflict to set the fire that is burning in the world, and
melting apart the amalgam of faith and superstition, and consuming the power of false necessity.
"'
The second wave of left romanticism is dominated by Emersonian ideas of America and
Marxist conceptions of socialism. From roughly the 1860s to the 1940s, human hopes for
democracy and freedom, equality and fraternity around the globe rested on the legacy of either
Emerson or Marx. Needless to say, European efforts at nation building and empire
consolidating-the major sources of second-wave right romanticism-violently opposed both the
Emersonian and the Marxist legacies. Yet by the end of the World War II, with the defeat of
Germany's bid for European and world domination at the hands of the Allied forces led by the
United States and Russia, the second wave of left romanticism began to wane. The dominant
version of the Marxist legacy-Marxist-Leninist (and at the time led by Stalin)-was believed by
more and more left romantics to be repressive, repulsive and retrograde. And the major mode of
the Emersonian legacy-Americanism (led then by Truman and Eisenhower)-was viewed by
many left romantics as racist, penurious and hollow.
The third wave of left romanticism proceeded from a sense of deep disappointment with
Marxist-Leninism and Americanism. Exemplary activistic stirrings can be found in the Third
World or among people of color in the First WorldGandhi in India, Mariategui in Peru, Nasser
in Egypt and Martin Luther King, Jr., in the United States. Yet principally owing to the tragic
facts of survival, myopic leadership and limited options, most Third World romanticism was
diverted from the third wave of left romanticism into the traps of a regimenting MarxistLeninism
or a rapacious Americanism. The major exceptions-Chile under Salvador Allende, Jamaica
under Michael Manley, Nicaragua under the Sandinistasencounter formidable, usually
insurmountable, obstacles. Needless to say, similar projects in Second World countries-Hungary
in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968, Poland in 1970-are tragically and brutally crushed.
The two great figures of the third wave of left romanticism are John Dewey and Antonio
Gramsci. Dewey applies the Jeffersonian and Emersonian viewpoints to the concrete historical
and social realities of our century. Similarly, Gramsci sharpens and revises the Rousseauistic
and Marxist perspectives on these realities. As we observed earlier, in numerous essays,
articles and reviews and, most important, in his texts The Public and Its Problems (1927),
Individualism: Old and New (1929), Liberalism and Social Action (1935) and Freedom and
Culture (1939), Dewey put forward a powerful interpretation of socialism that builds upon yet
goes beyond liberalism. This interpretation highlights a conception of social experimentation
that "goes all the way down"; that is, it embraces the idea of fundamental economic, political,
cultural and individual transformation in light of Jeffersonian and Emersonian ideals of
accountable power, small-scale associations and individual liberties. In various fragments,
incomplete studies and political interventions and in works such as The Prison Notebooks
(1929-35) and The Modern Prince, Gramsci sets forth a penetrating version of Marxism that
rests upon yet spills over beyond Leninism. This version focuses on a notion of historical


--- PAGE 147 ---
specificity and a conception of hegemony that preclude any deterministic, economistic or
reductionist readings of social phenomena. In this way, Dewey and Gramsci partly set the
agenda for any acceptable and viable third wave of left romanticism in our time.
Unger's provocative project occupies the discursive space between Dewey and Gramsci; it is
the most detailed delineation of third-wave left romanticism we have. Like prophetic
pragmatism, his work stands at the intersection of the JeffersonEmerson-Dewey insights and the
Rousseau-Marx-Gramsci formulations. Ironically, as an intellectual with Third World origins
and sensibilities (Brazilian) and First World academic status and orientations (Harvard law
professor for almost twenty years), Unger is much more conscious of and concerned with his
Rousseau-Marx-Gramsci heritage than with his Jefferson-Emerson-Dewey sentiments. In fact,
his major aim is to provide an alternative radicalism-at the levels of method and political and
personal praxis-to Marxism in light of his Third World experiences and First World training.
Iblitics is also the product of two very different experiences. One of these experiences is
exposure to the rich, polished, critical and self-critical but also downbeat and Alexandrian
culture of social and historical thought that now flourishes in the North-Atlantic democracies.
This social-thought culture suffers from the influence of a climate of opinion in which the most
generous citizens hope at best to avert military disasters and to achieve marginal redistributive
goals while resigning themselves to established institutional arrangements. The other shaping
experience is practical and imaginative engagement in the murky but hopeful politics of Brazil, a
country at the forward edge of the Third World. There, at the time of writing, at least some
people took seriously the idea that basic institutions, practices, and preconceptions might be
reconstructed in ways that did not conform to any established model of social organization.
Much in this work can be understood as the consequence of an attempt to enlist the intellectual
resources of the North-Atlantic world in the service of concerns and commitments more keenly
felt elsewhere. In this way I hope to contribute toward the development of an alternative to the
vague, unconvinced, and unconvincing Marxism that now serves the advocates of the radical
project as their Lingua Franca. If the arguments of this book stand up, the transformative focus of
this theoretical effort has a cognitive value that transcends its immediate origins and motives."
In this sense, Unger privileges Marxist discourse. On the one hand, Marxism's "structure and
institutional fetishism"-its tendency to impose historical and social scripts in the name of deep-
structure logics of inevitability-stand as the major impediment to Unger's radical project.12 On
the other hand, Marxism more than any other social theory contains the resources and analytical
tools to resist this tendency and thereby aid and abet Unger's work.
Much of this book represents a polemic against what the text labels deepstructure social
analysis. The writings of Marx and of his followers provide the most powerful and detailed
illustrations of the deep-structure moves. Yet Marx's own writings contain many elements that
assist the effort to free ambitious theorizing from deep-structure assumptions. People working in
the Marxist tradition have developed the deep-structure approach. Yet they have also forged
some of the most powerful tools with which to build a view of social life more faithful to the
antinaturalistic intentions of Marx and other classic social theorists than Marx's original science
of history.13


--- PAGE 148 ---
Unger even more closely associates his project with a particular group of Marxists (whom he
dubs "political Marxists"), though he by no means affirms their efforts to stay within the Marxist
explanatory framework. The major figure in this group is Antonio Gramsci. Indeed, it can be
said with assurance that Gramsci's flexible Marxism, which emphasizes and explores "the
relative autonomy of class situations and class consciousness from the defining features of a
mode of production like capitalism," serves as the principal springboard for Unger's work.14
His explicit acknowledgment of his debts to political Marxists such as Gramsci-a rare moment
in Unger's self-authorizing texts-bears this out.
At times the political Marxists have sacrificed the development of their insights to the desire to
retain a connection with the central theses of historical material ism. To them these tenets have
seemed the only available basis for theoretical generalization and for critical distance from the
arrangements and circumstances of the societies in which they lived. At other times, the political
Marxists have simply given up on theory.... They have then paid the price in the loss of an ability
to convey a sense of sharp institutional alternatives for past, present, and future society. The
constructive theory of Politics just keeps going from where the political Marxists leave off. It
does so, however, without either renouncing theoretical ambitions or accepting any of the
distinctive doctrines of Marx's social theory.15
Unger believes it is necessary to go beyond Gramsci not because Gramsci is a paradigmatic
Marxist "super-theorist" who generates theoretical generalizations and schemas that fail to grasp
the complexity of social realities, but rather because Gramsci, despite his Marxism, is an
exemplary "ultratheorist" who attempts to avoid broad explanations and theoretical systems in
order to keep track of the multifarious features and aspects of fluid social realities.' As an
unequivocal supertheorist (who tries to avoid the traps of positivism, naive historicism and
deepstructure logics), Unger criticizes ultratheorists like Gramsci and Foucault for rejecting
explanatory or prescriptive theories and thereby ultimately disenabling effective emancipatory
thought and practice. For Unger, the ultratheorist sees a deep-structure logic inside every
theoretical system, confuses explanatory generalizations with epistemic foundationalism and
runs the risk of his work's degenerating into a nominalistic form of conventional social science.
In short, the major lesson Unger learns from Gramsci is to be a more subtle, nuanced and
sensitive supertheorist than Marx by building on elements in Marx and others.
Despite the prominence of certain Deweyan themes in his project, Dewey is virtually absent
in Unger's text. Furthermore, the one reference to Dewey is a rather cryptic and misleading
statement. After alluding to Foucault and Gramsci as major ultratheorists, Unger adds:
"Moreover, it would be wrong to associate ultra-theory solely with Leftist or modernist
intellectuals. Why not, for example, John Dewey (despite the gap between the commitment to
institutional experimentalism and the slide into institutional conservatism)?" 17 This passage is
perplexing for three reasons. First, is Unger implying that Dewey was neither a leftist nor a
modernist intellectual? Second, is Unger drawing a distinction between his own social
experimentalism and Dewey's institutional experimentalism? Third, in what sense and when did
Dewey slide into institutional conservatism? If Unger answers the first question in the
affirmative, he falls prey to the misinformed stereotypical view of Dewey as a vulgar
Americanist. Dewey's sixty-fiveyear political record as a democratic socialist speaks for itself.


--- PAGE 149 ---
And no argument is needed for Dewey's being a modernist intellectual, when he stands as the
major secular intellectual of twentieth-century America. If Unger is making a dis tinction
between his form of experimentalism and that of Dewey, its validity remains unclear unless one
remains fixated on Dewey's educational reform movement and neglects the broader calls for
fundamental social change put forward during the years Dewey concentrated on progressive
education as well as afterward, in the late 1920s, 1930s and 1940s. And the implausible notion
that Dewey slid into institutional conservatism holds only if one wrongly views his brand of
anti-Stalinism in the 1940s as conservatism, for his critique of American society remained
relentless to the end.
I do believe Unger has simply slipped in his brief mention of Dewey. Yet this slip is
significant in that Dewey could provide Unger with some enabling insights and tools for his
project. These insights and tools will not be comparable to those of Marx, for Dewey was not a
social theorist. Yet Dewey's own brand of ultratheory could, like Gramsci's, chasten and temper
Unger's supertheory ambitions.
For example, Unger's attempt to work out an analogical relation between scientific notions of
objectivity and social conceptions of personality is prefiguredand more persuasive-in Dewey's
linkage of scientific attitude (as opposed to scientific method) to democracy as a way of life.
The key notions become not so much objectivity-not even Rorty's ingenious reformulation of
objectivity as selfcritical solidarity-as, more fundamentally, respect for the other and
accountability as a condition for fallibility. Is Similarly, Dewey's brand of ultratheory does not
exclude, downplay or discourage explanatory generalizations. In fact, Dewey holds that we
cannot get by without some form of supertheory, for the same reasons Unger invokes (i.e., for
explaining and regulating our practices). Yet Dewey admonishes us to view supertheories as we
do any other instruments or weapons we have, to use them when they serve our purposes and
satisfy our interests and criticize or discard them when they utterly fail us. The significant
difference between Gramsci and Dewey is not that the former accepts Marxist theory and the
latter rejects it, but rather that Gramsci tenaciously holds onto Marxist theory in those areas
where it fails, e.g., politics and culture. Dewey accepted much of the validity of Marxist theory
and simply limited its explanatory scope and rejected its imperial, monistic and dogmatic
versions. These Deweyan correctives to Unger's project point toward prophetic pragmatism.
Dewey's radical liberal version of socialism might dampen Unger's fires of utopian quest in
that Dewey recognized that authoritarian communisms and liberal capitalist democracies were
and are the major credible options in the First World and Second World at the moment. And
social experimentation in the Third World remains hampered by these limits. This is not to say
we ought not to dream, hope, live, fight and die for betterment, yet such romantic longings, even
when dressed up in sophisticated social thought, do not alter the severe constraints of the
international coordination of capital in the West and the bureaucratic stranglehold in the East. In
this sense, Dewey's petit bourgeois radicalism, which is no tradition to trash despite its vast
shortcomings, could not but be an incessant effort at radical reform in the West and a beacon
light on repression in the East. In the same way, Gramsci's Communist party leadership, whose
legacy now resides principally in Italy and Sweden, could not but comprise audacious attempts
at democratization in the East and a beacon light on socially induced misery (e.g., poverty,


--- PAGE 150 ---
racism) in the West. The fundamental challenge to Unger is to find space for historical
maneuvering-for his emancipatory experimentalism-between Dewey and Gramsci, between petit
bourgeois radicalism and Marxian socialism.
This challenge should be approached on two levels-that of highbrow academic production
and consumption and that of popular political organization and mobilization. Both levels have
their own kinds of significance. Universities, colleges and some professional schools, though
increasingly given over to hi-tech and computers, still provide one of the few institutional arenas
in which serious conversation about new ideological space can take place in liberal capitalist
democracies. It indeed is no accident that much of the legacy of the New Left in the 1960s now
resides in such places. Most of the consumers of Unger's project consist of these progressive
professional managers who exercise some degree of cultural authority in and from these
educational institutions. Their importance, especially as transmitters of elite cultural values and
sensibilities, should not be overlooked. But neither should their influence be exaggerated. In
fact, for the most part, what they produce and consume of a left political orientation remains
within the academy. Despite Unger's admirable efforts to write in a relatively jargon-free
language, this holds for his own texts. So his attempt to put forward a left project between
Dewey and Gramsci will more than likely remain the property of the same disillusioned
progressives he chastises. The importance of influencing the left sectors of the "downbeat and
Alexandrian" intellectual culture of our time ought not to be minimized; nevertheless, Unger
wants to do more than this-he wants to make a significant programmatic intervention in the real
world of politics.
This brings us to the level of political organization and mobilization. Unlike Dewey and
Gramsci, Unger pays little attention to the burning cultural and political issues in the everyday
lives of ordinary people-issues such as religious and nationalist (usually xenophobic) revivals,
the declining power of trade unions, escalating racial and sexual violence, pervasive drug
addiction and alcoholism, breakdowns in the nuclear family, the cultural and political impact of
mass media (TV, radio and videos) and the exponential increase of suicides and homicides.
Unger invokes a politics of personal relations and everyday life, yet he remains rather vague
regarding its content.
When I claim that Unger's discourse remains inscribed within a Eurocentric and patriarchal
framework, I mean that his texts remain relatively silent-on the conceptual and practical levels-
on precisely those issues that promote social mo tion and politicization among the majority of
people in the country. I am not suggesting that Unger write simple pamphlets for the masses, but
rather that his fascinating works give more attention to those issues that may serve as the
motivating forces for his new brand of left politics. To write a masterful text of social theory and
politics that does not so much as mention-God forbid, grapple withforms of racial and gender
subjugation in our time is inexcusable on political and theoretical grounds.19 To do so is to
remain captive to a grand though flawed Eurocentric and patriarchal heritage. More pointedly, it
is to miss much of the new possibilities for a realizable left politics. Needless to say, to take
seriously issues such as race and gender is far from a guarantee for a credible progressive
politics, but to bypass them is to commit the fatal sin of supertheory: to elide the concrete at the
expense of systemic coherence and consistency.


--- PAGE 151 ---
In conclusion, Unger's ambitious project warrants our close attention and scrutiny. It
articulates many of the motives and ideals of the political project of prophetic pragmatism. It is,
by far, the most significant attempt to articulate a third-wave left romanticism that builds on the
best of the Jefferson-EmersonDewey and Rousseau-Marx-Gramsci legacies. Unfortunately, he
remains slightly blinded by some of the theoretical and practical shortsightedness of these grand
North Atlantic legacies. Yet Unger would be the first to admit that all prophets are imperfect and
that all emancipatory visions and programs are subject to revision and transformation.
THE CHALLENGE OF MICHEL FOUCAULT
To praise Unger's project and that of prophetic pragmatism for their third-wave left romanticism
is to go against the grain in some progressive circles owing to the influence of Michel Foucault.
Foucault is the exemplary antiromantic, suspicious of any talk about wholeness, totality, telos,
purpose or even future.2° Prophetic pragmatism shares with Foucault a preoccupation with the
operation of powers. It also incorporates the genealogical mode of inquiry initiated by the later
phase of Foucault's work. In fact, prophetic pragmatism promotes genealogical materialist
modes of analysis similar in many respects to those of Foucault.21 Yet prophetic pragmatism
rejects Foucault's antiromanticism for three basic reasons.
First, despite the profound insights and rich illuminations of Foucault's renowned
archaeologies and genealogies, he remains preoccupied by one particular kind of operation of
power, namely, the various modes by which human beings are constituted into subjects.22 His
powerful investigations into modes of inquiry that take the form of disciplinary powers of
subjection and objectivization of human beings remain within a general Kantian framework.
Foucault still asks questions such as "What are the conditions for the possibility of the
constitution of the subject?" Instead of providing a transcendental response or even a histori
cally anthropocentric answer, he gives us a genealogical account of anonymous and autonomous
discourses that constitute subjects. In short, Foucault gives a Nietzschean reply to the Kantian
question of the constitution of subjects.
I wanted to see how these problems of constitution could be resolved within a historical
framework, instead of referring them back to a constituent object (madness, criminality or
whatever). But this historical contextualization needed to be something more than the simple
relativization of the phenomenological subject. I don't believe the problem can be solved by
historicizing the subject as posited by the phenomenologists, fabricating a subject that evolves
through the course of history. One has to dispense with the constituent subject, to get rid of the
subject itself, that's to say, to arrive at an analysis which can account for the constitution of the
subject within a historical framework. And this is what I would call genealogy, that is, a form of
history which can account for the constitution of knowledges, discourses, domains of objects,
etc., without having to make reference to a subject which is either transcendental in relation to
the field of events or runs in its empty sameness throughout the course of history.23
The irony of this self-description is that although Foucault's work swerves from Kantian,
Hegelian, and Marxist ways of accounting for the constitution of subjects, he remains obsessed
with providing such an account by asking the Kantian question. In fact, he is interested in the
operations of power only to the degree to which he can answer this subject-centered question. In


--- PAGE 152 ---
his most detailed reflections on his own work, Foucault candidly states:
I would like to say, first of all, what has been the goal of my work during the last twenty years. It
has not been to analyze the phenomena of power, nor to elaborate the foundations of such an
analysis.
My objective, instead, has been to create a history of the different modes by which, in our
culture, human beings have been made subjects ...
Thus, it is not power but the subject which is the general theme of my re- search.24
Prophetic pragmatism objects to Foucault's project not because he has no historical sense, but
rather because it remains truncated by the unhelpful Kantian question he starts with. Dewey and
Rorty-as well as Wittgenstein and Heidegger-have shown that a question that begins "What are
the conditions for the possibility of ..." is misleading in that the question itself is inextricably
tied to a conception of validity that stands above and outside the social practices of human
beings. In this regard, Foucault's answer-anonymous and autonomous discourses, disciplines and
techniques-is but the latest addition to the older ones: the dialectical development of modes of
production (vulgar Marxisms), workings of the Weltgeist (crude Hegelians) or activities of
transcendental subjects (academic Kantians).25 All such answers shun the centrality of dynamic
social practices structured and unstructured over time and space.
The second prophetic pragmatist objection is, unsurprisingly, to his reification of discourses,
disciplines and techniques. By downplaying human agency-both individual and collective human
actions-Foucault surreptitiously ascribes agency to discourses, disciplines and techniques. There
indeed are multiple unintended consequences and unacknowledged antecedent conditions of
human actions that both produce and are produced by institutions and structures. Methodological
individualism in social theory, according to which isolated and atomistic individual actions fully
account for humans' societies and histories, will not suffice. But the alternative is not the
exclusive ascription of agency to impersonal forces, transcendental entities or anonymous and
autonomous discourses. For prophetic pragmatists, human agency remains central-all we have in
human societies and histories are structured and unstructured human social practices over time
and space. Edward Said perceptively states regarding Foucault:
Yet despite the extraordinary worldliness of this work, Foucault takes a curiously passive and
sterile view not so much of the uses of power, but of how and why power is gained, used, and
held onto. This is the most dangerous consequence of his disagreement with Marxism, and its
result is the least convincing aspect of his work.... However else power may be a kind of
indirect bureaucratic discipline and control, there are ascertainable changes stemming from who
holds power and who dominates whom... .
What one misses in Foucault is something resembling Gramsci's analyses of hegemony,
historical blocks, ensembles of relationship done from the perspective of an engaged political
worker for whom the fascinated description of exercised power is never a substitute for trying to
change power relationships within society.26


--- PAGE 153 ---
Foucault is a political intellectual-a "specific" intellectual geared to and affiliated with local
struggles rather than a "universal" intellectual representing and speaking for the interests of a
class, nation or group-yet his Kantian questions lead him to downplay human agency, to limit the
revisability of discourses and disciplines and thereby to confine his attention to a specific set of
operations of power, i.e., those linked to constituting subjects. For instance, he pays little
attention to operations of power in economic modes of production and nation-states.
The last prophetic pragmatist criticism of Foucault's project is that he devalues moral
discourse. His fervent anti-utopianism-again in reaction to Hegelian and Marxist teleological
utopianisms-rejects all forms of ends and aims for political struggle. Therefore, he replaces
reform or revolution with revolt and rebellion. In this way, Foucault tends to reduce left ethics to
a bold and defiant Great Refusal addressed to the dominant powers that be. Yet by failing to
articulate and elaborate ideals of democracy, equality and freedom, Foucault provides solely
negative conceptions of critique and resistance. He rightly suspects the self-authorizing and self-
privileging aims of "universal" intellectuals who put forward such ideals, yet he mistakenly
holds that any attempt to posit these ideals as guides to political action and social reconstruction
must fall prey to new modes of subjection and disciplinary control. Foucault rightly wants to
safeguard relentless criticism and healthy skepticism, yet his rejection of even tentative aims and
provisional ends results in existential rebellion or micropolitical revolt, rather than concerted
political praxis informed by moral vision and systemic (though flexible) analyses. In stark
contrast, prophetic pragmatists take seriously moral discourse-revisable means and ends of
political action, the integrity and character of those engaged and the precious ideals of
participatory democracy and the flowering of the uniqueness of different human individualities.
Therefore, prophetic pragmatists reject Foucault's Kantian question, viewing it as a wheel that
turns yet plays no part in the mechanism. Instead, they move directly to strategic and tactical
modes of thinking and acting.27 These modes highlight the operations of powers and the uses of
provocation for the development of human personalities. Like Foucault, prophetic pragmatists
criticize and resist forms of subjection, as well as types of economic exploitation, state
repression and bureaucratic domination. But these critiques and resistances, unlike his, are
unashamedly guided by moral ideals of creative democracy and individuality.
TRAGEDY, TRADITION AND POLITICAL PRAXIS
A major shortcoming of Emersonian pragmatism is its optimistic theodicy. The point here is not
so much that Emerson himself had no sense of the tragic, but rather that the way he formulated the
relation of human powers and fate, human agency and circumstances, human will and constraints
made it difficult for him and for subsequent pragmatists to maintain a delicate balance between
excessive optimism and exorbitant pessimism regarding human capacities. The early Emerson
stands at one pole and the later Trilling at another pole. For prophetic pragmatism only the early
Hook and Niebuhr-their work in the early 1930s-maintam the desirable balance.
This issue of balance raises a fundamental and long-ignored issue for the progressive
tradition: the issue of the complex relations between tragedy and revolution, tradition and
progress. Prophetic pragmatism refuses to sidestep this issue. The brutalities and atrocities in
human history, the genocidal attempts in this century and the present-day barbarities require that


--- PAGE 154 ---
those who accept the progressive and prophetic designations put forth some conception of the
tragic. To pose the issue in this way is, in a sense, question begging since the very term "tragic"
presupposes a variety of religious and secular background notions. Yet prophetic pragmatism is
a child of Protestant Christianity wedded to left romanticism. So this question begging is
warranted in that prophetic pragmatism stands in a tradition in which the notion of the "tragic"
requires attention.
It is crucial to acknowledge from the start that the "tragic" is a polyvalent notion; it has
different meanings depending on its context. For example, the context of Greek tragedy-in which
the action of ruling families generates pity and terror in the audience-is a society that shares a
collective experience of common metaphysical and social meanings. The context of modern
tragedy, on the other hand-in which ordinary individuals struggle against meaninglessness and
nothingness-is a fragmented society with collapsing metaphysical meanings. More pointedly, the
notion of the "tragic" is bound to the idea of human agency, be the agent a person of rank or a
retainer, a prince or a pauper.
The real key, to the modern separation of tragedy from "mere suffering," is the separation of
ethical control and, more critically, human agency, from our understanding of social and
political life....
The events which are not seen as tragic are deep in the pattern of our own culture: war, famine,
work, traffic, politics. To see no ethical content or human agency in such events, or to say that
we cannot connect them with general meanings, and especially with permanent and universal
meanings, is to admit a strange and particular bankruptcy, which no rhetoric of tragedy can
finally hide.28
It is no accident that James, Hook, Niebuhr and Trilling focused on the content and character
of heroism when they initially grappled with theodicy and the "tragic." Although they had little
or no interest in revolution, their preoccupation with human agency, will and power resembles
that of the Promethean romantics, e.g., Blake, Byron, Shelley. Yet the ideological sources of
their conceptions of the "tragic" loom large in their deployment of the term.
James's focus on the individual and his distrust of big institutions and groups led him to
envision a moral heroism in which each ameliorative step forward is a kind of victory, each
minute battle won a sign that the war is not over, hence still winnable. Hook's early Marxism
provided him with a historical sense in which the "tragic" requires a choice between a proven
evil, i.e., capitalism, and a possible good, i.e., socialism. As the possible good proved to be
more and more evil, the old "proven evil" appeared more and more good. The notion of the
"tragic" in Hook underwent a metamorphosis such that all utopian quests were trashed in the
name of limits, constraints and circumstances. The later Trilling is even more extreme, for the
mere exertion of will was often seen as symptomatic of the self's utopian quest for the
unconditioned.
Niebuhr held the most complex view of the "tragic" in the pragmatist tradition. Even more
than the middle Trilling's intriguing ruminations on Keatsian theodicy, Niebuhr's struggle with
liberal Protestantism-especially with Richard Rorty's grandfather, Walter Rauschenbusch-forced


--- PAGE 155 ---
him to remain on the tightrope between Promethean romanticism and Augustinian pessimism. In
fact, Niebuhr never succumbs to either, nor does he ever cease to promote incessant human
agency and will against linuts and circumstances. In his leftist years, mindful of the novel forms
of evil in the new envisioned social order yet fed up with those in the present, he supported the
insurgency of exploited workers. In his liberal years, obsessed with the evil structures in the
Communist world and more and more (though never fully) forgetful of the institutional evil in
American society, Niebuhr encourages state actions against the Soviet Union and piecemeal
reformist practice within America.
Prophetic pragmatism affirms the Niebuhrian strenuous mood, never giving up on new
possibilities for human agency-both individual and collective-in the present, yet situating them in
light of Du Bois's social structural analyses that focus on working-class, black and female
insurgency. Following the pioneering work of Hans-Georg Gadamer and Edward Shils,
prophetic pragmatism acknowledges the inescapable and inexpungible character of tradition, the
burden and buoyancy of that which is transmitted from the past to the present.29 This process of
transmittance is one of socialization and appropriation, of acculturation and construction.
Tradition, in this sense, can be both a smothering and a liberating affair, depending on which
traditions are being invoked, internalized and invented.
In this way, the relation of tragedy to revolution (or resistance) is intertwined with that of
tradition to progress (or betterment). Prophetic pragmatism, as a form of third-wave left
romanticism, tempers its utopian impulse with a profound sense of the tragic character of life
and history. This sense of the tragic highlights the irreducible predicament of unique individuals
who undergo dread, despair, disillusionment, disease and death and the institutional forms of
oppression that dehumanize people. Tragic thought is not confined solely to the plight of the
individual; it also applies to social experiences of resistance, revolution and societal
reconstruction. Prophetic pragmatism is a form of tragic thought in that it confronts candidly
individual and collective experiences of evil in individuals and institutions-with little
expectation of ridding the world of all evil. Yet it is a kind of romanticism in that it holds many
experiences of evil to be neither inevitable nor necessary, but rather the results of human agency,
i.e., choices and actions.
This interplay between tragic thought and romantic impulse, inescapable evils and
transformable evils makes prophetic pragmatism seem schizophrenic. On the one hand, it
appears to affirm a Sisyphean outlook in which human resis tance to evil makes no progress. On
the other hand, it looks as if it approves a utopian quest for paradise. In fact, prophetic
pragmatism denies Sisyphean pessimism and utopian perfectionism. Rather, it promotes the
possibility of human progress and the human impossibility of paradise. This progress results
from principled and protracted Promethean efforts, yet even such efforts are no guarantee. And
all human struggles-including successful ones-against specific forms of evil produce new, though
possibly lesser, forms of evil. Human struggle sits at the center of prophetic pragmatism, a
struggle guided by a democratic and libertarian vision, sustained by moral courage and
existential integrity and tempered by the recognition of human finitude and frailty. It calls for
utopian energies and tragic actions, energies and actions that yield permanent and perennial
revolutionary, rebellious and reformist strategies that oppose the status quos of our day. These


--- PAGE 156 ---
strategies arc never to become ends-in-themselves, but rather to remain means through which are
channeled moral outrage and human desperation in the face of prevailing forms of evil in human
societies and in human lives. Such outrage must never cease, and such desperation will never
disappear, yet without revolutionary, rebellious and reformist strategies, credible and effective
opposition wanes. Prophetic pragmatism attempts to keep alive the sense of alternative ways of
life and of struggle based on the best of the past. In this sense, the praxis of prophetic
pragmatism is tragic action with revolutionary intent, usually reformist consequences and always
visionary outlook. It concurs with Raymond Williams's tragic revolutionary perspective:
The tragic action, in its deepest sense, is not the confirmation of disorder, but its experience, its
comprehension and its resolution. In our own time, this action is general, and its common name
is revolution. We have to see the evil and the suffering, in the factual disorder that makes
revolution necessary, and in the disordered struggle against the disorder. We have to recognize
this suffering in a close and immediate experience, and not cover it with names. But we follow
the whole action: not only the evil, but the men who have fought against evil; not only the crisis,
but the energy released by it, the spirit learned in it. We make the connections, because that is the
action of tragedy, and what we learn in suffering is again revolution, because we acknowledge
others as men and any such acknowledgement is the beginning of struggle, as the continuing
reality of our lives. Then to see revolution in this tragic perspective is the only way to maintain
it.30
This oppositional consciousness draws its sustenance principally from a tradition of
resistance. To keep alive a sense of alternative ways of life and of struggle requires memory of
those who prefigured such life and struggle in the past. In this sense, tradition is to be associated
not solely with ignorance and intolerance, prejudice and parochialism, dogmatism and docility.
Rather, tradition is also to be identified with insight and intelligence, rationality and resistance,
critique and contestation. Tradition per se is never a problem, but rather those traditions that
have been and are hegemonic over other traditions. All that human beings basically have are
traditions-those institutions and practices, values and sensibilities, stories and symbols, ideas
and metaphors that shape human identities, attitudes, outlooks and dispositions. These traditions
are dynamic, malleable and revisable, yet all changes in a tradition are done in light of some old
or newly emerging tradition. Innovation presupposes some tradition and inaugurates another
tradition. The profound historical consciousness of prophetic pragmatism shuns the Emersonian
devaluing of the past. Yet it also highlights those elements of old and new traditions that promote
innovation and resistance for the aims of enhancing individuality and expanding democracy. This
enhancement and expansion constitute human progress. And all such progress takes place within
the contours of clashing traditions. In this way, just as tragic action constitutes resistance to
prevailing status quos, the critical treatment and nurturing of a tradition yield human progress.
Tragedy can be an impetus rather than an impediment to oppositional activity; tradition may
serve as a stimulus rather than a stumbling block to human progress.
Prophetic pragmatism understands the Emersonian swerve from epistemology-and the
American evasion of philosophy-not as a wholesale rejection of philosophy, but rather as a
reconception of philosophy as a form of cultural criticism that attempts to transform linguistic,
social, cultural and political traditions for the purposes of increasing the scope of individual


--- PAGE 157 ---
development and democratic operations. Prophetic pragmatism conceives of philosophy as a
historically circumscribed quest for wisdom that puts forward new interpretations of the world
based on past traditions in order to promote existential sustenance and political relevance. Like
Emerson and earlier pragmatists, it views truth as a species of the good, as that which enhances
the flourishing of human progress. This does not mean that philosophy ignores the ugly facts and
unpleasant realities of life and history. Rather, it highlights these facts and realities precisely
because they provoke doubt, curiosity, outrage or desperation that motivates efforts to overcome
them. These efforts take the forms of critique and praxis, forms that attempt to change what is
into a better what can be.
Prophetic pragmatism closely resembles and, in some ways, converges with the
metaphilosophical perspectives of Antonio Gramsci. Both conceive of philosophical activity as
"a cultural battle to transform the popular `mentality."131 It is not surprising that Gramsci
writes: "What the pragmatists wrote about this question merits re-examination.... They felt real
needs and `described' them with an exactness that was not far off the mark, even if they did not
succeed in posing the problems fully or in providing a solution.."32 Prophetic pragmatism is
inspired by the example of Antonio Gramsci principally because he is the major twentieth
century philosopher of praxis, power, and provocation without devaluing theory, adopting
unidimensional conceptions of power or reducing provocation to Clausewitzian calculations of
warfare. Gramsci's work is historically specific, theoretically engaging and politically activistic
in an exemplary manner. His concrete and detailed investigations are grounded in and reflections
upon local struggles, yet theoretically sensitive to structural dynamics and international
phenomena. He is attuned to the complex linkage of socially constructed identities to human
agency while still convinced of the crucial role of the ever changing forms in classridden
economic modes of production. Despite his fluid Leninist conception of political organization
and mobilization (which downplays the democratic and libertarian values of prophetic
pragmatists) and his unswerving allegiance to sophisticated Marxist social theory (which is an
indispensable yet ultimately inadequate weapon for prophetic pragmatists), Gramsci exemplifies
the critical spirit and oppositional sentiments of prophetic pragmatism.
This is seen most clearly in Gramsci's view of the relation of philosophy to "common sense."
For him, the aim of philosophy is not only to become worldly by imposing its elite intellectual
views upon people, but to become part of a social movement by nourishing and being nourished
by the philosophical views of oppressed people themselves for the aims of social change and
personal meaning. Gramsci viewed this mutually critical process in world-historical terms:
From the disintegration of Hegelianism derives the beginning of a new cultural process, different
in character from its predecessors, a process in which practical movement and theoretical
thought are united (or are trying to unite through a struggle that is both theoretical and practical).
It is not important that this movement had its origins in mediocre philosophical works or, at best,
in works that were not philosophical masterpieces. What matters is that a new way of
conceiving the world and man is born and that this conception is no longer reserved to the great
intellectuals, to professional philosophers, but tends rather to become a popular, mass
phenomenon, with a concretely world-wide character, capable of modifying (even if the result


--- PAGE 158 ---
includes hybrid combinations) popular thought and mummified popular culture.
One should not be surprised if this beginning arises from the convergence of various elements,
apparently heterogeneous.... Indeed, it is worth noting that such an overthrow could not but have
connections with religion.33
Gramsci's bold suggestion here relates elite philosophical activity to the cultures of the
oppressed in the name of a common effort for social change. Prophetic pragmatist sensibilities
permit (or even encourage) this rejection of the arrogant scientistic self-privileging or haughty
secular self-images of many modern philoso- pliers and intellectuals. The point here is not that
serious contemporary thinkers should surrender their critical intelligence, but rather that they
should not demand that all peoples mimic their version of critical intelligence, especially if
common efforts for social change can be strengthened. On this point, even the nuanced
secularism of Edward Said-the most significant and salient Gramscian critic on the American
intellectual scene today-can be questioned.34 For Gramsci, ideologies of secularism or
religions are less sets of beliefs and values, attitudes and sensibilities and more ways of life and
ways of struggle manufactured and mobilized by certain sectors of the population in order to
legitimate and preserve their social, political and intellectual powers. Hence, the universities
and churches, schools and synagogues, mass media and mosques become crucial terrain for
ideological and political contestation. And philosophers are in no way exempt from this fierce
battle-even within the "serene" walls and halls of the academy. Similar to the American
pragmatist tradition, Gramsci simply suggests that philosophers more consciously posit these
battles themselves as objects of investigation and thereby intervene in these battles with
intellectual integrity and ideological honesty.
Prophetic pragmatism purports to be not only an oppositional cultural criticism, but also a
material force for individuality and democracy. By "material force" I simply mean a practice
that has some potency and effect or makes a difference in the world. There is-and should be-no
such thing as a prophetic pragmatist movement. The translation of philosophic outlook into
social motion is not that simple. In fact, it is possible to be a prophetic pragmatist and belong to
different political movements, e.g., feminist, Chicano, black, socialist, left-liberal ones. It also is
possible to subscribe to prophetic pragmatism and belong to different religious and/or secular
traditions. This is so because a prophetic pragmatist commitment to individuality and
democracy, historical consciousness and systemic social analyses and tragic action in an evil-
ridden world can take place in-though usually on the margin of-a variety of traditions. The
distinctive hallmarks of a prophetic pragmatist are a universal consciousness that promotes an
all-embracing democratic and libertarian moral vision, a historical consciousness that
acknowledges human finitude and conditionedness and a critical consciousness that encourages
relentless critique and self-criticism for the aims of social change and personal humility.
My own version of prophetic pragmatism is situated within the Christian tradition. Unlike
Gramsci, I am religious not simply for political aims, but also by personal commitment. To put it
crudely, I find existential sustenance in many of the narratives in the biblical scriptures as
interpreted by streams in the Christian heritage; and I see political relevance in the biblical
focus on the plight of the wretched of the earth. Needless to say, without the addition of modern


--- PAGE 159 ---
interpretations of racial and gender equality, tolerance and democracy, much of the tradi tion
warrants rejection. Yet the Christian epic, stripped of static dogmas and decrepit doctrines,
remains a rich source of existential empowerment and political engagement when viewed
through modern lenses (indeed the only ones we moderns have!).
Like James, Niebuhr and to some extent Du Bois, I hold a religious conception of pragmatism.
I have dubbed it "prophetic" in that it harks back to the Jewish and Christian tradition of
prophets who brought urgent and compassionate critique to bear on the evils of their day. The
mark of the prophet is to speak the truth in love with courage-come what may. Prophetic
pragmatism proceeds from this impulse. It neither requires a religious foundation nor entails a
religious perspective, yet prophetic pragmatism is compatible with certain religious outlooks.
My kind of prophetic pragmatism is located in the Christian tradition for two basic reasons.
First, on the existential level, the self-understanding and self-identity that flow from this
tradition's insights into the crises and traumas of life are indis- pensablefor me to remain sane. It
holds at bay the sheer absurdity so evident in life, without erasing or eliding the tragedy of life.
Like Kierkegaard, whose reflections on Christian faith were so profound yet often so frustrating,
I do not think it possible to put forward rational defenses of one's faith that verify its veracity or
even persuade one's critics. Yet it is possible to convey to others the sense of deep emptiness
and pervasive meaninglessness one feels if one is not critically aligned with an enabling
tradition. One risks not logical inconsistency, but actual insanity; the issue is not reason or
irrationality, but life or death. Of course, the fundamental philosophical question remains
whether the Christian gospel is ultimately true.35 And, as a Christian prophetic pragmatist
whose focus is on coping with transient and provisional penultimate matters yet whose hope
goes beyond them, I reply in the affirmative, bank my all on it, yet am willing to entertain the
possibility in low moments that I may be deluded.
Second, on the political level, the culture of the wretched of the earth is deeply religious. To
be in solidarity with them requires not only an acknowledgment of what they are up against, but
also an appreciation of how they cope with their situation. This appreciation does not require
that one be religious; but if one is religious, one has wider access into their life-worlds. This
appreciation also does not entail an uncritical acceptance of religious narratives, their
interpretations or, most important, their often oppressive consequences. Yet to be religious
permits one to devote one's life to accenting the prophetic and progressive potential within those
traditions that shape the everyday practices and deeply held perspectives of most oppressed
peoples. What a wonderful privilege and vocation this is!
The prophetic religious person, much like C. Wright Mills's activist intellectual, puts a
premium on educating and being educated by struggling peoples, organizing and being organized
by resisting groups. This political dimension of prophetic pragmatism as practiced within the
Christian tradition impels one to be an organic intellectual, that is, one who revels in the life of
the mind, yet relates ideas to collective praxis. An organic intellectual, in contrast to traditional
intellectuals, who often remain comfortably nested in the academy, attempts to be entrenched in
and affiliated with organizations, associations and, possibly, movements of grassroots folk. Of
course, he or she need be neither religious nor linked to religious institutions. Trade unions,


--- PAGE 160 ---
community groups and political formations also suffice. Yet, since the Enlightenment in
eighteenth-century Europe, most of the progressive energies among the intelligentsia have
shunned religious channels. And in these days of global religious revivals, progressive forces
are reaping the whirlwind. Those of us who remain in these religious channels see clearly just
how myopic such an antireligious strategy is. The severing of ties to churches, synagogues,
temples and mosques by the left intelligentsia is tantamount to political suicide; it turns the
pessimism of many self-deprecating and self-pitying secular progressive intellectuals into a self-
fulfilling prophecy. This point was never grasped by C. Wright Mills, though W. E. B. Du Bois
understood it well.
Like Gramsci, Du Bois remained intimately linked with oppositional forces in an oppressed
community. And in his case, these forces were (and are) often led by prophetic figures of the
black Christian tradition. To be a part of the black freedom movement is to rub elbows with
some prophetic black preachers and parishioners. And to be a part of the forces of progress in
America is to rub up against some of these black freedom fighters.
If prophetic pragmatism is ever to become more than a conversational subject matter for
cultural critics in and out of the academy, it must inspire progressive and prophetic social
motion. One precondition of this kind of social movement is the emergence of potent prophetic
religious practices in churches, synagogues, temples and mosques. And given the historical
weight of such practices in the American past, the probable catalyst for social motion will be the
prophetic wing of the black church. Need we remind ourselves that the most significant and
successful organic intellectual in twentieth-century America-maybe in American history-was a
product of and leader in the prophetic wing of the black church? Rarely has a figure in modern
history outside of elected public office linked the life of the mind to social change with such
moral persuasiveness and political effectiveness.
The social movement led by Martin Luther King, Jr., represents the best of what the political
dimension of prophetic pragmatism is all about. Like Sojourner Truth, Walter Rauschenbusch,
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Dorothy Day, King was not a prophetic pragmatist. Yet like them he
was a prophet, in which role he contributed mightily to the political project of prophetic
pragmatism. His allembracing moral vision facilitated alliances and coalitions across racial,
gender, class and religious lines. His Gandhian method of nonviolent resistance highlighted
forms of love, courage and discipline worthy of a compassionate prophet. And his appropriation
and interpretation of American civil religion extended the tradition of American jeremiads, a
tradition of public exhortation that joins social criticisms of America to moral renewal and
admonishes the country to be true to its founding ideals of freedom, equality and democracy.
King accented the antiracist and anti-imperialist consequences of taking seriously these ideals,
thereby linking the struggle for freedom in America to those movements in South Africa, Poland,
South Korea, Ethiopia, Chile and the Soviet Union.
Prophetic pragmatism worships at no ideological altars. It condemns oppression anywhere
and everywhere, be it the brutal butchery of Third World dictators, the regimentation and
repression of peoples in the Soviet Union and Sovietbloc countries or the racism, patriarchy,
homophobia and economic injustice in the First World capitalist nations. In this way, the


--- PAGE 161 ---
precious ideals of individuality and democracy of prophetic pragmatism oppose all those power
structures that lack public accountability, be they headed by military generals, bureaucratic party
bosses or corporate tycoons. Nor is prophetic pragmatism confined to any preordained historical
agent, such as the working class, black people or women. Rather, it invites all people of
goodwill both here and abroad to fight for an Emersonian culture of creative democracy in
which the plight of the wretched of the earth is alleviated.
SOURCE: "Prophetic Pragmatism: Cultural Criticism and Political Engagement," The American
Evasion ofPln1asophy, pp. 211-235, 269-271. Copyright © 1989. Reprinted by permission of The
University of Wisconsin Press.


--- PAGE 162 ---
PRAGMATISM AND T H E S E N S E O F T H E 
TRAGIC
This essay is part of a book on Josiah Royce I began writing in 1990 and have yet to finish. I
will get it done one day. Royce is the only pragmatist philosopher who wrestles with the great
Arthur Schopenhauer and, besides his friend William James, the only pragmatist with a tragic
temperament. As seen in the recent work of James Kloppen- berg on Dewey and Weber, and
Eddie Glaude on Dewey and the tragic, this discussion is an exciting one. In my view, Chekhov's
tragicomic sensibilities go so far beyond and cut so much deeper than anything in pragmatism
that even Royce comes up short. Yet Royce should be given more prominence in the
contemporary pragmatic renaissance in humanistic studies.
THE RECENT REVIVAL OF pragmatism provides a timely intellectual background for the most
urgent problematic of our postmodern moment: the complex cluster of questions and queries
regarding the meaning and value of democracy. No other modern philosophical tradition has
grappled with the various dimensions of this problematic more than that of American
pragmatism. Thomas Jefferson, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Abraham Lincoln-the grand spiritual
godfathers of pragmatism-laid the foundations for the meaning and value of democracy in
America and in the modern world. These foundations consisted roughly of the irreducibility of
individuality within participatory communities, heroic action of ordinary folk in a world of
radical contingency and a deep sense of evil that fuels struggles for justice.
Jeffersonian notions of the irreducibility of individuality within participatory communities
attempt to sidestep rapacious individualisms and authoritarian communitarianisms by situating
unique selves within active networks of powersharing that protect liberties, promote prosperity
and highlight accountability. In this sense, Jefferson's ideals combine much of the best of
liberalism, populism and civic republicanism. Emersonian formulations of heroic action of
ordinary folk in a world of radical contingency try to jettison static dogmatisms and impersonal
determinisms by accenting the powers of unique selves to make and remake themselves with no
original models to imitate or emulate. Emersonian ideals bring together salutary aspects of
Romanticism, libertarianism and Protestantism. Lincoln's profound wrestling with a deep sense
of evil that fuels the struggle for justice endeavors to hold at bay facile optimisms and paralyzing
pessimisms by positing unique selves that fight other finite opponents rather than demonic foes.
Lincoln's ideals hold together valuable insights of evangelical Christianity, American
constitutionalism and Scottish commonsensical realism. Yet not one American philosophical
thinker has put forward a conception of the meaning and significance of democracy in light of
these foundations laid by Jefferson, Emerson and Lincoln.
If there is one plausible candidate, it would have to be John Dewey. Like Maurice
Maeterlinck and Walt Whitman ("In Lincoln's lifetime Whitman was the only writer to describe
him with love"),' Dewey understood that if one takes democracy as an object of philosophical
investigation, then one must grapple with the contributions ofJefferson and Emerson. But, I
suggest, Dewey failed to seriously meet the challenge posed by Lincoln-namely, defining the
relation of democratic ways of thought and life to a profound sense of evil. Within the
development of post-Deweyan pragmatism, only Sidney Hook's suggestive essay "Pragmatism


--- PAGE 163 ---
and the Tragic Sense of Life" responds to Lincoln's challenge in a serious manner.' Yet it
remains far from the depths of other tragic democratic thinkers like Herman Melville, F. 0.
Matthiessen and Reinhold Niebuhr.
There is only one great American philosopher (Alfred North Whitehead's origins exclude
him) who seriously grappled with the challenge posed by Lincolnnamely, Josiah Royce. In fact, I
would go as far as to claim that Royce's systematic post-Kantian idealism is primarily a long
and winding set of profound meditations on the relation of a deep sense of evil to human agency.
Therefore a contemporary encounter between Dewey and Royce is neither an antiquarian
reconstruction of exchanges in philosophical journals nor a synoptic synthesis of instrumentalism
and idealism. Rather, it is a response to the most pressing problematic of our day that creatively
fuses the contributions of Jefferson, Emerson and Lincoln in our quest for the meaning and value
of democracy. Since Royce viewed his project as a kind of "absolute pragmatism" (principally
owing to valuable lessons learned from his close friend William James), the Dewey-Royce
encounter is an affair within the pragmatist tradition. Hence, the major philosophic progeny of
Jefferson, Emerson and Lincoln carry the banner of American pragmatism.
The three principal philosophic slogans of this banner are voluntarism, fallibilism and
experimentalism. Both Dewey and Royce are philosophers of human will, human power and
human action. Structured and unstructured social practices sit at the center of their distinct
philosophic visions. In short, they agree with the best characterization of pragmatism ever
formulated-that of C. I. Lewis:
Pragmatism could be characterized as the doctrine that all problems are at bottom problems of
conduct, that all judgments are, implicitly, judgments of value, and that, as there can be
ultimately no valid distinction of theoretical and practical, so there can be no final separation of
questions of truth of any kind from questions of the justifiable ends of action.'
Dewey's stress on the primacy of human will and practice is shot through all of his major works.
So his seminal conception of experience-over against that of British empiricists and Kantian
transcendentalists-will suffice. It is found in one of the classic essays of modern philosophy, his
"The Need for a Recovery of Philosophy" (1917):
Experience is primarily a process of undergoing: a process of standing something; of suffering
and passion, of affection, in the literal sense of these words. The organism has to endure, to
undergo, the consequence of its own actions....
Experience, in other words, is a matter of simultaneous doings and sufferings. Our undergoings
are experiments in varying the course of events; our active tryings are trials and tests of
ourselves.-
Royce also puts a premium on human will and embraces this stress of James and Dewey:
No truth is a saving truth-yes, no truth is a truth at all unless it guides and directs life. Therein I
heartily agree with current pragmatism and with James himself....


--- PAGE 164 ---
I agree that every opinion expresses an attitude of the will, a preparedness for action, a
determination to guide a plan of action in accordance with an idea. . . . There is no such thing as
a purely intellectual form of assertion which has no element of action about it. An opinion is a
deed. It is a deed intended to guide other deeds. It proposes to have what the pragmatists call
"workings." That is, it undertakes to guide the life of the one who asserts the opinion. In that
sense, all truth is practical.'
The voluntaristic impulse in Dewey and Royce leads to two basic notions: first, that truth is a
species of the good; and second, that the conception of the good is defined in relation to
temporal consequences. The first notion, that truth is a species of the good, means that our
beliefs about the way the world is have ethical significance. This is what James means when he
writes "our opinions about the nature of things belong to our moral life.."'' Or what Dewey
highlights when he notes:
Philosophy is a form of desire, of effort at action-a love, namely, of wisdom; but with the
thorough proviso, not attached to the Platonic use of the word, that wisdom, whatever it is, is not
a mode of science or knowledge. A philosophy which was conscious of its own business and
province would then perceive that it is an intellectualized wish, an aspiration subjected to
rational discrimination and tests, a social hope reduced to a working program of action, a
prophecy of the future, but one disciplined by serious thought and knowledge.?
Royce chimes in on the same theme in this way: "Opinions about the universe are counsels as to
how to adjust your deeds to the purposes and requirements which a survey of the whole of the
life whereto your life belongs shows to be the genuinely rational purposes and requirements.."s
The second notion, that the conception of the good is defined in relation to temporal
consequences, means that the future has ethical significance. In fact, the key to pragmatism, the
distinctive feature that sets it apart from other philosophical traditions-and maybe its unique
American character-is its emphasis on the ethical significance of the future. In a rare moment of
reflection on the beginnings and traits of pragmatism in "The Development of American
Pragmatism" (1922), Dewey states:
Pragmatism, thus, presents itself as an extension of historical empiricism, but with this
fundamental difference, that it does not insist upon antecedent phenomena but upon consequent
phenomena: not upon the precedents but upon the possibilities of action. And this change in point
of view is almost revolutionary in its consequences. An empiricism which is content with
repeating facts already past has no place for possibility and for liberty...
Pragmatism thus has a metaphysical implication. The doctrine of the value of consequences
leads us to take the future into consideration. And this taking into consideration of the future
takes us to the conception of a universe whose evolution is not finished, of a universe which is
still, in James' term "in the making," "in the process of becoming," of a universe up to a certain
point still plas- tic.9
For pragmatists, the future has ethical significance because human will-human thought and
action-can make a difference in relation to human aims and purposes. There is moral substance


--- PAGE 165 ---
in the fact that human will can make the future different and, possibly, better relative to human
ends and aims. As a young man of twenty-four (March 10, 1879), just beginning his assistantship
in English Literature at the University of California, Berkeley, Royce outlined his system of
philosophy:
Faust's contract with Mephisto is, in Goethe's view, no extraordinary act, no great crime, but
simply the necessary fundament of an active life that strives for the Ideal. Here is the whole
view as I just now conceive it to have been....
The essence of life is found in the individual moments of accomplishment, and in those alone....
The individual moment is the Real; but it is so only in so far forth as it denies itself, strives to
pass out over itself, to plunge on into a future....
The individual moments of our lives must be full of action, the fuller the better; but they must
also be, for the very same reason, full of unrest. No content of the moment, however great, must
lead us to wish to remain stationary in this moment. This content in the present moment is denial
of activity; it is death.'('
More than a year later, Royce wrote in his diary July 21, 1880): "Reflected further on the
present state of the systematic development of philosophy I am undertaking. The opening and
foundation thereof is surely the theory of the world of reality as a projection from the present
moment" (Fugitive Essays, p. 35). Royce's student, editor and most able contemporary expositor,
Jacob Loewenberg, comments on these fragments from the early diaries in this way: "The
present-be it a present moment, a present idea, a present thought, a present self-derives its
meaning from a constructive process of self-extension. And the whole technique of Royce's
thinking is dominated, as we have seen, by this process" (pp. 30-31).
This preoccupation with the prospective perspective-rooted in post-Kantian idealism and
given distinctive pragmatic twists by Royce and Dewey-leads Dewey to quip: "What should
experience be but a future implicated in a pres- ent!"11 Echoes ofJefferson's notion of periodic
revolutions and Emerson's view of power as onward transitions and upward crossings loom
large here. The pragmatic emphasis on the future as the terrain for humans-making-a-difference
(including a better difference) results in a full-blown fallibilism and experimentalism. All facts
are fallible and all experience is experimental. This is the common ground of pragmatism upon
which both Dewey and Royce stand. Unique selves acting in and through participatory
communities give ethical significance to an open, risk-ridden future. The slogans of voluntarism,
fallibilism and experimentalism posit self-criticism and self-correction as a central component
of human enterprises. The "majesty of community" and "the true spirituality of genuine doubting"
combine to ensure that nothing blocks the Peircean road to inquiry.
Yet Dewey and Royce part company in response to Lincoln's challenge. The deep sense of
evil affects Royce more than it does Dewey. Ironically, Royce clings to his post-Kantian
idealism-even after his appropriation of Peirce's theory of interpretive communities-owing to his
philosophic grappling with suffering and sorrow. Jamesian injunctions about the strenuous mood
against evil do not suffice for Royce. Nor do Deweyan leaps of faith in critical intelligence.
Royce holds on to his Christianlike dramatic portrait of reality-with its hope for and assurance


--- PAGE 166 ---
of ultimate triumph-precisely because his sense of evil and the tragic is so deep.
What separates Royce from other American pragmatists and most American philosophers-
though Arthur Danto comes to mind-is his prolonged and poignant engagement with the thought of
Arthur Schopenhauer. Royce's response to Lincoln's challenge takes the form of a lifelong
struggle with Schopenhauer's pessimism. The first course Royce ever taught (by choice) as a
graduate fellow at Johns Hopkins University at twenty-two years of age in 1877 January to
March) was on Schopenhauer. His classic text The Spirit of Modern Philosophy (1892) contains
thirty-three pages on Kant, twenty-eight pages on Fichte, thirty-seven pages on Hegel and thirty-
six pages on Schopenhauer. I know of no other American history of modern philosophy in which
Schopenhauer is treated so extensively and respectfully. For Royce, Schopenhauer is
"noteworthy," "significant," "a great thinker," "a philosopher of considerable dignity," equipped
with "an erudition vast rather than technical," who "enjoyed manifold labors rather than
professional completeness." 12 Royce states that "Schopenhauer's principal work, Die Welt als
Wille and Vorstellung, is in form the most artistic philosophical treatise in existence, if one
excepts the best of Plato's Dialogues." Furthermore, Schopenhauer is the crucial transitional
figure "from the romantic idealism to the modern realism.."13 In every major text of Royce-
including his Lectures on Modern Idealism, published posthumously-Schopenhauer makes a
significant appearance.
In sharp contrast, Schopenhauer-along with Lincoln's challenge of a deep sense of evil and the
tragic-makes no appearances in Dewey's vast corpus. This is why I find Royce profound and
poignant though ultimately unpersuasive, while I find Dewey sane and fascinating though, in the
end, unsatisfactory. Like Melville, Matthiessen and Niebuhr, I believe that a deep sense of evil
and the tragic must infuse any meaning and value of democracy. The culture of democratic
societies requires not only the civic virtues of participation, tolerance, openness, mutual respect
and mobility, but also dramatic struggles with the two major culprits-disease and death-that
defeat and cut off the joys of democratic citizenship. Such citizenship must not be so
preoccupied-or obsessed-with possibility that it conceals or represses the ultimate facts of the
human predicament.
I will not here plunge into Royce's rich reflections on evil-ranging from his famous essays
"The Problem of Job" (1897) and "The Practical Significance of Pessimism" (1879) to his
treatments in his major works. Instead, I shall only sketch his notion of "irrevocable deeds" as a
source of his conception of the Absolute in his most straightforward book, Sources of Religious
Insight (1912). Royce introduces this notion in the midst of his complimentary discussion of
pragmatism.
But now one of the central facts about life is that every deed once done is ipso facto irrevocable.
That is, at any moment you perform a given deed or you do not. If you perform it, it is done and
cannot be undone. This difference between what is done and what is undone is, in the real and
empirical world, a perfectly absolute difference. The opportunity for a given individual deed
returns not; for the moment when that individual deed can be done never recurs. Here is a case
where the rational constitution of the whole universe gets into definite relation to our momentary
experience. And if any one wants to be in touch with the "absolute "-with that reality which the


--- PAGE 167 ---
pragmatists fancy to be peculiarly remote and abstract-let him simply do any individual deed
whatever and then by to undo that deed. Let the experiment teach him what one means by calling
reality absolute. Let the truths which that experience teaches any rational being show him also
what is meant by absolute truth.14
Royce's point here is not simply to draw attention to the limits the past imposes on the future.
Rather, it is to show just how concrete and practical notions of an absolute can be. His aim is to
unhinge such notions from their association with impractical and inaccessible abstractions.
Furthermore, he wants to better enable unique selves to act in the present and give ethical
significance to the future by providing standards that transcend the present. Royce recognizes
that there must be some notions of standards with regulative and critical force-though always
partial and fragmentary-that sustain our strenuous mood in the perennial fight against the
"capricious irrationality of the world" and the "blind irrationality of fortune." 15
Royce defends his version of the absolute because he "looks to the truth for aid." 16 On the
one hand, he accents the interplay of what he calls "the no longer and not yet of past and future,
so that fulfillment never at one present instant is to be found."17 Like Hegel's unhappy
consciousness, dissatisfaction reigns and "temporal peace is a contradiction in terms." Yet he is
"ready to accept the dear sorrow of possessing ideals and of taking my share of the divine
task.."18 In this way,
absolute reality (namely, the sort of reality that belongs to irrevocable deeds), absolute truth
(namely, the sort of truth that belongs to those opinions which, for a given purpose, counsel
individual deeds, when the deeds in fact meet the purpose for which they were intended)-these
two are not remote affairs invented by philosophers for the sake of "barren intellectualism."
Such absolute reality and absolute truth are the most concrete and practical andfamiliar of
matters. The pragmatist who denies that there is any absolute truth accessible has never rightly
considered the very most characteristic feature of the reasonable will, namely, that it is always
counselling irrevocable deeds, and therefore is always giving counsel that is for its own
determinate purpose irrevocably right or wrong precisely in so far as it is definite counsel."
On the other hand, I suspect that something deeper is going on. Royce believes more is at
stake than warding off willful subjectivism and epistemic relativism. Re ality and truth must, in
some sense, he absolute not only because skepticism lurks about, but also, and more important,
because it is the last and only hope for giving meaning to the strenuous mood, for justifying the
worthwhileness of our struggle to endure. In one of the great moments in Royce's corpus-a
moment not to be found in Dewey-Royce questions his idealist response to the problem of evil.
After pushing pessimism to the brink, he holds on for dear life.
For I do not feel that I have yet quite expressed the full force of the deepest argument for
pessimism, or the full seriousness of the eternal problem of evil....
Pessimism, in the true sense, isn't the doctrine of the merely peevish man, but of the man who to
borrow a word of Hegel's, "has once feared not for this moment or for that in his life, but who
has feared with all his nature; so that he has trembled through and through, and all that was most
fixed in him has become shaken." There are experiences in life that do just this for us. And when


--- PAGE 168 ---
the fountains of the great deep are once thus broken up, and the floods have come, it isn't over
this or that lost spot of our green earth that we sorrow; it is because of all that endless waste of
tossing waves which now rolls cubits deep above the top of what were our highest mountains....
No, the worst tragedy of the world is the tragedy of brute chance to which everything spiritual
seems to be subject amongst us-the tragedy of the diabolical irrationality of so many among the
foes of whatever is significant. An open enemy you can face. The temptation to do evil is indeed
a necessity for spirituality. But one's own foolishness, one's ignorance, the cruel accidents of
disease, the fatal misunderstandings that part friends and lovers, the chance mistakes that wreck
nations:-these things we lament most bitterly, not because they are painful, but because they are
farcical, distracting,-not foe-men worthy of the sword of the spirit, nor yet mere pangs of our
finitude that we can easily learn to face courageously, as one can be indifferent to physical pain.
No, these things do not make life merely painful to us; they make it hideously petty.20
At this point, Royce seems to virtually throw up his hands and throw in the towel. Fresh
memories of his nervous breakdown-only three years earlier-and his recovery in Australia loom
large. He concludes, "From our finite point of view there is no remotely discoverable
justification for this caprice." Yet he refuses to give in to Schopenhauer and holds we must "dare
to hope for an answer":
Were our insight into the truth of Logos based upon any sort of empirical assurance, it would
surely fail us here. But now, as it is, if we have the true insight of deeper idealism, we can turn
from our chaos to him ... the suffering God ... who actually and in our flesh bears the sins of the
world, and whose natural body is pierced by the capricious wounds that hateful fools inflict
upon him-it is this thought, I say, that traditional Christianity has in its deep symbolism first
taught the world, but that, in its fullness, only an idealistic interpretation can really and rationally
express....
What in time is hopelessly lost, is attained for him in his eternity...
We have found in a world of doubt but one assurance-but one, and yet how rich! All else is
hypothesis.21
I have quoted at length to convey Royce's implicit response to Lincoln's challenge, answering
Schopenhauer. The point here is not whether his response is persuasive or convincing; rather,
the point is to highlight the depths of Royce's efforts to sustain the strenuous mood in the face of
the deep sense of evil. Never in the tradition of American pragmatism has Lincoln's challenge
been taken so seriously. Yet the democratic legacy ofJefferson, Emerson and Lincoln in our
ghastly century demands nothing less. The encounter between Dewey and Royce may help us
preserve the ethical significance of our future.
SOURCE: From Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America, by Cornel West, pp. 107-118, 297-
298. Copyright C` 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc.


--- PAGE 169 ---



--- PAGE 170 ---
T H E L I M I T S O F N E O P R A G M A T I S M
This critique of contemporary pragmatisms highlights the Marxist attitude toward pragmatism:
that it insufficiently grasps the role of power in dialogical and democratic practices. Following
the radical le pragmatist C. Wright Mills, I try to show how my prophetic pragmatism follows
the Marxist critique here. In the previous essay, I highlight the existential critique ofpragmatism
(no serious sense of the tragic or comic. Here I pursue the political critique of pragmatism (no
adequate attention to the operations of institutional or structural power.
THE RENAISSANCE OF PRAGMATISM in philosophy, literary criticism and legal thought in
the past few years is a salutary development. It is part of a more general turn toward historicist
approaches to truth and knowledge. I am delighted to see intellectual interest rekindled in
Peirce, James and especially Dewey. Yet I suspect that the new pragmatism may repeat and
reproduce some of the blindness and silences of the old pragmatism-most important, an
inadequate grasp of the complex operations of power, principally owing to a reluctance to take
traditions of historical sociology and social theory seriously. In this essay, my strategy shall be
as follows. First, I shall briefly map the different kinds of neopragmatisms in relation to
perspectives regarding epistemology, theory and politics. Second, I shall suggest that
neopragmatic viewpoints usually fail to situate their own projects in terms of present-day crises-
including the crisis of purpose and vocation now raging in the professions. Third, I will try to
show how my conception of prophetic pragmatism may provide what is needed to better
illuminate and respond to these crises.
Much of the excitement about neopragmatism has to do with the antifoundationalist epistemic
claims it puts forward. The idea that there are no self justifying, intrinsically credible or
ahistorical courts of appeal to terminate chains of epistemic justification calls into question
positivistic and formalistic notions of objectivity, necessity and transcendentality. In this sense,
all neopragmatists are antifoundationalists; that is, the validation of knowledge claims rests on
practical judgments constituted by, and constructed in, dynamic social practices. For
neopragmatists, we mortal creatures achieve and acquire knowledge by means of self critical
and self-correcting social procedures rooted in a variety of human processes.
Yet all neopragmatists are not antirealists. For example, Peircean pragmatists are intent on
sidestepping any idealist or relativist traps, and they therefore link a social conception of
knowledge to a regulative ideal of truth. This viewpoint attempts to reject metaphysical
conceptions of reality and skeptical reductions of truth-talk to knowledge-talk. In contrast,
Deweyan pragmatists tend to be less concerned with charges of idealism or relativism, owing to
a more insouciant attitude toward truth. In fact, some Deweyan pragmatists-similar to some
sociologists of knowledge and idealists-wrongly collapse truth claims into
warrantedassertability claims or rational-acceptability claims. Such moves provide fodder for
the cannons of not only Peircean pragmatists, but also old-style realists and foundationalists. To
put it crudely, truth at the moment cannot be the truth about things, yet warranted-assertable
claims are the only truths we can get. To miss the subtle distinction between dynamic knowledge
and regulative truth is to open the door to metaphysics or to slide down the slippery slope of
sophomoric relativism. Yet the antifoundationalist claims put forward by neopragmatists are


--- PAGE 171 ---
often construed such that many open such doors or slide down such slopes. In short, epistemic
pluralism degenerates into an epistemic promiscuity that encourages epistemic policing by
realists and foundationalists.
Neopragmatists disagree even more sharply in regarding the role of theory (explanatory
accounts of the past and present). All neopragmatists shun grand theory because it smacks of
metaphysical posturing. Yet this shunning often shades into a distrust of theory per se-hence a
distancing from revisable social theories, provisional cultural theories or heuristic historical
theories. This distrust may encourage an ostrichlike, piecemeal incrementalism that reeks of a
vulgar antitheo- reticism. On this view, neopragmatism amounts to crude practicalism. The grand
pragmatism of Dewey and especially C. Wright Mills rejects such a view. Instead, it subtly
incorporates an experimental temper within theory-laden descriptions of problematic situations
(for instance, social and cultural crises). Unfortunately, the pragmatist tradition is widely
associated with a distrust of theory, which curtails its ability to fully grasp the operations of
power within the personal, social and historical contexts of human activities.
It is no accident that the dominant form of politics in the pragmatist tradition accents the
pedagogical and the dialogical. Such a noble liberalism assumes that vast disparities in
resources, enormous polarizations in perceptions or intense conflicts of interests can be
overcome by means of proper education and civil conversation. If persuasive historical
sociological claims show that such disparities, polarizations and conflicts often produce
improper agitation and uncivil confrontation, the dominant form of politics in the pragmatist
tradition is paralyzed or at least rendered more impotent than it is commonly believed. One
crucial theme or subtext in my genealogy of pragmatism is the persistence of the sense of
impotence of liberal intellectuals in American culture and society, primarily because of
unattended class and regional disparities, unacknowledged racial and sexual polarizations and
untheorized cultural and personal conflicts that permeate and pervade our past and present. My
view neither downplays nor devalues education and conversation; it simply highlights the
structural background conditions of pedagogical efforts and dialogical events.
This leads me to my second concern, namely, the relative absence of pragmatist accounts of
why pragmatism surfaces now in the ways and forms that it does. Such an account must situate
the nature of pragmatist intellectual interventionstheir intended effects and unintended
consequences-in the present historical moment in American society and culture. I suspect that
part of the renaissance of neopragmatism can be attributed to the crisis of purpose and vocation
in humanistic studies and professional schools. On this view, the recent hunger for
interdisciplinary studies-or the erosion of disciplinary boundaries-promoted by neopragmatisms,
poststructuralisms, Marxisms and feminisms is not only motivated by a quest for truth, but also
activated by power struggles over what kinds of knowledge should be given status, rewarded
and passed on to young, informed citizens in the next century. These power struggles are not
simply over positions and curriculums, but also over ideals of what it means to be humanistic
intellectuals in a declining empire-in a first-rate military power, a near-rescinding economic
power and a culture in decay.
As Henry Adams suggests, the example of a turn toward history is most evident in American


--- PAGE 172 ---
culture when decline is perceived to be undeniable and intellectuals feel most removed from the
action. Furthermore, pragmatism at its best, in James and Dewey, provided a sense of purpose
and vocation for intellectuals who believed they could make a difference in the public life of the
nation. And it is not surprising that the first perceivable consequence of the renaissance of
neopragmatism led by Richard Rorty echoed James's attack on professionalization and
specialization. In this sense, Rorty's Philosophy and the Mirror of.Nature (1979) not only told
the first major and influential story of analytic philosophy, but was also a challenging narrative
of how contemporary intellectuals have come to be contained within professional and
specialized social spaces, with little outreach to a larger public and hence little visibility in, and
minimal effect on, the larger society. Needless to say, Rorty's revival of Jamesian
antiprofessionalism-not to be confused with anti-intellectualism or even anti-academicism-has
increased intellectuals' interest in public journalism and intensified the tension between
journalists and academics.
The crisis of purpose and vocation in humanistic studies and professional schools is
compounded by the impact of the class and regional disparities, racial and sexual polarizations
and cultural and personal conflicts that can no longer be ignored. This impact not only unsettles
our paradigms in the production of knowledge, but also forces us to interrogate and examine our
standards, criteria, styles and forms in which knowledge is assessed, legitimated and expressed.
At its worst, pragmatism in the academy permits us to embrace this impact without attending to
the implications of power. At its best, pragmatism behooves us to critically scrutinize this
impact as we promote the democratization of American intellectual life without vulgar leveling
or symbolic tokenism.
But what is this "pragmatism at its best"? What form does it take? What are its constitutive
features or fundamental components? These questions bring me to my third point-the idea of a
prophetic pragmatist perspective and praxis. I use the adjective "prophetic" in order to harken
back to the rich, though flawed, traditions of Judaism and Christianity that promote courageous
resistance against, and relentless critiques of, injustice and social misery. These traditions are
rich, in that they help keep alive collective memories of moral (that is, anti-idolatrous) struggle
and nonmarket values (that is, love for others, loyalty to an ethical ideal and social freedom) in a
more and more historically amnesiac society and marketsaturated culture. These traditions are
flawed because they tend toward dogmatic pronouncements (that is, "Thus saith the Lord") to
homogeneous constituencies. Prophetic pragmatism gives courageous resistance and relentless
critique a selfcritical character and democratic content; that is, it analyzes the social causes of
unnecessary forms of social misery, promotes moral outrage against them and organizes different
constituencies to alleviate them, yet does so with an openness to its own blindnesses and
shortcomings.
Prophetic pragmatism is pragmatism at its best because it promotes a critical temper and
democratic faith without making criticism a fetish or democracy an idol. The fetishization of
criticism yields a sophisticated ironic consciousness of parody and paralysis, just as the
idolization of democracy produces mob rule. As Peirce, James and Dewey noted, criticism
always presupposes something in place-be it a set of beliefs or a tradition. Criticism yields
results or makes a difference when something significant is antecedent to it, such as rich,


--- PAGE 173 ---
sustaining, collective memories of moral struggle. Similarly, democracy assumes certain
conditions for its flourishing-like a constitutional background. Such conditions for democracy
are not subject to public veto.
Critical temper as a way of struggle and democratic faith as a way of life are the twin pillars
of prophetic pragmatism. The major foes to be contested are despair, dogmatism and oppression.
The critical temper promotes a full-fledged experimental disposition that highlights the
provisional, tentative and revisable character of our visions, analyses and actions. Democratic
faith consists of a Pascalian wager (hence underdetermined by the evidence) on the abilities and
capacities of ordinary people to participate in decision-making procedures of institutions that
fundamentally regulate their lives. The critical temper motivated by democratic faith yields all-
embracing moral and/or religious visions that project credible ameliorative possibilities
grounded in present realities in light of systemic structural analyses of the causes of social
misery (without reducing all misery to historical causes). Such analyses must appeal to
traditions of social theory and historical sociology just as visions must proceed from traditions
of moral and/or religious communities. The forms of prophetic praxis depend on the insights of
the social theories and the potency of the moral and/or religious communities. In order for these
analyses and visions to combat despair, dogmatism and oppression, the existential, communal
and political dimensions of prophetic pragmatism must be accented. The existential dimension is
guided by the value of love-a risk-ridden affirmation of the distinct humanity of others that, at its
best, holds despair at bay. The communal dimension is regulated by loyalty--a profound
devotion to the critical temper and democratic faith that eschews dogmatism. The political
dimension is guided by freedom-a perennial quest for self-realization and self-development that
resists all forms of oppression.
The tradition of pragmatism is in need of a mode of cultural criticism that keeps track of
social misery, solicits and channels moral outrage to alleviate it and projects a future in which
the potentialities of ordinary people flourish and flower. The first wave of pragmatism
foundered on the rocks of cultural conservatism and corporate liberalism. Its defeat was tragic.
Let us not permit the second wave of pragmatism to end as farce.
SOURCE: Southern California Law Review 63, (1990) 1747-1762. Reprinted with permission of the
Southern California Law Review.


--- PAGE 174 ---
N I E T Z S C H E ' S P R E F I G U R A T I O N O F 
POSTMODERN AMERICAN P H I L O S O P H Y
The most profound philosophers in and of modernity with artistic temperamentsSchopenhauer
and Nietzsche-are fen ignored or overlooked by American philosophers. In this highly textual
essay, originally published in 1981, I try to argue that Nietzsche j perspectivalism prefigures
many crucial insights of the towering contemporary American philosophers like Quine,
Goodman, Sellars and Rorty. Yet the centrality of struggle in Nietzsche-lapsed Lutheran that he
was-led him to call for constructive alternatives for concrete living (even if only for the cruel
and courageous few in his aristocratic perfectionism).
You ask me about the idiosyncrasies of philosophers? . . . There is their lack of historical sense, their
hatred of even the idea of becoming, their Egyptianism. They think they are doing a thing honour when
they dehistoricize it, sub specie aeterni-when they make a mummy of it. All the philosophers have
handled for millennia has been conceptual mummies; nothing actual has escaped from their hands
alive. They kill, they stuff, when they worship, these conceptual idolaters-they become a mortal
danger to everything when they worship. Death, change, age, as well as procreation and growth, are
for them objections-refutations even. What is, does not become; what becomes, is not.
-NIETZSCHE, TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS
What I relate is the history of the next two centuries. I describe what is coming, what can no longer
come differently: the advent of nihilism. This history can be related even now, for necessity itself is
at work here. This future speaks even now in a hundred signs, this destiny announces itself
everywhere; for this music of the future all ears are cocked even now. For some time now, our whole
European culture has been moving as toward a catastrophe, with a tortured tension that is growing
from decade to decade: restlessly, violently,
headlong, like a river that wants to reach the end, that no longer reflects, that is afraid to reflect.
NIETZSCHE, THE WILL 70 POWER
Nietzsche is the central figure in postmodern thought in the West. His aphoristic style-the
epigram as style-governs the elusive texts of postmodern philosophers such as Ludwig
Wittgenstein and E. M. Cioran. His antihermeneutical perspectivism underlies the deconstructive
stance of postmodern critics such as Jacques Derrida and Paul de Man. His genealogical
approach, especially regarding the link between knowledge and power, regulates the Marxist-
influenced textual practice of postmodern critic-historians such as Michel Foucault and Edward
Said. And his gallant attempt to overcome traditional metaphysics is a major preoccupation of
postmodern thinkers such as Martin Heidegger, Hans-Georg Gadamer and Jean-Paul Sartre.
In this essay, I will try to show the ways in which Nietzsche prefigures the crucial moves
made recently in postmodern American philosophy. I will confine my remarks to two of
Nietzsche's texts: Twilight of the Idols and The Will to Power.' The postmodern American


--- PAGE 175 ---
philosophers I will examine are W. V. Quine, Nelson Goodman, Wilfred Sellars, Thomas Kuhn
and Richard Rorty. The three moves I shall portray are: the move toward antirealism or
conventionalism in ontology; the move toward the demythologization of the Myth of the Given or
antifoundationalism in epistemology; and the move toward the detranscendentalization of the
subject or the dismissal of the mind as a sphere of inquiry. I then shall claim that Nietzsche
believed such moves lead to a paralyzing nihilism and ironic skepticism unless they are
supplemented with a new worldview, a new "countermovement," to overcome such nihilism and
skepticism. Lastly, I will suggest that postmodern American philosophy has not provided such a
"countermovement," settling instead for either updated versions of scientism (Quine and
Sellars), an aristocratic resurrection of pluralistic stylism (Goodman), a glib ideology of
professionalism (Kuhn) or a nostalgic appeal to enlightened conversation (Rorty). Such weak
candidates for a "countermovement" seem to indicate the extent to which postmodern American
philosophy-similar to much of postmodern thought in the West-constitutes a dead, impotent
rhetoric of a declining and decaying civilization.
ANTI REALISM
The originating figures of modern analytic philosophy-Gottlob Frege, Alexius Meinong,
Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore-are the acknowledged ancestors of postmodern American
philosophers. These figures constituted a formidable realist revolt against psychologism,
conventionalism and idealism.2 Frege revolted against J. S. Mill's psychologism and J. Venn's
conventionalism in logic; Meinong, against Franz Brentano's psychologism in object theory;
Russell and Moore, against F. H. Bradley's Hegelian idealism in metaphysics and epistemology.
Each separate attack shares a common theme: an attempt to resurrect realism.
There are many forms of realism in modern analytic philosophy, including naive realism,
Platonic realism, critical realism and internal realism.3 The basic claims of any form of realism
are that objects, things, states of affairs or the world exist externally to us and independently of
our sense experience; and that these objects, things, states of affairs or this world, in some
fundamental way, determine what is true, objective and real.
This two-prong definition of realism suggests two important elements of any realist position.
First, it links any realist position to some notion of correspondence (or re-presenting) between
either ideas and objects, words and things, sentences and states of affairs, or theories and the
world. Second, this definition proposes something other than human social practice to serve as
the final court of appeal determining what is and what we ought to believe. To put it crudely,
realism is preoccupied with assuring us that there is an external world and with obtaining the
true (accurate, objective, valid) copy of this world.
Postmodern American philosophers affirm the first prong of the definition of realism-thus
bypassing idealism-but see no need to build the notion of correspondence into the way the claim
is stated. In short, they are highly critical of the subject-object problematic embodied in the first
prong of the definition, such that grasping reality consists of crossing the subject-object hiatus,
leaving one's inner world in order to get in contact with the external world, and of one's ideas
copying or corresponding to the world.


--- PAGE 176 ---
Postmodern American philosophers reject the second prong of the definition of realism-thus
promoting conventionalism in ontology. They refuse to accept the view that the world determines
truth or that the world is the final court of appeal that compels us to accept what is or believe as
we ought.
This rejection is based on two major insights of postmodern American philosophers: the
conventional character of constructing (reductionist or nonreduction- ist) logical systems of the
world and the theory-laden character of observations. The first insight crystallized after Rudolf
Carnap's highly acclaimed yet unsuccessful attempt in his Logical Construction of the World
(1928; better known as his Auf= ban) to rationally reconstruct the process of acquiring
knowledge by reducing (or translating) statements about the world to those of immediate
experience. The second insight was gained from A. J. Ayer's popular yet no less unsuccessful
attempt in his Language, Truth and Logic (1936) to defend the verificationist theory of meaning
(or roughly promoting the primacy of observational evidence for determining the meaningfulness
of a sentence).
Almost a decade after his painstaking study of Carnap's Aujbau in his masterful work The
Structure of Appearance (1951), Goodman concluded in his renowned essay "The Way the
World Is":
What we must face is the fact that even the truest description comes nowhere near faithfully
reproducing the way the world is ... for it has explicit primitives, routes of construction, etc.,
none of them features of the world described. Some philosophers contend, therefore, that if
systematic descriptions introduce an arbitrary artificial order, then we should make our
descriptions unsystematic to bring them more into accord with the world. Now the tacit
assumption here is that the respects in which a description is unsatisfactory are just those
respects in which it falls short of being a, faitlajitl picture; and the tacit goal is to achieve a
description that as nearly as possible gives a living likeness. But the goal is a delusive one. For
we have seen that even the most realistic way of picturing amounts merely to one kind of
conventionalization. In painting, the selection, the emphasis, the conventions are different from
but no less peculiar to the vehicle, and no less variable, than those of language. The idea of
making verbal descriptions approximate pictorial depiction loses its point when we understand
that to turn a description into the most faithful possible picture would amount to nothing more
than exchanging some conventions for others.I
After his search for a criterion of adequacy for constructional systems, such as Carnap's
phenomenalistic one, or for scientific theories, such as Einstein's special theory of relativity,
Goodman held that the choice is not based primarily on mere agreement with the facts, that is,
observational data, but rather on, among other things, structural simplicity. In his influential
essay "The Test of Simplicity," he writes:
Thus selection of a theory must always be made in advance of the determination of some of the
facts it covers; and, accordingly, some criterion other than conformity with such facts must be
applied in making the selection. After as many points as we like have been plotted by experiment
concerning the correlation of two factors (for example, of time and deterioration of
radioactivity), we predict the remaining points by choosing one among all the infinitely many


--- PAGE 177 ---
curves that cover the plotted points. Obviously, simplicity of some sort is a cardinal factor in
making this choice (we pick the "smoothest" curve). The very validity of the choice depends
upon whether the choice is properly made according to such criteria. Thus simplicity here is not
a consideration applicable after truth is determined but is one of the standards of validity that are
applied in the effort to discover truth .5
In a later essay, "Art and Inquiry," and in his most recent work, Ways of Worldmaking (1978),
Goodman advances the notion of fitness as appropriate to (and as replacement for) talk about
truth:
Truth of a hypothesis after all is a matter of fit-fit with a body of theory, and fit of hypothesis and
theory to the data at hand and the facts to be encountered.6
Briefly, then, truth of statements and rightness of descriptions, representations, exemplifications,
expressions-of design, drawing, diction, rhythm-is primarily a matter of fit: fit to what is
referred to in one way or another, or to other renderings, or to modes and manners of
organization. The differences between fitting a version to a world, a world to a version, and a
version together or to other versions fade when the role of versions in making the worlds they fit
is recognized. And knowing or understanding is seen as ranging beyond the acquiring of true
beliefs to the discovering and devising of fit of all sorts.'
In his famous essay "Two Dogmas of Empiricism," Quine observed that in Ayer's attempt to
correlate each meaningful sentence with observational evidence, that is, empirical confirmation,
Ayer remained tied to Carnap's reductionist project by trying to reduce the meaningfulness of a
sentence to its empirical import.
But the dogma of reductionism has, in a subtler and more tenuous form, continued to influence
the thought of empiricists. The notion lingers that to each statement, or each synthetic statement,
there is associated a unique range of possible sensory events such that the occurrence of any of
them would add to the likelihood of truth of the statement, and that there is associated also
another unique range of possible sensory events whose occurrence would detract from that
likelihood. This notion is of course implicit in the verification theory of meaning.
The dogma of reductionism survives in the supposition that each statement, taken in isolation
from its fellows, can admit of confirmation or information at all. My countersuggestion, issuing
essentially from Carnap's doctrine of the physical world in the Aufbau, is that our statements
about the external world face the tribunal of sense experience not individually but only as a
corporate body.'
Quire extended his critique of updated empiricism to the most cherished notion of modern
analytic philosophers-the notion of analyticity, the idea that a statement is true by virtue of
meanings and independently of fact. Given his Duhemian holism, the idea of an isolated
statement being true without empirical confirmation is as unacceptable as the idea of an isolated


--- PAGE 178 ---
statement being true with empirical confirmation. His main point is that the basic "unit of
empirical significance is the whole of science," 9 namely, competing theories (versions or
descriptions) of the world, not isolated statements, since the truth-value of such statements can
change relative to one's theory of the world.
If this view is right, it is misleading to speak of the empirical content of an individual statement-
especially if it is a statement at all remote from the experiential periphery of the field.
Furthermore it becomes folly to seek a boundary between synthetic statements, which hold
contingently on experience, and analytic statements, which hold come what may. Any statement
can be held true come what may, if we make drastic enough adjustments elsewhere in the system.
Even a statement very close to the periphery can be held true in the face of recalcitrant
experience by pleading hallucination or by amending certain statements of the kind called logical
laws. Conversely, by the same token, no statement is immune to revision.10
Goodman and Quine are the (retired, Harvard) patriarchs of postmodern American
philosophy. Their respective holistic critiques of Carnap and, to a lesser degree, Ayer constitute
the emergence of postmodernity in American philosophy and mark the Americanization of
analytic philosophy." If Goodman and Quine are the patriarchs, then Richard Rorty and Thomas
Kuhn are the renegade stepchildren. Rorty and Kuhn have followed through most thoroughly on
the antirealist, historicist and conventionalist implications of the views of Goodman and the
early Quine.
In his celebrated article "The World Well Lost," Rorty concludes that the theoryladen
character of observations relativizes talk about the world such that appeals to "the world" as a
final court of appeal to determine what is true or what we should believe is viciously circular.
We cannot isolate "the world" from theories of the world, then compare these theories of the
world with a theory-free world. We cannot compare theories with anything that is not a product
of another theory. So any talk about "the world" is relative to the alternative theories available.
In response to the second prong of the definition of realism-to the notion that the world
determines truth-Rorty states:
Now, to put my cards on the table, I think that the realistic true believer's notion of the world is
an obsession rather than an intuition. I also think that Dewey was right in thinking that the only
intuition we have of the world as determining truth is just the intuition that we must make our
new beliefs conform with a vast body of platitudes, unquestioned perceptual reports, and the
like.12
Kuhn, the other stepchild of Goodman and Quine, has received more attention than any
postmodern American philosopher of science primarily because he has provided a new
descriptive vocabulary that gives a new perspective on a sacrosanct institution, that is, natural
science, in our culture in light of the early Quine's pragmatism and Goodman's conventionalism.
His controversial yet highly acclaimed book The Structure of'Scientiftc Revolutions (1962)
serves as a rallying point for antirealists owing to statements such as the following:
A scientific theory is usually felt to be better than its predecessors not only in the sense that it is
a better instrument for discovering and solving puzzles, but also because it is somehow a better


--- PAGE 179 ---
representation of what nature is really like. One often hears that successive theories grow ever
closer to, or approximate more and more closely to, the truth. Apparently generalizations like
that refer not to the puzzle-solutions and the concrete predictions derived from a theory but
rather to its ontology, to the match, that is, between the entities with which the theory populates
nature and what is "really there."
Perhaps there is some other way of salvaging the notion of "truth" for application to whole
theories, but this one will not do. There is, I think, no theoryindependent way to reconstruct
phrases like "really there," the notion of a match between the ontology of a theory and its "real"
counterpart in nature now seems to me illusive in principle.13
If I am right, then "truth" may, like "proof," be a term with only intra-theoretic applications.14
There surely have been antirealists (such as Hegel), conventionalist philosophers of science
(such as Pierre Duhem) and pragmatists (such as John Dewey) prior to the rise of postmodern
American philosophy. But I claim that it is Nietzsche who most openly and unequivocally
prefigures the antirealist, conventionalist move made by postmodern American philosophers.
For example, in the section entitled "How the `Real World' at Last Became a Myth" in
Twilight of 'the Idols, Nietzsche comically mocks the notion of a theory-free world, a "world"
that can be appealed to in adjudicating between competing theories of the world.
4. The real world-unattainable? Unattained, at any rate. And if unattained also unknown.
Consequently also no consolation, no redemption, no duty: how could we have a duty towards
something unknown?
(The grey of dawn. First yawning of reason. Cockcrow of positivism.)
5. The "real world"-an idea no longer of any use, not even a duty any longer-an idea grown
useless, superfluous, consequently a refuted idea: let us abolish it!
(Broad daylight; breakfast; return of cheerfulness and bon.sens; Plato blushes for shame; all free
spirits run riot.)
6. We have abolished the real world: what world is left? the apparent world perhaps? ... But no!
with the real world we have also abolished the apparent world!
(Mid-day; moment of the shortest shadow; end of the longest error; zenith of mankind; INCIPIT
ZARATHUSTRA.) (Ti, pp. 40-41)
Nietzsche clearly subscribes to the insight of postmodern American philosophers that holds
that facts are theory-laden. He writes in The Will to Power:
Against positivism, which halts at phenomena-"There are only facts"-I would say: No, facts are


--- PAGE 180 ---
precisely what there is not, only interpretations. We cannot establish any fact "in itself": perhaps
it is folly to want to do such a thing. (WP, p. 267)
There are no facts, everything is in flux, incomprehensible, elusive; what is relatively most
enduring is-our opinions. (WP, p. 327)
Goodman's pleas for a pluralism of versions of the world as manifest in the following
passages:
The movement is from unique truth and a world fixed and found to a diversity of right and even
conflicting versions or worlds in the making.''
There are very many different equally true descriptions of the world, and their truth is the only
standard of their faithfulness. And when we say of them that they all involve
conventionalizations, we are saying that no one of these different descriptions is exclusively
true, since the others are also true. None of them tells us the way the world is, but each of them
tells us a way the world is. 16
echoes Nietzsche's quip: "No limit to the ways in which the world can be interpreted; every
interpretation a symptom of growth or of decline.... Inertia needs unity (monism); plurality of
interpretations a sign of strength. Not to desire to deprive the world of its disturbing and
enigmatic character!" (WP, p. 326)
As we saw earlier, for Goodman, this pluralism suggests multiple criteria for accepting
versions of the world-in science and art.
Truth is not enough; it is at most a necessary condition. But even this concedes too much; the
noblest scientific laws are seldom quite true. Minor discrepancies are overridden in the interest
of breadth or power or simplicity. Science denies its data as the statesman denies his
constituents-within the limits of prudence.... Truth and its aesthetic counterpart amount to
appropriateness under different names. If we speak of hypotheses but not works of art as true,
that is because we reserve the terms "true" and "false" for symbols in sentential form. I do not
say this difference is negligible, but it is specific rather than generic, a difference in field of
application rather than in formula, and marks no schism between the scientific and the
aesthetic.17
Similarly for Nietzsche, seeking after "truth" is essentially a matter of positing a goal and
achieving that goal.
The ascertaining of "truth" and "untruth," the ascertaining of facts in general, is fundamentally
different from creative positing, from forming, shaping, overcoming, willing, such as is of the
essence of philosophy. To introduce a meaning-this task still remains to be done, assuming there


--- PAGE 181 ---
is no meaning yet. Thus it is with sounds, but also with the fate of peoples: they are capable of
the most different interpretations and direction toward different goals.
On a yet higher level is to posit a goal and mold facts according to it; that is, active
interpretation and not merely conceptual translation. (WP, p. 327)
Note the way in which Nietzsche's perspectivism, most clearly stated in the following
passage,
That the value of the world lies in our interpretation (-that other interpretations than merely
human ones are perhaps somewhere possible-); that previous interpretations have been
perspective valuations by virtue of which we can survive in life, i.e., in the will to power, for
the growth of power; that every elevation of man brings with it the overcoming of narrower
interpretations; that every strengthening and increase of power opens up new perspectives and
means believing in new horizons-this idea permeates my writings. The world with which we are
concerned is false, i.e., is not a fact but a fable and approximation on the basis of a meager sum
of observations; it is "in flux," as something in a state of becoming, as a falsehood always
changing but never getting near the truth: forthere is no "truth." (WP, p. 330)
anticipates the early Quine's pragmatism, best articulated in this famous paragraph:
As an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of science as a tool, ultimately, for
predicting future experience in the light of past experience. Physical objects are conceptually
imported into the situation as convenient intermediaries-not by definition in terms of experience,
but simply as irreducible posits comparable, epistemologically, to the gods of Homer. For my
part I do, qua lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in Homer's gods; and I consider
it a scientific error to believe otherwise. But in point of epistemological footing the physical
objects and the gods differ only in degree and not in kind. Both sorts of entities enter our
conception only as cultural posits. The myth of physical objects is epistemologically superior to
most in that it has proved more efficacious than other myths as a device for working a
manageable structure into the flux of ex- perience.18
Note also the crucial role of utility and human interests in the early Quine's pragmatism and
Nietzsche's perspectivism:
The quality of myth, however, is relative; relative, in this case, to the epistemological point of
view. This point of view is one among various, corresponding to one among our various
interests and purposes.'9
The apparent world, i.e., a world viewed according to values; ordered, selected ac- cordmg to
values, i.e., in this case according to the viewpoint of utility in regard to the preservation and
enhancement of the power of a certain species of animal.... The perspective therefore decides
the character of the "appearance"! (WP, p. 305)


--- PAGE 182 ---
Postmodern American philosophers, unconsciously prefigured by Nietzsche, are aptly
described by Rorty when in the process of delineating what he calls "edifying" philosophers
such as Dewey, Kierkegaard and the later Heidegger, he writes:
These writers have kept alive the suggestion that, even when we have justified true belief about
everything we want to know, we may have no more than conformity to the norms of the day. They
have kept alive the historicist sense that this century's "superstition" was the last century's
triumph of reason, as well as the relativist sense that the latest vocabulary, borrowed from the
latest scientific achievement, may not express privileged representations of essences, but be just
another of the potential infinity of vocabularies in which the world can be de- scribed.20
Nietzsche catches the flavor of this passage when he writes, "That the destruction of an illusion
does not produce truth but only one more piece of ignorance, an extension of our `empty space,'
an increase of our `desert."' (WP, p. 327)
DEMYTHOLOGIZING THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN
The Myth of the Given is an attempt to secure solid foundations for knowledge claims; it is a
quest for certainty in epistemology.21 The Myth of the Given roughly holds that there is a given
element-a self-justifying, intrinsically credible, theory-neutral, noninferential element-in
experience that provides the foundations for other knowledge claims and serves as the final
terminating points for chains of epistemic justification. Therefore the attempt of postmodern
American philosophers to demythologize the Myth of the Given is a move toward
antifoundationalism in epistemology. It is not surprising that such antifoundationalism is akin to
the antirealism, holism and conventionalism we examined earlier.
The two major proponents of the Myth of the Given in modern analytic philosophy are C. I.
Lewis, a beloved teacher of Quine and Goodman, and H. H. Price, an appreciative student of
Russell.22 For both philosophers, the given element and its interpretation constitute the basic
characteristics of knowledge and experience. As Lewis states: "There are in our cognitive
experience, two elements, the immediate data such as those of sense, which are presented or
given to the mind, and a form, construction, or interpretation, which represents the activity of
thought.."23 Price also notes after acknowledging the data of the historian, general and detective:
But it is obvious that these are only data relatively and for the purpose of answering a certain
question. They are really themselves the results of inference, often of a very complicated kind.
We may call them data secundum quid. But eventually we must get back to something which is a
datum simpliciter, which is not the result of any previous intellectual process.24
As we said earlier, for Lewis and Price, the very foundations of knowledge are at stake in this
distinction. Lewis is quite candid about this:
If there be no datum given to the mind, then knowledge must be altogether contentless and
arbitrary; there would be nothing which it must be true to. And if there be no interpretation
which the mind imposes, then thought is rendered superfluous, the possibility of error becomes
inexplicable, and the distinction of true and false is in danger of becoming meaningless.25


--- PAGE 183 ---
Similarly for Price, the phenomenological investigation of the particular modes of perception
(which lies outside of science) provides the foundations for science. "Empirical Science can
never be more trustworthy than perception, upon which it is based.."2s
We are fortunate to have Goodman's direct response to Lewis's two-component view of
knowledge owing to a symposium in which they both (along with Hans Reichenbach) took part at
an American Philosophical Association meeting at Bryn Mawr in 1951. Needless to say,
Goodman is critical of Lewis's view. He replies not by denying the notion of the given, but by
severing any links of a given element with notions of the true, false or certain.
But this all seems to me to point to, or at least to be compatible with, the conclusion that while
something is given, nothing given is true; that while some things may be indubitable, nothing is
certain. What we have been urged to grant amounts at most to this: materials for or particles of
experience are given, sensory qualities or events or other elements are not created at will but
presented, experience has some content even though our description of it may be artificial or
wrong and even though the precise differentiation between what is given and what is not given
may be virtually impossible. But to such content or materials or particles or elements, the terms
"true," or "false," and "certain" are quite inapplicable. These elements are simply there or not
there. To grant that some are there is not to grant that anything is certain. Such elements may be
indubitable in the vacuous sense that doubt is irrelevant to them, as it is to a desk; but they, like
the desk, are equally devoid of certainty. They may be before us, but they are neither true nor
false. For truth and falsity and certainty pertain to statements or judgments and not to mere
particles or materials or elements. Thus, to deny that there are empirical certainties does not
imply that experience is a pure fiction, that it is without content, or even that there is no given
element.27
Five years later in his essay on Carnap, "The Revision of Philosophy," Goodman picks up the
given-interpretation issue again, and this time he rejects the distinction outright:
Any such view rests on the premise that the question "What are the original elements in
knowledge?" is a clear and answerable one. And the assumption remains uncontested so long as
we are dominated by the tradition that there is a sharp dichotomy between the given and the
interpretation put upon it-so long as we picture the knower as a machine that is fed experience in
certain lumps and proceeds to grind these up and reunite them in various ways. But I do not think
this view of the matter will stand very close scrutiny.28
And in his latest book, the very notion of epistemological foundations and the given element in
experience are dismissed and dispensed with. "With false hope of a firm foundation gone, with
the world displaced by worlds that are but versions, with substance dissolved into function, and
with the given acknowledged as taken, we face the questions how worlds are made, tested, and
known.."29
The most explicit attempts in postmodern American philosophy to demythologize the Myth of
the Given are those of Wilfred Sellars and Richard Rorty. For Sellars, the Myth of the Given
results from a confusion between the acquisition of knowledge and the justification of
knowledge, between empirical causal accounts of how one comes to have a belief and


--- PAGE 184 ---
philosophical investigations into how one justifies a belief one has. This confusion dissolves
when one realizes that knowledge begins with the ability to justify, the capacity to use words.
Everything else, he holds, is a noncognitive causal antecedent. Sellars's psychological
nominalism claims that there is no such thing as prelinguistic awareness; or, to put it positively,
that all awareness-of abstract and particular entities-is a linguistic affair. According to his view,
"not even the awareness of such sorts, resemblances, and facts as pertain to so-called immediate
experience is presupposed by the process of acquiring the use of a language."30
Sellars's view precludes the possibility of any form of the Myth of the Given because it rules
out any self justifying, intrinsically credible, theory-neutral, noninferential epistemic element in
experience. This is so because if knowledge begins with the ability to justify, then its beginnings
(or "foundations") are public and intersubjective, matters of social practice.
For example, one of the forms of the Myth of the Given subscribed to by traditional empiricist
philosophers
is the idea that there is, indeed must be, a structure of particular matter of fact such that (a) each
fact can not only be noninferentially known to be the case, but presupposes no other knowledge
either of particular matter of fact, or of general truths; and (b) such that the noninferential
knowledge of facts belonging to this structure constitutes the ultimate court of appeals for all
factual claims-particular and general-about the world.31
This privileged stratum of fact is justified by appeals to prelinguistic awareness of self-
authenticating, "phenomenal" qualities. Price tries to defend this view by characterizing a normal
perceptual situation-of a tomato under regular circumstances of light-in which he arrives at
certain indubitable beliefs:
One thing however I cannot doubt: that there exists a red patch of a round and somewhat bulgy
shape, standing out from a background of other colour-patches, and having a certain visual depth,
and that this whole field of colour is directly present to my consciousness.... This peculiar
manner of being present to consciousness is called being given and that which is thus present is
called a datum. The corresponding mental attitude is called acquaintance, intuitive apprehension,
or sometimes having.32
Sellars then replies:
One couldn't have observational knowledge of any fact unless one knew many other things as
well.... For the point is specifically that observational knowledge of any particular fact, e.g., that
this is green, presupposes that one knows general facts of the form X is a reliable symptom of
Y.... The essential point is that in characterizing an episode or a state as that of knowing, we are
not giving an empirical description of that episode or state; we are placing it in the logical space
of reasons, of justifying and being able to justify what one says.33
Sellars concludes that the conception of knowledge based on the Myth of the Given, along with
its concomitant picture of epistemology,


--- PAGE 185 ---
is misleading because of its static character. One seems forced to choose between the picture of
an elephant which rests on a tortoise (What supports the tortoise?) and the picture of a great
Hegelian serpent of knowledge with its tail in its mouth (Where does it begin?). Neither will do.
For empirical knowledge, like its sophisticated extension, science, is rational, not because it has
a foundation but because it is a self-correcting enterprise which can put any claim in jeopardy,
though not all at once.34
Rorty's epistemological behaviorism extends Sellars's psychological nominalism, accenting
even more the intersubjective, that is, social character, of the "foundations" of knowledge:
Explaining rationality and epistemic authority by reference to what society lets us say, rather
than the latter by the former, is the essence of what I shall call "epistemological behaviorism,"
an attitude common to Dewey and Wittgenstein. This sort of behaviorism can best be seen as a
species of holism-but one which requires no idealist metaphysical underpinnings.35
Following Sellars's attack on the Myth of the Given and linking this attack to Quine's holism,
Rorty claims:
A holistic approach to knowledge is not a matter of antifoundationalist polemic, but a distrust of
the whole epistemological enterprise. A behavioristic approach to episodes of "direct
awareness" is not a matter of antimentalistic polemic, but a distrust of the Platonic quest for that
special sort of certainty associated with visual perception.36
By combining the insights of Sellars and Quine, Rorty arrives at his own radical conclusion:
When Sellars's and Quire's doctrines are purified, they appear as complementary expressions of
a single claim: that no "account of the nature of knowledge" can rely on a theory of
representations which stand in privileged relations to reality. The work of these two
philosophers enables us ... to make clear why an "account of the nature of knowledge" can be, at
most, a description of human behavior.37
In Twilight of the Idols, Nietzsche acknowledges that the fundamental quest in Western
philosophy for self-authenticating, self justifying, intrinsically credible beliefs and concepts
must rest, to use Stanley Cavell's Wittgensteinian phrase, "outside language games.."38 For
Nietzsche, as for Sellars, such beliefs and concepts must presuppose some other kind of
knowledge rather than serve as the foundation of our knowledge; they are grounded on what we
already know rather than serve as the grounds for all that we know. He writes in section 4 of his
chapter entitled "`Reason' in Philosophy":
The other idiosyncrasy of philosophers is no less perilous: it consists in mistaking the last for
the first. They put that which comes at the end-unfortunately! for it ought not to come at all!-the
"highest concepts," that is to say the most general, the emptiest concepts, the last fumes of
evaporating reality, at the beginning as the beginning. It is again only the expression of their way
of doing reverence: the higher must not be allowed to grow out of the lower, must not be
allowed to have grown at all.... Moral: everything of the first rank must be causa sui. Origin in
something else counts as an objection, as casting doubt on value. (TI, p. 37)


--- PAGE 186 ---
Nietzsche considers the quest for certainty and the search for foundations in epistemology-any
forms of the Myth of the Given-unattainable and ultimately self-deceptive. Any such quest and
search must be subordinate to an inquiry as to why the will to power takes the form of such a
quest and search. "It might seem as though I had evaded the question of `certainty.' The opposite
is true; but by inquiring after the criterion of certainty I tested the scales upon which men have
weighed in general hitherto-and that the question of certainty itself is a dependent question, a
question of second rank" (WP, p. 322). Any attempt to ground knowledge claims must be
demystified such that the practical aims and goals concealed by such an attempt are disclosed:
Theory and practice.-Fatefid distinction, as if there were an actual drive for knowledge that,
without regard to questions of usefulness and harm, went blindly for the truth; and then, separate
from this, the whole world of practical interests-
I tried to show, on the other hand, what instincts have been active behind all these pure
theoreticians-how they have all, under the spell of their instincts, gone fatalistically for
something that was "truth" for then-for them and only for them. The conflict between different
systems, including that between epistemological scruples, is a conflict between quite definite
instincts (forms of vitality, decline, classes, races, etc.).
The so-called drive for knowledge can be traced back to a drive to appropriate and conquer.
(WP, p. 227)
Nietzsche's rejection of foundationalism in epistemology results from his acceptance of the
Heraclitean flux, of the world of becoming, which forever slips out of the arbitrary conceptual
schemas through which humans come to "know" the self and world.
The character of the world in a state of becoming as incapable of formulation, as "false," as
"self-contradictory." Knowledge and becoming exclude one another. Consequently, "knowledge"
must be something else: there must first of all be a will to make knowable, a kind of becoming
must itself create the deception of beings. (WP, p. 280)
A world in a state of becoming could not, in a strict sense, be "comprehended" or "known"; only
to the extent that the "comprehending" and "knowing" intellect encounters a coarse, already-
created world, fabricated out of mere appear ances but become firm to the extent that this kind of
appearance has preserved life-only to this extent is there anything like "knowledge"; i.e., a
measuring of earlier and later errors by one another. (WP, p. 281)
For Nietzsche, as for Quine, Goodman, Sellars and Rorty (and against Plato, Aristotle,
Descartes, Kant, Kripke and Levi-Strauss), knowledge is not a matter of grasping fixed forms,
static essences or permanent substances and structures. Rather, knowledge is a matter of
perceiving phenomena under a description, within a theory or in light of a version in order to, to
use a Wittgensteinian phrase, "help us get about." On this point, the early Quine's pragmatism
and Nietzsche's perspectivism again converge.


--- PAGE 187 ---
Each man is given a scientific heritage plus a continuing barrage of sensory stimulation; and the
considerations which guide him in warping his scientific heritage to fit his continuing sensory
promptings are, where rational, pragmatic.39
Not "to know" but to schematize-to impose upon chaos as much regularity and form as our
practical needs require.
In the formation of reason, logic, the categories, it was need that was authoritative: the need, not
to "know," but to subsume, to schematize, for the purpose of intelligibility and calculation. (WP,
p. 278)
Nietzsche's conception of knowledge as elastic in character and creative in content is echoed
in Goodman:
Furthermore, if worlds are as much made as found, so also knowing is as much remaking as
reporting. All the processes of worldmaking I have discussed enter into knowing. Perceiving
motion, we have seen, often consists in producing it. Discovering laws involves drafting them.
Recognizing patterns is very much a matter of inventing and imposing them. Comprehension and
creation go on together.40
Coming to know means "to place oneself in a conditional relation to something"; to feel oneself
conditioned by something and oneself to condition it-it is there fore under all circumstances
establishing, denoting, and making-conscious of conditions. (WP, p. 301)
Nietzsche debunks the Myth of the Given because, for him, knowledge is not a set of beliefs to
be "grounded," but rather a series of linguistic signs that designate and describe the world in
light of our evolving needs, interests and purposes. "It is an illusion that something is known
when we possess a mathematical formula for an event: it is only designated, described; nothing
more!" (WP, p. 335). He surely would agree with Rorty that demythologizing the Myth of the
Given-and promoting antifoundationalism in epistemology-results in "preventing man from
deluding himself with the notion that he knows himself, or anything else, except under optimal
descriptions.."41
DETRANSCENDENTALIZING THE SUBJECT
The last crucial move of postmodern American philosophy I will examine is the
detranscendentalizing of the subject-the dismissing of the mind as a selfcontained sphere of
inquiry. This move is a natural consequence of the antirealism, holism, conventionalism and
antifoundationalism we examined earlier.


--- PAGE 188 ---
It is important to note that notions such as the subject, self-consciousness, ego and "I" were
under attack by modern analytic philosophers. Therefore this last move of postmodern American
philosophers is part of the general trend of modem analytic philosophy.
For example, Quine's treatment of this matter follows, in many ways, the logical behaviorist
position put forward in Gilbert Ryle's classic work, The Concept of Mind (1949). This position,
largely intended to debunk the Cartesian myth of the "ghosts in machines," roughly holds that talk
about mental states, that is, an intentional idiom, is but a clumsy and confusing way of talking
about dispositions to behave in certain ways under specific circumstances, that is, a
behavioristic idiom. Quine's well-known passage in his Word and Object (1960) summarizes
his own behavioristic position:
One may accept the Brentano thesis either as showing the indispensability of intentional idioms
and the importance of an autonomous science of intention, or as showing the baselessness of
intentional idioms and the emptiness of a science of intention. My attitude, unlike Brentano's, is
the second. To accept intentional usage at face value is, we saw, to postulate translation
relations as somehow objectively valid though indeterminate in principle relative to the totality
of speech dispositions. Such postulation promises little gain in scientific insight if there is no
better ground for it than that the supposed translation relations are presupposed by the vernacular
of semantics and intention. 12
Underlying this viewpoint is Quire's eliminative materialist position, namely, the view that there
simply are no mental states, but rather neural events. In this way, Quine detranscendentalizes any
notion of the subject.
Rorty deepens this version of detranscendentalizing the subject by abandoning the very notion
of mind-body identity. On his view, the social practice of speaking in neural events (by those
who know neurology) and the social practice of speaking in mental states (by those who do not
know neurology) "are just two ways of talking about the same thing."43 And the "thing" being
talked about in each case is that which is posited within one's theory. As Sellars points out, such
thing-talk, be it neurological or commonsensical, occurs in
a framework of "unobserved," "nonempirical" "inner" episodes. For we can point out
immediately that in these respects they are no worse off than the particles and episodes in
physical theory. For these episodes are "in" language-using animals as molecular impacts are
"in" gases, not as "ghosts" are in "machines." They are "nonempirical" in the simple sense that
they are theoretical-not definable in observational terms. . . . Their "purity" is not a metaphysical
purity, but, so to speak, a methodological purity ... [and] the fact that they are not introduced as
physiological entities does not preclude the possibility that at a later methodological stage, they
may, so to speak, "turn out" to be such.44
Sellars's methodological behaviorism-his way of detranscendentalizing the subject-permits
him to be a behaviorist (like Quine) without thinking that all one's theoretical concepts in
relation to "mental events" will turn out to refer to neurological phenomena (unlike Quine)-
though, of course, they may. "The behavioristic requirement that all concepts should be
introduced in terms of a basic vocabulary pertaining to overt behavior is compatible with the


--- PAGE 189 ---
idea that some behavioristic concepts are to be introduced as theoretical concepts. "`t5
Nietzsche's dismissal of the mind as a self-contained sphere of inquiry is illustrated in section
3 of his chapter entitled "The Four Great Errors" in Twilight of the Idols:
The conception of a consciousness ("mind") as cause and later still that of the ego (the "subject")
as cause are merely after-products after causality had, on the basis of will, been firmly
established as a given fact, as empiricism. Meanwhile we have thought better. Today we do not
believe a word of it. The "inner world" is full of phantoms and false lights: the will is one of
them. The will no longer moves anything, consequently no longer explains anything-it merely
accompanies events, it can also be absent. The so-called "motive": another error. Merely a
surface phenomenon of consciousness, an accompaniment to an act, which conceals rather than
exposes the antecedcnatia of the act. And as for the ego! It has become a fable, a fiction, a play
on words: it has totally ceased to think, to feel and to will! ... What follows from this? There are
no spiritual causes at all! The whole of the alleged empiricism which affirmed them has gone to
the devil! (TI, p. 49)
Like Ryle's, Nietzsche's detranscendentalizing of the subject begins with a critique of Descartes:
"There is thinking: therefore there is something that thinks": this is the upshot of all Descartes'
argumentation. But that means positing as "true a priori" our belief in the concept of substance-
that when there is thought there has to be something "that thinks" is simply a formulation of our
grammatical custom that adds a doer to every deed. In short, this is not merely the substantiation
of a fact but a logical-metaphysical postulate. (WP, p. 268)
Similar to Rorty and Sellars, Nietzsche views subject-talk as mere convention, a matter of social
practice rooted in our needs, interests, and purposes:
"Everything is subjective," you say; but even this is interpretation. The "subject" is not something
given, it is something added and invented and projected behind what there is. (WP, p. 267)
However habitual and indispensable this fiction may have become by now-that in itself proves
nothing against its imaginary origin: a belief can be a condition of life and nonetheless be false.
(WP, p. 268)
He concludes that subject-talk is a linguistic social practice derived from our grammar, namely,
the subject-predicate structure of our judgments.
In every judgment there resides the entire, full, profound belief in subject and attribute, or in
cause and effect (that is, as the assertion that every effect is an activity and that every activity
presupposes an agent); and this latter belief is only a special case of the former, so there remains
as the fundamental belief that there are subjects, that everything that happens is related
attributively to some subject. (WP, p. 294)


--- PAGE 190 ---
NIHILISM
If Nietzsche prefigures certain important developments in postmodern American philosophy,
then it is appropriate to note briefly that he believed such developments ultimately lead to
nihilism unless they are supplemented with a new worldview. He makes this point clearly in his
Preface to The Will to Power.
For one should make no mistake about the meaning of the title that this gospel of the future wants
to bear. "The Will to Power: Attempt at a Revaluation of All Values"-in this formulation a
countermovement finds expression, regarding both principle and task; a movement that in some
future will take the place of this perfect nihilism-but presupposes it, logically and
psychologically, and certainly can come only after and out of it. For why has the advent of
nihilism become necessary? Because the values we have had hitherto thus draw their final
consequence; because nihilism represents the ultimate logical conclusion of our great values and
ideals-because we must experience nihilism before we can find out what value these "values"
really had.-We require, sometime, new values. (WP, pp. 3-4)
For Nietzsche, this nihilism results from certain ideals of modern Europe, especially those
ideals that presuppose belief in the categories of "aim," "unity" and "truth." Nihilism is a natural
consequence of a culture (or civilization) ruled and regulated by categories that mask
manipulation, mastery and domination of peoples and nature.
Suppose we realize how the world may no longer be interpreted in terms of these three
categories, and that the world begins to become valueless for us after this insight: then we have
to ask about the sources of our faith in these three categories....
Conclusion: The faith in the categories of reason is the cause of nihilism. We have measured the
value of the world according to categories that refer to a fictitious world.
Final conclusion: All the values by means of which we have tried so far to render the world
estimable for ourselves and which then proved inapplicable and therefore devaluated the world-
all these values are, psychologically considered, the results of certain perspectives of utility,
designed to maintain and increase human constructs of domination-and they have been falsely
projected into the essence of things. (WP, pp. 13-14)
Nihilism ushers in an era in which science-the great pride of modern Europe provides greater
and greater instrumentalities for world domination. As Maurice Blanchot observes:
The moment Nihilism outlines the world for us, its counterpart, science, creates the tools to
dominate it. The era of universal mastery is opened. But there are some consequences: first,
science can only be nihilistic; it is the meaning of a world deprived of meaning, a knowledge
that ultimately has ignorance as its foundation. To which the response will be that this
reservation is only theoretical; but we must not hasten to disregard this objection, for science is
essentially productive. Knowing it need not interpret the world, science transforms it, and by
this transformation science conveys its own nihilistic demands-the negative power that science
has made into the most useful of tools, but with which it dangerously plays. Knowledge is


--- PAGE 191 ---
fundamentally dangerous ... for a universe cannot be constructed without having the possibility of
its being destroyed ... [and] by making science possible, Nihilism becomes the possibility of
science-which means that the human world can be destroyed by it. 1f,
Nietzsche considers nihilism to be "partly destructive, partly ironic" (WP, p. 14). It is marked
by philosophical positions of antirealism, conventionalism, relativism and antifoundationalism.
We have seen that postmodern American philosophers support such positions. Quine describes
himself as a "relativist," 47 yet warns against associating him with the "epistemological
nihilism" 4s of Kuhn. Goodman labels his position "as a radical relativism under rigorous
restraints, that eventuates in something akin to irrealism.." I`' Rorty calls himself a "histori-
cist,"50 and Kuhn admits to subscribing to a form of relativism.si
The crucial moves made by postmodern American philosophers are highly significant in that
these moves disclose the unwarranted philosophical assumptions and antiquated theoretical
distinctions upon which rests much of modern analytic philosophy. Yet-and in this regard they
resemble their counterparts in postmodern literary criticism-postmodern American philosophers
have failed to project a new worldview, a countermovement, "a new gospel of the future."
Quine's and Sellars's updated versions of scientism not only reflect their positivist heritage, but,
more important, reveal their homage to an outdated cultural mode of thought. Goodman's attempt
to infuse the idea of style with new life is intriguing, yet ultimately resorts to an old aristocratic
preoccupation. Kuhn's unequivocal promotion of the proliferation of learned societies (or
groups) engaged in puzzle-solving under converging paradigms amounts to an unimaginative
ideology of professionalism. And Rorty's ingenious conception of philosophy as cultured
conversation rests upon a nostalgic appeal to the world of men (and women) of letters of
decades past. These viewpoints do not constitute vi sions, worldviews or, to use Gilles
Deleuze's phrase, "discourses as counter- philosophies"52 to the nihilism to which their
positions seem to lead. Instead, their viewpoints leave postmodern American philosophy
hanging in limbo, as a philosophically critical yet culturally lifeless rhetoric mirroring a culture
(or civilization) permeated by the scientific ethos, regulated by racist, patriarchal, capitalist
norms and pervaded by debris of decay.
SOURCE: From Early fbstmodeniism, edited by Paul A. Bove (Durham, N.C.: Duke University
Press, 1995), pp. 265-289.


--- PAGE 192 ---



--- PAGE 193 ---
T H E I N D I S P E N S A B I L I T Y YET I N S U F F I C I E N C Y 
O F M A R X I S T T H E O R Y
Georg Lukdcs is the most important Marxist philosopher of this century. I included a chapter on
his classic, History and Class Consciousness (1923), in my dissertation. I also later published a
long essay on his corpus-his literary criticism, Hegelian Marxism and social ontology.
This was a fun and fascinating interview with the Hungarian philosopher Eva L. Corredor
conducted in 1992. Note that although I acknowledge Lukdcs 's immense influence on my
conception f progressive Marxist theory, I unequivocally reject his teleological Hegelian
Marxism and his retrograde Stalinist politics.
Eva Corredor: Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me about Lukacs. What I
particularly appreciated in your book The Ethical Dimensions of Marxist Thought, was that your
approach to and interpretation of Lukacs's work seemed to have an urgency and a relevance to
your current preoccupations that I had not found in most other academic critics. I felt that Lukacs
really "spoke" to you and said something vital to you. In the introduction, which is very
interesting and which is also one of your most recent texts, you mentioned that you felt "seduced"
by Lukacs and the Frankfurt School, and that it actually happened here at Princeton. So I should
like to ask you how it happened, how you encountered Lukacs, and which books you read.
Cornel West: We had a study group here in the early 1970s with a number of graduate students in
philosophy, political theory and social theory. Mainly, people were studying with Sheldon
Wolin. I also was close to Richard Rorty at the time, but Sheldon Wolin was the catalyst for a
number of us who came together and began to read Lukacs, Foucault, Deleuze, Lyotard and a
host of others. We read the Frankfurt School as well, Adorno and Horkheimer. We had some
real tensions in that group, and a tension primarily between those of us who thought that
Hegelian versions of Marxist theory were the most interesting, and then the antiHegelians,
mainly linked to the Parisian intellectuals, especially Foucault and Derrida, Foucault probably
more than Derrida. Derrida I think is much closer to Hegel than Foucault. We had some
wonderful knockdown, drag-out fights. I was always convinced that Lukacs's essay on
reification was the most powerful text I had read, that fused philosophical reflection with an
analysis of capitalist society, as well as a sense of urgency as to how to change and transform it.
So that essay for me remains one of the great essays in contemporary thought, not just in Marxist
tradition, not just in Hegelian philosophy.
Corredor: So it was History and Class Consciousness that you read first? Had you read much of
his other works, his literary analyses?
West: No, not at all. In fact I began with the 1923 collection, History and Class Consciousness,
and then worked backwards and read Soul and Forms and The Theory of the Novel, and so on. It
was primarily the philosophical Lukacs, because I actually did not become preoccupied with
literary criticism until the mid to late 1970s. Early on, it was primarily the history of philosophy.
Actually it was Lukacs who led me back to Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. I had read parts of
it but I had read it in a very different way. Lukacs sent me back. That was partly because Kojeve


--- PAGE 194 ---
was an interlocutor. We were reading Kojeve's lectures on Hegel at that time.
Corredor: Was that here or in Paris?
West: No, that was here in Princeton. Not in class, just among ourselves.
Corredor: I am trying to find out how Lukacs might have influenced you in your thinking and
what you might have in common. I know that you describe yourself as a "prophetic, Christian,
pragmatist freedom fighter" and that you are also conservative in some ways.
West: I guess so, like somebody who wants to preserve something. I would make a distinction
between somebody who is in a preservative mode, who wants to preserve certain elements, and
a conservative, which has the thicker ideological connotation.
Corredor: Based on Lukacs's biography that was just published and some books I brought back
from Hungary on Lukacs's alleged messianism, one could establish a parallel between you and
Lukacs in the sense that Lukacs can be described as a "messianic, Jewish, Marxist social critic"
and also a conservative. There is the parallel with your religious side. You are a prophetic
Christian, and he is said to have been very interested in messianism, especially at the beginning
of his career. I am wondering whether you feel you share a prophetic-messianic religious
interest or sentiment with him, or is this something that you would rather not discuss.
West: That is a very good and complex question. First, I think, in Lukacs's case, here is someone
who, of course early on in his career, starting with existential Angst, those very early essays, let
us say 1910 to 1917, it is Dostoyevsky, it is the problems of life, it is the meaning of life, it is the
emptiness of life, it is the spiritual sterility in life that he is grappling with, around the Stefan
George Circle, an esoteric but fascinating group. There is always in Lukacs an attempt to link
quest for meaning with quest for freedom. And the quest for freedom is a kind of quest for
deliverance, because it has quasi-religious residues in the quest for meaning. The quest for
freedom has primarily a social and political character, but the individual dimension of that quest
for freedom is also very important for Lukacs. I think in Lukacs the quest for meaning and the
quest for freedom are inseparable, and that describes part of my own quest. I myself am certainly
deeply influenced by Kierkegaard, deeply influenced by Dostoyevsky, by a host of persons
preoccupied with the meaning of life and the absurdity of the human condition. At the same time,
I am also preoccupied with the struggle against injustice and institutional and personal forms of
evil, and I see that similar to Lukacs's quest for freedom. So the quest for meaning in the
Kierkegaardian tradition and the quest for freedom that comes out of a Marxist tradition do
establish some parallel between my own pilgrimage and that of Lukacs.
Corredor: In listening to you, I find a difference in your terminology and the one used by Lukacs.
Lukacs, I believe, thought of himself as a social critic, whereas you describe yourself as a
freedom fighter.
West: You are actually right, even though the meaning of an intellectual freedom fighter for me,
this fusion of intellectual engagement, political transformation and existential struggle, is so tight
that my first identity would be primarily that of a freedom fighter who engages in the fight for


--- PAGE 195 ---
intellectual, political, social and existential freedom.
Corredor: You turn to Marxism, but you also affirm that Marxism is not a religion. And again,
there is a similarity between you and Lukacs that I found in your writings which I should like to
quote: You speak of your own "leaps of faith" and that you are embracing "the absurdity of the
human condition" (The Ethical Dimensions of Marxist Thought, p. xxvii). In Lukacs's biography,
which I mentioned to you earlier, the author Kadarkay says that Lukacs, and in particular the
young Lukacs, could "arbitrarily leap from doubt into belief and find relief from the torment of
doubt by affirming the absurdity of the human condition" (Kadarkay, p. 103). 1 think the parallel
is quite striking.
West: Very, very interesting. But I tell you one fundamental divergence between my own view
and that of Lukacs: for me there is always a dialectic of doubt and faith, of skepticism and leap
of faith, so that I am much more influenced by Pascal or Montaigne, who are both part of a
particular tradition of faith but who understand that the doubt is inscribed within that faith. I am
thinking of an introduction by T. S. Eliot to Pascal's Pewees, where he talks of how doubt and
faith are intertwined, whereas with Lukacs, I think, you do get a quest for certainty that would
hold doubt at arm's length, and I am quite critical of something like this.
Corredor: Yes, I will have questions on this a bit later, if I may. In reading you, I felt that you
described yourself primarily as a prophetic man, as a theologian. You are a believer, but you do
not speak often of metaphysical things. You remain down here. In that sense, you are more a
social critic than a prophet.
West: Yes. If I am in any way prophetic, I'm a prophetic thinker without a thick metaphysics.
What I mean by that is that I am fairly historicist in my own formulations about how we go about
understanding the Real and the Truth, and hence I talk more in terms of tradition and community
than I do simply of truths and facts. So you are absolutely right, I have a very strong
antimetaphysical bent. And again, it is very different in Lukacs. Lukacs would not only make
some implicit metaphysical claims, but rather explicit ontological claims as well. He is much
more with those who do believe that metaphysical grounding ought to be in place for claims ...
much more than someone like Dewey or Rorty.
Corredor: Another question I have relates again to both you and Lukacs: You say somewhere
that we have a "need for a Simmelian moment." Simmel spoke of "sinful" modern times, which
Lukacs picked up, in particular in his early work The Theory of the Novel. You yourself have
written about "Nihilism in Black America: A Danger That Corrodes from Within" (Dissent,
Spring 1992). You say that "America is in the midst of a mess of social breakdown ... cultural
decay is pervasive." Cynicism and nihilism today return very often in your accusations of
modern times. The question is whether "modernism" is really sinful, again, since it was "sinful"
for Simmel, it was sinful for Lukacs in the early century and, listening to you it is sinful again or
still a century later. Is modern age really more sinful than the previous ones?
West: No. I do not think so. I think that we have to understand modernism as a very complex,
heterogeneous development with a variety of different streams and strains. The kind of attacks on
modernism that Lukacs puts forward, I would be quite critical of. That would be too narrow, too


--- PAGE 196 ---
truncated in its reading. I think there are some insights there, there is no doubt about it, but we
certainly cannot replace history with myths and turn away, internally, from the social and
political and attempt to create some kind of fetish of art before which one could pay homage as
in fact the social and political struggles were held at arm's length. I think that Lukacs's insights
there are quite useful, but I do believe that modernism as a very complex development is not one
that could be usefully described as "sinful." It has the connotation of blindness, but not sinful.
We are talking about the crisis of a civilization. We are talking about the challenges of the
people of color. We are talking about the inability of the elite to envision a democratic
expansion. We are talking about the rise of the Soviet Union and its attempt to find an alternative
to what seems to be a Western crisis in the 1920s. This was a very fascinating moment, but a
moment at which it is quite understandable that someone wanted to turn away from history as
some arena from which betterment could be procured. Now for me, when I talk about nihilism
and cynicism or what have you, especially among the working poor and very poor in the United
States, I am talking in fact about the various ways in which commodification and reification
completely shattered the institutional buffers for an already devalued, despised and oppressed
people, and where therefore the levels of destruction and self-destruction escalate among these
people. Levels of destruction and self-destruction that call into question any sense of meaning,
struggle and any sense of hope for the future, and especially for any oppressed people in the
United States of African descent. The only thing we have really had is some sense of meaning
and some sense of hope, and once that is gone, then we are in a living hell, in a Dantesque and
most profound hell, and that is actually what we have in some parts of our country.
Corredor: I should like to come back to this a bit later and ask you here about the importance you
attach to history. You say that "Rorty's historicist turn was like music to my ears." George
Steiner was jestingly criticizing Lukacs when he said that Lukacs had sold his soul, that he had
made a "devil's pact with History" because the devil had promised him the truth.... Again, there
is in both you and Lukacs this strong belief in the function of history. What do you see today as
major historical conditioners? You say that you strongly believe in historical "conditionedness"
of the human existence. So what is conditioning us negatively today, and what in particular is
conditioning the poor? Is it capitalism, the government, the drug lords, the mafia? What do we
have today that causes this nihilistic outlook and desperation?
West: Two points. One is that I do not believe in History, capital H. I am much closer here to
Antonio Gramsci; I believe in histories with a small h, and therefore History with a capital H,
associated with questions of certainty, must go. That's what Steiner means, and that is fine. But
histories, with a small h, with all the specific ways in which over time and space human
practices and social practices, both structured and unstructured, go into shaping and molding
who we are, that is for me the terrain we are talking about, either progress or regress, betterment
or disempowerment. Now when we look at the historical conditions of the present, again I
would say one major factor is what I call, loosely, commodification. What I mean by that is
simply the degree to which market forces now hold sway in every sphere of our society and in a
crucial kind of way echoing Lukacs's notion of reification. What happens to a society when in
fact market forces saturate a society.
Corredor: So you think that the drug world is in a way reifying the young people today and


--- PAGE 197 ---
making them into a commodity for capitalist exploiters?
West: They become a commodity. It generates gangster mentalities, because of the question of
getting over, as they would put it, instead of getting better, and that gangster mentality promotes a
war against all. And it is market driven, because it is a matter of buying and selling, in that case
drugs or bodies, primarily women's bodies, but it is market driven. Now I do not want to argue
that commodification is the sole force at work today. Not at all. We have got political lethargy,
in terms of the political electoral system. We have got a competition between nations that
impose constraints upon our economy and nation-state to create a public sphere in which there is
some vitality rather than squalor. And of course, we have this massive, unprecedented
redistribution of wealth from the working people to the well-to-do in the last twenty years. The
withdrawal of public provisions has to do with the level of impoverishment, material
impoverishment of poor people, which is a very crucial element as well in addition to the
cultural consumption. There are a number of forces that act as historical conditioners, but one of
the highlights I would still call the force of commodification. Again, Lukacs influenced me in
this as well.
Corredor: I found very interesting your periodization of history. As you know, Lukacs
established the periodization of literary genres, for instance, in his Theory of the ,Novel.
West: I liked that about Lukacs, even though we know that it could be slightly arbitrary, but we
need periodization.
Corredor: You have proposed two of them, which I found interesting, what you call "The Age of
Europe," from 1492 to 1945, and then "The American Century," from then on.
West: To 1973, yes.
Corredor: At the same time, I found it interesting that, in speaking of the American century, you
also attempted to show the influence of AfroAmerican culture, for instance, on American music
and in general on American style. I mentioned this to some of my colleagues, who said that they
had never looked at it this way. To Europeans this might be more obvious because of the clearly
non-European characteristics of American music, dance, etc., particularly in dance, jazz and the
blues. But at the same time, and again, you are very critical of this American century and the
modern period-I know, you told me earlier, that you are not more critical of this century than of
previous ones. You also state that the "Age of Europe" had a negative influence on what is
happening right now, being maybe at the root of it.
West: It does have an ambiguous legacy. The great contribution is the institutionalizing of the
critiques of arbitrary power, of illegitimate forms of authority, which are democratic institutions,
but, of course, there are significant racial, sexual and class constraints on those democratic
practices, and this is very important in this Age of Europe where it had been overlooked. So it is
an ambiguous legacy. You've got the white supremacy, the vicious male supremacy and class
exploitation, on the one hand, and you have the hammering out, on the ground, of democratic
practices, on the other, which are basic for the acceptability of social democracy.


--- PAGE 198 ---
Corredor: You deplore that there is no strong leadership in this world. Isn't it that in order to be
a great leader you have to have a dream or vision? If you look back in history, great leaders
usually had some vision, good or bad, to offer to the young by which to inspire them. Martin
Luther King had a dream. How do you envisage the future? Do you have a dream or vision for
the twenty-first century? In your writings, you actually seem to refuse to voice such a dream or
utopia.
West: Oh yes. I know that is true. But I am not really a dreamer. I have strong anti-utopian
elements, given my link to the skeptical tradition. What I do have, though, is a deep, deep
commitment to moral convictions and that these moral convictions can be linked to amelioration,
can be linked to social betterment, but that amelioration and social betterment are regulated more
by moral ideas than a social dream, a dream of a new society, and so forth. Of course, much of
this has to do with my own peculiar brand of Christianity. In Christianity, you have a strong anti-
utopian element in terms of talking about human history. If any dreaming is going on at all, it has
to do with the coming kingdom. This coming kingdom is such a radical disruption with the
present that it is difficult to talk about the kingdom within the realm of human history. So it kind
of dangles like some sort of a Kantian regulative ideal.
Corredor: Let us go back to Marx. You speak critically of people who are "trashing Marxist
thought" and of contemporary critics who practice "faddish ironic skepticism."
West: Yes, yes, and they tend to be the same people oftentimes.
Corredor: Wait, wait, one moment please, since I find that you yourself are sometimes a bit
critical of people as well-and I am often sharing your criticism, especially in the case of Derrida
and Foucault. In speaking of poststructuralist critics, you say that "they talk about their subtle
relations of rhetoric, knowledge, power, yet they remain silent about concrete ways by which
people are empowered to resist." With regard to the new historicists, you say that they are
"preoccupied with thick descriptions"-I love your terms!-"of the relativity of cultural products
while thoroughly distrustful of social explanatory accounts of cultural practice" (p. xxii). Then
you also speak of Foucault in relation to power. You say that you can learn from Foucault about
power. As I remember reading Foucault, he is usually critical of power, he wants to undo it and
show how the power of discourse, for instance, has been used to control individuals.
West: He recognizes no escape. His relational conception of power means that we are always
inscribed within some matrix of power, and so we can be critical of the various forms that it
takes and the manifestations that it has, but he recognizes that we are always already within a
certain matrix of power relations. I think he is absolutely right about that.
Corredor: At the same time, reading you, you do not see power only as a negative; you want to
empower, give power. Are you, in that sense, different from Foucault?
West: Yes and no. On the one hand, I want to talk explicitly about empowerment. Foucault
would say, of course, he wants gay comrades to be empowered, if I may say so. On the other
hand, though, I am, like Foucault, skeptical of any concentration of power. This is where my
democratic sensibility comes in, because I do believe in fact that a concentration of power does


--- PAGE 199 ---
tend to corrupt. I do believe that absolute power corrupts absolutely and hence we need
democratic mechanisms for the accountability of power. But the fact that my starting point is
among a relatively powerless people, I have got to be able to talk about power in a positive
way, not simply in political terms but also in existential terms. We are dealing with African
people whose humanity has been radically called into question. Therefore, you have to talk
about empowerment in terms of taking one's humanity for granted or affirming one's humanity, or
being able to accentuate one's humanity in conditions in which humanity has been so radically
called into question.
Corredor: I should like to ask you about "engagement." In reading you, I felt that in some of your
views you seem actually closer to Sartre than to Marx. In the New York Times Magazine
interview that was published a few months ago (September 15, 1992), the interviewer called
you a "young hip Black man in an old white Academy." Did this shock you?
West: Yes. One never knows what one's friends would talk about.
Corredor: I am picking this up because both Lukacs and Sartre were criticized for being social
critics, but also and maybe foremost, intellectuals and privileged people who did not get their
hands dirty. Sartre, in particular, in his ivory tower wrote volume after volume about the
bourgeois critic Gustave Flaubert while inciting others to engage in revolutionary action. How
do you show your engagement beyond your teaching here at this beautiful university?
West: Right, right. I think part of it has to do with my being one of the honorary chairpersons of
the Democratic Socialists of America, being part of a great legacy, of Norman Thomas and
especially Michael Harrington. As honorary chairperson it forces me to be engaged with issues
of labor, feminist issues, antihomophobic issues, antiracist issues. It is the leading left
organization in the country, maybe the only major one, and its numbers have doubled in the last
few years. In addition, of course, there is also my work in black churches, where I am in touch
with ordinary black people.
Corredor: Do you talk about God at that church?
West: Oh, yes, very much so. I preach on Sundays, so I do talk about God, about social issues,
and there is a long tradition of prophetic speaking in this church, the linking of the question of
freedom with rich spirituality. We talk about faith and hope and service, so that I am nothing but
an extension of a very long prophetic tradition. That is another reason I have a certain concern
for tradition, why T. S. Eliot and others mean much to me, even though the tradition he is talking
about is very different from the tradition I am talking about. But the very cancers with tradition,
also in the work of an Edward Shils, for example, means very much to me. I am deeply
concerned about the dynamic character of tradition, except that for me the tradition that I am
talking about comes from below and sometimes beneath modernity. It is a tradition of struggling
and resisting, black people's democratic tradition, whereas the tradition they are talking about
tends to be from above. But there is still so much to learn about the heroic tradition in a market
society ... we need more subversive memory. I think subversive memory is one of the most
precious heritages that we have.


--- PAGE 200 ---
Corredor: This kind of thinking and feeling maybe dictates the amazing sentences you compose,
of which I should like to quote a few. About Marxism, you say that "one of the major ironies of
our time is that Marxist thought becomes even more relevant after the collapse of Communism in
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe than it was before." You do see the relevance of Marxism
today? You are convinced that Marxist thought is an "indispensable tradition for freedom
fighters" (p. xiv)?
West: Oh yes. Very much so. And the reason why that is so is that Marx was fundamentally
concerned about the interlocking relation between corporate, financial and political elites who
had access to a disproportionate amount of resources, power, prestige and status in society.
Certainly, that is a starting point for understanding any society that we know of today, especially
the United States. Once we lose sight of the very complex relations between those three sets of
elites-corporate, financialbanking and political elites-and the reasons why the working people,
the working poor and the very poor, find themselves with very little access to resources-once
we lose sight of that, which was analyzed by the Marxist tradition (which was not the only, but
the primary tradition that would analyze this), once we lose sight of this, then we have little or
no analytical tools in our freedom fight. That is why I think that Marxism today becomes even
more important, and this is especially so now that Eastern Europe is going to undergo a kind of
"Latin Americanization" in which market forces become even more important. We see that in
Latin America, where corporate America circumscribes local capital, and where the state elites
go about carving up and digging up those resources among the masses that remain so tragically
impoverished. I think we are going to see a certain kind of "Latin Americanization" sweeping
across Eastern Europe as the corporate elites and transnational corporations hungrily go
searching for markets.
Corredor: You defend Marxism and the relevance of Marxist thought, ineluding "its ethical
dimension after the Cold War as an indispensable weapon" in this freedom fight. You stress
Marxist ethics. Could you explain what you understand by "Marxist ethics"?
West: Sure. First, I want to make a historical point. Marx is fundamentally a product of
Romanticism, one of the great, very complex movements in modern Europe in response to the
promise and tragedy of the French Revolution, or as Hazlitt put it, "the glad dawn of the morning
star, the springtime of the world." That sense of hope and expectation of social transformation,
which so much of Europe felt, was lost of course after the Reign of Terror. The second wave of
Romanticism in which the fundamental values consisted of the many-sided development of
individuals, the values of a harmonious personality that was able to flower and flourish in its
own unique and singular way ...
Corredor: This is very Lukacsean ...
West: Oh, yes, and it comes right out of the Letters on Aesthetic Education by the great Schiller.
Marx was deeply, deeply influenced by this. But secondly, democracy. This is why I spend so
much time trying to show that when Marx defines communism as a struggle for democracy, in the
Communist Manifesto, what he means is in fact that these ordinary people, workers, ought to
have some control over the conditions of their existence, especially the conditions of their
workplace. This is a profoundly democratic idea. Once you link the values of flourishing


--- PAGE 201 ---
individuality, a profoundly Romantic notion, with the expansion of democratic operations and
practices, I argue that you are at the ethical core of the Marxist project. As we know, Marxist-
Communists, Marxist-Leninists and so forth have subverted, bastardized, violated and
undermined such ethical claims. But when we look at Marx himself as a thinker in nineteenth-
century Europe, driven deeply by these ethical values, although never wanting to be viewed as a
moralist-he is concerned about being scientific-we know that these ethical values are deeply
inscribed within his own project, and then it seems to me that we recognize that those values
have much to say to us.
Corredor: Some people are opposed to the very idea of ethics, saying that ethics establish
something that has to be obeyed or followed. People do not want to be told how to behave.
West: We have to make a distinction between the ethical dimension and ethics per se, because
every social issue has an ethical dimension. What I mean by this is that there is some value
judgment built into every issue, some moral vantage point from which the world is viewed. This
is not solely a moral vantage point, but there is a moral dimension to the vantage point from
which the world is viewed. Unfortunately, there has been a reluctance and sometimes downright
refusal by Marxists to talk about ethics. I think that has been a major problem. They have tended
to displace that ethical discourse with a teleological-historical discourse that is completely
unconvincing, catechistic and just raw material for managerial elites to come in like Leninists
and then command, regiment and repress the masses. So it seems to me that we have to talk about
the ethical dimension, but also be critical of an ethics that is imposed from on high. I do agree
with that kind of critique that one ought not simply impose from on high. As radical democrats,
we engage in discourse in which we acknowledge the ethical dimension of what we do and try
to persuade persons, one, that the values we hold are convincing, and two, that the ways in
which we go about conceiving of what these values lead to regarding our politics, how society
ought to be organized, are possible.
Corredor: Are your own ethics compatible with both Christian and Marxist ethics, or do you
find incompatibilities with them?
West: If you believe as I do that Marxism is a particular species of secondwave Romanticism,
and if you believe that Romanticism is in many ways a naturalization of much of the Christian
narrative about the past and present ... (sorry, I interrupted you here!)
Corredor: Are you treating it as a religion?
West: Well, there are religious residues. I would not say it is a religion per se, because religion
for me does have something to do with God-talk or has something to do with ways of life in
which the divine and the sacred are accented, whereas with the naturalization of Christianity and
the Romantic movement you do get often the elimination of God-talk and you do get a
displacement of the divine and sacred with the imaginative and the creative. So I would not call
it a religion in that sense, but there are religious residues.
Corredor: Another approach to Marxism that I found very refreshing in your works was your use
of "difference" in naming the areas in which Marxism still would have much to do. This is


--- PAGE 202 ---
naturally very different from Derrida's "differance," one of the central terms in his
deconstructivism. I found your use refreshing because you are coming back to the literal sense of
the word in the real world after twenty years of Derridean playing with the letter a. So, would
you say that race, gender, sexual orientation, age-all these possible differences-have assumed the
place of the proletariat in Marxist theory? When you look at them, all these people, all these
groups, are not the masses; they are rather marginal, they are outside, they are minorities, not the
masses.
West: That is true. First of all, we have to disabuse ourselves of the notion that there ever was
this proletariat as logos. The proletariat itself is a construct that is shot through with all kinds of
divisions, cleavages, heterogeneities and so on, so that there is the sense that there never is any
centering in a group or in the masses, even though the modes of production do create the
possibility for such centering, but the notion of proletariat as center and the others as marginal
we have to be suspicious of. On the other hand, certainly, we talk about gender, race and sexual
orientation, which have always been there; therefore it upsets me when people are talking about
movements among these people as new movements. They are new relative to a Marxist
discourse, a working class movement. But, my God, the struggle against patriarchy predates
1789.
Corredor: There have been revolutionary women at the time of the French Revolution, like
Olympe de Gouge.
West: Exactly. You take for instance David Walker's Appeal to Colored Citizens of the World,
which is one of the most powerful critiques ever launched of white supremacy, in 1829! The
young Marx is eleven years old. So the struggle has been going on, so they are not really new
social movements, but they are significant social movements. I do think that we have to talk
about alliance and coalition because none of these movements in and of themselves or by
themselves has the power to deal with the rule of capital, that is, the rule of those interlocking
elites I was talking about. Oftentimes some versions of these social movements based on race,
gender and sexual orientation do not even talk about the role of corporate power, which is as
limiting and limited as one can imagine.
Corredor: Are you optimistic enough to believe that this will change eventually?
West: It is open-ended. Well, it is going to be a long process. I think Raymond Williams's "long
revolution" is an apt metaphor. But there are many of us who will go down fighting, trying to
ensure that linkages are made, so that we can target the role of these elites not in any vulgar or
immoral way, but simply acknowledge the degree to which they had this disproportionate
amount of power and resources that ought to be shared and distributed within constitutional
constraints.
Corredor: You are very laudatory about sophisticated Marxist theory; you say that it is
indispensable, but then you also feel that it is inadequate. It is not complete. It is not enough.
Where do you see its shortcomings? What else is necessary? Where do you find or get what is
necessary?


--- PAGE 203 ---
West: The Marxist tradition has no serious or subtle conception of culture, and by culture I mean
the sphere of desire and pleasure, the various quests for identities, e.g., nationalism. Eric
Hobsbawm's recent book on nationalism is a good example of this, a good example because it
shows some of the insights of Marxism on nationalism. We know that nationalism is primarily
about elites carving up territories in order to control markets and control populations. That is
true for any kind of bourgeoisie that casts itself on a nationalist mode. We also know about
nationalists' desire for association, recognition and protection, which all has to do with desire,
with how you bestow meaning upon yourself, with notions of mortality and notions of
monumentality that still have a hold on people's imagination. So nationalism must be understood
as a psychocultural phenomenon as well as an institutional phenomenon among elites. You see
Marxism simply does not speak to the levels of psychocultural politics. You need Freud ... and
you need novels, you need the blues and spirituals, a whole host of other insights.
Corredor: I teach [at the Naval Academy] future officers, future leaders, among them there are
some minorities, blacks, women. I was wondering what you would tell them. What would you
tell them to read?
West: Well, one, they should read a lot of history. They could begin with Paul Kennedy's book
The Rise and Fall of Great Powers, so that they would have a sense of where America is now,
so that as future leaders they would have a sense of the general sweep of the last seventy-five or
a hundred years. Second, they should read histories that help give an account of how they now
have opportunities in places where once those opportunities were denied, and what the nature of
those struggles was that made them gain access to such privileged spaces in American society,
how difficult, protracted and sacrificial those struggles were, and then they should try to situate
themselves in relation to that tradition of struggle. But that is a tough one because, you know,
there are always "betwixt and betweens" at the Naval Academy and that deep conservatism,
deep suspicion of any radical critique both for intellectual as well as personal and career
reasons. They have to struggle with that. They've got to wrestle with that.
Corredor: I am teaching a course in French Civilization in which I sometimes speak of
contemporary criticism, and I have noticed that in particular my black students are usually very
interested in contemporary criticism, even in theories such as Derrida's deconstruction, when I
bring in some examples as to how it could be used in social criticism concerning blacks or
women in the deconstruction of established discourse. My black students are usually much more
interested in this than the average white midshipman, to whom it is not of great urgency. I am
thinking of one of my students in particular, to whom I sometimes talk about such theories and
who seems to have questions concerning them.
West: Racism is everywhere these days, sexism is everywhere in society, so they experience
themselves as other, as you can imagine, in some way even degraded at the Naval Academy or
Princeton or any other elite place. These are theories that speak to that condition, I would
imagine.
Corredor: I think it would be wonderful to have you down there, but I am sure we cannot afford
you, I don't know.


--- PAGE 204 ---
West: No, no. I would love to come. I was thinking of North Carolina. But Maryland is not that
far. I am going to be preaching in Annapolis this summer.
Corredor: Are you! During the summer midshipmen are not going to be there. You should come
during the school year.
West: Well, maybe I'll wait until the fall. We'll work something out.
Corredor: We have a Black Studies Club at the Academy, which you could address. Now, I
should like to come back to something I think is characteristic of the methodology you use in
your essays on Marxist ethics. You seem to support very strongly the idea of "radical
historicism" and be critical, almost in a purist fashion, of those who do not adhere to it,
including Engels. In your analyses of Feuerbach, again, it is interesting to note what you single
out for your discussion and how you define radical historicism. You virtually do away with the
Marxist utopia. You see radical historicism as a process of which you approve, which you love,
if I may say so, and which you embrace. This is, in your view, what historicism should be.
West: Yes, this is a very, very significant point. Actually I do the same thing in my essay on
Jameson. I think that is just a built-in bias, and in the end it may be unjustified. That is a built-in
bias against utopianism, and yet for so much of any quest for freedom the utopian dimension is
crucial. I want to make a distinction between human hope and a utopian quest, because human
hope for me is always being able to keep going, to sustain struggle, with ideals, but that is very
different from a utopian impulse, where you try to project a whole different and better society
that could be realized and actualized. I am suspicious of the latter.
Corredor: You like process, praxis and continuation. I have written down at least ten notions that
you reject. Here are a few: rational necessity, universal obligation, philosophical certainty,
eternal truth. How can you reconcile this with your prophetic approach?
West: That's right. It is a peculiar, peculiar kind of prophetic view, because my conception of
the prophetic is not one in which one speaks from on top, which is continuous with the great and
grand Jewish and Christian traditions of the prophetic that I know of, in which "Thus says the
Lord" or "Eternal truth speaks from on top." My notion of the prophetic is a democratic one in
which, in the midst of the quotidian, the commonplace, in the midst of the messy struggle in
which one's hands are dirty, that one is holding on to moral convictions and tries to convince
others that they ought to be accepted even though these moral convictions themselves can still be
subject to criticism and change in vision and what-have-you.
Corredor: You are really preaching hope, I think.
West: That's it. That's right. But it is a hope that is grounded in a particular messy struggle, and it
is tarnished by any kind of naive projections of a better future, so that it u hope on the tightrope
rather than a utopian projection that looks over and beyond the present and oftentimes loses sight
of the present.
Corredor: In many ways, you are quite Pascalian. The Pascalian wager is there and also Pascal's


--- PAGE 205 ---
Essayons done de Bien penser." This is really what you are preaching.
West: Exactly. You hit the nail on the head, in the sense that my Pascalian sensibility is probably
my central sensibility.
Corredor: Again it is a stress on the process, the thinking, the being process. But I think, to come
back to Lukacs, that you credit Lukacs too much for being a process theoretician. For Lukacs it is
very important that "what there is" today is bad, and he seems to have a definite idea of "what
there ought to be." There is in him at least this teleological drive toward what there ought to be. I
like your interpretation, because I think you are "updating" Lukacs, in this sense you are going
beyond his limitations. I have often felt that Lukacs's theories were too closed, that he used too
many norms, for instance, for "realism." You emphasize the importance of process. Is it a
dialectic process?
West: Again, for me the dialectic is understood in a heuristic way rather than an ontological
way, and what I mean by that is that it is a dialectic that is posited in order to keep the process
going, rather than a dialectic that is somehow inherent in and implanted within the real. And so I
want to keep the process going, and I see dialectic as a very crucial means of doing that both
practically and theoretically. And, of course, what we mean by dialectic, and this is what I love
about Lukacs, is his concern with protracted struggle.
Corredor: In trying to identify your values, locating them in your texts, I was amazed by some of
your statements that seemed almost metaphysical, for instance, when you speak of "sacrificial
love" .. .
West: There is nothing metaphysical about it. It is just almost sublime, you know, because the
thing about sacrificial love is that it has no metaphysical foundation for it. It is simply a leap that
we make in our short lives that gives it so much meaning and infuses it with so much
significance. It is a dangling experience. You take a tremendous risk, you become tremendously
vulnerable, but there is no metaphysical ground. No security, nothing guaranteed, no surety
whatsoever.
Corredor: There are no truths that you are clinging to. The quest for truth and philosophical
certainty are anathema to the kind of radical historicism which you admire. Again, you are
maybe Pascalian in the sense that you recognize an end to what humans can do and can
understand, and simply subscribe to the process of life and its own limits. You affirm life and
have hope and maybe faith in life.
West: Well, in addition to the Pascalian sensibility, I have a deep Chekhovian strain. What is so
great about Chekhov? I think he understood this better than others, that we are able to love, care
and serve others-and this is so true of his life and his art-but we are able to do that with there
being no deep faith in life or human nature or history or what-have-you. And then it does not
mean that we are anti-life, it does not mean that we are cynical toward it, it is simply there, and
we do these things because, given our tradition that has shaped us, we do in fact feel that it does
give life so much meaning and richness and so forth. Now, as a Christian, I do this against the
backdrop of certain narratives, the gospel, the synoptic Gospel narratives, but again there is no


--- PAGE 206 ---
metaphysical underpinning.
Corredor: In reading such ideas in your text, it made me think of Camus. Camus says that the only
thing we can do is give affection, joy, and share in it. I am thinking of The Plague, in which the
doctor continues to treat his plague-stricken patients in the midst of all hopelessness. This gives
his life essence, quality. And it is not metaphysical in Camus either.
West: There are lots of parallels between him and Chekhov. I still think Chekhov had the highest
expression of this deep sense of love, and care, and struggle, and service. It is just that for him, it
is not against the Christian backdrop as it is for me.
Corredor: I am coming to the end of my questions. In that article in the New York Times, they
described you as a great "synthesizer," and I see that in you as well. You bring together
contradictions, you are a black star at a white academy, you are a believing Christian in a
secular society, you are a progressive socialist in the age of capitalism, a cosmopolitan, public
intellectual among academic specialists, a radical traditionalist. Do you see yourself in those
descriptions? Do you have a calling to bring together seeming contradictions?
West: It certainly is to build on the best of Lukacs, which promotes synthetic and synoptic views
and visions of the past and present. In fact, one of the things I said before, one of the things I love
about Lukacs is this synecdochical mode of thinking in which you always try to relate parts to a
whole, with notions of totality, even for me heuristically posited, that are very important in that
they highlight interrelations and dependencies.
Corredor: Is the notion of totality important to your thinking?
West: Oh yes. Very important.
Corredor: How can you reconcile this with your admiration for Deleuze?
West: No, I think Deleuze is wrong about this. I think post-structuralists are wrong about this. I
think they are right to trash certain conceptions of totality that elide and elude difference and
diversity, heterogeneity and alterity, and so forth. But I think that they have done away with
totalities per se. I think we need to posit totalities with all the openness and flexibility that one
can muster, but we must posit totalities in order to look at the dynamic relation between parts.
Corredor: I am coming to my final question. In your present prophetic pragmatism, is there a
Lukacs, and where is he? What is his future there?
West: Of course, politically, there is no Lukacs at all in terms of his links to Stalinism. I actually
believed that there was a Luxembourgist moment in the early Lukacs that has been overlooked,
but the general association of Lukacs with Stalinism is in fact quite empirically verifiable, and
therefore there are no political links for me in this regard. Philosophically and intellectually,
there are strong links, because my vantage point from looking at modern society, especially
American society, remains the processes of reification and commodification. That is where I
begin. So there is always a Lukacsean beginning. Methodologically, I begin with synecdochical


--- PAGE 207 ---
ways of looking at the world, the relation of parts to a totality. So again, I believe, that is deeply
Lukacsean, even though he has no monopoly on it, because there is the Christian view about
relations of parts and whole, and there is the Hegelian one, but I mean Lukacs is part of this
Hegelian-Marxist sweep in terms of the relationship between the parts and the whole. The
Lukacsean moment for me would be on two levels, on the methodological and the philosophical
level.
The irony is, here I am, as a black Christian, deeply indebted to the Marxist tradition, to Pascal,
Chekhov, the blues, spirituals, the black church and what-have-you, defending certain distinctive
elements in Lukacs's project and yet, at the same time, recognizing that Marxist theory and
Marxist secular sensibility are both indispensable and inadequate, something to build on but also
something to bring serious critique to bear on. The same values of individuality and democracy
that I see in Marx, in Schiller and the democratic tradition, now also filter through the best of the
black church, leads me to this radically secular Budapestborn Marxist, even though I come from
"the hood." In this sense, the struggle for human freedom is indivisible.
Corredor: I am not surprised that you do not stop at Lukacs, that you do not take him as an end in
itself, nor anyone or anything else for that matter. That would be contrary to your approach to
everything. Continuation and process are natural to you and your quest.
Would you like to add a final note to our discussion?
West: No, not really. I think this is one of the best interviews I have had. What you have actually
led me to see in myself I rarely get a chance to think about. I am on the run all the time and do not
really get a chance to think about, especially, this Pascalian-Chekhov stuff.
Corredor: Thank you very much. I hope you will come to preach in Annapolis and talk to my
students.
Source: "On the Influence of Lukacs: Interview by Eva L. Corredor," Beyond Eurocentrism and
Multiculturalism, Vol. 2: Prophetic Rellectioni (Monroe, Me.: Common Courage Press, 1993), pp.
47-71.


--- PAGE 208 ---
F R E D R I C J A M E S O N ' S A M E R I C A N M A R X I S M
Fredric Jameson is the most significant Marxist thinker in American culture. We worked
togetherfor many years on Social Text-the leading left journal in the 1980s. I shall never forget
our many afternoons and nights in New York, and Connecticut debating Fred C. L. R. lames,
Ernest Mandel, Antonio Labriola, Antonio Gramsci, Raymond Williams and others. This essay
on his work ranges far and wide in the Marxist tradition from the Frankfurt School to Walter
Benjamin's messianic Marxism. This piece, published in 1982, is a pivotal work in my corpus
because Jameson' work so deeply informs my conception of contemporary society and culture.
FREDRIC JAMESON IS THE most challenging American Marxist hermeneutic thinker on the
present scene. His ingenious interpretations (prior to accessible translations) of major figures of
the Frankfurt School, Russian formalism, French structuralism and poststructuralism as well as
of Georg Lukacs, Jean-Paul Sartre, Louis Althusser, Max Weber and Louis Marin are significant
contributions to the intellectual history of twentieth-century Marxist and European thought.
Jameson's treatments of the development of the novel, the surrealist movement, of Continental
writers such as Honore de Balzac, Marcel Proust, Alessandro Manzoni and Alain Robbe-
Grillet, and of American writers, including Ernest Hemingway, Kenneth Burke and Ursula Le
Guin, constitute powerful political readings. Furthermore, his adamantly antiphilosophical form
of Marxist hermeneutics puts forward an American Aufhebung of poststructuralism that merits
close scrutiny.
In this chapter I shall highlight Jameson's impressive intellectual achievements, specific
theoretical flaws, and particular political shortcomings by focusing on the philosophical
concerns and ideological aims in his trilogy.' Jameson is first and foremost a loyal, though
critical, disciple of the Lukacs of History and Class Con- seiousness, in the sense that he nearly
dogmatically believes that commodificationthe selling of human labor power to profit-
maximizing capitalists-is the primary source of domination in capitalist societies and that
reification-the appearance of this relation between persons and classes as relations between
things and pricesis the major historical process against which to understand norms, values,
sensibilities, texts and movements in the modern world.2
The central question that haunts Jameson is "How can one be a sophisticated Lukacsean
Marxist without Lukacs's nostalgic historicism and highbrow humanism?" A more general
formulation of this question is "How can one take history, class struggle and capitalist
dehumanization seriously after the profound poststructuralist deconstructions of solipsistic
Cartesianism, transcendental Kantianism, teleological Hegelianism, genetic Marxism and
recuperative humanism?" In Anglo-American commonsense lingo, this query becomes "How can
one live and act in the face of the impotence of irony and the paralysis of skepticism?" The
pressing problem that plagues Jameson is whether the Marxist quest for totalization-with its
concomitant notions of totality, mediation, narrative (or even universal) history, part/whole
relations, essence/appearance distinctions and subject/object oppositions-presupposes a form of
philosophical idealism that inevitably results in a mystification that ignores difference, flux,
dissemination and heterogeneity. Jameson's work can be read as a gallant attempt at such a quest,
which hopes to avoid idealist presuppositions and preclude mystifying results.


--- PAGE 209 ---
Jameson initiates this quest by examining the major European Marxist thinker for whom this
problematic looms large: Jean-Paul Sartre.3 Yet Jameson's project takes shape in the encounter
with the rich German tradition of Marxist dialectical thought best exemplified in the works of
Adorno, Benjamin, Marcuse, Bloch and, of course, Lukacs. His dialectical perspective first tries
to reveal the philosophical and political bankruptcy of modern Anglo-American thought. In the
preface to Marxism and Form he writes:
Less obvious, perhaps, is the degree to which anyone presenting German and French dialectical
literature is forced-either implicitly or explicitly-to take yet a third national tradition into
account, I mean our own: that mixture of political liberalism, empiricism, and logical positivism
which we know as Anglo-American philosophy and which is hostile at all points to the type of
thinking outlined here. One cannot write for a reader formed in this tradition-one cannot even
come to terms with one's own historical formation-without taking this influential conceptual
opponent into account; and it is this, if you like, which makes up the tendentious part of my book,
which gives it its political and philosophical cutting edge, so to speak. (MF, p. x)
Jameson's battle against modern Anglo-American thought is aided by poststructuralism in that
deconstruction disclose the philosophical bankruptcy of this bourgeois humanist tradition. Yet
such deconstructions say little about the political bankruptcy of this tradition; further, and more
seriously, deconstructions conceal the political impotency of their own projects. In short,
Jameson rightly considers poststructuralism an ally against bourgeois humanism, yet ultimately
an intellectual foe and political enemy. His tempered appreciation and subsequent rejection of
structuralism and poststructuralism are enacted in his superb critical treatment of their roots and
development in The Prison-House of Language. For example, he writes in the preface of this
text:
My own plan-to offer an introductory survey of these movements which might stand at the same
time as a critique of their basic methodology-is no doubt open to attack from both partisans and
adversaries alike. . . . The present critique does not, however, aim at judgments of detail, nor at
the expression of some opinion, either positive or negative, on the works in question here. It
proposes rather to lay bare what Collingwood would have called the "absolute presuppositions"
of Formalism and Structuralism taken as intellectual totalities. These absolute presuppositions
may then speak, for themselves, and, like all such ultimate premises or models, are too
fundamental to be either accepted or rejected. (PHL, p. x)
Jameson's first lengthy treatment of the Marxist dialectical tradition focuses on the most
intelligent thinker and adroit stylist of that tradition: Theodor Adorno.4 Adorno presents
Jameson with his most formidable challenge, for Adorno's delicate dialectical acrobatics
embark on the quest for totalization while simultaneously calling such a quest into question; they
reconstruct the part in light of the whole while deconstructing the notion of a whole; they devise
a complex conception of mediation while disclosing the idea of totality as illusion; and they
ultimately promote dialectical development while surrendering to bleak pessimism about ever
attaining a desirable telos. In short, Adorno is a negative hermeneutical thinker, a dialectical
deconstructionist par excellence: the skeleton that forever hangs injameson's closet.
In this way, Adorno is the most ingenious and dangerous figure for Jameson. Adorno


--- PAGE 210 ---
ingeniously makes and maintains contact with the concrete in a dialectical demystifying
movement that begins with the art object and engages the psychological, which moves from the
psychological and implicates the social, and then finds the economic in the social. Yet he refuses
to ossify the object of inquiry or freeze the concepts he employs to interrogate the object. This
intellectual energy and ability is characterized by Jameson in the following way:
It is to this ultimate squaring of the circle that Adorno came in his two last and most systematic,
most technically philosophical works, Negative Dialectics and Aesthetic Theory. Indeed, as the
title of the former suggests, these works are designed to offer a theory of the untheorizable, to
show why dialectical thinking is at one and the same time both indispensable and impossible, to
keep the idea of system itself alive while intransigently dispelling the pretensions of any of the
contingent and already realized systems to validity and even to existence.... Thus a negative
dialectic has no choice but to affirm the notion and value of an ultimate synthesis, while negating
its possibility and reality in every concrete case that comes before it.... Negative dialectics does
not result in an empty formalism, but rather in a thoroughgoing critique of forms, in a painstaking
and well-nigh permanent destruction of every possible hypostasis of the various moments of
thinking itself. (MF, pp. 54-55, 56)
Adorno is dangerous for Jameson because his deconstructionist strategies and political
impotence resemble the very poststructuralism with whichJameson wrestles. Jameson never
adequately settles this deep tension with Adorno. In his later work, he circumvents this tension
by reducing Adorno's negative dialectics to an aesthetic ideal, and this reduction minimizes
Adorno's philosophical challenge to Jameson's own antiphilosophical hermeneutics. Jameson
tries to disarm Adorno's position by construing it as a perspective that reconfirms that status of
the concept of totality by reacting to and deconstructing "totality."5 In Jameson's view, the an-
titotalizing deconstructionist strategies of Jacques Derrida and Paul de Man also "confirm" the
status of the concept of totality, since such strategies "must be accompanied by some initial
appearance of continuity, some ideology of unification already in place, which it is their mission
to rebuke and to shatter" (PU, p. 53). Jameson seems to be employing a rather slippery notion of
how the idea of totality is confirmed, since powerful projects that "rebuke" and "shatter" this
idea appear to "confirm" it. On this crucial point, Jameson presents neither a persuasive
argument against deconstructionists nor a convincing case for his own position, but rather a
defensive recuperative strategy that co-opts the deconstructionists in a quest for totality
unbeknownst and unrecognizable to them. This ad hoc strategy reflects Jameson's unsettled
tension with Adorno and his reluctance to come to terms with Paul de Man's rigorous version of
deconstruction.6
Yet what is missing in Adorno, Jameson finds in Benjamin, Marcuse and Bloch: a theoretical
mechanism that sustains hope and generates praxis in the present moment of the historical
process. Such hope and praxis are promoted by a politicized notion J'desire that is sustained by
a "nostalgia conscious of itself, a lucid and remorseless dissatisfaction with the present on the
grounds of some remembered plenitude" (MF, p. 82). For example, Jameson is attracted to
Benjamin primarily because Benjamin's conception of nostalgic utopianism as a revolutionary
stimulus in the present delivers Jameson from the wretched pessimism of Adorno.


--- PAGE 211 ---
For Jameson, Benjamin's notion of nostalgic utopianism-best elucidated in his masterful essay
on Nikolai Leskov, "The Storyteller"-unfolds as storytelling that does justice to our experience
of the past, as nonnovelistic (hence, nonindividual- istic) narrative that makes contact with the
concrete, with an authentic form of social and historical existence quickly vanishing owing to the
reification process in late monopoly capitalism. Following Benjamin, Jameson holds that
reification destroys the conditions for storytelling, for meaningful destinies and common plots
that encompass the past, present and future of the human community. Therefore one-dimensional
societies do not simply domesticate their opposition; they also deprive such opposition of the
very means to stay in touch with any revolutionary past or visionary future. Such societies
present no stories, but rather "only a series of experiences of equal weight whose order is
indiscriminately reversible" (ME,, p. 79).
Jameson conceives the politicized notion of desire-found first in Friedrich Schiller and then
more fully in Herbert Marcuse-as the transformative elan repressed and submerged by the
reification process in late monopoly capitalism. This conception of desire constitutes the central
component ofJameson's notion of freedom, a notion that he argues can never be conceptually
grasped but rather symptomatically displayed in the dissatisfaction of the present, in a Faustian
Refusal of the Instant or in a Blochian ontological astonishment that renders us aware of the "not-
yet" latent in the present. To put it crudely, Jameson's politicized notion of desire promises
access to a revolutionary energy lurking beneath the social veil of appearances, an energy
capable of negating the reified present order.
This notion of freedom-or negational activity motivated by the desire for freedom-serves as
the "center" thatJameson's Marxist hermeneutics dialectically discloses and decenters. This is
what makes his viewpoint political and hermeneutical as opposed to idealistic and
philosophical. For example, he states:
For hermeneutics, traditionally a technique whereby religions recuperated the texts and spiritual
activities of cultures resistant to them, is also a political discipline, and provides the means for
maintaining contact with the very sources of revolutionary energy during a stagnant time, or
preserving the concept of freedom itself, underground, during geological ages of repression.
Indeed, it is the concept of freedom which ... proves to be the privileged instrument of a political
hermeneutic, and which, in turn, is perhaps itself best understood as an interpretive device rather
than a philosophical essence or idea.' (MF, p. 84)
Jameson's totalizing impulse is seen quite clearly in his claim that this political hermeneutic
approach is the "absolute horizon of all reading and all interpretation" (PU, p. 17). This
approach preserves, negates and transcends all prevailing modes of reading and interpreting
texts, whether psychoanalytic, myth-critical, stylistic, ethical, structural or poststructural.
Jameson unequivocally states:
One of the essential themes of this book will be the contention that Marxism subsumes other
interpretive modes or systems; or, to put it in methodological terms, that the limits of the latter
can always be overcome, and their more positive findings retained, by a radical historicizing of
their mental operations, such that not only the content of the analysis, but the very method itself,
along with the analyst, then comes to be reckoned into the "text" or phenomenon to be explained.


--- PAGE 212 ---
(PU, p. 47)
This totalizing impulse can be best understood in the crucial links Jameson makes among the
notions of desire, freedom and narrative. In a fascinating and important discussion of Andre
Breton's Manifesto, Jameson writes:
It is not too much to say that for Surrealism a genuine plot, a genuine narrative, is that which can
stand as the very figure of Desire itself: and this not only because in the Freudian sense pure
physiological desire is inaccessible as such to consciousness, but also because in the
socioeconomic context, genuine desire risks being dissolved and lost in the vast network of
pseudosatisfactions which makes up the market system. In that sense desire is the form taken by
freedom in the new commercial environment, by a freedom we do not even realize we have lost
unless we think of it in terms, not only of the stilling, but also of the awakening, of Desire in
general. (MF, pp. 100-101)
In Jameson's sophisticated version of Lukacsean Marxism, narrative is the means by which the
totality is glimpsed, thereby preserving the possibility of dialectical thinking. This glimpse of
totality-disclosed in a complex and coherent story about conflicting classes and clashing modes
of production-constitutes the "very figure of Desire" in the present, a desire that both enables and
enacts the negation of the present. Jameson understands this notion, unlike the function of the
notion of desire in poststructuralism, to result in a will to freedom, not in a will to presence. In
fact, Jameson's conception of the function of desire is much closer to the Christian view of a will
to salvation than the deconstructionist "will to presence"; that is, Jameson's perspective more
closely resembles a transcendental system that regulates human action than a rhetorical system
that circumscribes epistemological moves.
Jameson's American Marxist Aujhebung of poststructuralism posits the major terrain-the
primal scene-of contemporary criticism not as epistemology, but as ethics. Instead of focusing on
the numerous Sisyphean attempts to construct a metaphysics of presence, he highlights the
various efforts to negate the present and shows how such negations point toward a society of
freedom. For example, Jacques Derrida, the preeminent deconstructionist, brilliantly unmasks
the binary oppositions in traditional and contemporary Western thought, such as speech and
writing, presence and absence and so forth. Yet Derrida remains oblivious to similar binary
oppositions in ethics, such as good and evil.
To move from Derrida to Nietzsche is to glimpse the possibility of a rather different
interpretation of the binary opposition, according to which its positive and negative terms are
ultimately assimilated by the mind as a distinction between good and evil. Not metaphysics but
ethics is the informing ideology of the binary opposition: and we have forgotten the thrust of
Nietzsche's thought and lost everything scandalous and virulent about it if we cannot understand
how it is ethics itself which is the ideological vehicle and the legitimation of concrete structures
of power and domination. (PU, p. 114)
Jameson's attempt to shift the fierce epistemological and metaphysical battles in contemporary
Continental philosophy and criticism to ethics is invigorating and impressive. This shift is
prompted by his de-Platonizing of the poststructuralist notion of desire-which freely floats above


--- PAGE 213 ---
history like a Platonic form only to be embodied in various versions of metaphysics of presence-
and his placing it in the underground of history that emerges in the form of a negation of the
present, as an "ontological patience in which the constraining situation itself is for the first time
perceived in the very moment in which it is refused" (MF, pp. 84-85). Of course, Jameson
recognizes that this shift replaces one metaphysical and mythical version of desire with his own.
Yet, in his view, his politicized notion of desire has crucial historical consequences and
therefore it is more acceptable than the poststructuralist conception of desire.
Yet, it will be observed, even if the theory of desire is a metaphysic and a myth, it is one whose
great narrative events-repression and revolt-ought to be congenial to a Marxist perspective, one
whose ultimate Utopian vision of the liberation of desire and of libidinal transfiguration was an
essential feature of the great mass revolts of the 1960s in Eastern and Western Europe as well as
in China and the United States. (PU, p. 67)
Jameson's project of politicizing the notion of desire is rooted in Schiller's Letters on the
Aesthetic Education of Mankind, which sidesteps the Kantian epistemological question of the
necessary conditions for the possibility of experience, and instead raises the more political
question of the speculative and hypothetical (or utopian) conditions for the possibility of a free
and harmonious personality. In attempting to answer this question, Schiller presents analogies
between the psyche and society, between the mental divisions of impulses (Stofftrieb, Formtrieb
and Spieltrieb) and the social divisions of labor (Work, Reason and Art). In the same vein,
Jameson's reading of Marcuse's Eros and Civilization sees Marcuse as replacing Freud's inquiry
into the structure of actual mental phenomena with an inquiry into the speculative and
hypothetical conditions for the possibility of an aggression-free society in which work is
libidinally satisfying. As in Benjamin's nostalgic utopianism, the primary function of memory is
to serve the pleasure principle; the origin of utopian thought resides in the remembered plenitude
of psychic gratification. Jameson quotes Marcuse's famous formulation of the origins of thought.
"The memory of gratification is at the origin of all thinking, and the impulse to recapture past
gratification is the hidden driving power behind the process of thought.."s Jameson then adds:
The primary energy of revolutionary activity derived from this memory of a prehistoric
happiness which the individual can regain only through its externalization, through its
reestablishment for society as a whole. The loss or repression of the very sense of such concepts
as freedom and desire takes, therefore, the form of a kind of amnesia or forgetful numbness,
which the hermeneutic activity, the stimulation of memory as the negation of the here and now, as
the projection of Utopia, has as its function to dispel, restoring to us the original clarity and
force of our own most vital drives and wishes. (MF, pp. 113-114)
It should be apparent that Jameson is, in many ways, a traditional hermeneutical thinker; that
is, his basic theoretical strategy is that of recuperation, restoration and recovery.`' Furthermore,
his fundamental aim is to preserve the old Christian notion-and Marxist affirmation-that history
is meaningful:
Only Marxism can give us an adequate account of the essential mystery of the cultural past,
which, like Tiresias drinking blood, is momentarily returned to life and warmth and allowed
once more to speak, and to deliver its long-forgotten message in surroundings utterly alien to it.


--- PAGE 214 ---
This mystery can be reenacted only if the human adventure is one.... These matters can recover
their original urgency for us only if they are retold within the unity of a single great collective
story; only if, in however disguised and symbolic form, they are seen as sharing a single
fundamental theme-for Marxism, the collective struggle to wrest a realm of Freedom from a
realm of Necessity; only if they are grasped as vital episodes in a single vast unfinished plot.
(PU, pp. 19-20)10
Jameson recognizes the deep affinity of his Marxist project with religious Weltanachauungen.
And since he is not afflicted with the petty, antireligious phobia of scientistic Marxists, Jameson
develops his affinity by juxtaposing the medieval Christian allegorical method and Northrop
Frye's interpretive system with his own project. I I In fact, the system of four levels-the literal,
allegorical, moral and anagogical levels-of medieval Christian allegorical interpretation
constitutes a crucial component of his theoretical framework. This model provides him a means
by which to come to terms with the persistent problem for Marxism: the problem of mediation,
the task of specifying the relationship between various levels and of adapting analyses from one
level to another in light of a meaningful story of the past, present and future of the human
community.
The first (or literal) level permits Jameson to retain the historical referents of events and
happenings-such as human suffering, domination and struggle-and the textual referents of books
and works-such as conflict-ridden historical situations, class-ridden social conditions and
antinomy-ridden ideological configurations. In this way, Jameson accepts the antircalist
arguments of poststructuralists, yet rejects their textual idealism.12 He acknowledges that history
is always already mediated by language, texts and interpretations, yet he insists that history is
still, in some fundamental sense, "there." He conceives of history as an "absent cause" known by
its "formal effects." In the crucial paragraph that directly replies to textual idealists and
completes his theoretical chapter in The Political Unconscious he writes :
History is therefore the experience of Necessity, and it is this alone which can forestall its
thematization or reification as a mere object of representation or as one master code among
many others. Necessity is not in that sense a type of content, but rather the inexorable form of
events; it is therefore a narrative category in the enlarged sense of some properly narrative
political unconscious which has been argued here, a retextualization of History which does not
propose the latter as some new representation or "vision," some new content, but as the formal
effects of what Althusser, following Spinoza, calls an "absent cause." Conceived in this sense,
History is what hurts, it is what refuses desire and sets inexorable limits to individual as well as
collective praxis, which its "ruses" turn into grisly and ironic reversals of their overt intention.
But this History can be apprehended only through its effects, and never directly as some reified
force. This is indeed the ultimate sense in which History as ground and untranscendable horizon
needs no particular theoretical justification: we may be sure that its alienating necessities will
not forget us, however much we might prefer to ignore them. (PU, p. 102)
The second (or allegorical) level sets forth the interpretive code, which is for Jameson the
mediatory code of the reification process in capitalist societies.13 This mediatory code takes the
form of a genealogical construction characterized by neither genetic continuity nor teleological


--- PAGE 215 ---
linearity, but rather by what Bloch called Ungleichzeitigkeit, or "nonsynchronous development."
This conception of history and texts as a "synchronic unity of structurally contradictory or
heterogeneous elements, genetic patterns, and discourses" allows Jameson to identify and isolate
particular aspects of the past as preconditions for the elaboration of reifying elements in the
present.' I
The third (or moral) level constitutes an ethical or psychological reading in which, following
Althusser's conception of ideology, representational structures permit individual subjects to
conceive their lived relationships to transindividual realities such as the destiny of humankind or
the social structure. The fourth (or anagogical) level-which is inseparable from the third level-
provides a political reading for the collective meaning of history, a characterization of the
transindividual realities that link the individual to a fate, plot and story of a community, class,
group or society.
Jameson's appropriation of the medieval system leads him to redefine the activity of
interpretation in allegorical terms; that is, his own political allegorical machinery, with its aims
of ideological unmasking and utopian projection, dictates the way in which interpretation and
criticism ought to proceed.
We will assume that a criticism which asks the question "What does it mean?" constitutes
something like an allegorical operation in which a text is systematically rewritten in terms of
some fundamental master code or "ultimately determining instance." On this view, then, all
"interpretation" in the narrower sense demands the forcible or imperceptible transformation of a
given text into an allegory of its particular master code or "transcendental signified": the
discredit into which interpretation has fallen is thus at one with the disrepute visited on allegory
itself.
Yet to see interpretation this way is to acquire the instruments by which we can force a given
interpretive practice to stand and yield up its name, to blurt out its master code and thereby
reveal its metaphysical and ideological underpinnings. (PU, p. 58)
Jameson's redefinition of the allegorical model also draws him closer to Northrop Frye. In
Marxism and Farm, Jameson invokes, in a respectful yet somewhat pejorative manner, Frye's
interpretive system as "the only philosophically coherent alternative" to Marxist hermeneutics.'
In a later essay, "Criticism in History," Jameson harshly criticizes Frye's system as ahistorical
and guilty of presupposing an unacceptable notion of unbroken continuity between the narrative
forms of "primitive" societies and those of modern times.'' Yet in The Political Unconscious,
there is some change of heart:
In the present context, however, Frye's work comes before us as a virtual contemporary
reinvention of the four-fold hermeneutic associated with the theological tradition....
The greatness of Frye, and the radical difference between his work and that of the great bulk of
garden-variety myth criticism, lies in his willingness to raise the issue of community and to draw
basic, essentially social, interpretive consequences from the nature of religion as collective
representation. (PU, p. 69)


--- PAGE 216 ---
In fact, Jameson's central concept of the political unconscious-though often defined in Levi-
Straussian language as a historical pensee sauvage and influenced by the Feuerbachian and
Durkheimian conceptions of religion-derives from Frye's notion of literature (be it a weaker
form of myth or a later stage of ritual) as a "symbolic meditation on the destiny of community."
17 What upsets Jameson about Frye is no longer simply Frye's ahistorical approach, but, more
important, Frye's Blakean anagogy-the image of the cosmic body-which Jameson claims
privatizes a political anagogy and hence poses the destiny of the human community in an
individualistic manner, in terms of the isolated body and personal gratification.'"
Frye's conflation of ethics and politics gives Jameson the opportunity both to congratulate and
to criticize him. Jameson congratulates Frye-the North American liberal version of
structuralism-because Frye conceives the central problematic of criticism to be not
epistemological, but rather ethical, namely, the relation of texts to the destiny of human
communities. In this sense, Frye is preferable to the French structuralists and poststructuralists,
since he understands that there is a crucial relationship among desire, freedom and narrative.
Jameson criticizes Frye because Frye understands this relationship too idealistically and
individualistically. In this sense, Frye stands halfway between the Platonized notion of desire
employed by those who deconstruct the metaphysics of presence and the politicized notion of
desire promoted by Jameson's Marxist hermeneutics. Frye's moralized notion of desire dictated
by his "anatomy of romance" (to use Geoffrey Hartman's phrase) constitutes a halfway house.'"
As Jameson notes: "Frye's entire discussion of romance turns on a presuppositionthe ethical axis
of good and evil-which needs to be historically problematized in its turn, and which will prove
to be an ideologeme that articulates a social and historical contradiction" (PU, p. 110).
By contrast, the principal attraction of Jameson to the project of Gilles Deleuze and Felix
Guattari in Anti-Oedipus is precisely their politicized notion of desire, which does not simply
relegate it to the subjective and psychological spheres. Jameson acknowledges that the "thrust of
the argument of the Anti-Oedipus is, to be sure, very much in the spirit of the present work, for
the concern of its authors is to reassert the specificity of the political content of everyday life
and of individual fantasy-experience" (PU, p. 22). But Jameson objects to their Nietzschean
perspectivist attack on hermeneutic or interpretive activity, and hence their antitotal- izing
orientation and micropolitical conclusions.
The major problem with Jameson's innovative Marxist hermeneutics is that, like Frye's
monumental liberal reconstruction of criticism or M. H. Abrams's magisterial bourgeois reading
of romanticism, his viewpoint rests on an unexamined metaphor of translation, an uncritical
acceptance of transcoding. In this sense, Geoffrey Hartman's incisive criticisms of Frye and J.
Hillis Miller's notorious attack on Abrams render Jameson's project suspect.2) In an interesting
manner, the gallant attempts of Frye to resurrect the romance tradition and the Blakean sense of
history, of Abrams to recuperate the humanist tradition and the bourgeois conception of history,
and of Jameson to recover the Marxist tradition and the political meaning of history, all
ultimately revert to and rely on problematic methodological uses of various notions of analogy
and homology.21
For example, Jameson presupposes homologous relations between ethics and epistemology.


--- PAGE 217 ---
This presupposition permits him to distinguish himself from Frye by articulating the differences
between moralizing and politicizing the notion of desire. As I noted earlier, Jameson ingeniously
shifts the primal scene of criticism from epistemology to ethics. Yet his attempt to historicize the
moralistic elements of Frye encourages him to follow the Nietzschean strategies of the
poststructuralists in the realm of ethics. Therefore he arrives at the notion that he must go beyond
the binary opposition of good and evil in order to overcome ethics and approach the sphere of
politics. This notion leads him to the idea that such overcoming of ethics is requisite for a
"positive" hermeneutics and a nonfunctional or anticipatory view of culture.
Three principal mistakes supportJameson's presupposition that analogous and homologous
relations obtain between ethics and epistemology. First, he believes that the epistemological
decentering of the bourgeois subject can be smoothly translated into the moral sphere as an
attack on individualistic ethics of bourgeois subjects. This plausible case of analogy seems to
warrant, in his view, more general considerations about the homologous relation between ethics
and epistemology. Second, he assumes that the poststructuralist attacks on epistemological and
metaphysical binary oppositions can be simply transcoded en bloc to ethical binary oppositions.
This assumption rests on the notion that these attacks are merely "misplaced, 1112 rather than
misguided. Third, Jameson misreads three important moments in modern philosophy, namely,
Nietzsche's ill-fated attempt to go beyond good and evil, Hegel's critique of Kantian morality
and Marx's rejection of bourgeois ethics.
There is a fundamental link between the epistemological decentering of the subject and an
attack on the individualistic ethics of bourgeois subjects, for the arguments by Spinoza and
Hegel against individualistic ethics were accompanied by epistemological hostility to the
isolated subject. And as Jameson rightly argues, the distinctive Marxist contribution to the
current discourse, which takes "decentering" as its center, is to show that both the subject
decentered and the decentering itself are modes of ideological activity that are always already
bound to particular groups, communities and classes at specific stages of capitalist development.
In my view, Jameson goes wrong in trying to relate epistemological moves to ethical ones in
ideological terms without giving an account of the collective dynamics that accompany these
moves. From the Marxist perspective, all metaphysical, epistemological and ethical discourses
are complex ideological affairs of spe cific groups, communities and classes in or across
particular societies. These discourses must not be understood in their own terms (which
Jameson rightly rejects), nor may one discourse become primary and consequently subordinate
other discursive nets (whichJameson often insinuates). Rather, the Marxist aim is to disclose the
ideological function and class interest of these evolving discourses in terms of the collective
dynamics of the pertinent moment in the historical process. Jameson moves two steps forward by
eschewing the metaphysical and epistemological terrains of the poststructuralists; his strategy
discredits rather than defeats them, which is appropriate since poststructuralist defeatism is
impossible to defeat on its own grounds. Yet Jameson moves a step backward by shifting the
battleground to ethics. This shift, as I shall show later, prevents him from employing the Marxist
logic of collective dynamics and leads him to call for a "new logic of collective dynamics" (PU,
p. 294).


--- PAGE 218 ---
Jameson's second mistake is to believe that the poststructuralist attacks on binary oppositions
are enacted in the wrong terrains, rather than being wrong attacks. Instead of calling into
question the very theoretical attitude or unmasking the ideological activity of "going beyond"
binary oppositions, Jameson appropriates the same machinery and directs it to ethical binary
oppositions. In this way, his project is akin to poststructuralist ones in the bad sense-or akin to
idealist projects in the Marxist sense. Jameson mistakenly does not object to deconstructionist
strategies, but rather to where they have been applied. In short, his critique does not go deep
enough; that is, he does not disclose the very form {of 'the strategies themselves as modes of
ideological activity that both conceal power relations and extend mechanisms of control by
reproducing the ideological conditions for the reproduction of capitalist social arrangements.
Jameson's third mistake is a threefold misreading: of Nietzsche's attempt to go beyond good
and evil, of Hegel's critique of Kantian morality and of Marx's rejection of bourgeois ethics. For
Jameson, Nietzsche's attempt to go beyond good and evil is the ethical analogue to the
poststructuralist attempt to go beyond the binary oppositions in metaphysics and epistemology.
But surely this is not so. Nietzsche's attempt to go beyond good and evil is, as the subtitle of his
text states, " V rspiel einer Philosophic der Zukunft" (Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future).
Nietzsche hardly rests with the aporias of deconstructionists, but rather aligns himself with the
genealogical concerns of the "historically minded" in order to get his own positive project off
the ground. His profound transvaluation of values is not enacted in order to transcend the moral
categories of good and evil, but rather to unmask them, disclose what they conceal, and build on
what underlies such categories. And for Nietzsche, the "reality" that lies beneath these categories
is the will to power. Ressentiment is one particular expression of the will to power of the weak
and oppressed toward the strong and the oppressors within traditional Judeo-Christian culture
and, to a certain extent, modern bourgeois European culture.23 Unlike the deconstructionists,
Nietzsche aims to debunk and demystify in order to build anew-and the springboard for his
"countermovement," his "new gospel of the future," is the will to power.
Suppose, finally, we succeeded in explaining our entire instinctive life as the development and
ramification of one basic form of the will-namely, of the will to power, as my proposition has it;
suppose all organic functions could be traced back to this will to power and one could also find
in it the solution of the problem of procreation and nourishment-it is one problem-then one
would have gained the right to determine all efficient force univocally as-will to power. The
world viewed from inside, the world defined and determined according to its "intelligible
character"-it would be "will to power" and nothing else.24
Jameson's emulation of poststructuralist strategies in the realm of ethics leads him to root
Nietzsche's project in the isolated subject of bourgeois epistemology and to offer the doctrine of
eternal recurrence as the Nietzschean solution to the problem of good and evil. He writes:
Briefly, we can suggest that, as Nietzsche taught us, the judgmental habit of ethical thinking, of
ranging everything in the antagonistic categories of good and evil (or their binary equivalents), is
not merely an error but is objectively rooted in the inevitable and inescapable centeredness of
every individual consciousness or individual subject: what is good is what belongs to me, what
is bad is what belongs to the Other. . . . The Nietzschean solution to this constitutional ethical


--- PAGE 219 ---
habit of the individual subject-the Eternal Return-is for most of us both intolerable in its rigor
and unconvincingly ingenious in the prestidigitation with which it desperately squares its circle.
(PU, p. 234)
It is necessary to note four points against Jameson, however. First, like Marx, Nietzsche
realizes that all ethical discourse is a communal affair; ethics is a group response to particular
historical circumstances. Therefore, bourgeois ethics (tied to the individual subject) is but one
communal response among others and certainly not identical or even similar to expressions of
traditional Christian moral- ity25 Second, Nietzsche's doctrine of eternal recurrence grounds his
affirmative attitude toward life (an alternative to that of Christianity, in his view); it is itself an
expression of his will to power, but not a "solution" to the binary opposition of good and evil.
Third, Nietzsche acknowledges that his "going beyond" good and evil does not result in
transcending morality, but rather in establishing a new morality that rests upon precisely that
which former moralities concealed and precluded: a will to power that generates a creative,
self-transforming, life-enhancing morality. Fourth, Nietzsche, again like Marx, holds that "going
beyond" good and evil is not a philosophical or even hermeneutical issue, but rather a
genealogical matter linked to a historical "countermovement" that contains a vision of the future.
Going beyond good and evil will not result in finding new categories untainted by the double
bind, but rather new distinctions of good and evil tied to building new communities or, for
Nietzsche, building new "selves."
This building of new communities leads us directly to Jameson's misunderstanding of Hegel's
critique of Kantian morality and Marx's rejection of bourgeois ethics. Jameson rightly notes that
one of the great themes of dialectical philosophy, the Hegelian denunciation of the ethical
imperative, [is] taken up again by Lukacs in his Theory of 'the Novel. On this diagnosis, the
Sollen, the mesmerization of duty and ethical obligation, necessarily perpetuates a cult of failure
and a fetishization of pure, unrealized intention. For moral obligation presupposes a gap
between being and duty, and cannot be satisfied with the accomplishment of a single duty and the
latter's consequent transformation into being. In order to retain its own characteristic
satisfactions, ethics must constantly propose the unrealizable and the unattainable to itself. (PU,
p. 194)
But Jameson then problematically adds that dialectical philosophy addresses itself to the matter
of "going beyond" good and evil and, in contrast to Nietzsche, "proposes a rather different stance
(this time, outside the subject in the transindividual, or in other words in History) from which to
transcend the double bind of the merely ethical" (PU, p. 235).
The problem here is that Jameson reads Hegel through poststructuralist lenses in which "the
double bind of the merely ethical" is a philosophical problem that demands categorical
transcendence, rather than through Marxist lenses in which "the double bind of the merely
ethical" is an ideological activity to unmask and transform by collective praxis. This Marxist
reading of Hegel is necessary in order to grasp the depths of Marx's rejection of bourgeois
ethics. Hegel's disenchantment with Kant's morality was not simply because he believed that the
categorical imperative was empty or that the moral ought was unattainable. But rather, more
important, Hegel was disenchanted because the way in which Kant separates the real from the


--- PAGE 220 ---
ideal requires a philosophical projection of an impossible ideal that both presupposed and
concealed a particular social basis, namely, Kant's own specific time and place.26 In other
words, Hegel saw Kant's morality as a Moralitdt-a first-personal matter-that was derivative
from a Sittlichkeit-a communal matter.
The Hegelian critique of Kantian morality opens the door to a Marxist viewpoint on ethics in
two respects. First, it rejects the Kantian conception of what a theory about the nature of ethics
must be. Second, it imposes severe limits on the role and function of ethical discourse (which is
not reducible to moral convictions) in social change. As David Hoy rightly points out, "in giving
up the Kantian metaphilosophical view about what theories of morality can and should do, Hegel
is giving up the dream of ideal resolutions of moral conflicts. Conflicts are matters of weighing
obligations, and moral obligations have no automatic priority."27
On this view, Marx's rejection of bourgeois ethics bears little resemblance to poststructuralist
attempts to go beyond good and evil. Rather, Marx's rejection is based on giving up the Kantian
dream of ideal resolutions of moral conflicts, giving up the Hegelian dream of philosophical
reconciliation of the real and the ideal and surrendering the poststructuralist dream of
philosophical transcendence of metaphysical, epistemological and ethical double binds.28 The
Marxist concern is with practically overcoming historical class conflicts. Therefore, the Marxist
rejection of bourgeois ethics has less to do with attacks on binary oppositions such as good and
evil and more to do with the Hegelian subordination of Moralitdt to Sittlichkeit. The Marxist aim
is to discern an evolving and developing Sittlichkeitin the womb of capitalist society, a
Sittlichkeit whose negative ideal is to resist all forms of reification and exploitation and whose
positive ideals are social freedom and class equality.
The Marxist lesson here is that only if one has taken metaphysics, epistemology and ethics
seriously, will one be attracted by Heideggerian rhetoric about going beyond metaphysics or
Nietzschean rhetoric about going beyond good and evil. If one, instead, takes history seriously-
as do Marx after 1844 and American pragmatism at its best-then metaphysics, epistemology and
ethics are not formidable foes against which to fight, nor are the All-like shuffles of the
deconstructions that "destroy" them impressive performances. On this view, deconstructionists
become critically ingenious yet politically deluded ideologues who rightly attack bourgeois
humanism, yet who also become the ideological adornments of late monopoly-capitalist
academies.
Analogies and homologies, no matter how sophisticated and refined, between epistemology
and ethics, metaphysics and morals, make sense as long as one clings to the notion that there are
two such interrelated yet distinct spheres, disciplines or discourses. One rejects this notion
neither by enabling interdisciplinary moves nor by questing "beyond" both spheres, but rather by
viewing the historical process outside the lenses of traditional or contemporary metaphysical,
epistemological and ethical discourses. That is, our history has not posed metaphysical,
epistemological and ethical problems that need to be solved or "gone beyond"; rather, it has left
us these problems as imaginative ideological responses to once pertinent but now defunct
problematics.
To resurrect the dead, as bourgeois humanists try to do, is impossible. To attack the dead, as


--- PAGE 221 ---
deconstructionists do, is redundant and, ironically, valorizes death. To "go beyond" the dead
means either surreptitiously recuperating previous "contents" of life in new forms (Nietzsche) or
else deceptively shrugging off the weight of the dead, whether by promoting cults of passive,
nostalgic "dwelling" (Heidegger) or by creative self-rebegetting and self-redescribing
(Emerson, Harold Bloom, Richard Rorty).
What is distinctive about the Marxist project is that it neither resurrects, attacks nor attempts
to "go beyond" metaphysical, epistemological and ethical discourses. It aims rather at
transforming present practices-the remaining life-against the backdrop of previous discursive
and political practices, against the "dead" past. Marxism admonishes us to "let the dead bury the
dead," acknowledges that this "dead" past weighs like an incubus upon prevailing practices and
accents our capacities to change these practices. Marx ignores, sidesteps and avoids discussions
of metaphysical, epistemological and ethical issues not because he shuns his inescapable
imprisonment in binary oppositions, remains insulated from metaphysical sedimentations, or
hesitates to make knowledge claims and moral judgments, but rather because, for him, the
bourgeois forms of discourse on such issues are "dead," rendered defunct by his particular
moment in the historical process. The capitalist mode of production-with its own particular
mystifying forms of social relations, technologies and bureaucracies and its aim of world
dominationrequires forms of theoretical and practical activity and modes of writing, acting and
organizing heretofore unknown to the "dead" past.
From this Marxist view, the deconstructionist disclosing and debunking of the binary
oppositions in the Western philosophical tradition is neither a threat to European civilization nor
a misplaced critique better enacted against the binary oppositions in ethics. Rather,
deconstructions are, like the left Hegelian critiques of Marx's own day, interesting yet impotent
bourgeois attacks on the forms of thought and categories of a "dead" tradition, a tradition that
stipulates the lineage and sustains the very life of these deconstructions. My claim here is not
simply that these attacks valorize textuality at the expense of power, but, more important, that
they are symbiotic with their very object of criticism; that is, they remain alive only as long as
they give life to their enemy. In short, deconstructionist assaults must breathe life into
metaphysical, epistemological and ethical discourses if their critiques are to render these
discourses lifeless.29
The major ideological task of the Marxist intervention in present philosophical and critical
discussions becomes that of exposing the reactionary and conservative consequences of
bourgeois humanism, the critical yet barren posture of poststructuralist skepticism and
deconstructionist ironic criticism, and the utopian and ultimately escapist character of the
Emersonian gnosticism of Bloom and the Emersonian pragmatism of Rorty. The negative moment
of Jameson's Marxist hermeneutics initiates this urgent task. The basic problem with the positive
moment in his project is precisely its utopianism, especially in linking the Nietzschean quest
beyond good and evil to Marxist theory and praxis. In a crucial passage, Jameson writes:
It is clear, indeed, that not merely Durkheim's notion of collective "consciousness," but also the
notion of "class consciousness," as it is central in a certain Marxist tradition, rests on an
unrigorous and figurative assimilation of the consciousness of the individual subject to the


--- PAGE 222 ---
dynamics of groups. The Althusserian and post-structuralist critique of these and other versions
of the notion of a "subject of history" may readily be admitted. The alternatives presented by the
Al- thusserians, however... have a purely negative or second-degree critical function, and offer
no new conceptual categories. What is wanted here-and it is one of the most urgent tasks for
Marxist theory today-is a whole new logic of collective dynamics, with categories that escape
the taint of some mere application of terms drawn from individual experience (in that sense,
even the concept of praxis remains a suspect one). (PU, p. 294)
It comes as little surprise that Jameson's plea for a "new logic" resembles Jacques Derrida's
call for a "new reason," since Jameson enacts the deconstructionist strategy of going beyond
binary oppositions. At this level of comparison, the major difference is that Jameson banks his
positive hermeneutics on this "new logic," whereas Derrida merely invokes "new reason" in his
rhetoric before returning to his negative antihermeneutical activity. Yet, from a Marxist
perspective, Jameson's basis for a positive hermeneutics is utopian in the bad sense, for it is a
utopianism that rests either on no specifiable historical forces potentially capable of actualizing
it or on the notion that every conceivable historical force embodies it. Jameson clearly favors
the latter formulation.
The preceding analysis entitles us to conclude that all class consciousness of whatever type is
Utopian insofar as it expresses the unity of a collectivity; yet it must be added that this
proposition is an allegorical one. The achieved collectivity or organic group of whatever kind-
oppressors fully as much as oppressed-is Utopian not in itself, but only insofar as all such
collectivities are themselves figures for the ultimate concrete collective life of an achieved
Utopian or classless society. Now we are in a better position to understand how even hegemonic
or ruling-class culture and ideology are Utopian, not in spite of their instrumental function to
secure and perpetuate class privilege and power, but rather precisely because that function is
also in and of itself the affirmation of collective solidarity. (PU, pp. 290-291)
This exorbitant claim illustrates not only utopianism gone mad, but also a Marxism in deep
desperation, as if any display of class solidarity keeps alive a dis credited class analysis. Even
more important, this claim, similar to the thin historicism and glib optimism of Bloom's
Emersonian gnosticism and Rorty's Emersonian pragmatism, reflects the extent to which Jameson
remains within the clutches of American culture. Given the barbarous atrocities and large-scale
horrors inflicted by hegemonic ruling classes in Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America, only a
Marxist thinker entrenched in the North American experience could even posit the possibility of
ruling-class consciousness figuratively being "in its very nature Utopian" (PU, p. 289).
Benjamin's tempered utopianism or Bloch's doctrine of hope certainly do not support such
Marxist flights of optimism or lead to such an American faith in the future.
Jameson's bad utopianism is but a symptom of the major political shortcoming of his work:
His texts have little or no political consequences. On the one hand, his works have little or no
political praxis as texts; that is, they speak, refer or allude to no political movement or formation
in process with which his texts have some connection.30 They thus remain academic Marxist
texts that, for the most part, are confined to specialists and antispecialists, Marxists and anti-
Marxists, in the academy. On the other hand, his works have little or no political praxis in yet


--- PAGE 223 ---
another sense: They provide little or no space for either highlighting issues of political praxis
within its theoretical framework or addressing modes of political praxis in its own academic
setting.81
Jameson's works are therefore too theoretical; his welcome call for a political hermeneutics
is too far removed from the heat of political battles. By their failure sufficiently to reflect, and
reflect on, the prevailing political strife, Jameson's works reenact the very process of reification
that they condemn. Surely, the present fragmentation of the North American Left, the
marginalization of progressive micropolitical formations and the rampant mystification of North
American life and culture impose severe constraints on Jameson's textual practice; nonetheless,
more substantive reflections on "practical"' political strategies seem appropriate. My plea here
is not anti-intellectual or antitheoretical, but rather a call for more sophisticated theory aware of
and rooted in the present historical and political conjuncture in American capitalist civilization.
Of course, Jameson's own social positioning-an American professor of French writing
Marxist hermeneutical works-solicits expectations of self-obsession, political isolation and
naive optimism. Yet Jameson's texts are not self-obsessed, though his style of elusive, elliptical
sentences (which appear more contrapuntal than dialectical) borders on a Frenchifying of
English prose. Jameson's texts are not isolated, monadic works, despite the consistent absence of
any acknowledgments to fellow critics or colleagues in his prefaces, yet they direct us to look at
France rather than at ourselves. Hence his critical treatments of Sartre, LeviStrauss, Althusser,
Lacan, Benichou, Deleuze, Guattari and Lyotard are nearly hermetic, and he is relatively silent
on distinguished American critics such as his former Yale colleague Paul de Man or noteworthy
historically minded critics like R. P. Blackmur, Philip Rahv or Irving Howe. Jameson is not a
naive optimist, but his sophisticated utopianism finally seems to be part and parcel of the
American penchant for unquenchable faith in history and irresistible hope for romantic triumph.
My main point here is not simply that Jameson should write less Frenchified, expand his
fascinating Marxist discourse to include talented American friends and foes and situate himself
more clearly within the American Marxist tradition. Rather, Jameson's own historical
predicament-his own conceptual tools, academic audience, utopian proclivities and political
praxis-should become more an object of his dialectical deliberations. Nevertheless, Jameson
has done more than any other American hermeneutical thinker in achieving intellectual
breakthroughs and accenting theoretical challenges of the Marxist tradition in our postmodern
times. The path he has helped blaze now awaits those, including himself, who will carry on with
the urgent tasks not simply of taking seriously history and politics, but, more specifically, of
taking seriously our intellectual, American and socialist identities as writers of texts, shapers of
attitudes, beneficiaries of imperialist fruits, inheritors of hegemonic sensibilities and historical
agents who envision a socialist future.
I would like to extend my gratitude to Jonathan Arac, Stanley Aronowitz, Paul Bove, Fredric
Jameson, David Langston, Michael Sprinker and Anders Stephanson for their incisive comments and
criticisms of an earlier version of this essay.
SOURCE: From Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America, by Cornel West, pp. 165-91, 302-
306. Copyright © 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc.


--- PAGE 224 ---



--- PAGE 225 ---
RACE AND SOCIAL THEORY
This is one of my initial attempts at a theoretical framework for explaining the complex
phenomena of racism. It maps existing theories, incorporates their insights, discards their
shortcomings and ends with my own genealogical materialist theory, one that confronts the
psychosexual dimension of race. I intend to develop this framework further in the future.
In this field of inquiry, sociological theory" has still to find its way, by a difficult effort of theoretical
clarification, through the Scylla of a reductionism which must deny almost everything in order to
explain something, and the Charybdis of a pluralism which is so mesmerized by "everything" that it
cannot explain anything. T those willing to labour on, the vocation remains an open one.
-STUART HALL
WE LIVE IN THE midst of a pervasive and profound crisis of North Atlantic civilization whose
symptoms include the threat of nuclear annihilation, extensive class inequality, brutal state
repression, subtle bureaucratic surveillance, widespread homophobia, technological abuse of
nature and rampant racism and patriarchy. In this essay, I shall focus on a small yet significant
aspect of this crisis: the specific forms of African American oppression. It is important to stress
that one can more fully understand this part only in light of the whole crisis, and that one's
conception of the whole crisis should be shaped by one's grasp of this part. In other words, the
time has passed when the so-called race question can be relegated to secondary or tertiary
theoretical significance. In fact, to take seriously the multileveled oppression of peoples of color
is to raise fundamental questions regarding the very conditions for the possibility of the modern
West, the diverse forms and styles of European rationality and the character of the prevailing
modern secular mythologies of nationalism, professionalism, scientism, consumerism and sexual
hedonism that guide everyday practices around the world.
My strategy in this essay will be as follows. First, I will examine briefly the major
conservative, liberal and left-liberal conceptions of African American oppression. Second, I
shall point out the distinctive strengths of adopting a refined Marxist methodology and analytical
perspective. I then will sketch four influential Marxist attempts to understand African American
oppression. Last, I shall argue that if we are to arrive at a more adequate conception of African
American oppression, we must build upon and go beyond the Marxist tradition with the help of
neoFreudian investigations (especially those of Otto Ranke, Ernest Becker and Joel Kovel) into
the modern Western forms of isolation and separation, as well as through poststructuralist
reflections (by Jacques Derrida, Paul de Man, Michel Foucault and Edward Said) on the role
and function of difference, otherness and marginality in contemporary philosophical discourse. I
will sketch such a genealogical materialist position.
CONSERVATIVE VIEWS o F AFRICAN AMERICAN OPPRESSION
We begin with conservative conceptions of African American oppression primarily because we
live in a country governed by those who accept many of these conceptions. Conservative


--- PAGE 226 ---
perspectives focus on two terrains: discrimination in the marketplace and judgments made in the
minds of people. It is no accident that conservatives tend to valorize neoclassical economics and
utilitarian psychology. The basic claim is that differential treatment of black people is motivated
by the "tastes" of white employers and/or white workers. Such "tastes," for instance, aversion to
black people, may indeed be bad and undesirable-that is, if it can be shown that such "tastes" are
based on faulty evidence, unconvincing arguments or irrational impulse. Yet it is possible that
such "tastes" may be rational choices made by white people owing to commitments to high
levels of productivity and efficiency in the economy, or due to evidence regarding the inferior
capacities and/or performances of blacks.
There are three basic versions of conservative views of African American oppression: the
market version, the sociobiologist version and the culturalist version. The market version-best
represented by Milton Friedman's classic Capitalism and Freedom (1962) and his student Gary
Becker's renowned The Economics of Discrimination (1957)-holds that it is not in the economic
interests of white employers and workers to oppose black employment opportunities. Friedman
and Becker claim that such racist behavior or "bad taste" flies in the face of or is an extraneous
factor mitigating against market rationality, that is, the maximizing of profits. In this way, both
understand "racist tastes" as the irrational choice of white employers and workers that sidetracks
market rationality in determining the best economic outcomes. The practical policy that results
from this market perspective is to educate and persuade white employers and workers to be
more rational or attuned to their own self-interests. The underlying assumption here is that
"pure" market mechanisms (as opposed to government intervention) will undermine "racist
tastes." Another basic presupposition here is that market rationality, along with undermining
"racist tastes," is in the interest of white employers and white workers and black people.
The sociobiologist version-put forward by Arthur Jensen (Harvard Educational Review,
Winter 1969) and Richard Hernstein (Atlantic Monthly, September 1971)suggests that prevailing
evidence leads to the conclusion that blacks are, in some sense, genetically inferior. Blacks'
IQperformance, which allegedly "measures" intelligence, that is, the capacity for acquiring
knowledge and solving problems, is such that the "racist tastes" of white employers and workers
may be justified-not on the basis of aversion to blacks, but due to group performance attainment.
Unlike Friedman and Becker, Jensen and Hernstein consider the "racist tastes" of white
employers and workers as rational choices made on "scientific" grounds. In this way, African
American oppression is not a changeable and eradicable phenomenon, but rather part of "the
natural order of things."
Last, the culturalist version-as seen in Edward Banfield's The Unheavenly City (1965) and
Thomas Sowell's Race and Economics (1975)-holds that the "racist tastes" of white employers
and workers can be justified on cultural rather than biological grounds. They argue that the
character and content of African American culture inhibits black people from competing with
other people in American society, be it in education, the labor force or business. For Banfield
and Sowell, the necessary cultural requisites for success-habits of hard work, patience, deferred
gratification and persistence-are underdeveloped among African Americans. Therefore African
American oppression will be overcome only when these habits become more widely adopted by
black people.


--- PAGE 227 ---
Although these three versions of conservative views of African American oppression differ
among themselves, they all share certain common assumptions. First, they view market
rationality (or marginal productivity calculations) as the sole standard for understanding the
actions of white employers and workers. Second, this market rationality presupposes an
unarticulated Benthamite felicific calculus or Hobbesian psychological egoistic model that holds
self-interest to be the dominant motivation of human action. Third, this calculus or model is
linked to a neoclassical economic perspective that focuses principally upon individuals and
market mechanisms, with little concern about the institutional structure and power relations of
the market and limited attention to social and historical structures, for instance, slavery, state
repression and second-class citizenship. Last, all agree that government intervention into the
marketplace to enhance the opportunities of African Americans does more harm than good.
LIBERAL VIEWS OF AFRICAN AMERICAN OPPRESSION
Liberal conceptions of African American oppression are under severe intellectual and political
assault, yet they remain inscribed within our laws and are still, in some ways, observed. It is
crucial to acknowledge that liberal viewpoints adopt the same neoclassical economic
perspective and egoistic model as those of conservatives. Yet unlike conservatives, liberals
highlight racist institutional barriers that result from the "racist tastes" of white employers and
workers. Liberals reject mere persuasion to change these "tastes" and attack genetic inferiority
claims as unwarranted and arbitrary. Liberals focus on two domains: racist institutional barriers
in the marketplace and inhibiting impediments in African American culture. Those liberals who
stress the former can be dubbed "market liberals," and those who emphasize the latter,
"culturalist liberals." Market liberals, such as Gunnar Myrdal and Paul Samuelson, claim that
African American oppression can be alleviated if the state intervenes into racist structures of
employment practices and thereby ensures, coercively if necessary, that fair criteria are utilized
in hiring and firing black people. Of course, what constitutes "fair criteria" can range from race-
free standards to race-conscious ones. Furthermore, culturalist liberals like Thomas Pettigrew
hold that government programs should be established to prepare people, especially blacks, for
jobs. These programs can range from educational efforts such as Head Start to direct training
and hiring to the now defunct Job Corps projects. School integration efforts going back to the
gallant struggles of the NAACP decades ago are part of this culturalist liberal position. In fact, it
is fair to say that the vast majority of black public officials are culturalist and/or market liberals.
As I noted earlier, both conservatives and liberals subscribe to market rationality as the
primary standard for understanding and alleviating African American oppression. Both groups
assume that "rough justice" between blacks and white Americans can be achieved if black
productivity is given its rightful due, namely, if there is close parity in black and white incomes.
At the level of public policy, the important difference is that liberals believe this "rough justice"
cannot be achieved without state intervention to erase racist institutional barriers, especially in
employment and education.
LEFT-LIBERAL VIEWS OF AFRICAN AMERICAN OPPRESSION
It is important that we do not confuse left liberals with liberals just as we should not confuse
conservatives with neoconservatives (the latter tend to be market liberals and culturalist


--- PAGE 228 ---
conservatives). This is so because left liberals have what most liberals and conservatives lack:
a sense of'history. This historical consciousness of left liberals makes them suspicious of
abstract neoclassical economic perspectives and sensitive to the role of complex political
struggles in determining the predominant economic perspective of the day. In other words, left
liberals recognize that classical economic views shifted to neoclassical ones (from Adam Smith
and David Ricardo to Alfred Marshall and Stanley Jevons) not only because better arguments
emerged, but also because those arguments were about changing realities of nineteenth-century
industrial capitalism and inseparable from clashing political groups in the midst of these
changing realities. Similarly the versions of market liberalism associated with Franklin
Roosevelt in regard to state-economy relations and John Kennedy in regard to state-economy-
race relations were transformations of neoclassicism in the face of the Depression, the rise of
organized labor and the struggles of Southern blacks under evolving capitalist conditions. Left
liberals understand African American oppression as an ever changing historical phenomenon
and a present reality. They locate the "racist tastes" of white employers and workers and the
racist institutional barriers of American society within the historical contexts of over two
hundred years of slavery and subsequent decades of Jim Crow laws, peonage, tenancy, lynchings
and second-class citizenship. It is no surprise that left liberals remain in dialogue with Marxist
thinkers and, in many cases, are deeply influenced by sophisticated forms of Marxist historical
and social analysis.
Left liberals, such as William Julius Wilson (The Declining Significance of Race, 1978) and
Martin Kilson (Neither Insiders nor Outsiders, forthcoming), who think seriously about African
American oppression are usually Weberians or followers of contemporary Weberians like
Talcott Parsons and Robert Merton. The major theoretical models they adopt and apply are not
those of neoclassical economics, but rather structural-functionalist sociology. This difference is
not as broad as it may seem, but the historical orientation of left liberals radically separates
them from most liberals and conservatives. In fact, this sense of history constitutes a kind of
"crossing of the Rubicon" by left liberals. After such a crossing there can be no return to
ahistorical conceptions of African American oppression.
Left liberals tend to be a rather eclectic lot who borrow insights from conservatives (for
instance, a stress on black self-reliance and the need to acquire efficacious habits for black
upward social mobility) and from liberals (for instance, the necessity for government action to
regulate employment practices and enhance African American cultural deprivation). They
acknowledge the crucial structural social constraints upon African Americans and, like Weber,
conceptualize these constraints in terms of groups competing for prestige, status and power over
scarce economic resources. For left liberals, strata and social position supersede class location,
and financial remunerations at the workplace, that is, income, serves as the basic measure of
societal well-being. The major index of African American oppression for left liberals is that
black incomes remain slightly less than 60 percent of white incomes in the United States. The
public policies they support to alleviate African American oppression focus upon full
employment, public works programs and certain forms of affirmative action.
MARXIST VIEWS OF AFRICAN AMERICAN OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 229 ---
We come now to Marxist conceptions of African American oppression. And one may ask, given
the conservative tenor of the times, why Marxist theory at all? Is not Marxism an outdated and
antiquated tradition that: (1) has tragically produced widespread unfreedom in the Communist
East; (2) utterly failed to attract the working classes in the capitalist West; (3) primarily served
the purposes of anticolonial mythologies in the Third World that mask the butchery of present-
day national bourgeoisies in parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America; and (4) is presently
overwhelmed by information, communication and technological revolutions as well as nonclass-
based movements like feminism, gay and lesbian rights, ecology and the various movements
among people of color in the First World? These questions are serious indeed, and must be
confronted by anyone who wishes to defend the continuing vitality and utility of the Marxist
tradition.
I shall begin by making some basic distinctions between Marxist thought as a monocausal,
unilinear philosophy of history that accurately predicts historical outcomes; Marxism as it is
exemplified in diverse "actually existing" Communist regimes in the Soviet Union, China, Cuba,
Poland and so forth; and Marxist theory as a methodological orientation toward the
understanding of social and historical realities. Needless to say, I readily reject Marxist thought
as a monocausal, unilinear, predictive science of history or a homogeneous, teleological
narrative of past and present events. Such infantile Marxism has been subjected to persuasive
criticism by Karl Popper, John Plamenatz, John Dewey and Raymond Aron from outside the
Marxist tradition, and by members of the Frankfurt School (Adorno, Horkheimer, Marcuse),
Raymond Williams and Antonio Gramsci from within. I also reject, although not without
sympathy for, the undemocratic regimes that regiment and dominate their peoples in the name of
Marxism. As a democratic and libertarian socialist, I find these regimes morally repugnant, yet I
wish to stress that detailed historical analysis of why they evolved as they have is required if we
are to grasp their tragic predicament. Such analysis does not excuse the atrocities committed, yet
it does give us a realistic sense of what these regimes have been up against.
Despite rejecting Marxist thought as a philosophy of history and Marxism as it has appeared
in diverse "actually existing" Communist regimes, I hold that Marxist theory as a methodological
orientation remains indispensable-although ultimately inadequate-in grasping distinctive features
of African American oppression. As a methodological orientation, Marxist theory requires that
we begin from two starting points.
First, the principle of historical specificity impels us to examine the various conditions under
which African American oppression emerged, the ever-changing structural constraints under
which African Americans have accommodated and resisted multiple forms of oppression, and
the crucial conjunctural opportunities (for instance, those in the 1870s, 1920s and 1960s) that
African Americans have either missed or seized. This historicizing approach entails that we
highlight economic, political, cultural and psychosexual conflicts over resources, power,
images, language and identities between black and other people as among black people
themselves.
The second starting point for Marxist theory is the Principle of the materiality of structured
social practices over time and space. This principle maintains that extradiscursive formations


--- PAGE 230 ---
such as modes of production, state apparatuses and bureaucracies, and discursive operations
such as religions, philosophies, art objects and laws not only shape social actions of individuals
and groups, but possess historical potency and effectivity in relation to, but not reducible to,
each other. Marxist theory is materialist and historical to the degree that it attempts to understand
and explain forms of oppression in terms of the complex relation of extradiscursive formations
to discursive operations. Classical Marxists view this relation in terms of a more or less
determining base and a more or less determined superstructure, whereas neoMarxists understand
this relation as (in Raymond Williams's famous phrase) "the mutual setting of limits and exerting
of pressures." The explanatory power of Marxist theory resides precisely in the specifying of the
complex relation of base and superstructure, limits and pressures, extradiscursive formations
and discursive operations, that is, in establishing with precision the nature of determination. This
problem remains unresolved in the Marxist tradition, while the most impressive efforts remain
those enacted in the best of Marx's own textual practices.
Marx's own effort to account for determination highlights the multileveled interplay between
historically situated subjects who act and materially grounded structures that circumscribe, that
is, enable and constrain, such action. This human action constitutes structured social practices
that are reducible neither to context-free discrete acts of individuals nor to objective structures
unaffected by human agency. The dialectical character of Marxist theory resides precisely in the
methodological effort to view the interplay of subject and structure in terms of dynamic social
practices during a particular time and in a specific space. The aim of Marxist theory is to view
each historical moment as a multidimensional transaction between subjects shaped by antecedent
structures and traditions and prevailing structures and traditions transformed by struggling
subjects. As Perry Anderson has recently put it, Marxism is "the search for subjective agencies
capable of effective strategies for the dislodgement of objective structures."
Each evolving society then becomes-as an object of investigation-a "complex articulated
totality" produced by social practices (including those that constitute the investigation itself) shot
through with relations of domination and conflict in an overdetermined economic sphere and
relatively autonomous political, cultural, theological and psychic spheres. By "complex
articulated totality" I mean that the specific conflicts on the various levels of society are linked
to one another, while the specificity of one level is neither identical with nor reducible to a
mirror image of the specificity of another level. Yet the articulation of these specific conflicts
within and across the various spheres constitutes a "totality" because the relations of these
conflicts are not arbitrary or capricious, as Marxist theorists attempt to show. These accounts or
explanations privilege the economic sphere without viewing the other spheres as mere
expressions of the economic. In other words, Marxist theory claims that social and historical
explanation must view, in some discernible manner, the economic sphere as the major
determining factor in accounting for the internal dynamics (or synchronicity) and historical
change (or di- achronicity) of human (and especially capitalist) societies. It should be apparent
that Marxist conceptions of African American oppression reject the "bad tastes" starting point of
conservatives, the "racist institutional barriers" starting point of liberals and the Weberian
views about the economic sphere of left liberals, that is, the stress on strata and status.
Nonetheless, there remains considerable controversy among Marxist theorists about how to
construe the economic sphere, whether as a mode of production, as merely the forces of


--- PAGE 231 ---
production, or as primarily a mode of surplus extraction or form of appropriation of surplus
value. Consensus has been reached only insofar as all hold that the economic sphere is
constituted by conflict-ridden classes characterized by their relation (ownership, effective
control or lack thereof) to the means of production.
Unfortunately-and largely due to the European character of Marxist scholarship on race-there
exists a paucity of sophisticated Marxist treatments of racially structured societies. Outside the
historical work of W. E. B. Du Bois, the grand efforts of Oliver Cox and C. L. R. James, and the
pioneering recent writings of Eugene Genovese, Stuart Hall, Cedric Robinson and Orlando
Patterson, the richness of the Marxist methodological orientation and analytical perspective in
relation to race remains untapped. Instead, Marxist theorists of African American oppression
have put forward rather bland and glib views. For example, class reductionicts have simply
subsumed African American oppression under class exploitation and viewed complex racist
practices as merely conscious profiteeringor a divide-and-conquer strategy-on behalf of
capitalists. Although this view captures a practical truth about racist employers' practices during
a particular period in racially fractured capitalist societies, it inhibits more thorough theoretical
investigation into other crucial aspects, features and functions of racist practices. Furthermore, it
tacitly assumes that racism is rooted in the rise of modern capitalism. Yet it can be easily shown
that although racist practices were appropriated and promoted in various ways by modern
capitalist processes, racism predates capitalism. Racism seems to have its roots in the early
encounter between the civilizations of Europe, Africa and Asia, encounters that occurred long
before the rise of modern capitalism. The very category of "race"-denoting primarily skin color-
was first employed as a means of classifying human bodies by Francois Bernier, a French
physician, in 1684. The first substantial racial division of humankind is found in the influential
Natural System (1735) of the preeminent naturalist of the eighteenth century, Carolus Linnaeus.
Yet both instances reveal racist practices-in that both degrade and devalue non-Europeans-at the
level of intellectual codification. Xenophobic folktales and mythologies, racist legends and
stories-such as authoritative church fathers' commentaries on the Song of Solomon and the
Ywain narratives in medieval Brittany-were operating in the everyday lives of ordinary folk
long before the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In fact, Christian anti-Semitism and
European antiblackism were rampant throughout the Middle Ages. In short, the class reductionist
viewpoint rests upon shaky theoretical and historical grounds.
The other simplistic Marxist conceptions of African American oppression are those of the
class super-exploitationist perspective and the class nationalist view. The former holds that
African Americans are subjected to general working-class exploitation and specific class
exploitation owing to racially differential wages received and/or to the relegation of black
people to the secondary sector of the labor force. Again the claim is that this is a conscious
divide-and-conquer strategy of employers to fan and fuel racial antagonisms between black and
white workers and to "bribe" white workers at the expense of lower wages for black workers.
Again, this perspective contains a practical truth about the aims of white employers during a
particular period of particular capitalist societies, yet the "bribe" thesis is a weak reed upon
which to hang an account of the many levels on which racism works. More important, this
position still views race solely in economic and class terms.


--- PAGE 232 ---
The class nationalist viewpoint is the most influential, widely accepted and hence
unquestioned among practicing black Marxists. It understands African American oppression in
terms of class exploitation and national domination. The basic claim is that African Americans
constitute or once constituted an oppressed nation in the Southern Black Belt and, much like
Puerto Ricans, form an oppressed national minority within American society. There are
numerous versions of this so-called Black Nation thesis. Its classical version was put forward in
the Sixth Congress of the Third International in 1928, slightly modified in its 1930 resolution and
codified in Harry Haywood's Negro Liberation (1948). Subsequent versions abound on the
sectarian black Left-from Nelson Peery's The Negro Rational Colonial Question (1978), James
Forman's Self-Determination and the African-American People (1981) to Amiri Baraka's
formulations in his journal, The Black Nation. More refined conceptions of the class nationalist
view were put forward in the form of an internal colony thesis by Harold Cruse in The Crisis of
the Negro Intellectual (1967) and Robert Allen in Black Awakening in Capitalist America
(1969); yet even in these two seminal texts of the 1960s the notion of African America as an
internal colony remains a mere metaphor without serious analytical content. Ironically, the most
provocative and persistent proponent of a class nationalist perspective is Maulana Karenga,
who arrived at his own self-styled position that infuses a socialist analytical component within
his cultural nationalism. His Essays in Strzile (1978) and Kawaida Theory (1981) stand
shoulders above much of the theoretical reflections on African Americans' oppression proposed
by the black Marxist Left.
On the practical level, the class nationalist perspective has promoted and encouraged
impressive struggles against racism in the United States. But with its ahistorical racial definition
of a nation, its flaccid statistical determination of national boundaries and its illusory distinct
black economy, the Black Nation thesis serves as a misguided attempt by Marxist-Leninists to
repudiate the class reductionist and class super-exploitationist views of African American
oppression. In short, it functions as a poor excuse for the absence of a viable Marxist theory of
the specificity of African American oppression.
Such a theory is, however, in the making. The recent efforts of Howard Winant and Michael
Omi to develop a class racialist position contribute to such a theory. As I noted earlier, the
pioneering work of Eugene Genovese, Stuart Hall and Orlando Patterson is also quite promising
in this regard. The Marxist conception of racially structured capitalist societies as "complex
articulated totalities," buttressed by flexible historical materialist analysis, looms large in their
work. Genovese is deeply influenced by Gramsci's nuanced conception of hegemony; Hall, by
Althusser and Gramsci's notion of articulation; and Patterson by Marx's own concept of
domination, by a homespun existentialism and by recent studies of Rytina and Morgan in
demography. A distinctive feature of these class racialist (or class ethnic) views is that they
eschew any form of reductionism, economism and a pri- orism in Marxist theory. Furthermore,
they attempt to give historically concrete and sociologically specific Marxist accounts of the
racial aspects of particular societies. This means that they accent the different forms of racial
domination and reject racism as a universal and unitary transhistorical phenomenon, for instance,
as a prejudicial proclivity of individual psychology or race instinct.
In this way, recent forms of Marxist theory demystify the conservative idea of "bad tastes" by


--- PAGE 233 ---
historically situating the emergence of these "tastes" as socially pertinent, functional and potent;
they structurally circumscribe the liberal notion of "racist institutional barriers" by viewing such
mechanisms within the operations of racially fractured and fractionated capitalist modes of
production; and they contest the Weberian assumptions of left liberals by linking struggles for
prestige and status to changing class conflicts and by stressing people's empowerment
(participation in decision-making processes) rather than mere increased financial remuneration
at the workplace (higher incomes). In stark contrast to vulgar Marxist views, this body of
Marxist theory holds racism to be neither a mere con spiracy or ideological trick from above,
nor a divide-and-conquer strategy of capitalists, but rather a complex cluster of structured social
practices that shape class relations and create a crucial dimension in the lives of individuals
throughout capitalist societies. The linchpin in this refined Marxist view is that the economic
sphere is the ultimate determining explanatory factor for grasping the role and function of racism
in modern societies. My own somewhat hesitant rejection of this linchpin leads me to build
upon, yet go beyond, this last incarnation of Marxist theory.
TOWARD A GENEALOGICAL MATERIALIST ANALYSIS
In this last section, I shall set forth a schematic outline of a new conception of African American
oppression that tries to bring together the best of recent Marxist theory and the invaluable
insights of neo-Freudians (Ranke, Becker, and Kovel) about the changing forms of immortality
quests and perceptions of dirt and death in the modern West, along with the formulations of the
poststructuralists (Derrida, de Man, Foucault, Said) on the role of difference, otherness and
marginality in discursive operations and extradiscursive formations.
My perspective can be characterized as a genealogical materialist analysis, that is, an analysis
that replaces Marxist conceptions of history with Nietzschean notions of genealogy, yet
preserves the materiality of multifaceted structured social practices. My understanding of
genealogy derives neither from mere deconstructions of the duplicitous and deceptive character
of rhetorical strategies of logocentric discourses, nor from simple investigations into the
operations of power of such discourses. Unlike Derrida and de Man, genealogical materialism
does not rest content with a horizon of language. In contrast to Foucault and Said, I take the
challenge of historical materialism with great seriousness. The aspects of Nietzsche that interest
me are neither his perennial playfulness nor his vague notions of power. What I find seductive
and persuasive about Nietzsche is his deep historical consciousness, a consciousness so deep
that he must reject prevailing ideas of history in the name of genealogy. It seems to me that in
these postmodern times, the principles of historical specificity and the materiality of structured
social practices-the very founding principles of Marx's own discourse-now require us to be
genealogical materialists. We must become more radically historical than is envisioned by the
Marxist tradition. By becoming more "radically historical" I mean confronting more candidly the
myriad effects and consequences (intended and unintended, conscious and unconscious) of
power-laden and conflict-ridden social practices-for instance, the complex confluence of human
bodies, traditions and institutions. This candor takes the form of a more theoretical open-
endedness and analytical dexterity than Marxist notions of history permit-without ruling out
Marxist explanations a priori.


--- PAGE 234 ---
Furthermore, a genealogical materialist conception of social practices should be more
materialist than that of the Marxist tradition, to the extent that the privileged material mode of
production is not necessarily located in the economic sphere. Instead, decisive material modes
of production at a given moment may be located in the cultural, political or even the psychic
sphere. Since these spheres are interlocked and interlinked, each always has some weight in an
adequate social and historical explanation. My view neither promotes a post-Marxist idealism
(for it locates acceptable genealogical accounts in material social practices), nor supports an
explanatory nihilism (in that it posits some contingent yet weighted set of material social
practices as decisive factors to explain a given genealogical configuration, that is, set of events).
More pointedly, my position appropriates the implicit pragmatism of Nietzsche for the purposes
of a deeper, and less dogmatic, historical materialist analysis. In this regard, the genealogical
materialist view is both continuous and discontinuous with the Marxist tradition. One cannot be
a genealogical materialist without (taking seriously) the Marxist tradition, yet allegiance to the
methodological principles of the Marxist tradition forces one to be a genealogical materialist.
Marxist theory still may provide the best explanatory account for certain phenomena, but it also
may remain inadequate to account for other phenomena-notably here, the complex phenomenon
of racism in the modern West.
My basic disagreement with Marxist theory is twofold. First, I hold that many social
practices, such as racism, are best understood and explained not only or primarily by locating
them within modes of production, but also by situating them within the cultural traditions of
civilizations. This permits us to highlight the specificity of those practices that traverse or cut
across different modes of production, for example, racism, religion, patriarchy, homophobia.
Focusing on racist practices or white-supremacist logics operative in premodern, modern and
postmodern Western civilization yields both racial continuity and discontinuity. Even Marxist
theory can be shown to be both critical of and captive to a Eurocentrism that can justify racist
practices. And though Marxist theory remains indispensable, it also obscures and hides the ways
in which secular ideologies-especially modern ideologies of scientism, racism and sexual
hedonism (Marxist theory does much better with nationalism, professionalism and consumerism)
-are linked to larger civilizational ways of life and struggle.
Second, I claim that the Marxist obsession with the economic sphere as the major explanatory
factor is itself a reflection of the emergence of Marxist discourse in the midst of an industrial
capitalism preoccupied with economic production; and, more important, this Marxist obsession
is itself a symptom of a particular Western version of the will to truth and style of rationality that
valorizes control, mastery and domination of nature and history. I neither fully reject this will to
truth, nor downplay the crucial role of the economic sphere in social and historical explanation.
But one is constrained to acknowledge the methodological point about the degree to which
Marxist theory remains inscribed within the very problematic of the unfreedom and domination it
attempts to overcome.
Genealogical materialist analysis of racism consists of three methodological moments that
serve as guides for detailed historical and social analyses:
1. A genealogical inquiry into the discursive and extradiscursive conditions for the possibility of


--- PAGE 235 ---
racist practices, that is, a radically historical investigation into the emergence, development and
sustenance of white-supremacist logics operative in various epochs in the modern Western
(Eastern or African) civilization.
2. A micro institutional (or localized) analysis of the mechanisms that promote and contest these
logics in the everyday lives of people, including the ways in which self-images and self-
identities are shaped and the impact of alien, degrading cultural styles, aesthetic ideals,
psychosexual sensibilities and linguistic gestures upon peoples of color.
3. A macrostructural approach that accents modes of overdetermined class exploitation, state
repression and bureaucratic domination, including resistance against these modes, in the lives of
peoples of color.
The first moment would, for example, attempt to locate racist discourses within the larger
Western conceptions of death and dirt, that is, in the predominant ways in which Western
peoples have come to terms with their fears of "extinction with insignificance," of existential
alienation, isolation and separation in the face of the inevitable end of which they are conscious.
This moment would examine how these peoples have conceptualized and mythologized their
sentiments of impurity at the visual, tactile, auditory and, most important, olfactory levels of
experience and social practice.
Three white-supremacist logics-the battery of concepts, tropes and metaphors constituting
discourses that degrade and devalue people of color-operative in the modern West may shed
some light on these issues. The Judeo-Christian racist logic, which emanates from the biblical
account of Ham looking upon and failing to cover his father Noah's nakedness, thereby
provoking divine punishment in the form of blackening his progeny, links racist practices to
notions of disrespect for and rejection of authority, to ideas of unruly behavior and chaotic
rebellion. The "scientific" raci t logic, which promotes the observing, measuring, ordering and
comparing of visible physical characteristics of human bodies in light of Greco-Roman aesthetic
standards, associates racist practices with bodily ugliness, cultural deficiency and intellectual
inferiority. And the psychosexual racist logic endows black people with sexual prowess, views
them as either cruel, revengeful fathers, frivolous, carefree children or passive, long-suffering
mothers. This logic-rooted in Western sexual discourses about feces and odious smells-relates
racist practices to bodily defecation, violation and subordination, thereby relegating black
people to walking abstractions, lustful creatures or invisible objects. All three white-
supremacist logics view black people, like death and dirt, as Other and Alien.
An important task of genealogical inquiry is to disclose in historically concrete and
sociologically specific ways the discursive operations that view Africans as excluded, marginal
and other and to reveal how racist logics are guided (or contested) by various hegemonic
Western philosophies of identity and universality that suppress difference, heterogeneity and
diversity. Otto Ranke and Ernest Becker would play an interesting role here, since their
conception of societies as codified hero-systems or as symbolic-action systems that produce,
distribute and circulate statuses and customs in order to cope with human fears of death or
extreme otherness may cast light on modern Western racist practices. For example, with the
lessening of religious influence in the modem West, human immortality quests were channeled


--- PAGE 236 ---
into secular ideologies of science, art, nation, profession, race, sexuality and consumption. The
deep human desire for existential belonging and for self-esteem-what I call the need for and
consumption of existential capital-results in a profound, even gut-level, commitment to some of
the illusions of the present epoch. None of us escapes. And many Western peoples get much
existential capital from racist illusions, from ideologies of race. The growing presence of
Caribbean and Indian peoples in Britain, Africans in Russia, Arabs in France and black soldiers
in Germany is producing escalating black/white hatred, sexual jealousy and intraclass
antagonisms. This suggests that the means of acquiring existential capital from ideologies of race
is in no way peculiar to the two exemplary racist Western countries, the United States and South
Africa. It also reminds us that racist perceptions and practices are deeply rooted in Western
cultures and become readily potent in periods of crisis, be that crisis cultural, political or
economic.
The second moment, the microinstitutional or localized analysis, examines the elaboration of
white-supremacist logics within the everyday lives of people. Noteworthy here is the conflict-
ridden process of identity formation and self-image production by peoples of color. The work of
Goffman and Garfinkel on role-playing and self-masking, the insights of Althusser, Kristeva and
Foucault on the contradictions shot through the process of turning individual bodies into
ideological subjects (for instance, "colored," "Negro," "black" subjects) and the painful struggle
of accepting and rejecting internalized negative and disenabling self-conceptions (for instance,
pervasive lack of self-confidence in certain activities, deep insecurities regarding one's
capacities) among people of color, as highlighted in Memmi and Fanon, are quite useful to this
analysis.
The third (and last) moment, the macrostructural analysis, deepens the histori cal materialist
analyses of Genovese, Hall and Patterson, with the proviso that the economic sphere may, in
certain cases, not be the ultimate factor in explaining racist practices. As I noted earlier, there is
little doubt that it remains a crucial factor in every case.
SOURCE: From Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America, by Cornel West, pp. 251-270.
Copyright 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc.


--- PAGE 237 ---



--- PAGE 238 ---
T H E ROLE O F LAW I N P R O G R E S S I V E 
POLITICS
This essay was published in David Kairys c best-seller The Politics of Law, which is used in
law schools and classes around the country. It provides a historical perspective on the role of
law in progressive politics and concrete advice for lawyers interested in progressive social
change. It is one of the most requested essays in my corpus.
WHAT IS THE ROLE and function of the law in contemporary progressive politics? Are legal
institutions crucial terrain on which sigtuficant social change can take place? If so, how? In
which way? What are progressive lawyers to do if they are to remain relatively true to their
moral convictions and political goals?
In this chapter I shall attempt to respond to these urgent questions. This response will try to
carve out a vital democratic left space between the Scylla of upbeat liberalism, which harbors
excessive hopes for the law, and the Charybdis of downbeat leftism, which promotes exorbitant
doubts about the law. My argument rests upon three basic claims. First, the fundamental forms of
social misery in American society can be neither adequately addressed nor substantially
transformed within the context of existing legal apparatuses. Yet serious and committed work
within this circumscribed context remains indispensable if progressive politics is to have any
future at all. Second, this crucial work cannot but be primarily defensive unless significant
extraparliamentary social motion or movements bring power and pressure to bear on the
prevailing status quo. Such social motion and movements presuppose either grassroots citizen
participation in credible progressive projects or rebellious acts of desperation that threaten the
social order. Third, the difficult task of progressive legal practitioners is to link their defensive
work within the legal system to possible social motion and movements that attempt to transform
American society fundamentally.
Any argument regarding the role of law in progressive politics must begin with two sobering
historical facts about the American past and present. First, American society is
disproportionately shaped by the outlooks, interests and aims of the business community-
especially that of big business. The sheer power of corporate capital is extraordinary. This
power makes it difficult even to imagine what a free and democratic society would look like (or
how it would operate) if there were publicly accountable mechanisms that alleviated the vast
disparities in resources, wealth and income owing in part to the vast influence of big business on
the U.S. government and its legal institutions. This is why those who focus on forms of social
misery-such as the ill-fed, ill-clad and i11-housed-must think in epochal, not apocalyptic, terms.
The second brute fact about the American past and present is that this society is a chronically
racist, sexist, homophobic and jingoistic one. The complex and tortuous quest for American
identity from 1776 to our own time has produced a culture in which people define themselves
physically, socially, sexually and politically in terms of race, gender, sexual orientation and
"anti-American" activities. One unique feature of the country among other modern nations-with
the embarrassing exceptions of South Africa and Hitler's Germany-is that race has served as the
linchpin in regulating this national quest for identity. A detailed genealogy of American legal


--- PAGE 239 ---
discourse about citizenship and rights, as initiated by the late Robert Cover of Yale, bears out
this inescapable reality. The historical articulation of the experiential weight of African slavery
and Jim Crowism to forms of U.S. patriarchy, homophobia and anti-American (usually
Communist and socialist) repression or surveillance yields a profoundly conservative culture.
The irony of this cultural conservatism is that it tries to preserve a highly dynamic corporate-
driven economy, a stable election-centered democracy and a precious liberties-guarding rule of
law. This irony constitutes the distinctive hybridity of American liberalism (in its classical and
revisionist versions) and the debilitating dilemma of American radicalism (in its movements for
racial, class and sexual equality). In other words, American liberalism diffuses the claims of
American radicals by pointing to long-standing democratic and libertarian practices, despite
historic racist, sexist, class and homophobic constraints. Hence, any feasible American
radicalism seems to be but an extension of American liberalism. Needless to say, the sacred
cow of American liberalism-namely, economic growth achieved by corporate priorities-is
neither examined nor interrogated. And those that do are relegated to the margins of the political
culture.
My first claim rests upon the assumption that the extension of American liberalism in response
to movements for racial, class and sexual equality is desirable yet insufficient. This is so
because the extension of American liberalism leaves relatively untouched the fundamental
reality that undergirds the forms of social misery: the maldistribution of resources, wealth and
power in American society. Yet the extension of American liberalism in regard to race, labor,
women, gays, lesbians and nature appears radical on the American ideological spectrum
principally because it goes against the deeply entrenched cultural conservatism in the country. In
fact, this extension-as seen, for example, in the 1930s and 1960stakes place by means of
insurgent social motion and movements convincing political and legal elites to enact legislation
or judicial decrees over the majority of the population. In short, the very extension of American
liberalism has hardly ever been popular among the masses of American people primarily owing
to a pervasive cultural conservatism.
The law has played a crucial role in those periods in which liberalism has been extended
precisely because of the power of judicial review and an elected body of officials responding to
social movements-not because cultural conservatism has been significantly weeded out. The
effects of these laws and policies over time have attenuated some of the more crude and overt
expressions of cultural conservatism, yet the more subtle expressions permeate the culture. The
existing legal apparatuses cannot adequately address or substantially transform the plight of the
racially and sexually skewed ill-fed, ill-clad or ill-housed not only because of the marginalizing
of perspectives that highlight the need for a redistribution of resources, wealth and power, but
also because of the perception that the extension of American liberalism is the most radical
option feasible within American political culture.
Is this perception true? Is it the case that all workable radical alternatives must presuppose
economic growth achieved by corporate priorities? These questions are especially acute given
the collapse of social Keynesianism in the mid-1970sthat "magic" Fordist formula of mass
production undergirded by mass consumption alongside government provisions to those with no


--- PAGE 240 ---
access to resources, which sustained economic growth in the postwar period. The conservative
project of supply-side economics and military Keynesianism of the 1980s yielded not simply a
larger gap between the haves and have-nots, but also a debt-financed public sphere and a more
corporate-dominated economy-all in the name of "free enterprise."
If the extension of American liberalism is the only feasible radical option within American
political culture, then the defensive role of progressive lawyers becomes even more important.
Their work constitutes one of the few buffers against cultural conservatism, which recasts the
law more in its own racist, sexist, antilabor and homophobic image. Furthermore, the work
within the existing legal system helps keep alive a memory of the social traces left by past
progressive movements of resistance, a memory requisite for future movements. This defensive
work, though possibly radical in intent, is liberal practice in that it proceeds from within the
legal system in order to preserve the effects of former victories threatened by the conservative
offensive. Yet this same defensive work has tremendous radical potential, especially within the
context of vital oppositional activity against the status quo. This is why the distinction between
liberal and radical legal practice is not sharp and rigid; rather, it is fluid and contingent due to
the ever changing larger social situation. Needless to say, the crucial role of this kind of legal
practice-be it to defend the rights of activists, secure permits to march or dramatize an injustice
with a class suit-is indispensable for progressive politics. Yet in "cold" moments in American
society-when cultural conservatism and big business fuse with power and potency-radical
lawyers have little option other than defensive work. This work is often demoralizing, yet it
serves as an important link to past victories and a basis for the next wave of radical action.
In our present period, radical legal practice takes two main forms: theoretical critiques of
liberal paradigms in the academy that foster subcultures of radical students and professors or
participation in radical organizations that engage in extraparliamentary social motion. It is no
accident that the first form consists of a pedagogical reform movement within elite institutions of
the legal academy. This critical legal studies (CLS) movement is symptomatic of a pessimism
regarding feasible radical options in American political culture and a distance between radical
legal critiques and radical legal action vis-a-vis the courts. This sense of political impotence
and gulf between radical professors of law and radical lawyers results not because CLS consists
of insular bourgeois theorists with little grasp of political reality. In fact, their understanding of
this reality is often acute. Yet some of the CLS trashing of liberalism at the level of theory spills
over to liberal legal practice. This spillover is myopic, for it trashes the only feasible
progressive practice for radical lawyers vis-a-vis the courts. This myopia becomes downright
dangerous and irresponsible when aimed at civil rights lawyers for whom the very effort to
extend American liberalism may lead to injury or death in conservative America.
Is there any way out of this impasse? Can progressive legal practice be more than defensive?
My second claim holds that there are but two ways out. In situations of sparse resources along
with degraded self-images and depoliticized sensibilities, one avenue for poor people is
existential rebellion and anarchic expression. The capacity to produce social chaos is the last
resort of desperate people. It results from a tragic quest for recognition and survival. The civic
terrorism that haunts our city streets and the criminality that frightens us is, in part, poor people's
response to political neglect and social invisibility. Like most behavior in American society, it


--- PAGE 241 ---
is directly linked to market activity-the buying and selling of commodities. In this case, the
commodities tend to be drugs, alcohol and bodies (especially women's bodies). These tragic
forms of expression have yet to take on an explicitly political character, yet they may in the near
future. If and when they do, the prevailing powers will be forced to make political responses,
not simply legal ones that lead to prison overcrowding.
One major challenge for progressive politics is to find a way of channeling the talent and
energy of poor people into forms of social motion that can have impact on the powers that rule.
This second way out of the impasse is the creation of organized citizen participation in credible
progressive projects. Yet American political culture mitigates against this. The status quo lives
and thrives on the perennial radical dilemma of disbelief: It is hard for ordinary citizens to
believe their actions can make a difference in a society whose resources, wealth and power are
disproportionately held by the big-business community.
The best project progressive politics offered in recent decades was the courageous and
exciting 1980s presidential campaigns of the charismatic spokesperson seeking acceptance and
respect within the Democratic party: the prophetic witness of the Reverend Jesse Jackson. Yet
his two campaigns reveal the weakness of American progressive politics: the obsession with
televisual visibility alongside little grassroots organizing beyond elections and the inability to
generate social motion outside electoral politics. In Jackson's case, it also discloses the refusal
to promote democratic practices within one's own organization. Jackson has had a significant
and, for the most part, salutary effect on American progressive politics. The major contribution
of his efforts is that they were the first serious attemptsince the Poor People's Campaign of
Martin Luther King, Jr., to constitute a multiracial coalition to raise the issue of the
maldistribution of resources, wealth and power. Yet, unlike King's, Jackson's attempt to
highlight this crucial issue was often downplayed or jettisoned by his quest for entry into the
elite groupings of the centrist Democratic party. Social motion and movements in America tend
to be neither rooted in nor sustained by campaigns for electoral office, no matter how
charismatic the leader.
There can be no substantive progressive politics beyond the extension of American liberalism
without social motion or movements. And despite the symbolic and cathartic electoral victories
of liberal women and people of color, all remain thoroughly shackled by corporate priorities in
the economy and in debt-ridden administrations. Under such conditions, the plight of the ill-fed,
ill-clad and illhoused tends to get worse.
With the lethargic electoral system nearly exhausted of progressive potentialthough never to
be ignored owing to possible conservative politicians eager for more power-we must look
toward civil society, especially to mass media, universities, religious and political groupings
and trade unions. Despite the decline of popular mobilization and political participation and the
decrease of unionized workers and politicized citizens, there is a vital and vibrant culture
industry, religious life, student activism and labor stirrings. In the midst of a market-driven
culture of consumption-with its spectatorial passivity, pervasive banality and modes of
therapeutic release-there is an increasing sense of social concern and political engagement.
These inchoate progressive sentiments are in search of an effective mode of organized


--- PAGE 242 ---
expression. Until we create some channels, our progressive practice will remain primarily
defensive.
How do we go about creating these channels of resistance and contestation to corporate
power? What positive messages do we have to offer? What programs can we put forward? This
brings me to the third claim regard ng the role of law in progressive politics. In a society that
suffers more and more from historical amnesia-principally due to the dynamic, past-effacing
activities of market forceslawyers have close contact with the concrete traces and residues of
the struggles and battles of the past. This is in part what Alexis de Tocqueville had in mind when
he called the legal elites America's only aristocracy. Needless to say, he understood continuity
with the past in terms of social stability. I revise his formulation to connect continuity with the
memory of the effects of progressive victories of the past inscribed in the law of a society whose
link with the past is tenuous and whose present is saturated with flashing images, consumer and
hedonistic sensibilities and quick information (much of it disinformation dispensed by unreliable
corporate cartels).
The role of progressive lawyers is not only to engage in crucial defensive practices-liberal
practice vis-a-vis the courts-but also to preserve, recast and build on the traces and residues of
past conflicts coded in laws. This latter activity is guided by a deep historical sensibility that not
only deconstructs the contradictory character of past and present legal decisions or demystifies
the power relations operative in such decisions; it also concocts empowering and enabling
narratives that cast light on how these decisions constitute the kind of society in which we live
and how people resist and try to transform it. Progressive lawyers can be politically engaged
narrators who tell analytically illuminating stories about how the law has impeded or impelled
struggles for justice and freedom. Like rap artists of the best sort, progressive lawyers can reach
out to a demoralized citizenry to energize them with insights about the historical origins and
present causes of social misery in light of visions, analyses and practices to change the world.
Lawyers can perform this role more easily than others due to the prestige and authority of the
law in American society. Progressive lawyers can seize this opportunity to highlight the internal
contradictions and the blatant hypocrisy of much of the law in the name of the very ideals-
fairness, protection and formal equality-heralded by the legal system. This kind of progressive
legal practice, narrative in character and radical in content, can give visibility and legitimacy to
issues neglected by and embarrassing to conservative administrations as well as expose and
educate citizens regarding the operations of economic and political powers vis-a-vis the courts.
In this regard, historical consciousness and incisive narratives yield immanent critiques,
disclose the moral lapses and highlight the structural constraints of the law while empowering
victims to transform society.
Without this kind of historical consciousness and analytical storytelling, it is difficult to create
channels for resistance and challenge to corporate power. In addition, there must be an accent on
the moral character of the leaders and followers in the past and present who cared, sacrificed
and risked for the struggle for justice and freedom. Progressive lawyers must highlight the
ethical motivations of those who initiated and promoted the legal victories that furthered
struggles for racial, sexual and class equality within the limiting perimeters of American law.


--- PAGE 243 ---
The CLS movement is significant primarily because it introduced for the first time in legal
discourse a profoundly historicist approach and theoretical orientation that highlights
simultaneously the brutal realities of class exploitation, racial subordination, patriarchal
domination, homophobic marginalization and ecological abuse in the American past and present.
By historicist approach, I mean a candid recognition that the law is deeply reflective of-though
not thoroughly determined by-the political and ideological conflicts in American society. By
theoretical orientation, I mean a serious encounter with social theories that accent the structural
dynamics of the economy, state and culture that shape and are shaped by the law.
Legal formalism, legal positivism and even legal realism remained relatively silent about the
brutal realities of the American past and present. This silence helped American liberalism
remain for the most part captive to cultural conservatism. It also limited radical alternatives in
legal studies to extensions of American liberalism. The grand breakthrough of CLS was to
expose the intellectual blinders of American liberal legal scholarship and to link these blinders
to the actual blood that has flowed owing to the realities hidden. It calls attention to the human
costs paid by those who suffer owing to the institutional arrangements sanctioned by liberal law
in the name of formal equality and liberty.
Yet CLS has not been and cannot be more than a progressive movement within a slice of the
professional managerial strata in American society without connections to other social motions
in American society. Academic leftist subcultures have a crucial role to play, yet they do not get
us beyond the impasse.
It may well be that American culture does not possess the democratic and libertarian
resources to bring about racial, sexual and class equality. Its cultural conservatism and big-
business influences may impose insurmountable constraints for such a radical project. Lest we
forget, there are roughly three reactionaries (Klansmen, John Birchers and so on) for every
leftist in America. Yet it is precisely this kind of cynical-or is it realistic?-outlook that often
confines radicalism to extensions of American liberalism. How does one combat or cope with
such an outlook?
There is no definitive answer to this question. The enabling and empowering response that
avoids illusions is to sustain one's hope for social change by keeping alive the memory of past
and present efforts and victories and to remain engaged in such struggles owing principally to
the moral substance of these efforts. As Nietzsche noted (with different aims in mind),
subversive memory and otherregarding morality are the principal weapons for the wretched of
the earth and those who fight to enhance their plight. This memory and morality in the United
States consists of recurring cycles of collective insurgency and violent repression, social
upsurge and establishmentarian containment. The American Left is weak and feeble during
periods of social stability owing to the powers of big business and cultural conservatism; it
surfaces in the form of social movements (usually led by charismatic spokespersons) to contest
this stability due to their moral message that borrows from the nation's collective self-definition
(as democratic and free) and due to cleavages within big business and culturally conservative
groups. The social movements do not, and cannot, last long; they indeed change the prevailing
status quo, but rarely fundamentally rearrange the corporate priorities of American society. In


--- PAGE 244 ---
this regard, American radicalism is more than an extension of American liberalism when it
constitutes a serious and concrete threat to big business, usually in the call for substantial
redistribution of resources, wealth and power. Yet this threat, though significant, is short-lived
owing to repression and incorporation. After such social movements, American radicalism is
relegated to a defensive posture, that is, trying to preserve its victories by defending extensions
of American liberalism.
If this crude historical scenario has merit, the major role of the law in progressive politics is
threefold. First, past victories of social movements encoded in the law must be preserved in
order to keep alive the memory of the past, struggle in the present and hope for the future.
Second, this preservation, though liberal in practice, is radical in purpose in that it yearns for
new social motion and movements that can threaten the new social stability of big business and
cultural conservatism long enough to enact and enforce more progressive laws before repression
and incorporation set in. In this regard, radical American legal practice is a kind of Burkean
project turned on its head. It fosters tradition not for social stability, but to facilitate threats to
the social order; it acknowledges inescapable change not to ensure organic reform, but to
prepare for probable setbacks and defeats of social movements. Third, the new memories and
victories inscribed in new laws are kept alive by the defensive work of progressive lawyers in
order to help lay the groundwork for the next upsurge of social motion and movements.
The interplay between the work of progressive lawyers and social movements is crucial. In
some cases, it is a matter of life or death for charismatic leaders or courageous followers. In
other instances, it is a question of serving as the major buffer between the unprincipled
deployment of naked state power and "principled" use of the courts against social movements.
Such a buffer may prolong these movements and increase their progressive impact on society
and culture. The moral character of these movements is important precisely because it may make
repressive attackers less popular and will more than likely help sustain the memory of the
movement more easily. One of the reasons the civil rights movement led by Martin Luther King,
Jr., is remembered more than, say, other equally worthy ones such as the CIO-led unionization
movement or the feminist movement is that its moral vision was central to its identity and
accented by its major spokesperson. Needless to say, this vision appealed to the very ideals that
define the national identity of many who opposed the movement.
How do progressive lawyers articulate ideals that may subvert and transform the prevailing
practices legitimated by limited liberal versions of these ideals? Progressive legal practice must
put forward interpretations of the precious ideal of democracy that call into question the
unregulated and unaccountable power of big business; it also must set forth notions of the
precious ideal of liberty that lay bare the authoritarian attitudes of cultural conservatism. This
two-pronged ideological strategy should consist of an unrelenting defense of substantive
democracy (in a decentralized, nonstatist fashion) and all-inclusive liberty (as best articulated in
the Bill of Rights). This defense is utopian in that it tries to keep alive the possibility of social
movements; it is realistic in that it acknowledges the necessity of liberal legal practices for
radical lawyers to preserve the gains after social movements have been crushed or absorbed.
With solid yet insular academic leftist subcultures, eager yet sober black, brown, Asian and


--- PAGE 245 ---
red Lefts, a battered yet determined labor movement (especially organized public-sector
workers), beleaguered yet bold feminist and womanist progressives, scarred though proud gay
and lesbian Lefts and the growing number of green and gray activists, united social motions and
movements are in the making. What is needed is neither a vanguard party nor purist ideology, but
rather a coming together to pursue the common goals of radical democratic and libertarian
projects that overlap, especially locally and regionally and not simply within electoral politics.
Democratic leadership of and by ordinary citizens in extraparliamentary modes must flourish.
The social stability of the conservative and moderate administrations must be bombarded and
shaken by democratic demands and libertarian protections. The profits and investments of big
businesses should be scrutinized for public accountability and civic responsibility. The
xenophobia and jingoism of cultural conservatives have to be morally rejected and judicially
checked. A new world is in the making. Let us not allow the lethargy of American politics, the
predominance of big business and the pervasiveness of cultural conservatism to blunt the
contributions we can make, especially if some of us choose the law as the vocational terrain for
progressive politics.
SOURCE: From Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America, by Cornel West, pp. 251-270.
Copyright 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routlcdge, Inc.


--- PAGE 246 ---
THE POLITICAL INTELLECTUAL
My close fiend and brother Anders Stephanson, distinguished professor of history at Columbia
University-conducted this interview for the international art magazine Flash Art in 1987 He and
Igo back over twenty years of intense dialogues about culture, international relations (his book
on George Kennan is a gem) and politics. We even wrote a Joint essay on Perry Anderson, the
towering Marxist intellectual. This interview is one of the best I've done because he asked such
challenging questions.
Anders Stephanson: Philosophically speaking, you come out of the American tradition of
pragmatism. In everyday parlance, pragmatism is often understood as adjusting in an almost
opportunistic manner to existing circumstances. Philosophical pragmatism is something quite
different.
Cornel West: When philosophers talk about pragmatism, they are talking about Charles Peirce,
William James and John Dewey. For me, it is principally Dewey. Three theses are basic: (1)
antirealism in ontology, so that the correspondence theory of truth is called into question and one
can no longer appeal to Reality as a court of appeal to adjudicate between conflicting theories of
the world; (2) antifoundationalism in epistemology, so that one cannot in fact invoke
noninferential, intrinsically credible elements in experience to justify claims about experience;
and (3) detranscendentalizing of the subject, the elimination of mind itself as a sphere of inquiry.
These three theses (mainly Dewey's) are underpinned by the basic claim that social practices-
contingent, power-laden, structured social practices-lie at the very center of knowledge. In other
words, knowledge is produced, acquired and achieved. Here, the link to the Marxist tradition,
especially that of Antonio Gramsci, looms large for me.
Stephenson: These claims also have similarities with some poststructuralist theory.
West: Very much so. Detranscendentalizing the subject is, in Derrida's case, of course, a matter
of the decentering of the subject, and in that regard his deconstruction clearly converges with
Dewey's three basic theses of long ago. Derrida is more than a skeptical footnote to Husserl, but
he can be viewed as that; and when he is, his deconstruction is a problema- tization of Husserl's
quest for certainty within the interior monologue, within the self-presence of consciousness,
within the mental theater.
Stephanson: There is obviously no pragmatic agreement on what Derrida at times is erroneously
understood to be arguing, the absurd idea that there is nothing outside the text.
West: He can actually be understood to claim that there is nothing outside social practices:
intertextuality is a differential web of relations shot through with traces, shot through with
activity. For a pragmatist, that activity is always linked to human agency and the context in which
that agency is enacted. If he is read that way, I am in agreement.
Stephanson: Poststructuralism is a critique of Marxism insofar as it undermines "the worldliness
of the text"; but what also stands out is the attack on totalizing and totality. In the French context,
this seems in part an effort to escape from Sartre's shadow, in part a general reaction against the


--- PAGE 247 ---
postwar dominance of Marxism within the intelligentsia. In the "totalizing heterogeneity" of the
United States one might well feel more inclined to retain some notion of totality.
West: I agree. Without "totality," our politics become emaciated, our politics become dispersed,
our politics become nothing but existential rebellion. Some heuristic (rather than ontological)
notion of totality is in fact necessary if we are to talk about mediations, interrelations,
interdependencies, about totalizing forces in the world. In other words, a measure of
synecdochical thinking must be preserved, thinking that would still invoke relations of parts to
the whole, as for example the Gramscian articulation of spheres and historical blocs. It is true,
on the other hand, that we can no longer hang on to crude orthodox "totalities" such as the idea of
superstructure and base.
Stephanson: It is curious that French poststructuralism in a way shares its fixation on language
with Habermas, an antagonistic thinker thoroughly mired in "modernity." I find the idea of
language as a model for social and political theorizing quite suspect.
West: Language cannot be a model for social systems, since it is inseparable from other forms of
power relations, other forms of social practices. I recognize, as Gadamer does, the radical
linguisticality of human existence; I recognize, as Derrida does, the ways in which forms of
textualization mediate all our claims about the world; but the linguistic model itself must be
questioned. The multilevel operations of power within social practices-of which language is
one-are more important.
Stephanson: This is why you describe yourself as a "neo-Gramscian pragmatist."
West: Gramsci's notion of hegemony is an attempt to keep track of these operative levels of
power, so one does not fall into the trap of thinking that class relations somehow can be
understood through linguistic models, so one does not fall into the trap of thinking that state
repression that scars human bodies can be understood in terms of linguistic models. Power
operates very differently in nondiscursive than in discursive ways.
Stephanson: The earlier Foucaultian distinction between discursive and nondiscursive
formations remains valid for you then?
West: He should have held on to it, just as Habermas should have held on to his earlier notion of
interaction-a notion rooted in the Marxist talk about social relations of production-rather than
thinning it out into some impoverished idea of communication. Both can be seen as a move
toward linguistic models for power.
Stephanson: Even in the case of Foucault? His pan-power theories are, after all, discursive
rather than purely linguistic.
West: True. The later, genealogical Foucault would not make claims on linguistic models, but he
remained more interested in power as it relates to the constitution of the subject than in power as
such. Now, the structure of identity and subjectivity is important and has often been overlooked
by the Marxist tradition; but forms of subjection and subjugation are ultimately quite different


--- PAGE 248 ---
from "thick" forms of oppression like economic exploitation or state repression or bureaucratic
domination. At any rate, "the conditions for the possibility of the constitution of the subject" is a
Kantian question to which there is no satisfactory answer. To answer it, as Heidegger said in his
self-critique, is to extend the metaphysical impulse in the name of an attack on metaphysics.
From that viewpoint, Foucault's notion of anonymous and autonomous discourses is but one in a
series of attempts going back to Kant's transcendental subject and Hegel's transindividual world
spirit.
Stephanson: What if Foucault would have said that he recognized the existence of other types of
oppression, but that his field of analysis was simply different?
West: I would have replied: "Fine, but that sounds more like the language of an academic than a
political intellectual." It would have been to fall into the same traps of disciplinary division of
labor he was calling into question. If, in fact, one is writing texts that are strategic and tactical in
relation to present struggles, then it is difficult for me to see how one can be counterhegemonic
without actually including "thick" forms.
Stephanson: At any rate, the poststructuralist problematic seems now to have been engulfed by
the general debate on postmodernism. A certain confusion of terminology marks this debate.
Conceptual pairs like moder nity/postmodernity and modernism/postmodernism mean very
different things depending on country and cultural practice.
West: Three things are crucial in clearing that up: historical periodization, demarcation of
cultural archives and practices, and politics/ideology. Take history and demarcation, for
example. It is clear that "modern" philosophy begins in the seventeenth century, well before the
Enlightenment, with the turn toward the subject and the new authority, the institutionalization, of
scientific reason. What we call postmodern philosophy today is precisely about questioning the
foundational authority of science. This trajectory is very different from that of modernist literary
practices, which in turn is quite different from that of architecture: the former, to simplify,
attacks reason in the name of myth, whereas the latter valorizes reason together with technique
and form. These problems of periodization and demarcation are often ignored. For instance, Por-
toghesi's work on postmodern architecture seems to assume that his historical framework is an
uncontroversial given.
Stephanson: In this sense, Lyotard's initial theorization of the postmodern condition is
profoundly marked by its French provenance.
West: Yes. His book, in many ways an overcelebrated one, is really a French reflection on the
transgressions of modernism that has little to do with postmodernism in the American context. In
France, modernism still appears to be the centering phenomenon. Figures like Mallarme, Artaud,
Joyce and Bataille continue to play a fundamental role. In the United States, as Andreas Huyssen
has emphasized, postmodernism is an avant-garde-like rebellion against the modernism of the
museum, against the modernism of the literary and academic establishment. Note, too, the
disjunction here between cultural postmodernism and postmodern politics, for Americans are
politically always already in a condition of postmodern fragmentation and heterogeneity in a
way that Europeans have not been; and the revolt against the center by those constituted as


--- PAGE 249 ---
marginals is an oppositional difference in a way that poststructuralist notions of difference are
not. These American attacks on universality in the name of difference, these "postmodern" issues
of Otherness (Afro-Americans, Native Americans, women, gays) are in fact an implicit critique
of certain French postmodern discourses about Otherness that really serve to hide and conceal
the power of the voices and movements of Others.
Stephanson: From an American viewpoint, the debate between Lyotard and Habermas is thus
rather off the mark.
West: Interesting philosophical things are at stake there, but the politics is a family affair, a very
narrow family affair at that. Habermas stands for the grand old tradition of the Enlightenment
project of Vernunft. I have some affinities with that tradition, but there is nothing new about what
he has to say. Lyotard's attack on Habermas comes out of a valorization of the transgression of
modernism vis-a-vis an old highbrow, Enlightenment perspective. All this is very distant from
the kind of debates about postmodernism we have in the States, though of course one has to read
it, be acquainted with it.
Stephanson: Agreed, but the debate has not been without effect here either. For instance, it is
now often felt necessary in architectural discussions to make references to Lyotard.
West: It has become fashionable to do so because he is now a major figure, but I am talking
about serious readings of him. Anyone who knows anything about Kant and Wittgenstein also
knows that Lyotard's readings of them are very questionable and wrenched out of context. When
these readings then travel to the United States, they often assume an authority that remains
uninterrogated.
Stephanson: A case in point is the concept of "life-world," now freely bandied about and most
immediately originating in Husserl. In the later Habermas it fulfills an important function as the
site of colonization for the "systems-world." This, roughly, seems to combine Weber with
Husserl, but the result is in fact nothing so much as classic American sociology.
West: When Habermas juxtaposes the life-world with the colonizing systems, it strikes me as a
rather clumsy Parsonian way of thinking about the incorporation of culture into advanced
capitalist cycles of production and consumption. On the one hand, Habermas has in mind the
fundamental role that culture has come to play, now that the commodification process has
penetrated cultural practices that were previously relatively autonomous; on the other hand, he is
thinking of how oppositional forces and resistance to the system (what I call the process of
commodification) are on the wane. This is simply a less effective way of talking about
something that Marxists have been talking about for years.
Stephanson: Yet, it is obvious that both Lyotard and Habermas must have done something to fill
a kind of lack somewhere-otherwise their reception here would be inexplicable.
West: True. These remarks do not explain why Habermas and Lyotard have gained the attention
they have. Habermas, of course, speaks with the status of a second-generation Frankfurt School
theorist; and he has become such a celebrity that he can drop a number of terms from a number of


--- PAGE 250 ---
different traditions and they take on a salience they often do not deserve. More fundamentally,
his encyclopedic knowledge and his ob session with the philosophical foundations of
democratic norms also satisfy a pervasive need for left academic intellectuals-a need for the
professional respectability and rigor that displace political engagement and this-worldly
involvement. At the same time, his well known, but really tenuous, relation to Marxism provides
them with an innocuous badge of radicalism. All of this takes place at the expense of an
encounter with the Marxist tradition, especially with Gramsci and the later Lukacs of the
ontology works. In this sense, Habermas unwittingly serves as a kind of opium for some of the
American left academic intelligentsia. The impact of Lyotard, on the other hand, is probably the
result of the fact that he was the first serious European thinker to address the important question
of postmodernism in a comprehensive way. Deleuze, to take a related philosopher, never did,
though he is ultimately a more profound poststructuralist who should get more attention than he
does in the United States. His early book on Nietzsche is actually an original text.
Stephanson: Why?
West: Because Deleuze (and Levinas) was the first to think through the notion of difference
independent of Hegelian ideas of opposition, and that was the start of the radical anti-
Hegelianism that has characterized French intellectual life in the last decades. This position-the
trashing of totality, the trashing of mediation, the valorization of difference outside the subject-
object opposition, the decentering of the subject-all these features we now associate with
postmodernism and poststructuralism go back to Deleuze's resurrection of Nietzsche against
Hegel. Foucault, already assuming this Deleuzian critique, was the first important French
intellectual who could circumvent, rather than confront, Hegel, which is why he says that we live
in a "Deleuzian age." To live in a Deleuzian age is to live in an anti-Hegelian age so that one
doesn't have to come to terms with Lukacs, Adorno or any other Hegelian Marxists.
Stephanson: Nietzsche's ascendancy was not without maleficent effects when French theory was
imported into the United States.
West: It was unfortunate for American intellectual life, because we never had the Marxist culture
against which the French were reacting. Nor was it a culture that took Hegel seriously; the early
John Dewey was the only left Hegelian we ever had. Nietzsche was received, therefore, in the
context of analytic philosophy, and you can imagine the gaps and hiatuses, the blindness that
resulted when Nietzsche entered narrow Anglo-American positivism. In literary criticism, on the
other hand, Nietzsche was part of the Derridean baggage that the "New Critics" were able easily
(and often uncritically) to assimilate into their close readings. As a result, we now have a
"Tower of Babel" in American literary criticism.
Stephanson: The current, however, does not run in only one direction. Is the present French
interest in "postanalytic" philosophy an indication that intellectual life is being reoriented
toward the United States, at least in terms of objects of inquiry?
West: No doubt. French society has clearly come under the influence of Americanization, and
West Germany, always somewhat of a fifty-first state, has moved in this direction as well. More
immediately, now that the university systems in Europe no longer have the status or financial


--- PAGE 251 ---
support they once had, American universities are pulling in the European intellectuals, offering
money and celebrity status but also a fairly high level of conversation.
Stephanson: Features of what we associate with the concept of postmodernism have been part of
American life for a long time: fragmentation, heterogeneity, surfaces without history. Is
postmodernism in some sense really the codification of life in Los Angeles?
West: Only in one form and specifically at the level of middlebrow culture. The other side is the
potentially oppositional aspect of the notion. Postmodernism ought never to be viewed as a
homogeneous phenomenon, but rather as one in which political contestation is central. Even if
we look at it principally as a form of Americanization of the world, it is clear that within the
United States there are various forms of ideological and political conflict going on.
Stephanson: The black community, for example, is more "contestational" than average America.
West: The black political constituency still has some sense of the reality of the world, some
sense of what is going on in the Third World. Look at the issues Jesse Jackson pressed in 1984
and now in 1988, and you find that they were issues normally reserved for the salons of leftist
intellectuals. Bringing that on television had a great impact.
Stephanson: Yet, the black American condition, so to speak, is not an uplifting sight at the
moment.
West: Not at all. There is increasing class division and differentiation, creating, on the one hand,
a significant black middle class, highly anxiety-ridden, insecure, willing to be co-opted and
incorporated into the powers that be, concerned with racism to the degree that it poses
constraints on upward social mobility; and, on the other, a vast and growing black underclass, an
underclass that embodies a kind of walking nihilism of pervasive drug addiction, pervasive
alcoholism, pervasive homicide and an exponential rise in suicide. Now, because of the
deindustrialization, we also have a devastated black industrial working class. We are talking
here about tremendous hopelessness.
Stephanson: Suicide has increased enormously?
West: It has increased exponentially in the last decades for black males like myself who are
between eighteen and thirty-five. This is unprecedented. Afro-Americans have always killed
themselves less than other Americans, but this is no longer true.
Stephanson: What does a black oppositional intellectual do in these generally dire
circumstances?
West: One falls back on those black institutions that have attempted to serve as resources for
sustenance and survival, the black churches being one such institution, especially their
progressive and prophetic wing. One tries to root oneself organically in these institutions so that
one can speak to a black constituency, while maintaining a conversation with the most engaging
political and postmodernist debates on the outside so that the insights they provide can be


--- PAGE 252 ---
brought in.
Stephanson: That explains why you are, among other things, a kind of lay preacher. It does not
explain why you are a Christian.
West: My own left Christianity is not simply instrumentalist. It is in part a response to those
dimensions of life that have been flattened out, to the surface-like character of a postmodern
culture that refuses to speak to issues of despair, that refuses to speak to issues of the absurd. To
that extent I still find Christian narratives and stories empowering and enabling.
Stephanson: What does it mean to a black American to hear that, in Bau- drillard's language, we
are in a simulated space of hyperreality, that we have lost the real?
West: I read that symptomatically. Baudrillard seems to be articulating a sense of what it is to be
a French, middle-class intellectual, or perhaps what it is to be middle class generally. Let me
put it in terms of a formulation from Henry James that Fredric Jameson has appropriated: There
is a reality that one cannot not know. The ragged edges of the Real, of Necessity, not being able
to eat, not having shelter, not having health care, all this is something that one cannot not know.
The black condition acknowledges that. It is so much more acutely felt because this is a society
where a lot of people live a Teflon existence, where a lot of people have no sense of the ragged
edges of necessity, of what it means to be impinged upon by structures of oppression. To be an
upper-middle-class American is actually to live a life of unimaginable comfort, convenience and
luxury. Half of the black population is denied this, which is why they have a strong sense of
reality.
Stephanson: Does that make notions of postmodernism meaningless from a black perspective?
West: It must be conceived very differently at least. Take Ishmael Reed, an exemplary
postmodern writer. Despite his conservative politics, he cannot deny the black acknowledgment
of the reality one cannot not know. In writing about black American history, for instance, he has
to come to terms with the state-sponsored terrorism of lynching blacks and so on. This is
inescapable in black postmodernist practices.
Stephanson: How is one in fact to understand black postmodernist practices?
West: To talk about black postmodernst practices is to go back to bebop music and see how it
relates to literary expressions like Reed's and Charles Wright's. It is to go back, in other words,
to the genius of Charlie Parker, John Coltrane and Miles Davis. Bebop was, after all, a revolt
against the middle-class "jazz of the museum," against swing and white musicians like Benny
Goodman, who had become hegemonic by colonizing a black art form. What Parker did, of
course, was to Africanize jazz radically: to accent the polyrhythms, to combine these rhythms
with unprecedented virtuosity on the sax. He said explicitly that his music was not produced to
be accepted by white Americans. He would be suspicious if it were. This sense of revolt was to
be part and parcel of the postmodern rebellion against the modernism of the museum.
Stephanson: To me, bebop seems like a black cultural avant-garde that corresponds historically


--- PAGE 253 ---
to abstract expressionism in painting-the last gasp of modernism-on which indeed it had some
considerable influence.
West: Certainly they emerge together, and people do tend to parallel them as though they were
the same, but abstract expressionism was not a revolt in the way bebop was. In fact, it was an
instance of modernism itself. Bebop also had much to do with fragmentation, with heterogeneity,
with the articulation of difference and marginality, aspects of what we associate with
postmodernism today.
Stephanson: Aspects of the cultural dominant, yes; but these elements are also part of
modernism. Surely one can still talk about Charlie Parker as a unified subject expressing inner
angst or whatever, an archetypal characteristic of modernism.
West: True, but think too of another basic feature of postmodernism, the breakdown of highbrow
and pop culture. Parker would use whistling off the streets of common black life: "Cherokee,"
for instance, was actually a song that black children used to sing when jumping rope or, as I did,
playing marbles. Parker took that melody of the black masses and filtered it through his
polyrhythms and technical virtuosity, turning it into a highbrow jazz feature that was not quite
highbrow anymore. He was already calling into question the distinction between high and low
culture, pulling from a bricolage, as it were, what was seemingly popular and re lating it to what
was then high. Yet, I would not deny the modernist impulse, nor would I deny that they were
resisting jazz as commodity, very much like Joyce and Kafka resisted literary production as
commodity. In that sense bebop straddles the fence.
Stephenson: The ultimate problem, however, is whether it is actually useful to talk about
someone like Charlie Parker in these terms.
West: It is useful to the degree that it contests the prevailing image of him as a modernist. As you
imply, on the other hand, there is a much deeper question as to whether these terms
modernism/postmodernism relate to AfroAmerican cultural practices in any illuminating way at
all. We are only at the beginning of that inquiry.
Stephanson: Was there ever actually a mass black audience for bebop?
West: Yes, Parker's was the sort of music black people danced to in the 1940s. Miles's "cool"
stage was also big in the 1950s with albums like "Kinda Blue," though it went hand in hand with
the popularity of Nat King Cole and Dinah Washington.
Stephanson: What happened to this avant-garde black music when Motown and Aretha Franklin
came along?
West: It was made a fetish for the educated middle class, principally, but not solely, the white
middle class. In absolute terms, its domain actually expanded because the black audience of
middle-class origin also expanded. But the great dilemma of black musicians who try to
preserve a tradition from mainstream domestication and dilution is in fact that they lose contact
with the black masses. In this case, there was eventually a move toward "fusion," jazz artists


--- PAGE 254 ---
attempting to produce objects intended for broader black-and-white consumption.
Stephanson: Miles Davis is the central figure of that avant-garde story.
West: And he crossed over with the seminal record Bitches Brew in 1970, accenting his jazz
origins while borrowing from James Brown's polyrhythms and Sly Stone's syncopation. Bitches
Brew brought him a black mass audience that he had lost in the 1960s-certainly one that Coltrane
had lost completely.
Stephanson: Crossover artists, in the sense of having a racially mixed mass audience, are not
very numerous today.
West: No, but there are more than ever: Whitney Houston, Dionne Warwick, Lionel Richie,
Diana Ross and Anita Baker. Baker is a very different crossover artist, because she is still
deeply rooted in the black context. Michael Jackson and Prince are crossover in another sense;
their music is less rooted in black musical traditions and much more open to white rock and so
forth.
Stephanson: In Prince's case it has to do with the fact that he is not entirely from a black
background.
West: Still, he grew up in a black foster home and a black Seventh Day Adventist church, but in
Minneapolis, which is very different from growing up like Michael Jackson in a black part of
Gary, Indiana. Minneapolis has always been a place of cultural cross-fertilization, of interracial
marriages and relationships. The earlyJackson Five, on the other hand, were thoroughly
ensconced in a black tradition, and Michael began his career dancing like James Brown. Now he
is at the center of the black-white interface.
Stephanson: Prince never really played "black" music as one thinks of it. His music was "fused"
from the start.
West: To be in a black context in Minneapolis is already to be in a situation of fusion, because
the blacks themselves have much broader access to mainstream white culture in general. You get
the same thing with other black stars who have come out of that place.
Stephenson: Michael Jackson, by contrast, is now a packaged middle-American product.
West: A nonoppositional instance of commodification in black skin that is becoming more and
more like candy, more radical than McDonald's, but not by much. It is watered-down black
music, but still with a lot of the aggressiveness and power of that tradition.
Stephanson: Music is the black means of cultural expression, is it not?
West: Music and preaching. Here, rap is unique because it combines the black preacher and the
black music tradition, replacing the liturgical-ecclesiastical setting with the African polyrhythms
of the street. A tremendous articulateness is syncopated with the African drumbeat, the African
funk, into an American postmodernist product; there is no subject expressing original anguish


--- PAGE 255 ---
here, but a fragmented subject pulling from past and present, innovatively producing a
heterogeneous product. The stylistic combination of the oral, the literate and the musical is
exemplary as well. Otherwise, it is part and parcel of the subversive energies of black
underclass youth, energies that are forced to take a cultural mode of articulation because of the
political lethargy of American society. The music of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five,
Kurtis Blow, and Sugar Hill Gang has to take on a deeply political character because, again,
they are in the reality that the black underclass cannot not know-the brutal side of American
capital, the brutal side of American racism, the brutal side of sexism against black women.
Stephanson: I always thought rap was too indigenous a black form of expression to make it in the
general marketplace. Run/DMC has proven me wrong on this.
West: Indeed. Run/DMC is as indigenous as you can get. Upper-middleclass white students at
Yale consume a lot of Run/DMC.
Stephanson: Yet, the constitutive elements of rap seemed to me too fixed for it to become a
permanent presence on the crossover scene, more anonymous and less easily assimilated into
existing white concepts of melody and structure. This, too, is probably wrong.
West: People said the same thing about Motown in 1961, the same thing about Aretha Franklin,
who is about as organic as you can get. She is not as accepted by mainstream white society as
the smoother and more diluted Warwick and Ross, but she is accepted. That, from the
perspective of 1964-1965, is unbelievable. The same thing could happen with rap music, since
the boundaries are actually rather fluid. But it won't remain the same.
Stephanson: Where will rap end up?
West: Where most American postmodern products end up: highly packaged, regulated,
distributed, circulated and consumed.
Stephanson: Preaching, as you said, is obviously a cultural form of expression, but is it a
specifically artistic form?
West: Sure. The best preachers are outstanding oral artists, performance artists. Martin Luther
King, Jr., gave white America just a small taste of what it is to be an artistic rhetorician in the
black churches. Tremendous gravity and weight are given to these artistic performances, because
people's lives hang on them. They provide some hope from week to week so that these folk won't
fall into hopelessness and meaninglessness, so that they won't kill themselves. The responsibility
of the black preacher-artist is, in that sense, deeply functional, but at the same time it entails a
refinewent ofaform bequeathed to him by those who came before. Black preaching is
inseparable here from black singing. Most secular black singers come out of the choir, and the
lives of the congregation hang on how they sing the song, what they put into the song, how
passionate, how self-invested they are. Preaching is just less visible to the outside as an art form
because words uttered once don't have the same status as cultural products; but the black
preachers are artists with a very long tradition.


--- PAGE 256 ---
Stephanson: Since it does not lend itself to mechanical reproduction, preaching is also hard to
destroy by turning it into a business. How is this artistic form of expression actually evaluated?
West: In terms of the impact the preacher has on the congregation. This impact can take the form
of cantankerous response, or the form of existential empowerment, the convincing of people to
keep on keeping on, to keep on struggling, contesting and resisting.
Stephanson: It is Kant's acrobat who intervenes constantly to transform an otherwise unstable
equilibrium into another equilibrium.
West: Well put. Black sermonic practices have not received the attention they deserve. As a
matter of fact, black linguistic practices as such need to be examined better, because they add a
lot to the American language.
Stephanson: Black language creates a wealth of new words, which are then quickly picked up by
the mainstream.
West: Usually with significant semantic changes. Stevie Wonder's "Everything is alright, uptight,
out of sight" is a string of synonyms. Uptight, when I was growing up, meant smooth, cool,
everything is fine. By the time it got to middle America, uptight meant anxiety-ridden, the
inability of everything to be fine. Similar semantic shifts, though perhaps less drastic, take place
with chilling out, mellowing out and other black expressions. Chilling out meant letting things
be, a sort of Heideggerian notion of aletheia, letting the truth reveal itself, letting it shine, letting
it come forth.
Stephanson: Given the social circumstances of which it is a product, black American language
seems to me, on the outside, not to allow very easily for prevalent white orders of theoretical
reflection.
West: It is a hustling culture, and a hustling culture tends to be radically "practicalist," deeply
pragmatic, because the issue is always one of surviving, getting over.
Stephanson: This, I imagine, demands some sharp linguistic twists for you.
West: I am continually caught in a kind of "heteroglossia," speaking a number of English
languages in radically different contexts. When it comes to abstract theoretical reflection, I
employ Marx, Weber, Frankfurt theorists, Foucault and so on. When it comes to speaking with
the black masses, I use Christian narratives and stories, a language meaningful to them but
filtered through and informed by intellectual developments from de Tocqueville to Derrida.
When it comes to the academy itself, there is yet another kind of language, abstract but often
atheoretical, since social theorizing is mostly shunned. Philosophers are simply illequipped to
talk about social theory-they know Wittgenstein but not Weber, they know J. L. Austin but not
Marx.
Ste/ihanson: Apart from the musician and the preacher, black culture exhibits a third artist of
great importance: the athlete. There is enormous emphasis on aesthetic execution in black sports.


--- PAGE 257 ---
West: You can see this in basketball, where the black player tries to style reality so that he
becomes spectacle and performance, always projecting a sense of self, whereas his white
counterpart tends toward the produc- tivistic and mechanistic. A lot of time, energy and
discipline also go into it, but usually with a certain investment of'self that does not express the
work ethic alone. All was, of course, exemplary in this respect. Not only was he a great boxer,
but a stylish one as well-smooth, clever, rhythmic, and syncopated.
Stephanson: Whence comes this emphasis on spectacle?
West: Originally, it derives from an African sense of pageantry, the tendency to project yourself
in performance in a way so that you are at one with a certain flow of things. By "one," I do not
mean any romantic kind of unity between subject and object or pantheistic unification with
nature, but at one with the craft and task at hand. It is also to risk something. Baraka has spoken
of the African deocation of accident, by which he indicated the acknowledgment of risk and
contingency: to be able to walk a tightrope, to be able to do the dangerous and to do it well. But
it is a form of risk-ridden execution that is self-imposed.
Stephanson: Among the various black modes of cultural expression, pictorial art has not, with all
due allowances for graffiti art, been much in evidence. The black middle class seems
uninterested and so does the underclass; art as a practice is esoteric and largely without
rewards.
West: Access to the kinds of education and subcultural circles is much less available to potential
black artists. In addition to the racism in the avantgarde world, painting and sculpture are not as
widely appreciated as they ought to be in black America. Therefore, pictorial black artists are
marginal. They deserve more black support-and exposure.
Stephanson: Beyond impediments of entry, is there not also some indigenous cultural element at
work here? There are, after all, many black writers and dancers.
West: The strong, puritanical Protestantism of black religion has not been conducive to the
production of pictures. For the same reason, there is a great belief in the power of the word, in
literate acumen. In fact, writers are sometimes given too much status and become
"spokespeople" for the race, which is ridiculous. Yet there is an openness, diversity, multiplicity
of artistic sensibility when developed and cultivated in the black community. Realist modes of
representation are, for example, not inherently linked to Afro-American culture. The pioneering
artwork of Howardina Pindell, Emma Amos, Benny Andrews and Martin Puryear are exemplary
in this regard.
Stephanson: It is a cliche to say that we live in a society of images, but we obviously do. Blacks
watch more television than the average. Do they appropriate these images differently?
West: There is an element of scrutiny involved. The images have been so pervasively negative,
so degrading and devaluing of black people-espe cially of black women-that the process has
always been one tied to some skepticism and suspicion.


--- PAGE 258 ---
Stephanson: Images are seen through a skeptical racial grid?
West: A racial grid as transmitted from one generation to the next. This does not mean it is
always critical. Think, for example, of all the Italian pictures of Jesus that hang in black
churches at this very moment, pictures of Michelangelo's uncles when the man was actually a
dark Palestinian Jew. Such images are widely accepted. But that particular one is, of course,
different because it is sacred and therefore much more difficult to question. There is a much
more critical attitude toward television. With the exception of the new phenomenon of the Casty
Show and Frank's Place, black folk are still usually depicted there as buffoons, black women as
silly.
Stephanson: Images of blacks are sometimes produced by blacks, as in many music videos.
Those I have watched tend to be either sentimental ones about people yearning for the "right
one" or highly charged ones featuring minutely choreographed movement.
West: You also find a lot of conspicuous consumption-a lot of very expensive cars, furs, suits
and so forth. The American dream of wealth and prosperity remains a powerful carrot, because
television producers are aware of the reality that the black audience cannot not know. Another
big problem is the relation between black men and women. Different kinds of women are
projected as objects of desire and quest, but they are downright white women, or blacks who
look entirely white, or very light-skinned black women. Rarely do you find any longing for the
really dark woman. And when a black woman is the star, she is usually yearning for a black man
who is light-never a white man, but a black man who is light.
Stephanson: Black culture is, of course, as sexist as the rest.
West: In a different way. The pressure on Afro-Americans as a people has forced the black man
closer to the black woman-they are in the same boat. But they are also at each other's throats.
The relation is internally hierarchical and often mediated by violence: black men over black
women.
Stephanson: Is it not more unabashedly sexist in its macho version? For even though popular
culture as such is deeply infused with macho imagery, it seems to me that the black ditto is more
overtly so.
West: Black society shows the typical range from the extreme machismo of any patriarchy to a
few egalitarian relations. Nonetheless, what you say is probably true, and there are simply no
excuses for the vicious treatment of black women by these men. Yet interaction between the
sexes in the black community is unintelligible without highlighting the racist and poverty-ridden
circumstances in which so many blacks live. Machismo is itself a bid for power by relatively
powerless and degraded black men. Remember, too, that the white perception here is principally
informed by interracial relations between black men and white women, relations in which black
machismo is particularly pronounced. There is also an expectation among large numbers of
white folk that black men be macho, and black men then tend to fulfill that expectation. Those
who do not are perceived as abnormal. A crucial part of this phenomenon is the question of
sexual prowess; if you're not a "gashman," your whole identity as a black male becomes highly


--- PAGE 259 ---
problematic. So, to a degree, the process is a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Stephanson: There has been an extreme destruction of the family within the black underclass.
Aside from the obvious causes, why is this?
West: Aside from the changes in society as a whole, developments like hedonistic consumerism
and the constant need of stimulation of the body, which make any qualitative human relationships
hard to maintain, it is a question of a breakdown in cultural resources, what Raymond Williams
calls structures of meaning. Except for the church, there are few potent traditions on which one
can fall back in dealing with hopelessness and meaninglessness. There used to be a set of stories
that could convince people that their absurd situation was one worth coping with, but the
passivity is now overwhelming. Drug addiction is only one manifestation of this-you live a life
of living death, of slower death, rather than killing yourself immediately. I recently spoke at a
high school in one of the worst parts of Brooklyn, and the figures were staggering: almost 30
percent had attempted suicide, 70 percent were deeply linked to drugs. This is what I mean by
"walking nihilism." It is the imposing of closure on the human organism, intentionally, by that
organism itself. Such nihilism is not cute. We are not dancing on Nietzsche's texts here and
talking about nihilism; we are in a nihilism that is lived. We are talking about real obstacles to
the sustaining of a people.
Stephanson: Which is not quite how Nietzschean nihilism is normally conceived.
West: There are a variety of nihilisms in Nietzsche, and this is not so much one in which
meaning is elusive, certainly not one with a surplus of meaning. What we have, on the contrary,
is not at all elusive-meaninglessness, a meaningless so well understood that it can result in the
taking of one's own life.
SOURCE: From Beyond Eurocentrism and Multiculturalism, V 1. 2: Prophetic Reflections (Monroe,
Me.: Common Courage Press, 1993), pp. 81-102. Originally appeared in Flash Art in 1987.


--- PAGE 260 ---
A WORLD OF IDEAS
This interview was my first television appearance in America. Of course, Bill Moyers is a
master interviewer. He teased out features of my style and substance often overlooked by others.
He and I have precious roots in Texas, are shaped by Baptist church experiences and are deeply
concerned about race and injustice in America. This was an ideal place for me to express my
beliefs to a television audience for the f rst time. My audience base rose quickly after this
interview.
Bill Moyers: You've been seen in some very unusual places for an intellectual: the storefronts
and streets of Harlem, the shanty-towns of South Africa, one of the worst high schools in one of
the worst districts in Brooklyn. Why? Those are so far from Princeton, so far from the ivory
tower.
Cornel West: I understand the vocation of the intellectual as trying to turn easy answers into
critical questions and putting those critical questions to people with power. The quest for truth,
the quest for the good, the quest for the beautiful all require us to let suffering speak, let victims
be visible and let social misery be put on the agenda of those with power. So to me, pursuing the
life of the mind is inextricably linked with the struggle of those who have been dehumanized on
the margins of society.
Moyers: One black intellectual said you make him uncomfortable with your ease out there on the
street.
West: Certainly I have tried, on the one hand, to uphold the discipline of the life of the mind, but,
on the other hand, to keep track of other people's humanity, their predicaments and plights. I want
to empathize and sympathize with them the best that I possibly can.
Moyers: Many Americans believe that a substantial portion of the black community in the inner
cities is simply saying yes now to death, violence and hate. What do you find when you go there?
West: I do find a lot of meaninglessness and hopelessness, but at the same time I find people
who are struggling, trying to survive and thrive under excruciating conditions. So the question
becomes: How does one attempt to transform this meaninglessness and hopelessness into a more
effective kind of struggle and resistance? It's a very difficult task, but there are many highly
courageous people, working people, ordinary people, who are trying to hold on to meaning and
value in a society that revolves more and more around the market mentality, the market ethos that
permeates almost every sphere of this society.
Moyers: What does that ethos do to a community?
West: It makes it very difficult to hold on to nonmarket values, such as commitment in
relationships, solidarity, community, care, sacrifice, risk and struggle. Market values encourage
a preoccupation with the now, with the immediate.
Moyers: The future is now.


--- PAGE 261 ---
West: That's exactly right. What that means, then, is people feel they no longer have to work or
sacrifice. Why? Because the big money can be achieved right now. In the black community
market activity is at its most pernicious and vicious right now in the drug industry. Young people
want to make the easy buck now. In many ways they are mirroring what they see in society at
large, what they see on Wall Street. It makes it very difficult for them to take not only
commitment and caring and sacrificing, but ultimately human life itself seriously. Profits become
much more important than human life. What we see is a very cold-hearted meanspiritedness
throughout these communities. I think again it reflects so much of our own culture and
civilization. It's quite frightening.
Moyers: You've been making a lot of speeches to young people in the high schools like those in
Brooklyn, where the situation is fairly miserable. What do you say to those young people?
West: I tell them we live in a society that suffers from historical amnesia, and we find it very
difficult to preserve the memory of those who have resisted and struggled over time for the
ideals of freedom and democracy and equality. Then I provide some historical background of
people who displayed this kind of courage in its highest form-people like Martin Luther King,
Jr., Michael Harrington, Ida B. Wells-Barnett and other freedom fighters. Then I move up to the
present and talk about how many of their parents and brothers and sisters in some way extend
that kind of tradition. And I ask the kids: "Are you going to be part of this tradition? What's going
to happen to this tradition? How can we keep it alive? How can we keep it vital and vibrant?"
Moyers: You're suggesting that each one of them can matter, and yet they're living in
communities where the institutions have broken down, where the family is fragmented, where
chaos is all around them. Don't they need institutions that will nurture them? Institutions they can
hold on to for the message of self-worth and self-determination to take hold?
West: Oh, very much so. In fact, when I talk about the historical leaders, I talk about the
institutions that produced them-the families, the schools, the colleges, the churches, the
synagogues and the temples. It's true that many American families, neighborhoods and
associations are undergoing a kind of disintegration and decomposition, but it's not thorough.
There are still some American families and some black families that are holding together. There
are still some neighborhoods, black, white, brown and Asian, that are holding together.
Moyers: What do you tell them about how to signify?
West: They have to hope. They have to hold on to some notion that the future can be different if
they sacrifice, if they fight, if they struggle. This is an old message. I learned this message in the
black church years ago. I'm very much a product of a loving black family and a caring black
church. And more than anything else, the church taught me the lesson of the cross. The only way
to hope, to faith, to life is through the blood. The cross is a symbol of the impossible possibility,
to use Karl Barth's language, the impossible possibility of holding on to faith, hope, and love in
the kind of world in which we live, the kind of world in which blood is in fact always flowing.
Moyers: Once upon a time the church did provide that kind of lesson, it did provide that kind of
community. But a poll I saw just recently said that in the black community, the church is less and


--- PAGE 262 ---
less a part of the life of young people. Do you find that so?
West: The influence of the black church is declining, as are churches around the country. But I do
think that the message of the church remains relevant, even among those who are not Christians.
The value of service to others, the value of caring for others, the value of attempting to keep
one's eye on the forms of social misery, inadequate housing, health care, child care,
unemployment and underemployment-religion has no monopoly on these kinds of values.
Religion may help motivate persons to act on these values in light of the stories within their
traditions, but neither Christians nor Jews nor Muslims nor Hindus have a monopoly on this.
Moyers: I've always been curious why so many blacks, when they were brought to this country,
adopted Christianity, which was the religion that often defended the slavery that imprisoned
them. How do you explain that?
West: I think large numbers of black people turned to Christianity for three basic reasons. The
first had to do with issues of meaning and value. Black people arriving here 371 years ago had
to come to terms with the absurd in the human condition in America, the place of enslavement.
Moyers: So that image of the Exodus, of the slaves freeing themselves, was especially appealing
to black slaves in America.
West: Yes. The God of history who sides with the oppressed and the exploited, a God who
accents and affirms one's own humanity in a society that is attacking and assaulting black
intelligence and black beauty and black moral character, namely, white-supremacist ideology-
this message spoke very deeply at the level of meaning and value. But Christianity is also
important institutionally because black people appropriated primarily the left wing of the
Reformation. The Baptists and the Methodists are much more democratically structured than the
Catholics. The preachers are immediately accountable to the congregation, and the pew has
access to leadership. Black humanity at the level of both leadership and followership could be
accented.
Then I think there was also a political reason. Black people could engage in a form of critique of
slavery, of Jim Crowism, of second-class citizenship, while holding on to the humanity of those
who they opposed. This is the great lesson of Martin Luther King, Jr., who is a product of this
tradition.
Moyers: We have opponents, but not enemies.
West: That's exactly right. Actually, the enemy is oppression and exploitation. It's legitimate to
abhor and hate oppression and exploitation, but we cannot lose sight of the humanity of those
who are perpetuating it. This is a very difficult and complex doctrine, because it seems to
promote a kind of a masochistic love of oppressor.
Moyers: The negative side of religion was that it could breed apathy and compliance. Also, the
black church could even become a haven for charismatic con men, as modern-day television is
to some evangelists.


--- PAGE 263 ---
West: Sure. I think Karl Marx's critique of religion as an impotent form of protest against
suffering has an element of truth. Religion has tended to legitimize and to undergird forms of
oppression precisely because it provided a critique that remained spiritual and had very little
understanding of the social, economic and political conditions that were sustaining the
oppression. At its best, religion can provide us with the vision and the values, but it doesn't
provide the analytical tools. One doesn't look to the Bible to understand the complexity of the
modern industrial and postindustrial society. It can give us certain insights into the human
condition, certain visions of what we should hope for, but we also need the tools. They are
found outside of religious texts and outside of religious sensibilities. We move to the social
sciences for some handle on the maldistribution of resources, wealth, income, prestige and
influence in our society. So all forms of prophetic religion must be linked in some sense with a
set of analytical tools.
Moyers: But there is still in that old scripture a very powerful moral message. You end one of
your books, Prophesy Deliverance, with a quote of Jesus from Luke 4:18: "The spirit of the Lord
is upon me because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to
proclaim release to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who
are oppressed." Do you think that message still means anything in urban areas where you visit
often?
West: Yes, I do. I think it means that there is still someone who cares for those who are socially
invisible and politically marginalized. The spirit of the Lord is still empowering to those who
have been cast aside to struggle, enabling those who've been cast aside to not lose hope.
Moyers: You have been on a long intellectual odyssey yourself. Are you still an active
Christian?
West: Very much so. Jesus' words, along with many others, have helped sustain me as I
encountered for myself the absurdity of being an American and a person of African descent. W.
E. B. Du Bois talked about this years ago in his American classic Souls of Black Folk. "All that
people of a darker hue have ever wanted to be," he said, "is human beings who could be both
American and also acknowledge their African heritage." This double consciousness, of living in
many ways in America but not still fully of it, is a tension, I think, that all of us forever grapple
with. Those words allow me to hold on to my sense of possibility.
Moyers: You have talked about combative spirituality. What do you mean by that?
West: I mean a form of spirituality-of community and communion-that preserves meaning by
fighting against the bombardments of claims that we are inferior or deficient. Combative
spirituality sustains persons in their humanity, but also transcends solely the political. It
embraces a political struggle, but it also deals with issues of death or dread, of despair or
disappointment. These are the ultimate facts of existence and they're filtered through our social
and political existence. Ultimately all of us as individuals must confront these, and a combative
spirituality accents a political struggle, but goes beyond it by looking death, dread, despair,
disappointment and disease in the face and saying that there is in fact a hope beyond these.


--- PAGE 264 ---
Moyers: But isn't that hope deferred again? Isn't that justice deferred? Isn't that saying, "You
have to put up with the miserable conditions in Brooklyn today, in Harlem, because one day
there'll be a reward?"
West: No, because it calls into question all illusions that there'll be a utopia around the corner.
When you talk about hope, you have to be a long-distance runner. This is again so very difficult
in our culture, because the quick fix, the overnight solution, mitigates against being a long-
distance runner in the moral sense, the sense of fighting because it's right, because it's moral,
because it's just. That kind of hope linked to combative spirituality is what I have in mind.
Moyers: So combative spirituality is that sense of subversive joy, as you once called it?
West: Subversive joy is the ability to transform tears into laughter, a laughter that allows one to
acknowledge just how difficult the journey is, but also to acknowledge one's own sense of
humanity and folly and humor in the midst of this very serious struggle. It's a joy that allows one
both a space, a distance from the absurd, but also empowers one to engage in the struggle again
when the time is necessary.
Moyers: Some of that has come, has it not, from black music, from gospel and jazz and blues?
West: Yes.
Moyers: What about rap? Does rap have any of that spiritual energy in it?
West: Oh, very much so. I mean, black rap music is the most important popular musical
development in the last ten years. It is a profound extension of the improvisational character of
what I call the Afro-American spiritual blues impulse, which is an attempt to hold at bay the
demons and devils. What rap has done is to allow a kind of marriage between the rhetorical and
the musical by means of some of the most amazing linguistic virtuosities we have seen in the
language, the lyrics, the quickness, the speaking.
Moyers: You have said that rap music is part and parcel of the subversive energies of the
youthful black underclass. What do you mean by subversive energies?
West: They respond to their sense of being rejected by the society at large, of being invisible in
the society at large, with a subversive critique of that society. It has to do with both the
description and depiction of the conditions under which they're forced to live, as well as a
description and depiction of the humanity preserved by those living in such excruciating
conditions. It then goes beyond to a larger critique of the power structure as a whole. It is
international in terms of its link to struggles in South Africa, so that in that sense it's part of a
prophetic tradition. But I should say that what is lacking in rap music is vision and analysis. It's
fun, it's entertaining, it helps sustain the rituals of party-going on the weekends, but it still lacks a
vision. This is where again the church plays an important role, you see, because otherwise, it's
quite easy to channel these energies into very narrow, chauvinistic, xenophobic forms that lack
vision, that have no moral content or ethical substance.


--- PAGE 265 ---
Moyers: Blacks have made an enormous contribution in this country through preaching, through
music, through sports, yet we still see the black underclass sinking in a quagmire. Almost every
analyst I know says nothing is helping, not black rap music, not the black church, not social
programs, not capitalist economics. Nothing is helping this black underclass. And yet you still
trumpet hope.
West: Yes, I do. I mean, the condition of the black underclass is tragic, but they are still human
beings who are getting about. Many are still making sense of the world. Many are actually still
escaping. I don't want to lose sight of them. Many are still in churches trying to hold on to their
moral character. Many are outside of churches trying to hold on to their moral character. I don't
want to view the black underclass as a monolithic or homogeneous entity. These are actual
human beings, children of God. Some are losing, many are losing, some are winning in terms of
holding on to their sense of self and holding on to their sense of vitality and vibrancy.
That in no way excuses the structural and institutional forces that are at work: the unemployment,
the failed educational system, the consumer culture that bombards them. The black underclass
still has to contend with all of these in addition to the larger racist legacy. But it's not only about
race. As we know, there are other factors as well, so that certainly a description of their
conditions must include this. But I hold up hope. I'm talking about my cousins and friends and
relatives who are seemingly locked into this condition, yet change can indeed come about.
Moyers: Where is the moral outrage in society today? Do you see it?
West: Not enough. There's been a kind of anaesthetizing, I think, in the 1980s toward forms of
social misery. But there's the National Coalition of the Homeless. There's the NAACP and DSA,
Democratic Socialists of America, of which I'm an honorary chair. There's a whole host of
groups that have been trying to sustain some moral outrage, filtered through a systemic analysis
of our situation and regulated by a vision. It hasn't taken the way it has in past decades, but I
think the 1990s will be different.
Moyers: The conundrum is that if you are morally outraged today, you're relegated to the margins
of society. It's almost considered out of the norm to be concerned about social misery. To be
mature today means you're supposed to say we can't ameliorate certain circumstances in life.
West: But I think the important point there is that we have to understand why this is so. Why has
cynicism become so pervasive over the past ten years for those who wanted to focus on social
misery? And I see that cynicism more and more on the wane. I think Eastern Europe is providing
us with a different lesson, you see. Up until the last few months, people did not believe that
ordinary human beings organized could fundamentally change society. We had scholars around
the world saying that the very notion of revolution was outdated and antiquated. We could not
even imagine a transfer of power that we have witnessed in Eastern Europe in the past month
and a half. So all of those assumptions and presuppositions are now being called into question,
which means that the focus of ordinary people organizing, mobilizing, having impact on powers
that be, once again moves to the center of the agenda.
SOURCE: From Beyond Eurocentrism and Multiculturalism, Vol. 2: Prophetic Reflections (Monroe,


--- PAGE 266 ---
Me.: Common Courage Press, 1993), pp. 103-112.


--- PAGE 267 ---
T H E D I L E M M A O F T H E BLACK I N T E L L E C T U A L
This essay, written in 1985, is the most widely quoted and controversial piece I have published.
It has been reprinted many times in a variety ofplaces-especially by the younger generation of
intellectuals of all colors. This popularity r~flects a deep crisis of vocation among black
intellectuals. bell hooks's `Black Women Intellectuals "-in our book Breaking Bread (1991)-is a
devastating critique of this piece. I recommend that people read them together.
The peculiarities of the American social structure, and the position of the intellectual class within it,
make the functional role of the negro intellectual a special one. The negro intellectual must deal
intimately with the White power structure and cultural apparatus, and the inner realities of the Black
world at one and the same time. But in order to function successfully in this role, he has to be acutely
aware of the nature of the American social dynamic and how it monitors the ingredients of class strati
acations in American society.... Therefore the functional role of the negro intellectual demands that he
cannot be absolutely separated from either the Black or White world.
-HAROLD CRUSE
The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual (1967)
The contemporary black intellectual faces a grin predicament. Caught between an insolent
American society and insouciant black community, the Afro-American who takes seriously the
life of the mind inhabits an isolated and insulated world. This condition has little to do with the
motives and intentions of black intellectuals; rather, it is an objective situation created by
circumstances not of their own choosing. In this meditative essay, I will explore this dilemma of
the black intellectual and suggest various ways of understanding and transforming it.
ON BECOMING A BLACK INTELLECTUAL
The choice of becoming a black intellectual is an act of self-imposed marginality; it assures a
peripheral status in and to the black community. The quest for liter acy indeed is a fundamental
theme in Afro-American history and a basic impulse in the black community. But for blacks, as
with most Americans, the uses for literacy are usually perceived to be for more substantive
pecuniary benefits than those of the writer, artist, teacher or professor. The reasons some black
people choose to become serious intellectuals are diverse. But in most cases these reasons can
be traced back to a common root: a conversion-like experience with a highly influential teacher
or peer that convinced one to dedicate one's life to the activities of reading, writing and
conversing for the purposes of individual pleasure, personal worth and political enhancement of
black (and often other oppressed) people.
The way in which one becomes a black intellectual is highly problematic. This is so because
the traditional roads others travel to become intellectuals in American society have only recently
been opened-and remain quite difficult. The main avenues are the academy or the literate
subcultures of art, culture and politics. Prior to the acceptance of black undergraduate students to


--- PAGE 268 ---
elite white universities and colleges in the late 1960s, select black educational institutions
served as the initial stimulus for potential black intellectuals. And in all honesty, there were
relatively more and better black intellectuals then than now. After a decent grounding in a black
college, where self-worth and self confidence were affirmed, bright black students then
matriculated to leading white institutions to be trained by liberal sympathetic scholars often of
renowned stature. Stellar figures such as W. E. B. Du Bois, E. Franklin Frazier and John Hope
Franklin were products of this system. For those black intellectuals-to-be who missed college
opportunities for financial or personal reasons, there were literate subcultures-especially in the
large urban centers-of writers, painters, musicians and politicos for unconventional educational
enhancement. Major personages such as Richard Wright, Ralph Ellison and James Baldwin
were products of this process.
Ironically, the present-day academy and contemporary literate subcultures present more
obstacles for young black intellectuals than those in decades past. This is so for three basic
reasons. First, the attitudes of white scholars in the academy are quite different than those in the
past. It is much more difficult for black students, especially graduate students, to be taken
seriously as potential scholars and intellectuals, owing to the managerial ethos of our
universities and colleges (in which less time is spent with students) and to the vulgar (racist!)
perceptions fueled by affirmative-action programs, which pollute many black student-white
professor relations.
Second, literate subcultures are less open to blacks now than they were three or four decades
ago, not because white avant-garde journals or leftist groups are more racist today, but rather
because heated political and cultural issues, such as the legacy of the black power movement,
the Israeli/Palestinian conflict and the invisibility of Africa in American political discourse,
have created rigid lines of demarcation and distance between black and white intellectuals.
Needless to say, black presence in leading liberal journals like the New York Review ofBooks
and the New York Times Book Review is negligible-nearly nonexistent. And more leftist
periodicals such as Dissent, Socialist Review, The Nation and Telos or avant-garde scholarly
ones like Diacritics, Salmagundi, Partisan Review and Raritan do not do much better. Only
Monthly Review, Massachusetts Review, Boundary 2 and Social Txt make persistent efforts to
cover black subject matter and have regular black contributors. The point here is not mere
finger-pointing at negligent journals (though it would not hurt matters!), but rather an attempt to
highlight the racially separatist publishing patterns and practices of American intellectual life,
which are characteristic of the chasm between black and white intellectuals.
Third, the general politicization of American intellectual life (in the academy and outside),
along with the rightward ideological drift, constitutes a hostile climate for the making of black
intellectuals. To some extent, this has always been so, but the ideological capitulation of the
significant segment of former left liberals to the new-style conservatism and old-style
imperialism has left black students and black professors with few allies in the academy and in
influential periodicals. This hostile climate requires that black intellectuals fall back upon their
own resources-institutions, journals and periodicals-which, in turn, reinforces the de facto
racially separatist practices of American intellectual life.


--- PAGE 269 ---
The tragedy of black intellectual activity is that the black institutional support for such activity
is in shambles. The quantity and quality of black intellectual exchange is at its worst since the
Civil War. There is no major black academic journal, no major black intellectual magazine, no
major black periodical of highbrow journalism, not even a major black newspaper of national
scope. In short, the black infrastructure for intellectual discourse and dialogue is nearly
nonexistent. This tragedy is, in part, the price for integration-which has yielded mere marginal
black groups within the professional disciplines of a fragmented academic community. But this
tragedy also has to do with the refusal of black intellectuals to establish and sustain their own
institutional mechanisms of criticism and selfcriticism, organized in such a way that people of
whatever color would be able to contribute to them. This refusal over the past decade is
significant in that it has lessened the appetite for, and the capacity to withstand, razor-sharp
criticism among many black intellectuals whose formative years were passed in a kind of
intellectual vacuum. So, besides the external hostile climate, the tradition of serious black
intellectual activity is also threatened from within.
The creation of an intelligentsia is a monumental task. Yet black churches and colleges, along
with significant white support, served as resources for the first black intellectuals with formal
training. The formation of high-quality habits of criticism and international networks of serious
intellectual exchange among a relatively isolated and insulated intelligentsia is a gargantuan
endeavor. Yet black intellectuals have little choice: either continued intellectual lethargy on the
edges of the academy and literate subcultures unnoticed by the black community, or insurgent
creative activity on the margins of the mainstream ensconced within bludgeoning new
infrastructures.
BLACK INTELLECTUALS AND THE BLACK COMMUNITY
The paucity of black infrastructures for intellectual activity results, in part, from the inability of
black intellectuals to gain respect and support from the black community-and especially the
black middle class. In addition to the general antiintellectual tenor of American society, there is
a deep distrust and suspicion of the black community toward black intellectuals. This distrust
and suspicion stem not simply from the usual arrogant and haughty disposition of intellectuals
toward ordinary folk, but, more important, from the widespread refusal of black intellectuals to
remain, in some visible way, organically linked with Afro-American cultural life. The relatively
high rates of exogamous marriage, the abandonment of black institutions and the preoccupations
with Euro-American intellectual products are often perceived by the black community as
intentional efforts to escape the negative stigma of blackness or as symptoms of self-hatred. And
the minimal immediate impact of black intellectual activity on the black community and
American society reinforces common perceptions of the impotence, even uselessness, of black
intellectuals. In good American fashion, the black community lauds those black intellectuals who
excel as political activists and cultural artists; the life of the mind is viewed as neither
possessing intrinsic virtues nor harboring emancipatory possibilities-solely short-term political
gain and social status.
This truncated perception of intellectual activity is widely held by black intellectuals
themselves. Given the constraints on black upward social mobility and the pressures for status


--- PAGE 270 ---
and affluence among middle-class peers, many black intellectuals principally seek material gain
and cultural prestige. Since these intellectuals are members of an anxiety-ridden and status-
hungry black middle class, their proclivities are understandable and, to some extent, justifiable,
since most intellectuals are in search of recognition, status, power and often wealth. For black
intellectuals this search requires immersing oneself in and addressing oneself to the very culture
and society that degrade and devalue the black community from whence one comes. And, to put
it crudely, most black intellectuals tend to fall within the two camps created by this predicament:
"successful" ones, distant from (and usually condescending toward) the black community, and
"unsuccessful" ones, disdainful of the white intellectual world. But both camps remain marginal
to the black community-dangling between two worlds with little or no black infrastructural base.
Therefore, the "successful" black intellectual capitulates, often uncritically, to the prevailing
paradigms and research programs of the white bourgeois academy, and the "unsuccessful" black
intellectual remains encapsulated within the parochial discourses of Afro-American intellectual
life. The alternatives of meretricious pseudocosmopolitanism and tendentious, cathartic
provincialism loom large in the lives of black intellectuals. And the black community views both
alternatives with distrust and disdain-and with good reason. Neither alternative has had a
positive impact on the black community. The major black intellectuals from W. E. B. Du Bois
and St. Clair Drake to Ralph Ellison and Toni Morrison have shunned both alternatives.
This situation has resulted in the major obstacle confronting black intellectuals: the inability
to transmit and sustain the requisite institutional mechanisms for the persistence of a discernible
intellectual tradition. The racism of American society, the relative lack of black community
support and hence the dangling status of black intellectuals have prevented the creation of a rich
heritage of intellectual exchange, intercourse and dialogue. There indeed have been grand black
intellectual achievements, but such achievements do not substitute for tradition.
I would suggest that there are two organic intellectual traditions in Afro-American life: the
black Christian tradition of preaching and the black musical tradition of'ierfor- mance. Both
traditions, though undoubtedly linked to the life of the mind, are oral, improvisational and
histrionic. Both traditions are rooted in black life and possess precisely what the literate forms
of black intellectual activity lack: institutional matrices over time and space within which there
are accepted rules of procedure, criteria for judgment, canons for assessing performance,
models of past achievement and present emulation and an acknowledged succession and
accumulation of superb accomplishments. The richness, diversity and vitality of the traditions of
black preaching and black music stand in strong contrast to the paucity, even poverty, of black
literate intellectual production. There simply have been no black literate intellectuals who have
mastered their craft commensurate with the achievements of Louis Armstrong, Charlie Parker or
Rev. Manuel Scott just as there are no black literate intellectuals today comparable to Miles
Davis, Sarah Vaughan or Rev. Gardner Taylor. This is so not because there have been or are no
first-rate, black, literate intellectuals, but rather because without strong institutional channels to
sustain traditions, great achievement is impossible. And, to be honest, black America has yet to
produce a great, literate intellectual, with the sole exception of Toni Morrison. There indeed
have been superb ones-Du Bois, Frazier, Ellison, Baldwin, Hurston-and many good ones. But
none can compare to the heights achieved by black preachers and, especially musicians.


--- PAGE 271 ---
What is most troubling about black literate intellectual activity is that, as it slowly evolved
out of the black Christian tradition and interacted more intimately with secular Euro-American
styles and forms, it seemed as if, by the latter part of the twentieth century, maturation would set
it. Yet, as we approach the last few years of this century, black literate intellectual activity has
declined in both quantity and quality. As I noted earlier, this is so primarily because of
relatively greater black integration into postindustrial capitalist America with its bureaucratized,
elite universities, dull middlebrow colleges and decaying high schools, which have little
concern for and confidence in black students as potential intellectuals. Needless to say, the
predicament of the black intellectual is inseparable from that of the black community-especially
the black middle-class community-in American society. And only a fundamental transformation
of American society can possibly change the situation of the black community and the black
intellectual. And though my own Christian skepticism regarding human totalistic schemes for
change chasten my deep socialist sentiments regarding radically democratic and libertarian
socioeconomic and cultural arrangements, I shall forego these larger issues and focus on more
specific ways to enhance the quantity and quality of black literate intellectual activity in the
United States. This focus shall take the form of sketching four models for black intellectual
activity, with the intent to promote the crystallization of infrastructures for such activity.
THE BOURGEOIS MODEL: THE BLACK INTELLECTUAL AS HUMANIST
For black intellectuals, the bourgeois model of intellectual activity is problematic. On the one
hand, the racist heritage-aspects of the exclusionary and repressive effects of white academic
institutions and humanistic scholarship-puts black intellectuals on the defensive: There is always
the need to assert and defend the humanity of black people, including their ability and capacity to
reason logically, think coherently and write lucidly. The weight of this inescapable burden for
black students in the white academy has often determined the content and character of black
intellectual activity. In fact, black intellectual life remains largely preoccupied with such
defensiveness, with "successful" black intellectuals often proud of their white approval and
"unsuccessful" ones usually scornful of their white rejection. This concern is especially acute
among the first generation of black intellectuals accepted as teachers and scholars within elite
white universities and colleges, largely a post-1968 phenomenon. Only with the publication of
the intimate memoirs of these black intellectuals and their students will we have the gripping
stories of how this defensiveness cut at much of the heart of their intellectual activity and
creativity within white academic contexts. Yet, however personally painful such battles have
been, they had to be fought, given the racist milieu of American intellectual and academic life.
These battles will continue, but with much less negative consequences for the younger generation
because of the struggles by the older black trailblazers.
On the other hand, the state of siege raging in the black community requires that black
intellectuals accent the practical dimension of their work. And the prestige and status, as well as
the skills and techniques provided by the white bourgeois academy, render it attractive for the
task at hand. The accentuation of the practical dimension holds for most black intellectuals
regardless of ideological persuasion-even more than for the stereotypical, pragmatic American
intellectual. This is so not simply because of the power-seeking lifestyles and status-oriented
dispositions of many black intellectuals, but also because of their relatively small number,


--- PAGE 272 ---
which forces them to play multiple roles vis-a-vis the black community and, in addition,
intensifies their need for self-vindication-the attempt to justify to themselves that, given such
unique opportunities and privileges, they are spending their time as they ought-which often
results in activistic and pragmatic interests.
The linchpin of the bourgeois model is academic legitimation and placement. Without the
proper certificate, degree and position, the bourgeois model loses its raison d'etre. The influence
and attractiveness of the bourgeois model permeate the American academic system; yet the
effectiveness of the bourgeois model is credible for black intellectuals only if they possess
sufficient legitimacy and placement. Such legitimacy and placement will give one access to
select networks and contacts that may facilitate black impact on public policies. This seems to
have been the aim of the first generation of blacks trained in elite white institutions (though not
permitted to teach there), given their predominant interests in the social sciences.
The basic problem with the bourgeois model is that it is existentially and intellectually
stultifying for black intellectuals. It is existentially debilitating because it not only generates
anxieties of defensiveness on the part of black intellectuals; it also thrives on them. The need for
hierarchical ranking and the deep-seated racism shot through bourgeois humanistic scholarship
cannot provide black intellectuals with either the proper ethos or conceptual framework to
overcome a defensive posture. And charges of intellectual inferiority can never be met upon the
opponent's terrain-to try to do so only intensifies one's anxieties. Rather the terrain itself must be
viewed as part and parcel of an antiquated form of life unworthy of setting the terms of
contemporary discourse.
The bourgeois model sets intellectual limits, in that one is prone to adopt uncritically
prevailing paradigms predominant in the bourgeois academy because of the pressures of
practical tasks and deferential emulation. All intellectuals pass through some kind of
apprenticeship stage in which they learn the language and style of the authorities, but when they
are already viewed as marginally talented, they may be either excessively encouraged or
misleadingly discouraged to critically examine paradigms deemed marginal by the authorities.
This hostile environment results in the suppression of their critical analyses and in the limited
use of their skills in a manner considered legitimate and practical.
Despite its limitations, the bourgeois model is inescapable for most black intellectuals. This
is so because most of the important and illuminating discourses in the country take place in white
bourgeois academic institutions and because the more significant intellectuals teach in such
places. Many of the elite white universities and colleges remain high-powered schools of
education, learning and training principally due to large resources and civil traditions that
provide the leisure time and atmosphere necessary for sustained and serious intellectual
endeavor. So, aside from the few serious autodidactic black intellectuals (who often have
impressive scope, but lack grounding and depth), black intellectuals must pass through the white
bourgeois academy (or its black imitators).
Black academic legitimation and placement can provide a foothold in American intellectual
life so that black infrastructures for intellectual activity can be created. At present, there is a
small yet significant black presence within the white bourgeois academic organizations, and it is


--- PAGE 273 ---
able to produce newsletters and small periodicals. The next step is to more broadly
institutionalize black intellectual presence, as the Society of Black Philosophers of New York
has done, by publishing journals anchored in a discipline (crucial for the careers of prospective
professors), yet relevant to other disciplines. It should be noted that such a black infrastructure
for intellectual activity should attract persons of whatever hue or color. Black literary critics
and especially black psychologists are far ahead of other black intellectuals in this regard with
journals such as the Black American Literature Forum, the College Language Association and
the Journal of Black Psychology.
Black academic legitimation and placement also can result in black control over a portion of,
or significant participation within, the larger white infrastructures for intellectual activity. This
has not yet occurred on a broad scale. More black representation is needed on the editorial
boards of significant journals so that more black intellectual presence is permitted. This process
is much slower and has less visibility, yet, given the hegemony of the bourgeois model, it must
be pursued by those so inclined.
The bourgeois model is, in some fundamental and ultimate sense, more part of the problem
than the "solution" in regard to black intellectuals. Yet, since we live our lives daily and
penultimately within this system, those of us highly critical of the bourgeois model must try to
transform it, in part from within the white bourgeois academy. For black intellectuals-in alliance
with nonblack progressive intellectualsthis means creating and augmenting infrastructures for
black intellectual activity.
THE MARXIST MODEL: THE BLACK INTELLECTUAL AS REVOLUTIONARY
Among many black intellectuals, there is a knee-jerk reaction to the severe limitations of the
bourgeois model (and capitalist society)-namely, to adopt the Marxist model. This adoption
satisfies certain basic needs of the black intelligentsia: the need for social relevance, political
engagement and organizational involvement. The Marxist model also provides entry into the
least xenophobic white intellectual subculture available to black intellectuals.
The Marxist model privileges the activity of black intellectuals and promotes their prophetic
role. As Harold Cruse has noted, such privileging is highly circumscribed and rarely accents the
theoretical dimension of black intellectual activity. In short, the Marxist privileging of black
intellectuals often reeks of condescension that confines black prophetic roles to spokespersons
and organizers; only rarely are they allowed to function as creative thinkers who warrant serious
critical attention. It is no accident that the relatively large numbers of black intellectuals
attracted to Marxism over the past sixty years have yet to produce a major black Marxist
theoretician. Only W. E. B. Du Bois's Black Reconstruction (1935), Oliver Cox's Caste, Class
and Race (1948) and, to some degree, Harold Cruse's The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual
(1967) are even candidates for such a designation. This is so not because of the absence of black
intellectual talent in the Marxist camp, but rather because of the absence of the kind of tradition
and community (including intense critical exchange) that would allow such talent to flower.
In stark contrast to the bourgeois model, the Marxist model neither generates black intellectual
defensiveness nor provides an adequate analytical apparatus for short-term public policies.


--- PAGE 274 ---
Rather, the Marxist model yields black intellectual selfsatisfaction, which often inhibits growth;
it also highlights social structural constraints with little practical direction regarding
conjunctural opportunities. This self-satisfaction results in either dogmatic submission to and
upward mobility within sectarian party or pre-party formations, or marginal placement in the
bourgeois academy equipped with cantankerous Marxist rhetoric and sometimes insightful
analysis utterly divorced from the integral dynamics, concrete realities and progressive
possibilities of the black community. The preoccupation with social structural constraints tends
to produce either preposterous, chiliastic projections or paralyzing, pessimistic pronouncements.
Both such projections and pronouncements have as much to do with the self-image of black
Marxist intellectuals as with the prognosis for black liberation.
It is often claimed that "Marxism is the false consciousness of the radicalized, bourgeois
intelligentsia." For black intellectuals, the Marxist model functions in a more complex manner
than this glib formulation permits. On the one hand, the Marxist model is liberating for black
intellectuals in that it promotes critical consciousness and attitudes toward the dominant
bourgeois paradigms and research programs. Marxism provides attractive roles for black
intellectuals-usually highly visible leadership roles-and infuses new meaning and urgency into
their work. On the other hand, the Marxist model is debilitating for black intellectuals because
the cathartic needs it satisfies tend to stifle the further development of black critical
consciousness and attitudes.
The Marxist model, despite its shortcomings, is more part of the "solution" than part of the
problem for black intellectuals. This is so because Marxism is the brook of fire-the purgatory-of
our postmodern times. Black intellectuals must pass through it, come to terms with it and
creatively respond to it if black intellectual activity is to reach any recognizable level of
sophistication and refinement.
THE FOUCAULTIAN MODEL: THE BLACK INTELLECTUAL AS POSTMODERN
SKEPTIC
As Western intellectual life moves more deeply into crisis, and as black intellectuals become
more fully integrated into intellectual life-or into "the culture of careful and critical discourse"
(as the late Alvin Gouldner called it)-a new model appears on the horizon. This model, based
primarily upon the influential work of the late Michel Foucault, unequivocally rejects the
bourgeois model and eschews the Marxist model. It constitutes one of the most exciting
intellectual challenges of our day: the Foucaultian project of historical nominalism. This
detailed investigation into the complex relations of knowledge and power, discourses and
politics, cognition and social control compels intellectuals to rethink and redefine their self-
image and function in our contemporary situation.
The Foucaultian model and project are attractive to black intellectuals primarily because they
speak to the black postmodern predicament, defined by the rampant xenophobia of bourgeois
humanism predominant in the whole academy, the waning attraction to orthodox reductionist and
scientific versions of Marxism and the need for reconceptualization regarding the specificity and
complexity of Afro-American oppression. Foucault's deep antibourgeois sentiments, explicit
post-Marxist convictions and profound preoccupations with those viewed as radically "other"


--- PAGE 275 ---
by dominant discourses and traditions are quite seductive for politicized black intellectuals
wary of antiquated panaceas for black liberation.
Foucault's specific analyses of the "political economy of truth"-the study of discursive ways in
which and institutional means by which "regimes of truth" are constituted by societies over
space and time-result in a new conception of the intellectual. This conception no longer rests
upon the smooth transmittance of "the best that has been thought and said," as in the bourgeois
humanist model, or on the utopian energies of the Marxist model. Rather, the postmodern
situation requires "the specific intellectual" who shuns the labels of scientificity, civility and
prophecy and, instead, delves into the specificity of the political, economic, and cultural
matrices within which regimes of truth are produced, distributed, circulated and consumed. No
longer should intellectuals deceive themselves by believing-as do humanist and Marxist
intellectuals-that they are struggling "on behalf" of the truth; rather, the problem is the struggle
over the very status of truth and the vast institutional mechanisms that account for this status. The
favored code words of "science," "taste," "tact," "ideology," "progress" and "liberation" of
bourgeois humanism and Marxism are no longer applicable to the self-image of postmodern
intellectuals. Instead, the new key terms become those of "regime of truth," "power/knowledge"
and "discursive practices."
Foucault's notion of the specific intellectual rests upon his demystification of conservative,
liberal and Marxist rhetorics that restore, resituate and reconstruct intellectuals' self-identities
so that they remain captive to and supportive of institutional forms of domination and control.
These rhetorics authorize and legitimate, in different ways, the privileged status of intellectuals,
which not only reproduces ideological divisions between intellectual and manual labor, but also
reinforces disciplinary mechanisms of subjection and subjugation. This self-authorizing is best
exemplified in the claims made by intellectuals that they "safeguard" the achievements of
highbrow culture or "represent" the "universal interests" of particular classes and groups. In
Afro-American intellectual history, similar self-authorizing claims such as "the talented tenth,"
"prophets in the wilderness," "articulators of a black aesthetic," "creators of a black
renaissance" and "vanguard of a revolutionary movement" are widespread.
The Foucaultian model promotes a leftist form of postmodern skepticism; that is, it encourages
an intense and incessant interrogation of power-laden discourses in the service of neither
restoration, reformation nor revolution, but rather of revolt. And the kind of revolt enacted by
intellectuals consists of the disrupting and dismantling of prevailing "regimes of truth"-including
their repressive effects-of present-day societies. This model suits the critical, skeptical and
historical concerns of progressive black intellectuals and provides a sophisticated excuse for
ideological and social distance from insurgent black movements for liberation. By conceiving of
intellectual work as oppositional political praxis, it satisfies the leftist self-image of black
intellectuals, and, by making a fetish of critical consciousness, it encapsulates black intellectual
activity within the comfortable bourgeois academy of postmodern America.
THE INSURGENCY MODEL: THE BLACK INTELLECTUAL AS CRITICAL,
ORGANIC CATALYST


--- PAGE 276 ---
Black intellectuals can learn much from each of the three previous models, yet should not
uncritically adopt any one of them. This is so because the bourgeois, Marxist and Foucaultian
models indeed relate to, but do not adequately speak to, the uniqueness of the black intellectual
predicament. This uniqueness remains relatively unexplored, and will remain so until black
intellectuals articulate a new "regime of truth" linked to, yet not confined by, indigenous
institutional practices permeated by the kinetic orality and emotional physicality, the rhythmic
syncopation, the protean improvisation and the religious, rhetorical and antiphonal elements of
Afro-American life. Such articulation depends, in part, upon elaborate black infrastructures that
put a premium on creative and cultivated black thought; it also entails intimate knowledge of
prevailing Euro-American "regimes of truth," which must be demystified, deconstructed and
decomposed in ways that enhance and enrich future black intellectual life. The new "regime of
truth" to be pioneered by black thinkers is neither a hermetic discourse (or set of discourses),
which safeguards mediocre black intellectual production, nor the latest fashion of black writing,
which is often motivated by the desire to parade for the white bourgeois intellectual
establishment. Rather it is inseparable from the emergence of new cultural forms that prefigure
(and point toward) a post- (not anti-) Western civilization. At present, such talk may seem mere
dream and fantasy. So we shall confine ourselves to the first step: black insurgency and the role
of the black intellectual.
The major priority of black intellectuals should be the creation or reactivation of institutional
networks that promote high-quality critical habits primarily for the purpose of black insurgency.
An intelligentsia without institutionalized critical consciousness is blind, and critical
consciousness severed from collective insurgency is empty. The central task of postmodern
black intellectuals is to stimulate, hasten and enable alternative perceptions and practices by
dislodging prevailing discourses and powers. This can be done only by intense intellectual work
and engaged insurgent praxis.
The insurgency model for black intellectual activity builds upon, yet goes beyond, the
previous three models. From the bourgeois model, it recuperates the emphasis on human will
and heroic effort. Yet the insurgency model refuses to conceive of this will and effort in
individualistic and elitist terms. Instead of the solitary hero, embattled exile and isolated genius-
the intellectual as star, celebrity, commodity-this model privileges collective intellectual work
that contributes to communal resistance and struggle. In other words, it creatively accents the
voluntarism and heroism of the bourgeois model, but it rejects the latter's naivete about society
and history. From the Marxist model, it recovers the stress on structural constraints, class
formations and radical democratic values. Yet the insurgency model does not view these
constraints, formations and values in economistic and deterministic terms. Instead of the a priori
privileging of the industrial working class and the metaphysical positing of a relatively
harmonious socialist society, there is the wholesale assault on varieties of social hierarchy and
the radical democratic (and libertarian) mediation, not elimination, of social heterogeneity. In
short, the insurgency model ingeniously incorporates the structural, class and democratic
concerns of the Marxist model, yet it acknowledges the latter's naivete about culture.
Last, from the Foucaultian model, the insurgency model recaptures the preoccupation with
worldly skepticism, the historical constitution of "regimes of truth" and the multifarious


--- PAGE 277 ---
operations of "power/knowledge." Yet the insurgency model does not confine this skepticism,
this truth-constituting and detailed genealogical inquiry to micronetworks of power. Instead of
the ubiquity of power (which simplifies and flattens multidimensional social conflict) and the
paralyzing overreaction to past utopianisms, there is the possibility of effective resistance and
meaningful societal transformation. The insurgency model carefully highlights the profound
Nietzschean suspicion and the illuminating oppositional descriptions of the Foucaultian model,
though it recognizes the latter's naivete about social conflict, struggle and insurgency-a naivete
primarily caused by the rejection of any form of utopianism and any positing of a telos.
Black intellectual work and black collective insurgency must be rooted in the specificity of
Afro-American life and history; but they also are inextricably linked to the American, European
and African elements that shape and mold them. Such work and insurgency are explicitly
particularist though not exclusivist-hence they are international in outlook and practice. Like
their historical forerunnersblack preachers and black musical artists (with all their strengths and
weak- nesses)-black intellectuals must realize that the creation of "new" and alternative
practices results from the heroic efforts of collective intellectual work and communal resistance
that shape and are shaped by present structural constraints, workings of power and modes of
cultural fusion. The distinctive Afro-American cultural forms such as the black sermonic and
prayer styles, gospels, blues and jazz should inspire, but not constrain, future black intellectual
production; that is, the process by which they came to be should provide valuable insights, but
they should serve as models to neither imitate nor emulate. Needless to say, these forms thrive
on incessant critical innovation and concomitant insurgency.
THE FUTURE OF THE BLACK INTELLECTUAL
The predicament of the black intellectual need not be grim and dismal. Despite the pervasive
racism of American society and anti-intellectualism of the black Community, critical space and
insurgent activity can be expanded. This expansion will occur more readily when black
intellectuals take a more candid look at themselves, the historical and social forces that shape
them and the limited though significant resources of the community from whence they come. A
critical "selfinventory "-which this essay schematically sets forth-that scrutinizes the social
positions, class locations and cultural socializations of black intellectuals is imperative. Such
scrutiny should be motivated by neither self pity nor self-satisfaction. Rather, this "self-
inventory" should embody the sense of critique and resistance applicable to the black
community, American society and Western civilization as a whole. James Baldwin has noted
that the black intellectual is "a kind of bastard of the West." The future of the black intellectual
lies neither in a deferential disposition toward the Western parent nor a nostalgic search for the
African one. Rather, it resides in a critical negation, wise preservation and insurgent
transformation of this hybrid lineage that protects the earth and projects a better world.
SOURCA:: From Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual Li/e, by bell hooks and Cornel West
(Cambridge, Mass.: South End Press, 1991), pp. 131-146. Originally appeared in Cultural Critique 1,
no. 1 (1985).


--- PAGE 278 ---



--- PAGE 279 ---
A M E R I C A N P R O G R E S S I V I S M R E O R I E N T E D
I remember hearing about Roberto Unger, the Brazilian intellectual wonder tenured at Harvard
Law School in his mid-twenties, in 1976, and I attended his famous dramatic lectures on Marx,
Weber, Durkheim and others soon after. I first met him in a Habermas seminar on American
philosophy in Frankfurt, Germany, in 1987. Our common friend and connection was Richard
Rorty. We met in New York City a few times in the years that followed, and when I arrived at
Harvard in 1994, we decided to teach courses together on race, nation and democracy-as well
as American democracyat the law school. After three years of discussion, we published The
Future of American Progressivism (1998). This section from the book puts forward a full
fledged set of programs that could get us beyond the present impasse of a neoliberal Democratic
party and conservative Republican party. Unger's democratic experimentalism and my radical
democracy come together in a fascinating way.
THE WORK OF AMERICAN progressivism today is to democratize the market economy and
energize representative democracy. Progressives should build the link between economic
reforms designed to challenge the stark divisions between vanguards and rearguards, and
political reforms intended to quicken democratic politics in America.
The program we outline opposes dualism, the division of the economy into a rigid contrast of
advanced and backward sectors, and proposes a deepening of democracy: strengthening the
tools for the collective discussion and solution of collective problems. It is, therefore, a
productivist program, rooting a bias toward more equality of income and wealth in a set of
economic arrangements and a strategy of economic growth, rather than merely attempting,
through retrospective and compensatory tax-and-transfer, to undo part of what the economy has
wrought. It rejects the simple contrast between governmental activism and free enterprise not
because it wants to have a little of each, but because it insists upon having more of both. To this
end, our program offers to renovate the institutional machinery for a decentralized and
experimental partnership between government and business. It seeks to extend the rights of labor,
increasing the wage take from national income. The point is to do so in ways that serve the
interests of the working people of the country as a whole rather than benefit the relatively
privileged and organized workers in capital- and technology-rich industries. It goes beyond the
fight against racial discrimination to the redress of racial injustice while recognizing that the
problems of racial injustice are inseparable from the problems of class injustice. Our program
defends a refinancing of the government on a basis that reconciles a high tax yield-and therefore
a more effective governmental ability to invest in people's capabilities-with the need to
preserve, indeed to strengthen, incentives to work, save and invest. It both exemplifies and
encourages the master practice of democratic experimentalism: motivated, sustained and
cumulative tinkering with the institutional arrangements of the government and the economy. It
relies on a more engaged and informed citizenry rather than on a more enlightened technocratic
elite. And it maps out the steps that make possible the gradual emergence of a lasting transracial
progressive majority in American politics as both the condition and the consequence of the
democratizing changes it proposes. It is not the humanization of the inevitable; it is the
alternative to an unnecessary and unacceptable fate. It is the American religion of possibility
translated into a plan for the next step.


--- PAGE 280 ---
A key assumption of this proposal is that the focus of ideological controversy and institutional
innovation throughout the world has shifted. The old conflict between market and command,
progovernment and antigovernment, is dead or dying. The days of pitting state planning against
laissez-faire policies are over. They are giving way to a new contest between the alternative
institutional forms of representative democracies, market economies and free civil societies.
The institutional arrangements for political, economic and social pluralism now established in
the North Atlantic world will turn out to be a subset of a larger set of institutional and social
possibilities. We must now look to a democratic civilization that embraces new ways of
organizing and deepening political, economic and social freedom.
Institutions house civilizations. Ideals live in practices. By pursuing divergent institutional
pathways, according to their own needs and strivings, countries will reveal the vital role of
national distinctions in a world of democracies: to develop the powers and possibilities of
humanity in different directions. The United States-the most experimentalist of modern nations-
has the most to gain, spiritually as well as practically, from this rebirth of its religion of human
possibility on a global scale. The doctrine of the one true way flatters the country, and betrays it.
Here are some of the planks in a progressive platform faithful to these ambitions. They are
meant to mark a path rather than to define a blueprint. Each of their elements is controversial.
Each element could be replaced by equivalent de vices. Taken together, they nevertheless
indicate a way to begin from where we are now. This path can lead, by small, incremental steps,
into a society that is more democratic and more innovative. In that society the grid of class,
gender and race weighs less heavily upon our life in common.
TAXES: FROM LIBERAL PIETIES TO REDISTRIBUTIVE REALITIES
The United States has the lowest aggregate tax take of any of the major industrial countries: the
revenues of the federal government amount to 20 percent of GDP and the revenues of all three
levels of American government to 36 percent GDP (as contrasted, for example, with 47 percent
of GDP in France in a recent year). A considerable body of evidence shows that people in many
countries support a high tax base tenaciously as long as its improved social, educational and
health benefits are palpable. To be sure, we must not kill the goose that lays the golden eggs,
dampening incentives to work, save and invest. One solution may be to reform taxation so that it
falls on consumption rather than on income.
Progressives regularly oppose consumption taxes, particularly when they apply to transactions
(as in a sales tax) rather than to individuals. Such taxes are admittedly regressive because they
hit the poor proportionately more than the rich. Business interests, for the same reason, favor
them. The business interests and the progressives are both mistaken. The most important lesson
of comparative tax experience of First World nations is that redistribution takes place much
more on the spending side of the budget than on its revenue-raising side. In other words, it
matters less how fair the raising of revenue is than how much the government takes if it can use
what it takes to help the people who most need help. The United States has on paper one of the
most progressive tax systems in the industrialized world, and the greatest levels of social and


--- PAGE 281 ---
economic inequality. Despairing of a political economy that would achieve real redistribution,
American progressives today prefer to genuflect to progressive pieties than to achieve
progressive results.
Broad-based taxation of consumption (as through the so-called comprehensive, flat-rate,
value-added tax) can make it possible to increase revenues while easing the burden of taxation
upon saving and investment. It is a money machine. In a second stage, once tax reform has
secured the basis of a strong revenue flow friendly to economic growth, we can begin to give a
larger role to two sets of redistributive taxes. One would be the direct taxation, on a steeply
progressive scale, of what an individual spends on his own consumption with a basic level of
spending left untaxed-like an income tax with an exemption for saving. The other would be taxes
on the accumulation of wealth and on its transmission through family inheritance and family gifts.
American democracy should work toward the generalization of a principle of social
inheritance. Everyone should be able to count on a minimum of resources. These resources are
the tools of self-reliance, not an alternative to self-reliance. People should have a social-
endowment account, so that society can do for everyone a little bit of what family inheritance
does for a few. At major moments in their lives-when they go to college, make a down payment
on a house, or open a business-they should be able to draw on this account. The minimum
account should increase according to two countervailing principles: compensation for special
need or handicap according to predefined criteria and reward for special capacity,
competitively demonstrated.
PENSIONS, SAVING AND INVESTMENT: THE RESOURCES FOR GROWTH
Capital is now supposed to be globalized. It is not. The truth is that only a small portion of
investment funds crosses national frontiers, and in doing so sometimes makes a big ruckus. The
architects of the new, neoliberal world economy are building, in the name of economic freedom,
an order that allows capital to roam all over the globe and imprisons labor in the nation-state.
Most capital nevertheless stays at home.
For a long time, the United States has fallen into the habit of depending upon other people's
money: Foreigners put their money in the United States, buy the public debt of the American
government and even hold-abroad-most of the paper currency. Like many pieces of undeserved
good fortune, this one has its dark side. It helps keep the United States from facing the full
consequences, or recognizing the full dimensions, of its low saving level. Gross domestic saving
in the United States is 15 percent of GDP, well below what it is in many other rich economies.
Dependence upon foreign saving limits the freedom of maneuver in American economic policy
and makes economic growth in America hostage to events in other parts of the world.
The need to raise the level of saving in order to ensure sustained economic progress is an
opportunity as well as a problem, for it can help push the country in a direction in which it has
other reasons to travel. It provides a context in which to reconcile faster economic growth with a
more equal distribution of national wealth.
A shift to consumption-based taxation may help raise the saving level by exempting saving


--- PAGE 282 ---
from taxation as well as by helping the federal government avoid future deficits. However, the
greatest, because most direct, boost to saving is likely to come from a system for the public
organization of compulsory private saving. The most important setting in which to introduce such
a system is Social Security and private-pension reform. The United States hardly needs the
astronomical saving rate (51 percent) that tiny Singapore has achieved under an unnecessarily
bureaucratic and centralized version of such a system of required private saving. All it needs is
to do better, socially as well as economically, than it has.
The law would require everyone to save in special pension funds a certain percentage of their
incomes, defined on a progressive scale according to income levels. Middle-level income
earners would keep what they get. High earners would have some of what they save
redistributed away from them into the accounts of low earners. Low earners, demonstrating
either that they work or that they suffer from a problem that prevents them from working, would
have money distributed into their accounts (simply an extension of the principal of the earned-
income tax credit, which long enjoyed bipartisan support).
The money would be paid into a broad range of independently managed and competitive
funds-not just conventional mutual funds, investing in the established equity and bond markets,
but mixed public-private venture-capital funds, investing in new business. Many of these
venture-capital funds would be chartered to invest in a diversified mix of start-up firms, and
some would get matching or contributory funds or credit enhancements from government to
invest in the small and medium-sized businesses of the economic rearguard. Once fully
developed, such a system would replace both Social Security and private pensions.
Is this proposal a pay-as-you-go redistributive pension scheme like Social Security? Or a get-
what-you-saved saving scheme like private pensions? It combines the market orientation of the
latter with the equalizing commitments of the former. Is it a marginal improvement to the existing
conduit between saving and productive investment offered by banks and stock markets? Or is it
the beginning of an attempt to build, alongside banks and stock markets, an additional bridge
between saving and productive investment? We cannot tell beforehand, and it hardly matters.
In the United States, as in other industrial economies, an average of 80 percent of investment
in production by businesses of all sizes comes from "retained earnings," what companies save
from profits. Most of what individuals save disappears into a financial casino, a money-filled
black hole with haphazard, uneven relevance to the funding of production and innovation.
Venture capital-the financing of new enterprise by outside investors-remains a tiny sideshow to
the operations of this casino. In the spirit of democratic experimentalism, we should try to find a
way to tap more of the productive potential of saving by innovating in the economic
arrangements that make saving available to enterprise. We should do so in ways that help
anchor, in the core institutions of the economy, a bias toward greater equality of access and
greater freedom of initiative.
CHILDREN AND EDUCATION: THE FUTURE FIRST
The top priority of social legislation in the United States today, and the greatest justification for
a high tax take, should be child protection. The law must ensure food and medical and dental


--- PAGE 283 ---
support through families or neighborhoods to every child who needs them.
Thirty-eight percent of poor people in the United States are children. The contrast between the
relative generosity for the old-through Social Security and Medicare-and the cruel and stupid
abandonment of the young is one of the great injustices of American life. Frustration with the
results of programs like Aid to Families with Dependent Children has now prompted Democrats
to join with Republicans in broadening what was already a tremendous gap.
Experience throughout the world has taught us that such support is more effective when
families and community groups share in the formulation as well as the implementation of
programs, turning public-resource transfers into devices of social solidarity and triggers for
social organization. A parent movement that enables the nurturers of our society to come through
for their children is a good start. The partnership of a weakened family with a welfare
bureaucracy falls short. It must be backed up, and transformed, by the action of neighborhood
associations and family networks. Cooperative, supervised preschooling and afterschool care
can form part of their job.
Social supports for children can serve as the front line in the development of social rights for
everyone. For example, the sensible and characteristically American way to introduce universal,
publicly backed health insurance would be to begin by guaranteeing health insurance to all
children. In the setting of child support, we could try out different mixes of public funding and
private payment, of public oversight and private management. The successful models in
universal health insurance for children could then be extended, by incremental steps, to the adult
population.
The child crisis converges with the failure of the American public school system to
accomplish a central part of the mission of schools in a democracy: to rescue children from the
limitations of class and family situation, giving them access to a world of longer memory,
broader imagination and stronger ambition. The professional and business class avoids this
failure either by living in upscale neighborhoods, with better than average public schools, or by
sending their children to private schools. The majority of public schools become both a source
and a mirror of social apartheid in America. This crisis is not the inevitable price of political
and economic freedom; it is simply the result of bad arrangements, bad ideas and bad politics.
With the strengthening of a national focus upon the future, and therefore upon children, we can
address anew the reform of public education. Three principles should guide our efforts.
The first principle is that, in a democracy, the child must be available to the school; it is not
enough for the school to be available to the child. To exercise effectively the right to a public
education, children need ample support, if necessary, from the government and, if possible, in
their families.
The second principle is that everyone should master a core set of generic conceptual and
practical skills, getting ready for a life of instability, learning and innovation. Specialized study
and vocational training should supplement rather than replace education in these basic,
multipurpose skills. What begins in childhood should extend throughout life in the form of


--- PAGE 284 ---
continuing adult education.
The third principle is that, if democracy is to triumph, localism in education should be
contained. Schools should be able to rely upon state and national as well as local finance so that
they do not reproduce the economic advantages and disadvantages of their communities. Nor
should their curricula passively reflect community attitudes. If parent participation is important,
so is the role of the school as a counterweight to the limitations of local opinion and family
circumstance.
The school in a democracy should take no part in delivering to children the ancient message of
the family or the local community: Become like me. It has a bigger job-to equip children with the
means to think and to stand on their own feet, bringing the ideas and experiences of far away or
long ago to bear upon the understanding and the criticism of the here and now. The school should
examine possibilities of imagination and of life that the surrounding society is unable or
unwilling to countenance. It should be the voice of the future-of alternative futures-within the
present, and it should recognize in children, the future workers and citizens, little prophets.
Thus, we need to prevent any one level of government and any one form of connection
between school, community and family from having the definitive say over what goes on in the
classroom. A system of multiple accountability, multiple guidance and multiple funding-from
federal, state and municipal levels of government-will help liberate the public schools from
exclusive dependence upon local control and give them the economic and cultural resources
with which to form free people.
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND CLASS INJUSTICE: How NOT TO FORGET
ABOUT ONE WHILE DEALING WITH THE OTHER
Racial antagonisms hurt American democracy in two ways: first, by the evils of racial
discrimination and segregation and, second, by the obstacles they create to the redress of class
injustice. Working Americans remain divided by race, struggling under the injustices of racial
oppression and resentful of what often seem to be the unjust effects of policies designed to right
racial wrongs. These divisions have helped keep them from uniting around leaders,
organizations, policies and programs committed to loosen the constraints that class status
imposes on the life chances of individuals. The present body of antidiscrimination law and
policy-ineluding affirmative action-has become both part of the solution and part of the problem.
The flaw in the conventional approach to racial discrimination and affirmative action today is
that it sits uncomfortably between two missions, accomplishing neither fully and making the
execution of the one seem a hindrance to the achievement of the other. One goal is the struggle
against racial discrimination; the other is the improvement of the circumstances of a racially
marked underclass.
The legal and political triumphs of the civil rights movement, in and outside government, have
succeeded in diminishing the force of racial discrimination throughout American life. It would
be perverse to belittle this achievement. Nevertheless, the antidiscrimination law we now have
may be too little to combat the hardened, substantial forms of racial pr, judice that remain. In


--- PAGE 285 ---
some areas-affirmative action first among them-established law and practice go beyond
antidiscrimination to some element of active preferment in jobs and education in favor of blacks
and other groups that continue to suffer from racial oppression. However, law and practice
move toward this goal without either reaching or acknowledging it; the majority of the country
and its jurists reject a policy of race-based compensatory privileges. In the meantime, however,
this confused, halfhearted policy produces some benefits-captured disproportionately by the
elites of the favored groups (the black professional and business class, for example)-and
countless resentments-felt by the white losers, real or imagined. These resentments help prevent
the development of the transracial progressive majority we need.
The solution is to cut boldly through this tangle of inhibiting confusions, clearly distinguishing
antidiscrimination from the larger effort to redress the difficult mixture of racial and class
injustice-and devising means suited to each of these two objectives.
Progressives should confront racial discrimination as a distinct evil. They should persuade
Americans to follow the example of some other countries, criminalizing its most serious
instances. At the same time we should insist upon creating many more situations in American life
where people of different races work, study and live together, discovering in their human
individualities likenesses and differences that cut across racial divisions. Now that there is
disappointment with the cause of racial desegregation, the case for pressing it as a tonic to
American democracy has never been stronger.
The suffering of a black and Latino underclass that combines racial stigma with class
subjugation presents a different problem, requiring different solutions. We do need a policy of
active preferment in education and jobs in favor of those caught in entrenched situations of
social disadvantage and exclusion from which they cannot escape, readily or at all, by their own
initiative. However, we should not base this preferment solely on race, for race is typically just
one element, although often a major one, of the social disablement we seek to repair.
The law should develop standards to give a special push in schooling and employment-and
therefore also in admissions and hirings-to those who suffer from an accumulation of forms of
disadvantage from which they cannot be expected to escape on their own. Prominent among
these sources of subjugation are class, race, gender and handicap. We know for a fact that it is
the convergence of some of these factors in the life situation of individuals that may prevent them
from seizing upon the opportunities of American society. Placed in this context, the offer of
preferment loses its invidious, narrowly racial character. We can defend it, as a matter of the
law and the Constitution (although it would surely require a change of present constitutional
understandings), because it helps make feasible the demand for individual self-reliance. It helps
keep the promise of equal opportunity for all.
Such an effort is useful and even necessary. It is, however, no substitute for the broader
attempt to democratize the market economy in America, narrowing the gap between vanguard
and rearguard. We must take it for what it is: a subsidiary tool of social policy, but a major
vindication of justice for the individual.
ECONOMIC VANGUARDISM OUTSIDE THE VANGUARD: NARROWING THE CAP


--- PAGE 286 ---
BETWEEN THE ADVANCED AND BACKWARD SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY
The most important issue of political economy today in the United States, as throughout the
world, is not deficits, taxes, saving or even, in the conventional sense, jobs. It is the social form
that will be taken by a way of working together and producing goods and services that is
beginning to reconstruct economies all over the globe. A method of collaboration rather than a
technology of production lies at the heart of this advanced economy, although technologies of
information and communication have helped equip it. It is a method of flattened hierarchies and
permanent innovation, of fluid job definitions and constant reshaping of products, services and
practices. It combines teamwork with competition. It is production as learning. It can be carried
out by decentralized big businesses or by cooperative-competitive networks of small and
medium-sized businesses. It thrives under particular conditions: a background of community life
and good government, especially good local government-able to ensure high-quality basic
education, opportunities for continuous reskilling, dense networks of association and the high
trust such networks breed-as well as first-rate transport and communication facilities. It is not
just for making computers and software or for supplying highly paid professional services; it is
for doing anything. Flexible, hightechnology, and knowledge-rich production is here to stay.
Where such conditions are largely present, national government can take a back seat. Without
intervention, economic vanguardism flourishes in an isolated, advantaged part of the economy.
That is the situation we see emerging in America as elsewhere: a world of advanced sectors and
regions connected with one another and weakly linked to the backward sectors and regions of
their own societies.
The reordering of production as learning will happen one way or another. The crucial issue is
whether it will happen in forms that are more or less socially inclusive. The work of
progressives must be to steer it in an inclusive direction. To that end, we need to fashion the
instruments for decentralized, participatory and experimentalist styles of partnership between
government and business. To push economic vanguardism beyond the social and geographic
frontiers of the conventional vanguards, we need national and local governments able to help
create the missing conditions and to help form the missing agents.
We should reject the false choice between the idea of arms'-length government (embraced by
free-market orthodoxy) and the contrasting practice (exemplified by some of the northeast Asian
"tiger economies") of a centralized economic bureaucracy formulating industrial and trade
strategy, subsidizing credit and rewarding promise or success with favor. Instead, we should
develop a broad-based and market-friendly effort to lift up the rearguard.
Such an effort would have four elements. The first element is the focus on child protection and
educational renewal and the use of child-centered support programs to encourage the
development of community groups. Without an organized local society, able to take care of its
children, vanguardism outside the vanguard has no chance. A second element is the creation of
technical support centers, reskilling services and small-business incubators to assist private
initiative outside the advanced sectors of the economy. A major responsibility of such centers
would be to help identify and propagate successful work and business practices as they
emerged. A third element is the organization of associations among firms. The associated


--- PAGE 287 ---
businesses would pool financial, commercial and technical resources in some areas while
competing with one another in others. A fourth element is the broadening of access to finance
and technology through the establishment of independently administered venture-capital funds,
chartered to invest in the rearguard and to conserve and grow the resources with which they
would be endowed. Experience suggests that, with accountable but independent management and
properly diversified investment portfolios, such funds can achieve high rates of return on their
endowments.
Different kinds of property relations between the funds and their client firms would develop
over time. Some funds would keep a distance from their clients, auctioning capital off to a
diversified group of entrepreneurs with the best prospects of making good on the investment and
taking equity stakes in the firms they helped start, as any venture capitalist would. Other funds
would nurture close and lasting relations with a group of similar small businesses, becoming the
financial and technical brain and arm of a little confederation of firms. Property would be
divided up in different ways between funds and firms, and different regimes of private and
social property and decentralized initiative would begin to coexist experimentally within the
economy.
The outcome of such experiments is not the suppression of the market; it is the democratizing
and diversification of the market. It is the road to closing the gap between vanguard and
rearguard. It is the refusal to let the global reshaping of production continue on an exclusive and
divisive course.
AN ORGANIZED SOCIETY AND AN EMPOWERED LABOR FORCE: THE TOOLS
AND RESOURCES OF ASSOCIATION
A disorganized society cannot generate conceptions of its alternative futures or act on them.
Organization is power, a power essential to a vigorous democracy. Disorganization is surrender
to drift, to accident, to fate. America has always been famous for its wealth of voluntary
associations. Today, however, Americans are more disassociated than ever before: living alone,
often without friends, and less engaged in unions, clubs, fraternal orders and even local
government or parentteacher associations. Only in church, synagogue and mosque attendance do
the numbers seem to hold up, faith in God having outlived, for many Americans, hope in society.
It is not enough to call for a rebirth of the spirit of voluntary association, for although we may
call the spirit, it may not come. Instead, we need to reexamine and reconstruct the institutional
setting in which association thrives. Reforms in labor law, local government law and federal tax
law can help renew the force and democratize the scope of associational activity in America.
Such reforms can also diminish the force of a striking and troubling feature of associational
life in all contemporary industrial democracies. The associations with a message for society at
large-clubs and churches as well as political partiesremain detached from the everyday world of
work and production. Practical associations involved in this everyday world-firms and unions-
lack such a message; their job is to make money and defend the interests of their members. If the
established rules of contract and corporate law that people use to create and maintain practical
associations are indeed like a language, capable of expressing any thought, then the problem is


--- PAGE 288 ---
that those who speak this language may have little to say, while those who have something to say
are unable to speak it.
Society should be independently organized outside the government-a simple idea with
complicated and controversial implications. One major site of organization is work. Labor laws
need to be strengthened not to deepen divisions between a minority of relatively privileged
workers in traditional industry and everyone else, but to facilitate unionization everywhere. As
temporary work increases in many sectors of the economy, we need to reform the labor laws to
encourage the unionization of temporary workers and to ensure the blend of legal regulation of
the employment relation and collective bargaining with the employer that is appropriate to their
circumstances. More generally, we have to create a structure in which union representation of
workers and collaborative profit sharing with workers come to be seen as complementary rather
than incompatible approaches. Otherwise, we shall have allowed a contest between cooperation
at work and association among workers to develop at the heart of industry, threatening the
project of greater economic democracy in America.
An emphasis on early and continuing education and reskilling rather than on job tenure, the
development of varied forms of worker protection suited to the circumstances of a segmented
labor force and a commitment to generalize the principle of worker participation in company
profits can combine to reverse one of the most antidemocratic trends in recent American life: the
decrease of the wage take from national income. Moreover, this trend can be reversed without
threatening the high employment levels the United States has happily achieved. The ability to
raise the real value of wages, without threatening jobs and economic growth or risking inflation,
will be further strengthened if we succeed in replacing all payroll taxes by the consumption-
oriented taxation we advocate.
What we must resist at any cost is the entrenchment of stark divisions between insiders-
relatively privileged, organized workers with jobs in the capital- and knowledge-rich sectors of
the economy-and outsiders-workers with unstable, dead-end jobs in the capital- and knowledge-
poor sectors. It is a division that has helped bring European social democracy to grief.
Traditional social democrats often fight for something close to job tenure for workers with the
good jobs and promote, under the slogan of stakeholding, a mini-constitutionalism of the firm:
Consumer groups and local communities as well as workers would have a say or even a veto
over management decisions. It is a formula that sets up a tension between defending workers'
rights and promoting economic flexibility and innovation. Moreover, it is predicated on a
division between insiders and outsiders and can help reinforce it. Instead of enshrining job
tenure, we want to enhance the capabilities of workers through devices such as government-
supported continuous reskilling and social-endowment accounts. Instead of a rigid scheme of
checks and balances in corporate governance, we propose radically to decentralize and
democratize access to productive resources and opportunities through means such as the public-
private venture-capital funds and technical support centers we earlier described.
If work is one site of voluntary association, community life is another. We could, for example,
create legal mechanisms for the selection of community coun cils or neighborhood associations
outside the structure of local government. Such councils could be elected on a neighborhood


--- PAGE 289 ---
basis to engage individual citizens as well as community groups in the solution of the social-not
the physical or financial-problems of the neighborhood, for example, working with the police to
set up community policing, identifying children in trouble and referring them or their families to
the right sources of public or private assistance and intervening with hospitals, insurers, and
bureaucracies when the old and the sick need help. This work would be neither continuous nor
paid. It would be a form of social leadership, somewhere in between private charity and public
office. Those who performed it would have, as a matter of law, only advisory power but, as a
matter of practical effect, as much influence as their organizing efforts allowed them to exert.
Private philanthropy has been a powerful engine of voluntary action in the United States. It
survives, however, on a tax favor. Thus, its consequence is to magnify the voice of the rich,
allowing them to ride their social and cultural hobbyhorses. Thanks to the tax laws, their poorer
fellow citizens co-sign these gifts whether they want to or not and whether they know it or not.
Why not democratize the tax favor? For every tax-deducted dollar the donor were allowed to
use as he or she wished, a certain portion of the donor's dollars would have to go into a common
fund, with the percentage calculated to preserve the force of the tax incentive. That fund, with
decentralized governance and independent trustees drawn from every walk of American life,
would finance social groups who applied to it for help-through, for example, matching funds or
matching commitments of free labor time-to carry out their own charitable activities. The
disincentive to private contributions would be limited; the impact upon the resource base of
voluntary action in America, immense.
POLITICS, MONEY AND MEDIA: QUICKENING THE TEMPO OF DEMOCRACY
For better and worse, Americans revere their Constitution. They early rejected Thomas
Jefferson's advice to replace the Constitution completely every few generations. As a result, they
hesitate to fiddle with the setup of the government, and they often prefer to revise (or rather to let
Supreme Court justices revise) their Constitution by reinterpreting it rather than by changing it
outright.
There are many constitutional reforms that would be worth discussing if the American
antipathy to constitutional redesign were less severe. Consider one such example. Admittedly
outside the agenda of feasible contemporary concerns, it nevertheless suggests both the price of
constitutional conservatism and the possible direction of political reform. Moreover, it clarifies
the vision underlying the here-and-now political innovations we do propose further ahead.
Madison's scheme for the Constitution combined two principles: an insistence upon the
dispersal of political power and a plan to slow politics down by establishing a rough
correspondence betweer. the transformative reach of a political project and the severity of the
constitutional obstacles it has to overcome in the course of its execution. Both principles
combine in the system of "checks and balances" among branches of government: Franklin
Roosevelt, for example, had to wage a tremendous struggle until he got the Supreme Court as
well as the Congress on his side, and he had an economic and social disaster working for him.
These two principles-the fragmentation of political power and the slowing down of political
change-could, however, be disconnected in the interests of a deepened democracy. We might


--- PAGE 290 ---
want to keep the first principle and rid ourselves of the second. For example, think of the
following way to combine characteristics of the presidential and parliamentary systems of
government. If the president and the Congress disagree about a program of reform for the
country, either of the two elected branches of government can call early elections, but then both
branches have to run. The idea is to resolve the impasse quickly through the prompt engagement
of the electorate in its resolution, rather than to perpetuate it in divided government until the next
regular election.
To follow the logic of the remedy, we might make voting mandatory, as it is in many
contemporary democracies, with the penalty of a fine for the violation of the duty. Failure to vote
would, therefore, be sanctioned less severely than, for example, refusal to do jury duty. The
obligation to come to the polling station, however, is intended to achieve a good that is at least
as great as serving on juries: to prevent the government from being elected by a minority, given
that over half the adult citizenry now fails to vote in the United States. That a citizen should have
to turn his or her mind for a few moments, every now and then, to the affairs of the Republic-
with the privilege of abstaining in the voting booth-seems a tiny measure of intrusion to accept in
exchange for a huge advance in civic engagement. Comparative experience suggests that, once
the law directs people to vote, they get into the habit. In no democracy that has adopted such a
rule has there ever been a majority in favor of its revocation.
The combined effect of these changes would be to quicken the tempo and raise the energy
level of American democracy, while maintaining or even strengthening the fundamental
mechanism for making governmental power decentralized and accountable. It will not happen, at
least not anytime soon, but it points in a direction. We offer four connected proposals to move
American democracy in this direction.
First, establish public financing of political campaigns. Public financing is more effective than
the attempt to tighten the policing of private money, especially when combined with our next
suggestion, extended free access to television time. It is a minor expense, with vast equalizing
and limit-breaking potential for Amer ican politics. The best criterion for the distribution of such
public funding is a standard intermediate between the present representation of the political
parties at the level of government-federal, state or local-at which they are running and a standard
of arithmetical equality-the same for all.
Second, give the political parties and their candidates ample free time on television. Fight in
the legislatures and the courts to get this time freely given by the networks and channels, as a
condition of their license rather than as a service to be paid by the taxpayers. Americans need a
public space in which to discuss their shared problems, and television has become the space that
matters most. In Brazil, for example, fifty minutes a day of television and radio on all channels
are blocked out for the parties and candidates forty-five days before an election. The primitive
technology and the indifferent content of many of the political talks have not prevented the
campaign programs from maintaining a substantial audience. The voters learn, and so do the
politicians. The perversity of the sound bite is reversed when candidates for major national
office are required to spend many hours on the air; in the surprisingly intimate medium of
television, it is hard to disguise yourself for long.


--- PAGE 291 ---
Third, lower the legal, constitutional and ideological barriers to experimental, localized and
temporary reversals and combinations of governmental and private responsibilities. If, for
example, municipal sanitation services can be contracted out to private business, research and
development can also be conducted by joint ventures of governmental agencies, nonprofit
organizations such as universities and private businesses. Venture capital-investment in start-up
firms-can be arranged by decentralized funds and support centers, with independent
management, a mixed public-private character and special responsibility for the development of
the economic rearguard.
Many such reversals and combinations of function should be tried out locally and temporarily.
Different trial solutions to the same problems should be allowed to coexist. How else can we
find out what works? Much more is at stake here than efficiency of public administration. The
point is to tap the repressed potential for decentralized partnership among individuals,
government and business, rejecting the model of arms'-length regulation as the only acceptable
way in which government can relate to society. One project will lead to another. Small
successes will give impulse to larger ambitions. American federalism-far from being a pretext to
stop social experiments in the name of "states' rights"-will turn out to be a special case of the
larger idea of "many laboratories."
Fourth, change the attitudes and the practices about party politics so that the political parties-
the two big parties as well as emerging third parties-can become the authors and agents of real
alternatives. We need not choose between the political party as the disciplined instrument of a
purist ideology and the political party as a syndicate of professional office-seekers catering to
an amorphous as sortment of special interests. Americans are unlikely ever to adopt proportional
representation-the electoral system that distributes legislative seats in proportion to votes for
parties. They are even less likely to embrace the closed-list version of such systems-where the
voter votes only for a party and the parties determine the priority of the candidates on its slate.
However, the present scheme of election primaries in the United States makes sense only if
Americans have given up on political parties and the coherent options that it would be the task of
the parties to forge and implement. Adopted in the name of grassroots democracy, this scheme
robs the parties of any prospect of strong internal organization and programmatic definition.
Who knows the name of the chairman of either major political party in the United States? He
or she is invariably a creature of the president in office or a caretaker until the next presidential
candidate shows up and, in either event, a hapless hustler for money. Members of Congress are
routinely reelected, although the electorate professes disgust with the political class, because the
public expects from them little more than service to local interests and conformity to certain
minimum ideological tests in their voting behavior. The result is that, although Americans are
able to discuss, for example, an isolated issue, like whether to allow physicians to help the
terminally ill commit suicide, they lack the political instruments with which to define,
collectively, different roads for their country to take. Should such a demarcation of national
possibilities be just the work of a clever politician, sensing a change in national mood and
grasping at the latest fashions from the universities? Or should it result from a more inclusive
and sustained conversation in the country?


--- PAGE 292 ---
The political parties should assert greater authority over slates, candidates, candidate
selection and party platforms. At the same time, however, they should open themselves up to
internal democracy, organizing national elections among their members to choose their leaders
and directions. The shift from an emphasis upon candidate-by-candidate choice through
primaries to an emphasis upon party democracy and party leadership would trigger the
organization of movements and factions within each party to contest such party elections. The
defeated groups would clamor for minority representation in the party councils or establish third
parties. The temperature of American politics would rise, and its repertory of programmatic
alternatives broaden.
In this great country every privilege is suspect, and ordinary men and women are known to be
not so ordinary after all. Tinkering is both a habit and a creed, and experimentalism joins hands
with democracy. An America triumphant in the world nevertheless seems unable to solve its
own problems. Class injustice, racial hatred and rationalized selfishness thrive today in a
climate of disillusionment and feed on an experience of disengagement and disconnection. In this
circumstance, the work of the progressives is to speak, within and outside the Democratic party,
for a clear alternative. Not for some impossible, romantic dream of a different "system." Not for
the last-ditch defense of every part of the New Deal compromise in American politics. Not for
the Republican agenda-or the doctrine of the one true way-with a human face. Not for the
humanization of the inevitable. But for a practical view of how, step by step and piece by piece,
to democratize the American economy and reenergize American democracy.
To understand your country you must love it. To love it you must, in a sense, accept it. To
accept it as it is, however, is to betray it. To accept your country without betraying it, you must
love it for that in it which shows what it might become. American-this monument to the genius of
ordinary men and women, this place where hope becomes capacity, this long halting turn of the
no into the yes-needs citizens who love it enough to reimagine and remake it.
SOURCE: From 7lte Fulure i f Amenr an Progressivism: An Initiative for Pilitical and &murmic
Reform, by Roberto Mangabcira Unger and Cornel West (Boston: Beacon Press, 1998), pp. 56-93.


--- PAGE 293 ---
PARENTS AND N A T I O N A L S U R V I V A L
In 1993 Senator Bill Bradley, William Bennett and David Gergen brought together progressive
and conservative intellectuals for a dialogue in Aspen, Colorado. It was at this meeting that I met
the progressive and feminist economist Sylvia Ann Hewlett. A product of working-class Wales,
Cambridge University and Harvard University, she had taught at Barnard and written books on
Latin American economies and workplace issues. In 1994 l joined her National Parents'
Association and became co-chair of its ?ask Force. We started writing our book, The War
Against Parents, in 1995 and published it in 1998. Afterfortyjive lectures in thirteen states, the
book received much attention-resulting in our being summoned to the White House for meetings
with President Bill Clinton, First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and Domestic Adviser Bruce
Reed. This brief excerpt from the book gives one a sense of what we are up to-stealing the
thunder from the Right on family issues and establishing progressive policies for working
parents. Some left critics trashed the book primarily owing to our attention to fathers and dads,
including our critical yet subtle treatments of Promise Keepers and the Nation of Islam. Willa
the rise f progressive Working Family parties in New York and other places, we are vindicated.
WHATEVER THEIR POLITICAL ORIENTATION, our leaders seem to have little
understanding of how much the decks are stacked against parents in our materialistic,
individualistic age. At the heart of the matter is the fact that from a purely economic standpoint,
raising a child has become the ultimate nonmarket activity as various types of market logic have
moved against mothers and fathers. Adults have never viewed children solely or even primarily
as financial assets, but through history and across cultures, parents have often reaped at least
some material reward from raising children-help with planting or harvesting, support in old age
and so on. None of these economic reasons for raising children hold true today. On the contrary,
in the modern world children are hugely expensive and yield little in the way of economic return
to the parents. Estimates of the costs of raising a child to age eighteen are now in the $145,000
range-and this figure does not include college or graduate school!' Despite this significant
investment, the grown-up child rarely contributes earnings-or any other kind of material support-
to the parental household. In the late twentieth century, children "provide love, smiles, and
emotional satisfaction, but no money or labor."2
Of course, large numbers of well-meaning moms and dads may still elect to invest large
quantities of money and time in child-raising, but for the first time in history their loving energies
are not reinforced by enlightened self-interest. Instead, they must rely entirely on large reserves
of altruistic love-large enough to last for more than two decades per child. This is a tall order in
a society that venerates the market. We are asking parents to ignore the logic of their
pocketbooks and buck the dominant values of our age. If they routinely fall down on the job, who
can blame them? Contemporary moms and dads are trapped between the escalating requirements
of their children, who need more resources (in terms of both time and money) for longer periods
of time than ever before, and the signals of a culture that is increasingly scornful of effort
expended on others. Parents often feel as though they are expected to read from two or three
scripts that diverge completely in terms of how they lead their lives. Should they take on a
second job to pay for college, or should they stay home in the evening to do a little bonding and
turn off the TV? Or should they do neither of the above, but instead work two jobs and spend the


--- PAGE 294 ---
extra income on health-club membership? Life is short, and paying at least some attention to
oneself is a good idea. Besides, a trimmer figure might make all the difference in the next round
of promotions. It is easy for a bewildered parent to become paralyzed as he or she is besieged
by a host of contradictory demands.
FREE FEMALE LABOR
For more than a century, a variety of scholars and social commentators have paid tribute to the
nonmarket work done by women in American society. In the 1880s and 1890s, the social
feminist Jane Addams stressed the moral heft of women's traditional roles. Indeed, much of her
political activism was directed toward securing for women the right to stay at home and care for
their children rather than being forced into the labor market. She saw "the home as the original
center of civilization."3
Much more recently, the psychologist Carol Gilligan has made a distinction between the
voices of men and women. In her highly acclaimed 1982 book, In a Different Voice, she
describes how men gravitate toward the instrumental and the impersonal and emphasize abstract
principles, while women lean toward intimacy and caring and give priority to human
relationships. Gilligan points out that the female "care" voice is not inferior to the male
"instrumental" voice, as it is often treated in psychological theory; it is simply different-different
and enormously important. Over the decades this voice of care has played a critical role in
producing a healthy equilibrium between individual and community in American so ciety.
Because it balances self with other and tempers market values with nonmarket values, it has
gone some distance toward redeeming the urgent greed that is the spirit of capitalism.
Prior to the 1960s, when more families were organized along traditional lines than is true
today, women provided this voice of care, which knitted together family and community. At least
in the middle classes, a clear division of labor between the sexes allowed women to devote
huge amounts of time to nourishing and nurturing: They read bedtime stories, helped with
homework, wrapped presents, attended parent-teacher conferences and taught Sunday school.
But in the 1970s, myriad selfless tasks that were the stuff of raising kids and building
communities went by the board as American society underwent a sea change. Traditional
patterns were broken by a liberation movement that often encouraged women to clone the male
competitive model in the marketplace and by a new set of economic pressures that increasingly
required both parents to be in the paid labor force to sustain any semblance of middle-class life.
Before getting too nostalgic about traditional roles, however, we should remember that the
sacrificial load carried by at-home women was often hard to bear. Many spent their entire lives
laboring to serve the needs of others. Gilligan tells us that the main change wrought by feminism
was that it "enabled women to consider it moral to care not only for others but also for
themselves." She quotes Elizabeth Cady Stanton telling a reporter in 1848 "to put it down in
capital letters: SELF-DEVELOPMENT IS A HIGHER DUTY THAN SELF-SACRIFICE."n
Despite her appreciation of the importance of women's traditional roles, Jane Addams was also
convinced that women must undergo a struggle for identity and recognition. She thought that the
great challenge facing women was to hold in fruitful tension the "I" of the self, the "us" and
"ours" of the family and the "we" of citizens of the wider civic world.' Nora struggled with this


--- PAGE 295 ---
challenge in Ibsen's A Doll's House (1879), and women have been struggling with it ever since.
The insights of Addams and Gilligan reflect the lives of middle-class white women and have
little to do with the lives of poor women, particularly poor black women. Since the beginning of
this nation, women of color have toiled both in the workplace-often in a white woman's kitchen-
and in their own homes. In a very real sense, their contribution to family and community has been
even more heroic than that of middle-class women. In sustained and steadfast ways, they have
looked after the children of affluent white women in addition to their own, and they have
received very little in the way of recompense or recognition. Black women thus have done
double duty and been doubly invisible.
This brief historical excursion helps explain why the shortcomings of our nation on the parent-
support front were until recently cloaked by the existence of a deep and largely invisible
reservoir of free female labor. For generations women spent huge chunks of their lives making
the nonmarket investments in family and com munity that underpin our nation. By nurturing
children and by nourishing a web of care that included neighborhood and township, women
created the competence and character upon which our democracy and our economy depended.
Thus, the invisible labor of women comprised nothing less than the bedrock of America's
prosperity and power. In addition, as women grew and tended our stock of human and social
capital, they masked the contradictions inherent in our political culture. Conservatives had the
luxury of cultivating a blind faith in markets because women (unacknowledged and
unappreciated though they were) provided the all-important nonmarket work. And liberals had
the luxury of cultivating a taste for self-fulfillment-at least white men did-because women
reached out to others.
As we move into the twenty-first century, it is clear that relying on free and invisible female
labor as the wellspring of our social and human capital no longer works. Modern women are
intent on a fair measure of self-realization, and besides, the economic facts of family life
preclude a return to traditional structures. Falling male wages and sky-high rates of single
parenthood make it hard to spin out a scenario in which large numbers of women (or men) have
the option of staying home on a full-time basis.
It is ironic to note that the nurturing, caring roles that are so underappreciated by
contemporary culture are very much factored in by the market. Career interruptions triggered by
childbirth and the special demands of the early childhood years cost women dearly in terms of
earning power. A study by the Rand Corporation shows that a two- to four-year break in
employment lowers lifetime income by 13 percent, while a five-year break lowers it by 19
percent.6 Of course, if we were to expand our programs of family support-paid parenting leave,
job sharing and the like-more women would be able to stay on their career ladders during the
childbearing years.
FATHERS UNDER SIEGE
The inability of our nation to give value to or even to recognize the work of parents has
penalized men and women in different ways. If the work done by mothers has been rendered
invisible-or used to exact a price in the labor market-fathers have come under special attack by


--- PAGE 296 ---
programs and policies oblivious to the importance of the father-child bond. Over the last thirty
years, divorce reform and the enormous expansion of our welfare system have conspired to
make it extremely difficult for a large proportion of American men-somewhere between a third
and a half-either to live with or to stay in effective touch with their children. Aid to Families
with Dependent Children is a case in point. In retrospect, it seems clear that AFDC, the
nationwide program that for three decades provided the lion's share of income support for poor
families, was set up so as to deliberately exclude fathers. The rules held that if an "able-bodied
man" resided in a house hold, a woman with dependent children was unable to claim benefits for
herself and her children.? This caused men to be literally pushed out of the nest. Not only did
these AFDC regulations create a huge disincentive to marry; they made it extremely difficult for
poor men to become fathers to their children. These government-sponsored rules help explain
why out-of-wedlock births in the black community leapt from 21 percent in 1960 to 69.8 percent
in 1996.8
In recent years men have experienced a tremendous loss of power in the workplace and in the
family, which is a large part of the reason why millions of men are turning to Promise Keepers
and the Nation of Islam. Demoralized, displaced men are seeking solace in brotherhood and
turning inward to their gods. Jesus or Allah might just come through for them in a way that is
increasingly problematic for employers or government.
The antifather bias in our public policies has found its clearest expression in the demonization
of deadbeat dads. Public outrage on this subject was triggered by a 1989 Census Bureau report
entitled "Child Support and Alimony," which described how more than a quarter of all
noncustodial fathers were absent from their children's lives and paid nothing in the way of child
support.9 Shocking and shameful as these findings are, some factors were overlooked. To begin
with, almost 40 percent of the "absent fathers" described in this report had neither custody nor
visitation rights and therefore no ability to connect with their children. It seems odd to call them
by the pejorative term "absent" when they have no right to be present. In addition, a little-known
study by the Department of Health and Human Services shows that noncustodial mothers have a
far worse record of child-support compliance than noncustodial fathers-almost half of all
noncustodial mothers pay nothing toward the support of their children."' It seems that once a
parent-male or female-has lost touch with a child, that parent is unlikely to contribute financial
support. It is probably unrealistic to think we can keep in place all the obligations of traditional
parenthood without its main reward: loving contact with a child." Yet, rather than create policies
that help noncustodial parents connect with their children, all we seem capable of doing is
cracking down some more on deadbeat dads-thin stuff in a country that leads the world in
fatherlessness.
One thing we do know: The huge increase in fatherlessness goes some distance toward
explaining why so many youngsters are out of control. There is now a weight of evidence
connecting fatherlessness to child poverty, juvenile crime and teen suicide.
THE PARENT-CHILD BOND
This brings us to the heart of the matter: If the center of this nation is to hold, we have to learn to
give new and self-conscious value to the art and practice of par enting. It can no longer be left to


--- PAGE 297 ---
invisible female labor or the tender mercies of the market. Make no mistake about it, the work of
moms and dads is of utmost importance to our nation. At a fundamental level of analysis, the
parent-child bond is the strongest and most primeval of all human attachments. When it weakens
and frays, devastating consequences ripple through our nation, because this elemental bond is the
ultimate source of connectedness in society.
H. F. Harlow, the animal psychologist, demonstrated in a famous series of studies of infant
monkeys the extraordinary importance of parental love. Taking a group of newborn monkeys
from their parents, he placed them with artificial surrogates-a wire mesh "mommy" and a terry-
cloth "mommy." Despite the fact that the infant monkeys were supplied with all the ingredients
for physiological development-nourishment, water, proper temperature and protection against
diseasethey failed to flourish. In Harlow's study, the deprived infants became zombies,
developing odd, autistic behavior of the kind one sees in severely retarded persons. To Harlow,
they did not seem fully alive. And while the baby monkeys enormously preferred the terry-cloth
mommy to the wire-mesh mommy, avoiding the cold wire mesh and clinging fiercely to the
warm, cuddly terry cloth, even the terry-cloth mommy was a long way from being enough.
These artificial surrogates failed to provide loving, tender, responsive care, and thus the baby
monkeys grew up not knowing the give-and-take of talk and touch, of feeding and fondling, of
learning and playing. The infants survived and eventually grew into adults, but strange, abnormal
adults who could not relate to their own kind or reproduce.12 The implication of Harlow's
research for humans is clear: The mere fact of physical survival does not guarantee a person.
The full development of a human being requires something much deeper and more complicated
than food and water; it requires sustained and sustaining love. According to the psychiatrist
Willard Gaylin, "It is necessary to care for a child with love, in order to initiate a similar
capacity in the child."13
Who will provide this transforming love? The obvious candidates are parents, because it is
mothers and fathers, above other adults, who tend to fall crazily in love with their children. As
the child psychologist Uric Bronfenbrenner has shown, children thrive on huge amounts of
"irrational, emotional attachment," most often the gift of a mother or a father but in exceptional
cases provided by a devoted grandparent or some other caregiver.'4 This is the magical force
that provides the basis for self-love and self-esteem. And once a child has learned to love
himself or herself, that child is able to care deeply about others. Thus parental love not only
contributes powerfully to the development of a fully human being, it also nourishes and sustains
the larger society. The connections are straightforward enough: Caring about the well-being of
others is the foundation of compassion, conscience and citizenship. When a child is deprived of
parental love, that youngster is liable to grow up in an infantilized state-very much like Harlow's
zombies-never developing a love of self, never developing the ability to reach out to others.
This is a recipe for violence, against oneself and against others, for anger and aggression remain
raw and exposed, untempered by a commitment to anyone or anything. It is also a recipe for
civic collapse. How do you persuade a young person who is profoundly careless of his own or
of others' well-being to join a Boys and Girls Club or to vote in our democracy?


--- PAGE 298 ---
Cornel West: I remember meeting one of these disconnected, tortured youngsters at a talk I gave
at a community center in Newark, New Jersey. After the event, a young man sixteen or seventeen
years old came up to me and said, "Professor West, I hear you're a pretty smart brother, you
write this deep stuff, it must take a lotta talent and a lotta work to do something like that. Well,
I've got talent too. I'm the smartest guy in my class. But the rub is, I can't find any motivation. I
don't see why I should try to do what you do. More and more I feel I belong on the streets,
hustling, dealing and hurting like everyone else. That's the way to survive where I live."
He then asked a question. "Brother, what made you want to keep doing all that hard work,
what made you believe in some kind of different future?" So I talked about my dad encouraging
and disciplining me, my mom reading poetry to me, my older brother helping me with my
homework, and my younger sisters cheering me on. The young man listened closely and then, in
obvious pain, said, "Here's the score-I'm in this world by myself. My mother's strung out and
tuned out. I have brothers, but I don't know them, and as for my father, where he is nobody
knows. I sure have never seen him."
I remember feeling totally helpless. I had no recipe to heal these open wounds. The only thing
I could think of doing was to bow before the enormity of his misery kiss the young brother's hand
and mumble some words of empathy. "My God, I can't imagine-it's beyond my experience.
You've got things you can teach me-you've been somewhere I've never been. I've read a ton of
books on alienation, but I cannot grasp what you are living.... I cannot understand what it must be
like to have never been loved." I then simply told him to stay strong and don't forget to pray.
This bleak and bitter encounter in Newark reflects the agony of a child who was born without a
skin, without the tender love of an attentive parent. For this young man, the parent-child bone-the
relationship that transmits self-love and the capacity to love others-had never developed, and the
consequences were quite deadly.
A WORLD UPSIDEDOWN
This young man is not alone. In modern America, across race, gender and class, millions of
children are in terrible trouble. Consider the following facts:
• The homicide rate for children aged fourteen to seventeen has risen 172 percent since 1985.
• One fifth (20.5 percent) of all children are growing up in poverty-a 36 percent increase since
1970.
• The number of homeless children has tripled since the late 1980s.
• The use of illicit drugs among high-school seniors is up 44 percent since 1992.
• SAT scores have slipped 27 points since the early 1970s.


--- PAGE 299 ---
• The rate of suicide among black teenagers has more than tripled since 1980.
• Obesity among children aged twelve to seventeen has doubled since 1970.15
Some of these statistics (poverty, homelessness) describe the pain of disadvantaged kids;
others (obesity, SAT scores) describe the anguish of middle-class kids. Problems triggered by
divorce, teen pregnancy, school failure and substance abuse are no longer confined to the ghetto.
They reach deep into the middle class; they belong to "us" as well as to "them." Out-of-control
children aren't always other people's kids. They come in all sizes, shapes and colors and from
affluent neighborhoods as well as down-at-the-heel city 'hoods. Kids who do bad things have
highly educated parents as well as barely literate ones. A recent Carnegie Corporation report
describes the depth and reach of our child-related problems: "Nearly half of American
adolescents are at high or moderate risk of seriously damaging their life chances. The damage
may be near term and vivid, or it may be delayed, like a time bomb set in youth.."11'
The enormous surge in youth violence is perhaps the most cruel-and most costly-manifestation
of our inability to nurture our young. Children are now responsible for a staggering 20 million
crimes a year. Between 1985 and 1994, among those aged fourteen to seventeen, arrests for
murder increased by 172 percent, and for other violent crimes (rape, robbery and aggravated
assault) by 46 percent. And while violent crime among teenagers has been escalating,
comparable crime rates for adults have been falling quite rapidly: Between 1990 and 1994,
homicide rates among adults aged twenty-five and older declined 18 percent.17 There are now
two crime trends in America, one for adults and one for children, and they are moving in
opposite directions. One poorly understood fact is the hefty price tag attached to juvenile crime,
as society ends up paying for a lifetime spent in and out of jail. A recent study estimates the cost
to taxpayers of one violent young person at $1.5 million."
In a day and age when we associate crime with young black men, it is important to stress that
increases in juvenile crime apply across the board, in "all races, social classes, and lifestyles."
Although young black males are four to five times more likely to be arrested for violent crime
than white youths of the same age, the increase in the rate of arrests is far higher for white youths
than for black: a 44 percent increase compared to a 19 percent increase between 1988 and
1993.19
Daphne Abdela, age fifteen, moved in a private-school underworld in New York City where
belonging means playing thug, getting wasted and committing crimes. In her case, these crimes
might well have included murder. In June 1997, she and her buddy Chris Vasquez, also fifteen,
were arraigned in connection with the stabbing death of a forty-four-year-old real estate agent
named Michael McMorrow. The killing occurred in the vicinity of the stately apartment building
on Central Park West where Daphne lived. Daphne reportedly told the police that after the
murder she and Chris mutilated the body, cutting off the dead man's nose and almost severing a
hand in an attempt to hide his identity. Then they tried to sink McMorrow's 220-pound frame in
the park's lake, gutting it first, Daphne told police, "because he was a fatty."
Daphne cannot claim to be black, brown or disadvantaged. She is a highly privileged
youngster, even by the standards of Manhattan. Before her arrest she lived in a $3 million home


--- PAGE 300 ---
and was driven to school by the family chauffeur.211
When we look into the future, the picture becomes bleaker still. Demographic trends indicate
that when it comes to juvenile crime, the worst may be yet to come. A "baby boomlet" in the late
1980s and early 1990s means that there are now 40 million children under age ten in the United
States. We can therefore expect the adolescent population to swell by a quarter over the next
decade. Since so many of these children are growing up below the poverty line in fragmented
families, there is every reason to expect a new surge in juvenile crime.
If thousands of American youngsters are being killed or injured at the hands of their peers,
thousands more are lost in their own nightmares. These are the children who self-destruct, seeing
suicide as their only way out. Their numbers too are soaring. Between 1960 and 1994, the
suicide rate among teens nearly tripled, making suicide the third leading cause of death for young
people. Black children and very young children seem to be at risk in new and dreadful ways:
The suicide rate among black males aged ten to fourteen went up a staggering 240 percent
between 1980 and 1995.21
A particularly shameful fact is that the United States has the highest percentage of children
living in poverty of any rich nation: 20.5 percent, a figure that represents a 36 percent increase
since 1970 and compares with 9 percent in Canada, 4 percent in Germany and 2 percent in
Japan.22 Children quite simply have not shared in America's prosperity in recent years. Very
young children are particularly badly off: For those under six years of age, the poverty rate is 23
percent, which means that over 5 million preschoolers now live below the poverty line.23 Bad
as these figures are, they are expected to get considerably worse as the effects of welfare reform
kick in. The Urban Institute predicts an additional 1.1 million children will have slithered into
poverty in 1997 alone. Black and Hispanic children are disproportionately represented in the
poor population-47 percent of black children and 34 percent of Latino children are poor-but in
recent years the poverty rate has grown twice as fast among whites as among blacks.
Significantly, in 1996, 69 percent of poor children lived in families where at least one adult was
at work-up from 61 percent in 1993.24 In the late 1990s, getting a job does not necessarily pull a
family out of poverty.
Substance abuse is also on the increase among teens. The use of illegal drugs by adolescents
increased significantly between 1992 and 1995. This represents a reversal of earlier downward
trends. In 1996 the government reported troubling increases in drug use in all age groups. For
example, between 1992 and 1995 the use of marijuana by high-school seniors increased by 63
percent, while the use of inhalants such as glues, aerosols and solvents by eighth graders
increased 28 percent.25
On the educational front the news is equally grim, since underachievement and failure
continue to dog the steps of American youngsters. Across the nation, combined average
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores have fallen significantly since 1972, despite a recent
recentering exercise, which had the effect of raising nominal scores. Data collected by the


--- PAGE 301 ---
National Assessment of Educational Progress, which has been testing national samples of
students aged nine, thirteen and seventeen each year since 1969, show "few indications of
positive trends" in reading and writing.21' American children are also at or near the bottom in
most international surveys measuring educational achievement, coming in seventh out of ten
countries in physics and tenth-dead last-in average mathematics proficiency.
Another disturbing fact is that only 69.7 percent of American students who enter ninth grade
earn a high-school diploma four years later, a figure that has slipped seven percentage points
since 1970.27 Most policymakers see this as a national disgrace in an age where other advanced
nations have nearly universal sec ondary-school education. Injapan, for example, 90 percent of
seventeen-year-olds graduate from high school.
Not only is a large proportion of American youth growing up badly educated and ill prepared
for the world of work, but a significant number are further handicapped by increasingly serious
emotional problems. According to the Carnegie Corporation, today's youngsters are having
trouble coping with stresses in their lives: "Many are depressed, and about a third of
adolescents report they have contemplated suicide.."28 Since 1971, the number of adolescents
admitted to private psychiatric hospitals has increased fifteenfold. Experts in the field explain
this alarming trend by pointing to a constellation of pressures ranging from long workdays to
divorce to absent fathers, which have left many parents too thinly stretched to provide consistent
support for their children. The pressures on single mothers are particularly severe. Indeed, in
many instances the stress is so great that parenting breaks down and becomes inconsistent and
erratically punitive.
One thing seems clear enough from this brief survey: Not only are American children failing
to thrive; in several critical respects, their condition and life circumstances are steadily
deteriorating. Overall, they lead more dangerous and more poverty-stricken lives than children
did thirty, twenty or even five years ago. They are also less likely to succeed in school and more
likely to experiment with drugs, and many are depressed and seriously self-destructive. It is
particularly distressing to realize that children in America are at much greater risk than children
elsewhere in the advanced industrial world. Although the United States ranks second worldwide
in per capita income, this country does not even make it into the top ten on any significant
indicator of child welfare.
SouRCE: "Parents and National Survival," Vie War Against Parents: What We Can Do .16r
America's Beleaguered Mom and Dads, by Sylvia Ann Hewlett and Cornel West, pp. 35-47, 268-
270. Copyright 1998 by Sylvia Ann Hewlett and Cornel West. Reprinted by permission of Houghton
Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 302 ---



--- PAGE 303 ---
ON THE 198OS
Tltis brief piece is my interpretation of the decade of the 1980s as requested by Newsweek
magazine for its anniversary issue. My respondent was Secretary James Baker of the Reagan
administration. Based on the letters I received, this essay saw good use in high-school social
studies classes across the nation. This kind ofjournalistic writing is risky, because it can become
too simplistic' At or clever. In fact, I gave up journalism a few years later. Now I only give
lectures, write books and read voraciously.
THE 1980s WERE NOT simply a decade of glitz and greed. More important, they ushered in a
new era of American history-the triumphant conservatism of Reagan, Rambo and retrenchment.
The Reagan revolution was a full-blown ideological response to the anemic liberalism of the
Carter presidency, which faltered in the face of runaway inflation, sluggish economic growth, the
Iranian hostage crisis and the relative erosion of America's place in the global economy. The
Rambo mentality harked back to a gunfighter readiness to do battle with an "evil" empire at
nearly any cost. And the unapologetic retrenchment took the form of making people more
comfortable with their prejudices and reducing public focus on the disadvantaged. The 1980s
discouraged a serious national conversation on the deep problems confronting us.
For the first time since the 1920s, the political Right-along with highly organized conservative
corporate and bank elites-boldly attempted to reform American society. The aim of
Reaganomics-couched in the diverse languages of supply-siders (Arthur Laffer), single-minded
monetarists (Paul Volcker) and budget balancers (Alan Greenspan)-was to give new life to the
utopian ideology of laissez-faire capitalism. This ideology cast high taxes, regulation and
welfare assistance to the poor as the major impediments to economic growth and prosperity.
Low taxes, deregulation and cutbacks in liberal social programs were viewed as a means to
curtail inflation and generate an economic boom.
The decade brought us the largest peacetime military buildup in American history (about 28
percent of the federal budget in 1988!); it brought us the shortsighted choices of highly
compensated corporate executives to consume, acquire and merge rather than invest, research
and innovate. Together these develop ments caused high levels of public and private debt and
the starvation of the public sector. There was little money for roads, railways, community
development, housing, education, neighborhood improvement and, above all, decent-paying jobs
for those displaced by industrial flight.
In the 1980s, the expansion of unfettered markets produced great wealth for the top 1 percent
of the population, impressive income for the top 20 percent and significant decline in real wages
for the bottom 40 percent. For example, the top 1 percent owned 44 percent of the household net
wealth in 1929 and 36 percent in 1989 (in 1976, it dropped to 20 percent). By 1989, the top 1
percent of families owned 48 percent of the total financial wealth in the country. Of course,
income inequality is less extreme than wealth inequality-yet the significant increase of both in
the 1980s reveals the fundamental virtues and vices of unbridled capitalist markets. These
markets yield efficiency and ingenuity in regard to what consumers desire and what products
cost. At the same time they increase inequality and isolation in regard to what the most


--- PAGE 304 ---
vulnerable people need and which basic social goods are available to them.
The major economic legacy of Reaganomics was to increase the disparity between rich and
poor and to downsize the American middle class. Our social structure began to look less like a
diamond and more like an hourglass. More hours of work were required to sustain a decent
standard of living even as an undeniable decline in the quality of life set in-with increased
crime, violence, disease (e.g., AIDS), tensions over race, gender and sexual orientation,
decrepit public schools, ecological abuse and a faltering physical infrastructure. In short,
Reaganomics resulted in waves of economic recovery, including mullions of new jobs (many
parttime), alongside a relative drop in the well-being of a majority of Americans.
The unintended cultural consequence of this economic legacy was a spiritual impoverishment
in which the dominant conception of the good life consists of gaining access to power, pleasure
and property, sometimes by any means. In other words, a fully crystallized market culture
appeared in which civic institutions such as families, neighborhoods, unions, churches,
synagogues, mosques held less and less sway, especially among young people. Is it a mere
accident that nonmarket values like loyalty, commitment, service, care, concern-even tenderness-
can hardly gain a secure foothold in such a market culture? Or that more and more of our
children believe that life is a thoroughly hedonistic and narcissistic affair?
One of the telling moments of the 1980s came when a member of the Federal Communications
Commission boasted that when television was deregulated, "the marketplace will take care of
children." And, to a significant degree, this unintentionally sad and sobering prophecy has come
true. The entertainment industry, with its huge doses of sex and violence, has a disproportionate
and often disgusting influence over us and our children. A creeping Zeitgeist of coldheartedness
and mean-spiritedness accompanies this full-blown market culture. Everything revolves around
buying and selling, promoting and advertising. This logic leads ultimately to the gangsterization
of culture-the collapse of moral fabric and the shunning of personal responsibility in both vanilla
suburbs and chocolate cities. Instead of reviving traditional values, the strong patriotism and
social conservatism of the 1980s has ironically yielded a populace that is suspicious of the
common good and addicted to narrow pleasures.
The 1980s came to a close with the end of the Cold War-yet the culture wars of a racially torn
and market-driven American society loom large. A strategy of "positive polarization"
(especially playing the racial card) has realigned the electorate into a predominantly white
conservative Republican party and a thoroughly bewildered centrist Democratic party. This has
helped produce a disgruntled citizenry that slouches toward cynicism, pessimism and even
fatalism. Nearly half of all black children and 20 percent of all American children grow up in
poverty, trapped in a cycle of despair and distrust.
The major paradox of the 1980s is that the decade ended with the collapse of moribund
Communist regimes of repression and regimentation-as well as the advent of more than 40 new
social experiments in democracy around the worldjust as American democracy is quietly
threatened by internal decay. In other words, the far-reaching insights of Adam Smith's defense
of the role of markets loom large in the eyes of former Communist societies just as the cultural
inanities of capitalism pointed out by Karl Marx become clearer in rich capitalist democracies-


--- PAGE 305 ---
especially in the United States.
The market magic of the triumphant conservatism of the 1980s did help squeeze out fat and
make American business more competitive in the brutal global economy. But we have yet to
come to terms with the social costs. Confused citizens now oscillate between tragic resignation
and vigorous attempts to hold at bay their feelings of impotence and powerlessness. Public life
seems barren and vacuous. And gallant efforts to reconstruct public-mindedness in a balkanized
society of proliferating identities and constituencies seem far-fetched, if not futile. Even the very
art of public conversation-the precious activity of communicating with fellow citizens in a spirit
of mutual respect and civility-appears to fade amid the noisy backdrop of name-calling and
finger-pointing in flat sound bites.
The new decade of the 1990s begins with Americans hungry to make connections, to
communicate their rage, anger, fury and hope. The new popularity of radio and TV talk shows is
one symptom of this populist urge. Rap-the major form of popular music among young people-is
another. The great American novel of the 1980s, the Nobel Prize laureate Toni Morrison's
Beloved, yearns to tell a "story not to be passed on"-a story of a great yet flawed American
civilization afraid to confront its tragic past and fearful of its frightening future.
This fear now permeates much of America-fear of violent attack or vicious assault, fear of
indecent exposure or malicious insult. Out of the 1980s came a new kind of civic terrorism-
physical and psychic-that haunts the public streets and private minds of America.
Race sits at the center of this terrifying moment. Although a small number of black men-who
resemble myself or my son in appearance-commit a disproportionate number of violent crimes,
the unfair stereotype of all black men as criminals persists. And despite the fact that most of
these crimes are committed against black people, the national focus highlights primarily white
victims.
Yet we all must assume our share of responsibility for the despair and degradation. The
generational layers of social misery that afflict poor communities were rendered invisible in the
1980s not just by our government, but by ourselves. Economic desperation coupled with social
breakdown now threatens the very existence of impoverished communities in urban areas-with
growing signs of the same forces at work in rural and suburban America. The drug and gun
cultures among youth are the most visible symptoms of this nihilism. If we are to survive as a
nation, the 1990s must be a decade in which candid and critical conversation takes place about
race and poverty, rights and responsibilities, violence and despair.
The great comeback pop singer of the 1980s Tina Turner tragically croons, "What's Love Got
to Do With It?" In a decade of glitz and greed, "Who needs a heart when a heart can be broken?"
And the most talented songwriting team in American popular music of the 1980s, Babyface and
L. A. Reid, nod in their classic song, "My, My, My." Maybe in the 1990s we can bring back
some love, justice, humor and community.
SOURCE: From .Newsweek, January 3, 1994, pp. 48-49. Copyright © 1994 Newsweek, Inc. All
rights reserved. Reprinted by permission.


--- PAGE 306 ---



--- PAGE 307 ---
M I C H A E L H A R R I N G T O N , D E M O C R A T I C 
S O C I A L I S T
As a member of Democratic Socialists of America-the largest l organization in the country-for
seventeen years, a member of'its .National Political Action committee for six years and now one
of'its honorary chairs, I have a close connection to Michael Barrington 's legacy. We worked
closely together and traveled the country as spokespersons for the organization in the 198 Os. So
I was honored when The Nation magazine asked me in 1990 to write an essay just after he lost
his battle with cancer. I tried to do it with insight and love for him as well as critical challenge
to the American L ft. His bold thought and gallant efforts will live forever in the annals
offreedom fighters everywhere.
THE DEATH OF MICHAEL Harrington is the end of an era in the history of American
socialism. He was the socialist evangelist of our time-the bearer of the mantles of Eugene Debs
and Norman Thomas. Unlike Debs and Thomas, however, Harrington was a serious intellectual.
His first book, The Other America (1962)-with a boost from Dwight Macdonald's famous
review in the New Yorkerthrust him into the limelight and prompted the Kennedy
administration's campaign against poverty. His fifteen other books ranged from solid history of
Western socialist movements (Socialism, 1972), to analysis of advanced capitalist societies
(Twilight of Capitalism, 1976), to autobiographical reflections (The Long-Distance Runner,
1988) to broad pronouncements about the prevailing crisis of Western civilization (The Politics
at God's Funeral, 1984). Though far from original works, these books guided and inspired many
progressives in their struggles for freedom, solidarity and justice.
Like the late Raymond Williams in Britain and the late C. P. Macpherson in Canada,
Harrington carved out a vital democratic socialist space between the Scylla of Stalinism and the
Charybdis of liberalism. With his early roots in Irish Catholicism, he was a Pascalian Marxist
who wagered boldly on the capacity of ordinary men and women to create and sustain a socialist
future. Harrington was also a socialist in the American grain: experimental in method, moral in
motivation and optimistic in outlook. Like Walt Whitman, John Dewey and C. Wright Mills, he
believed in the possibility of social betterment by means of creative in telligence, moral suasion
and political struggle. Yet he was the first great democratic socialist in the United States to be
well read in the Marxist classics (his translation of Georg Lukacs's "What Is Orthodox
Marxism?" thirty-years ago was the first in this country) and to have mastered the details of
progressive public policy. Endowed with great ambition, talent, discipline and curiosity-but no
Ph.D.-he became the shining knight and activist intellectual of the democratic Left for nearly
three decades.
Harrington was the product of two distinct intellectual subcultures: those of the artistic
bohemian radicals (centered at the White Horse tavern in Greenwich Village) and the anti-
Stalinist socialists of the late 1950s and early 1960s. The former changed him from a follower
of Dorothy Day's Catholic social gospel (after college at Holy Cross, a year at Yale Law School
and an M.A. in English at the University of Chicago) into a secular proponent of sexual freedom
and racial equality; the latter turned him into a self-styled Marxist with deep democratic
sentiments. Both left subcultures were thoroughly New Yorkish and disproportionately Jewish,


--- PAGE 308 ---
and thus permeated by intense conversation, bookish knowledge, oppositional outlooks and
identification with the oppressed and exploited. Harrington's superb oratorical skills, voracious
reading and links with the progressive wing of the labor movement were fundamentally shaped
by these subcultures-which are no longer available to young intellectuals. His charisma as a
progressive leader and his heritage as a public intellectual bore this particular historical stamp
and reflected as well his good nature and his ability to reconcile opposing people and ideas.
In his last book, Socialism: Past and Future, Harrington grapples with the most fundamental
questions facing democratic socialists: Is socialism more than "the hollow memory of a
passionate youth" or "humankind's most noble and useful political illusion"? Can the socialist
ideal once again become credible and desirable, given its heavy "baggage of historic failure" in
the form of command economies, bureaucratic authoritarian elites and repressive regimentation
of ordinary people in the "actually existing" Communist countries? What are the analytical
contents, practical socioeconomic arrangements and moral values that define the term
"socialism"? Does the term obstruct and obscure the very ideals it purports to promote? What
does it mean to be a democratic socialist today?
Harrington's attempt to reply to these pressing questions constitutes not only a reevaluation of
the socialist life he led, but also a projection of his legacy. The book was begun the day he was
told that he had inoperable cancer and a limited time to live. And the text is vintage Harrington-
lucid, candid, tempered, yet upbeat. His basic argument is that the hope for human freedom and
justice in the future rests upon the capacity of people to choose and implement democratic forms
of socialization in the face of "irresponsible," "unthinking" and "unsocial" versions of corporate
socialization. Harrington defines corporate socialization as a fusion of Weber's notion of
rationalization, or the expansion of bureaucratic hierarchies that impose impersonal rules and
regulations in order to increase efficiency, and Marx's idea of commodification, or the
globalization of capital. (This takes the form of centralizing corporations that concentrate power
and wealth and render people increasingly dependent on market forces to satisfy their needs and
desires.) For Harrington, the fundamental choice is not between rigid command economies and
"free markets," or between bureaucratic collectivist regimes and capitalist democracies. Rather,
the basic choice in the future will be between a democratic, or "bottom-up," socialization and a
corporate, or "top-down," socialization. This choice is much more complex than it appears on
the surface and is a far cry from the classic Marxist choice between socialism and barbarism
posed by Rosa Luxemburg.
First, Harrington's notion of democratic socialization has nothing to do with nationalization or
state control of economic enterprises. Nor is it associated with a socialist "negation" of
capitalism. Instead, it is a process in which social forcesespecially those brought to bear by
progressive groups, associations and organizations-try to broaden the participation of citizens in
the economic, cultural and political spheres of society and thus control the conditions of their
existence. At present these forces are weak compared with those of corporate socialization.
Orthodox Marxist-Leninists have made the fatal mistake of reducing democratic socialization to
elitist nationalization, creating monstrosities that are neither socialist nor capitalist, neither free
nor efficient.


--- PAGE 309 ---
Second, Harrington shows that the reality of corporate socialization can be separated from the
rhetoric about "free markets" or the absence of state intervention in the economy. As Reagan and
Thatcher illustrated, corporate socialization, despite conservative pieties about "laissez-faire"
capitalism, is deeply statist, with its military buildups, socially authoritarian regimentation of the
labor force, moral strictures on individual (especially women's) choices and a debt-financed
public sphere.
Third, democratic socialization, in Harrington's view, entails more than workers'
participation in investment decisions (including access to relevant knowledge and information)
and the use of markets for nonmarket purposes. It also requires a new culture, a new civilization.
Harrington's attempt to define this "new socialism" harks back to the best of the nineteenth-
century utopian socialists, such as Charles Fourier, Robert Owen and the Saint-Simonians.
Although Harrington shuns their naivete, moralism and messianism, he accents their feminist,
communitarian and cultural radicalism. He then adds a strong antiracist and ecological
consciousness that calls for a new global civilization in which wealth is distributed more
equally and life is lived more meaningfully.
Harrington's project is indeed visionary. Yet he struggles to make it appear to be more than
mere fantasy. So he accepts the sacred cow of the present capitalist structure of accumulation-
namely, economic growth-and attempts to show how it can be channeled toward qualitative
living, not merely quantitative consuming. He proposes replacing the gross national product with
a new set of statistics, the qualitative national (and international) product, which would subtract
from the GNP environmental degradation, premature death, wasteful packaging and
uninformative advertising in order to keep track of the quality of life. Further, Harrington
suggests a restructuring of the United Nations and its related economic institutions-such as the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund-in order to transfer resources from North to
South and promote cultural differences. He emphatically points out that Third World debt not
only forces cutbacks in crucial social services for the countries' poor people, but also prevents
the South from consuming First World goods-consumption that could fuel economic growth in
both North and South. And his trenchant critique of the calculated dependence of the export-led
economies of the Four Tigers (Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore)-the showcase
countries for conservative economists-reveals the fragility of the present international economic
order. His discussion is extremely relevant to Eastern Europeans clamoring for the "free mar-
ket"-that is, full integration into the corporate-dominated economic order of the West.
How will democratic socialization come about? How do we radically reform a system while
working within it? How can democratic socialist practices be more than a social democracy in
which corporate priorities operate within a public sector organized by liberals and managed by
bureaucratic elites? And given the fragmentation and casualization of the labor force-the de-
skilling and re-skilling of workers due to the automation, computerization and robotization in the
workplace-who will be the major agents of social change?
Harrington approaches these questions with candor and caution. First, he assumes that any
socialist conception of social change must be epochal, not apocalyptic. He finds it impossible to
conceive the triumph of democratic socialization in the next fifty years. Second, he presents


--- PAGE 310 ---
Sweden's social democratic order as the major inspiration-not the utopian model or flawless
example-for figuring out how to overcome the most inegalitarian effects of corporate
socialization. Sweden's policy of "collective capital formation," which links growth to
efficiency and democratic management, and solidaristic wage demands that first reward those at
the bottom of the labor force fall far short of his vision. Yet they show what can be done when
pressure is brought to bear on capital in the interests of social justice and democratic
participation. Harrington acknowledges the precious gains achieved by reformers as well as the
structural constraints on reform. His notion of "visionary gradualism" is an attempt to walk this
tightrope of short-term strategies and tactics and long-term aims.
But is he successful? Does he remain blind to possible new social forces or silent about new
strategies for change? It is extremely difficult to know how to measure "success" here. Certainly
social movements he did not foresee may emerge. New cleavages in the fragile conservative
camp could weaken the right offensive, and structural transformations could threaten the present
forms of corporate socialization. Yet it would be unfair to blame Harrington for failure to
predict such events.
The major problem I have with Harrington's impressive project is that it remains too far
removed from lived experience in advanced capitalist societies. Despite his call for a new
culture, he does not discuss the civic terrorism that haunts our city streets; the central role of TV,
video, radio and film in shaping the perceptions of citizens; the escalating violence against
women, gays and lesbians; the racial and ethnic polarization or the slow decomposition of civil
society (families, schools, neighborhoods and associations). There are no reflections in the book
about the impact of the plagues of drugs and AIDS on a terrified populace or the entrenchment of
jingoistic patriotism and nationalism. Although he invokes Gramsci, Harrington is more
interested in the notion of "historic blocs"-coalition politics-than in the actual operations of
hegemony that mobilize people's "consent" (in the forms of indifference or passivity) to the
"fate" of corporate socialization. Subtle investigations into such cultural, experiential and
existential realities-as intimated in the works of Georg Simmel, Lukacs, Walter Benjamin,
Siegfried Kracauer and other cultural critics-are needed before democratic socialization can
become more than a noble ideal.
Harrington combined many of the best qualities of the old Left and a genuine openness to some
of the insights of the New Left. In his life and work, the fist and rose begin to come together.
With the historic merger of his organization, the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee,
with the New American Movement in 1982, this unity-in-process, though full of tension, was
manifest. His mere presence gave the new group, Democratic Socialists of America, a visibility
and legitimacy in progressive circles far beyond its numbers (roughly 7,000).
Because the Left is organizationally weak and intellectually timid relative to its conservative
counterparts (it is armed more with journals and gestures than with programs and politicians), it
has tended to rely on charismatic spokespersons and insurgent movements. Harrington's death
makes this situation more apparent. The splitting of the old and New Lefts from the black,
brown, yellow and red Lefts-dating back to the mid-1960s-exacerbates the predicament of
progressives. This is why Jesse Jackson's Rainbow politics is so refreshing. It is a new


--- PAGE 311 ---
multiracial attempt to channel the inchoate left-liberal sentiments of ordinary people into an
electoral campaign of national scope. Yet the legacy of Harrington, as well as those of Martin
Luther King, Jr., Fannie Lou Hamer and Malcolm X, as well as the efforts of feminists, greens,
the Gray Panthers and gays and lesbians, deserves a movement with deeper roots. Jackson's
courageous attempt to gain power at the national level is a symptom of the weakness of the Left-
a sign that its capacity to generate extraparliamentary social motion or movements has waned.
The best way to keep the legacy of Harrington alive is to go beyond it by building from
grassroots citizens' participation in credible progressive projects in which activists see that their
efforts can make a difference. In this way, the crucial difference that Michael Harrington made in
many of our lives can become contagious.
SOURCE: "Michael Harrington, Socialist," Beyond Eurocottrism and Multiculturalism, Vol. 1:
Prophetic Thought in Fhstruodern Times (Monroe, Me.: Common Courage Press, 1993), pp. 181-188.


--- PAGE 312 ---



--- PAGE 313 ---
T H E C R I S I S I N CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN 
R E L I G I O N
These introductory remarks to my second book, Prophetic Fragments (1988), convey my moral
outrage at the relative indifference of American religion to the challenge of social justice beyond
charity. The Christian Right is a glaring example of this tendency. Yet I view myself as neither a
self-righteous prophet railing at those gone astray nor an elevated elitist who brings the Truth to
the benighted masses. T be a part of a prophetic tradition is not to be a prophet or elitist. Rather,
it is humbly to direct your strongest criticisms at yourself and then self-critically speak your
mind to others with painful candor and genuine compassion.
THE CRISIS IN CONTEMPORARY American religious life is profound and pervasive. The
crisis is profound in that it deepens as Americans turn more desperately toward religion. The
crisis is pervasive in that it affects every form of religiosity in the country-from Christianity to
Buddhism, from reform Judaism to Islam. To put it bluntly, American religious life is losing its
prophetic fervor. There is an undeniable decline in the clarity of vision, complexity of
understanding and quality of moral action among religious Americans. The rich prophetic
legacies of Sojourner Truth, Walter Rauschenbusch, Dorothy Day, Abraham Hes- chel, and
Martin Luther King, Jr., now lay nearly dormant-often forgotten-and the possession of a marginal
few. Political and cultural conservatism seems to have silenced most of the prophetic religious
voices and tamed the vast majority of churches, temples, synagogues and mosques. Prophetic
religion indeed is at the crossroads in present-day America.
The principal aim of Prophetic Fragments is to examine and explore, delineate and demystify,
counter and contest the widespread accommodation of American religion to the political and
cultural status quo. This accommodation is suffocating much of the best in American religion; it
promotes and encourages an existential emptiness and political irrelevance. This
accommodation is, at bottom, idolatrous-it worships the gods created by American society and
kneels before the altars erected by American culture.
American religious life-despite its weekly rituals and everyday practices-is shot through with
existential emptiness. This emptiness-or lack of spiritual depth-results from the excessive
preoccupation with isolated personal interests and atomistic individual concerns in American
religious life. These interests and concerns unduly accommodate the status quo by mirroring the
privatism and careerism rampant in American society. Like so much of American culture,
exorbitant personalistic and individualistic preoccupations in American religion yield
momentary stimulation rather than spiritual sustenance, sentimental self-flagellation rather than
sacrificial self-denial. Needless to say, these accommodationalist forms of religion fit well with
the thriving consumerism, narcissism and hedonism in the country. Religion becomes but one
more stimulant in a culture addicted to stimulation-a stimulation that fuels consumption and
breeds existential emptiness. In this way, postmodern American culture attempts to eliminate
spiritual depth, disseminate stimulatory surfaces, flatten out transcendence into titillation and
replace the sense of the mystery of existence with that of the self's feelings of intensity (usually
of the orgiastic sort). Accommodationalist forms of religion usually aid and abet this postmodern
condition, thereby surreptitiously prohibiting the very existential state they claim to promote-


--- PAGE 314 ---
namely, spiritual depth.
Furthermore, American religious life-notwithstanding its vast philanthropic networks and
impressive charitable record-lacks a substantive social consciousness. This is so because, like
so much of American life, it suffers from social amnesia. American religious people have little
memory of or sense for collective struggle and communal combat. At the level of family and
individuals, this memory and sense lingers. But at the level of larger social groups and
institutions, this memory and sense of struggle evaporates. This social amnesia prevents
systemic social analysis of power, wealth and influence in society from taking hold among most
religious Americans. Instead, the tendency is to fall back on personalistic and individualistic
explanations for poverty, occupational mobility or social catastrophe.
For instance, moralistic acts are often conflated with moral actions. Yet the former proceed
from sheer sentimental concern-for example, pity-whereas the latter flow from an understanding
of the larger context in which the action takes place and of the impact of the action on the
problem. In short, moralistic acts rest upon a narrow, parochial anti-intellectualism that sees
only pitiful individuals, whereas moral action is based on a broad, robust prophetism that
highlights systemic social analysis of the circumstances under which tragic persons struggle. It is
no accident that the moralistic, anti-intellectualistic forms of American religion thoroughly trash
modernity and secularity, yet revel in the wonders of technology and in the comfortable living of
modern prosperity. This flagrant hypocrisy-simply highlighted in the events in recent months, yet
true for all of the big-time, narrow TV evangelists-is overcome only when one adopts a
principled prophetism, that is, a prophetic religion that incorporates the best of modernity and
secularity (tolerance, fallibilism, criticism), yet brings prophetic critique to bear upon the idols
of modernity and secularity (science, technology and wealth).
I live, work and write out of a particular religious perspective-namely, that of the prophetic
stream of the Christian tradition. I first encountered this stream in the bosom of the black Baptist
heritage in America, and this stamp is still felt and seen in my own religious outlook. Yet I am
concerned with the prophetic potential of all religions (such as Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism
and Islam) and the progressive possibilities of all secular ideologies (including feminism,
Marxism, anarchism and liberalism). My prophetic outlook is informed by a deep, historical
consciousness that accents the finitude and fallenness of all human beings and accentuates an
international outlook that links the human family with a common destiny; an acknowledgment of
the inescapable yet ambiguous legacy of tradition and the fundamental role of community; a
profound sense of the tragic character of life and history that generates a strenuous mood, a call
for heroic, courageous moral action always against the odds; and a biblically motivated focus on
and concern for the wretched of the earth that keeps track of the historic and social causes for
much (though by no means all) of their misery.
On the one hand, I assume that religious traditions are, for the most part, reactionary
repressive and repulsive without heavy doses of modern formulations of rule of law, gender and
racial equality, tolerance and, especially, substantive democracy. On the other hand, such
modern formulations can be based on or derived from the best of religious traditions. To be a
contemporary religious intellectual-and person-is to be caught in this creative tension on the


--- PAGE 315 ---
boundary between past and present, tradition and modernity-yet always mounted in the
barricades on this battlefield on which life is lived and history is made. Prophetic thought and
action is preservative in that it tries to keep alive certain elements of a tradition bequeathed to us
from the past and revolutionary in that it attempts to project a vision and inspire a praxis that
fundamentally transforms the prevailing status quo in light of the best of the tradition and the
flawed yet significant achievements of the present order. These fragments-which feebly reflect
the Christian faith that shores me up against the ruins in our world-are linked together by my
response to one basic question: How does a present-day Christian think about and act on
enhancing the plight of the poor, the predicament of the powerless and the quality of life for all
in a prophetic manner?
SOURCE: "Introduction: The Crisis in Contemporary American Religion." Prophetic Fragments
(Grand Rapids, Mich.: Win. B. Ecrdmans Publishing Co., 1988), pp. ix-xi.


--- PAGE 316 ---
T H E H I S T O R I C I S T T U R N I N P H I L O S O P H Y O F 
R E L I G I O N
This ambitious essay is a philosophical inquiry into the limits of philosophic reflections on
religion-especially in America. It reflects my skepticism about any claims of religious certainty
or dogmatic pronouncements about the nature of God. Yet I remain skeptical about skepticism,
since we must not only think and question, but also live and love-and die. My Chekhovian
Christian way of being is peppered by skepticism, but not paralyzed by it. I live on the
treacherous and tortuous terrain between doubt and faith, at the bloody crossroads of despair and
hope.
From the disintegration of Hegelianism derives the beginning of a new cultural process, different in
character, from its predecessors, a process in which practical movement and theoretical thought are
united (or are trying to unite through a struggle that is both theoretical and practical).... Out of the
critique of Hegelianism arose modern idealism and the philosophy of praxis. Hegelian immanentism
becomes historicism, but it is absolute historicism only with the philosophy of praxis.... One should
not be surprised if this beginning arises from the convergence f various elements, apparently
heterogeneous.... Instead, it is worth noting that such an overthrow could not but have connections
with religion.
-ANTONIO GRAMSCI. PRISON No7-EBOOKS
IN THE PAST FEw decades philosophy of religion has suffered decline as a discipline.
Consider the towering figures in the field: The synoptic vision of Edgar Sheffield Brightman, the
tough-minded empiricism of Henry Nelson Wieman and the magisterial metaphysics of Alfred
North Whitehead are now distant memories for present-day participants in this discipline. Here I
shall sketch a brief account of this decline and, more important, suggest a new conception of
philosophy of religion that warrants serious attention. This new conception promotes a
historicist turn in philosophy of religion that remains within yet deepens the American grain-
empirical, pluralist, pragmatic and activist.'
THE GOLDEN AGE OF PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION
The Enlightenment critiques of religious thought-such as David Hume's Dialogues Concerning
Natural Religion and Immanuel Kant's chapter "The Ideal of Pure Reason" in his Critique of
Pure Reason-set the terms for the modern philosophical debate concerning the status of religious
beliefs. These terms accepted the subjectivist turn that puts philosophical reflection first and
foremost within the arena of immediate awareness or self-consciousness. Undergirded by the
rising authority of science-with its probabilistic reasoning and fallibilistic conclusions-
postHumean and post-Kantian philosophers of religion were forced either to give up or to
redefine the scientific character of religious beliefs and thereby to conceptually redescribe such
beliefs in moral, affective, aesthetic or existential terms. In other words, one became a neo-
Kantian, Schleiermachean, Hegelian or Kierkegaardian. Whether such descriptions yielded
epistemic status to religious beliefs became the question for modern philosophy of religion.


--- PAGE 317 ---
Yet this question was not the central issue for the masters of European philosophy in the late
nineteenth century. Karl Marx, John Stuart Mill and Friedrich Nietzsche were obsessed
primarily with the nature of modern science and the character of modern society and culture.
Modern theologians were preoccupied with the epistemic status of religious beliefs, but this
preoccupation signified their marginality in European intellectual life.
In stark contrast to their European counterparts, religious concerns loomed large in the first
significant American philosophical response to modernity. The first generation of American
pragmatists, especially Charles Peirce and William James, attempted not only to demythologize
modern science, but also to update religion. For American pragmatists, religious beliefs were
not simply practical postulates for moral behavior, pietistic modes of self-consciousness,
pictorial representations of absolute knowledge or anxiety-ridden, self-involving choices.
Religious beliefs were on the same spectrum as any other beliefs-always linked to experience.
The pragmatism of Peirce and James incredibly seized the imagination of a whole generation of
American philosophers, including idealist philosophers like Josiah Royce, William Ernest
Hocking and Edgar Sheffield Brightman-thereby initiating the Golden Age of philosophy of
religion in modern Euro-American thought.
Nowhere in the modern world did philosophers take religion more seriously than in the
United States between 1900 and 1940. No other national philosophical tradition compares with
the set of American texts such as William James's The Varieties of Religious Experience (1902),
John Elof Boodin's Truth and Reality (1911), William Ernest Hocking's The Meaning of ' God in
Human Experience (1912), Josiah Royce's The Problem of Christianity (1913), Douglas Clyde
Maclntosh's Theology as an Empirical Science (1919), Henry Nelson Wieman's Religious
Experience and Scientific Method (1926), Alfred North Whitehead's Process and Reality
(1929), Shailer Math- ews's The Growth of the Idea of God (1931), John Dewey's A Common
Faith (1934) and Edgar Sheffield Brightman's A Philosophy ofReligion (1940).
There are complex sociological and historical reasons that account for this phenomenon. My
basic point is simply that for the first four decades of this century most of the major American
philosophers were philosophers of religion and that the Golden Age of philosophy of religion in
the modern West was primarily an American affair.
This American predominance in philosophy of religion produced profound philosophical
breakthroughs. First, major American philosophers, starting with Peirce, radically questioned
the subjectivist turn in philosophy. They attacked the notion that philosophical reflection begins
within the inner chambers of mental episodes. American pragmatists promoted an
intersubjectivist turn that highlighted the communal and social character of acquiring knowledge.
American process philosophers accented a primordial form of experience, for example, causal
efficacy, which disclosed the often overlooked interpretive and abstract status of sense
perception.
These two diverse critiques of the fundamental starting point for European Enlightenment
philosophy undermined the relational framework of mind-objectsGod. The pragmatists' move
led toward a focus on the social practices-from verification procedures to communal values-that
produced knowledge about minds, objects and God. The process strategy yielded a new


--- PAGE 318 ---
complicated vocabulary that rejected lines of demarcation between consciousness, world and
the divine. Furthermore, the legacies of both pragmatic and process thought reclaimed the
epistemic and scientific status of religious beliefs as well as their practical value. In short, the
major movements in the Golden Age of philosophy of religion undercut the three basic pillars of
modern European philosophy.
The distinctive feature of the most influential American philosophies of religion-pragmatism
and process thought-is that they defend religious experience and beliefs under the banners of
radical empiricism, open-ended pragmatism and ethical activism. Radical empiricism tries to
stay in tune with the complex plurality and fluid multiplicity of experience on the individual and
corporate levels. Open-ended pragmatism accentuates the various problems motivating logical
inquiry and reflective intelligence. Ethical activism links human responsibility and action to the
purposeful solving of problems in the personal, cultural, ideological, political, economic and
ecological spheres of human and natural activities. In this sense, the major American
philosophers prior to World War II did not succumb to the secular insularity of their European
counterparts; nor did they cater to the irrational impulses of parochial religious and ideological
thinkers: Their plebeian humanism-more democratic than Matthew Arnold's bourgeois humanism
and more individualistic than Marx's revolutionary humanism-encouraged them to view
sympathetically, though critically, the lives of common people and hence take religion seriously
in their sophisticated philosophical reflection.
THE DECLINE OF PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION
As I noted earlier, the Golden Age of philosophy of religion is long past. The flowering of
American philosophy-with its deep religious concerns-was cut short. The political and military
crisis in Europe resulted in intellectual emigres to the United States who changed the academic
discipline of philosophy. This change was inextricably bound to the increasing
professionalization of the discipline of philosophy.
The advent of logical positivism-with its diverse versions of atomism, reductionism and
narrow empiricism-put an end to the Golden Age of philosophy of religion. This Viennese-style
positivism, though popularized in America by A. J. Ayer's Language, Truth, and Logic (1936),
brought with it all the old European Enlightenment baggage pragmatism and process thought had
discredited: the subjectivist starting point, subject/object relations and the philosophical trashing
of religion. As Dewey's long and languishing star faded in New York and Whitehead's legacy
courageously persisted in relative isolation at Chicago, the positivism of Rudolf Carnap, Carl
Hempel and others spread like wildfire throughout elite graduate schools in philosophy-
especially Harvard, UCLA and Minnesota. By the death of Whitehead in 1947, few graduate
students in philosophy at influential schools had heard of Hocking and Brightman, had read
Wieman or grappled with Whitehead (besides, maybe, his Principia Mathematica). James was
deemed a cultural critic who lacked philosophical rigor; Dewey, a mere social activist with
scientistic sentiments and fuzzy philosophical meditations. Technical argumentation, logical
notation and rigorous analysis-with their concomitant subfields of logic, epistemology and
methodology in the natural sciences-had seized center stage.
To put it crudely, logical positivism was based on three fundamental assumptions. First, it


--- PAGE 319 ---
assumed a form of sentential atomism that correlates isolated sentences with either possible
empirical confirmation (as in the sciences), logical necessity (as in mathematics and logic) or
emotion (as in ethics, religion and the arts). Second, it emerged with a kind of phenomenalist
reductionism that translates sentences about physical objects into sentences about actual and
possible sensations. Third, it presupposed a version of analytical empiricism that holds
observational evidence to be the criterion for cognitively meaningful sentences and hence the
final court of appeal in determining valid theories about the world. These crucial assumptions,
which constitute independent yet interrelated doctrines, were held at various times by the
leading logical positivists. More important, they were guided by fundamental distinctions
between the analytic and the synthetic, the linguistic and the empirical, theory and observation.2
The immediate consequence of logical positivism on philosophy of religion was the near
collapse of the latter as a serious academic discipline, or even a subfield within philosophy.
This consequence had a devastating effect: During the early stages of the professionalization of
philosophy after World War II, philosophy of religion had little or no academic legitimacy.
Therefore most of those interested in philosophy with religious concerns were forced to study in
graduate programs of divinity schools or seminaries such as Yale, Chicago or Union.
Furthermore, since American philosophies of religion also were forms of social and cultural
criticism, the near collapse of philosophy of religion was a symptom of the narrow mode of
philosophizing promoted by logical positivists. Needless to say, as philosophers had less and
less to say about religion, politics, ethics, the arts and the normative role of science in the world,
and more and more to say about analytical sentences, methodological operations in physics and
the reducibility of objects to sense data, the literate populace lost interest in the intellectual
activity of philosophers. In other words, philosophy in America was losing touch with American
philosophy.
THE RESURGENCE OF AMERICAN PHILOSOPHY
The major tragedy of contemporary philosophy of religion is that the resurgence of American
philosophy occurred at the time when most American theologians were being seduced either by
the antiphilosophical stance of Karl Barth or by the then fashionable logical positivism and
linguistic analysis. The great contributions of W. V. Quine, Nelson Goodman and Wilfred
Sellars, which undermined Viennese-style positivism and Oxford-inspired linguistic philosophy,
were made just as A. J. Ayer, J. L. Austin and Ludwig Wittgenstein or Karl Barth and Emil
Brunner were becoming prominent on the American theological scene. The result of this
situation is that Quine, Goodman and Sellars are relatively alien to most contemporary religious
thinkers, and that either refined forms of German idealism, as with Paul Tillich, heuristic
mythological versions of Christianity, as in Reinhold Niebuhr, and indigenous updates of
process philosophy, as in Schubert Ogden and John B. Cobb, Jr., constitute the most significant
contributions of philosophy of religion in America after World War II.
The resurgence of American philosophy was enacted by the powerful critiques of logical
positivism launched by Quine, Goodman and Sellars. Quine's epistemological holism, which
heralded systems of sentences (or theories) as opposed to isolated sentences as the basic units of
empirical significance, discarded sentential atomism. Furthermore, his methodological monism,


--- PAGE 320 ---
which rejected the analytic-synthetic distinction, rendered unacceptable the positivist
classificatory criterion for tautological and meaningful sentences.3 Goodman's postempiricist
antireductionism highlighted the theory-laden character of observation and undercut the narrow
empiricist standard for adjudicating between conflicting theories of the world. And his
ontological pluralism relegated the idea of truth to that of fitness and promoted diverse true
versions of the world instead of a fixed world and unique truth. He thus called into question the
monocosmic naturalism of logical positivism (a radical move which even Quine resisted owing
to his ontological allegiance to physics-a lingering trace of positivism in the great critic of
positivism) .4
Lastly, Sellars's epistemic antifoundationalism precluded any "given" elements as acceptable
candidates that serve as the final terminating point for chains of epistemic justification-thereby
condemning any form of empiricist grounding of knowledge claims.' The Quine-Goodman-
Sellars contributions, though related in complex and often conflicting ways and still questionable
in some philosophical circles, signify the American takeover of analytical philosophy-a takeover
that has led to the demise of analytical philosophy.'
The Quine-Goodman-Sellars insights bear striking resemblances to the viewpoints of earlier
American pragmatists. The resurgence of American philosophy is, in part, the recovery of the
spirit and temper of American pragmatism reflected in Charles Peirce's first rule of reason: Do
not block the way of inquiry.? Yet this resurgence is silent regarding the status and role of
religion (and social and cultural criticism) in philosophical reflection. Contemporary American
philosophy is postanalytic philosophy, with deep debts to pragmatism, yet little interest in
religious reflection.
This is so principally because postanalytic philosophy has been preoccupied with the secular
priesthood, the sacred institution in modern culture: the scientific community and its practice.
Thomas Kuhn's influential book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) can be viewed as
the grand postanalytic philosophical text written for the positivist philistines-the great
popularization of the implications of the Quine-Goodman-Sellars contributions for the paradigm
of rationality in modern culture, that is, the practices of scientists. Paul Feyerabend, who
describes himself as a "church historian," deepens these implications (in the political and
ideological spheres) regarding the demystification of scientific method and practices in Against
Method (1975) and Science in a Free Society (1978). In short, the philosophy and history of
science function in contemporary American philosophy as did the philosophy and history of
religion in the Golden Age of American philosophy. The gain is a more sophisticated dialogue
concerning the content and character of rationality in modernity; the loss is a less engaged
relation with the wider culture and society.
This situation is exemplified in Richard Rorty's masterful manifesto of American postanalytic
philosophy, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979), and Richard Bernstein's learned
meditations on the role of philosophy after Rorty in Beyond Objectivism and Relativism (1983).
Despite their Kuhnian perspectives regarding the social character of rationality, both focus their
philosophical concerns almost exclusively on philosophy of science and say nothing about
philosophy of religion. And this latter silence is accompanied by a glaring absence of sustained


--- PAGE 321 ---
social and cultural criticism. The salutary contributions of Rorty and Bernstein are that (like
Hegel and Marx at their best) they make historical consciousness central to their philosophical
reflections, without falling into the transcendentalist trap of making historical consciousness the
new candidate for philosophically grounding knowledge claims (as did Hegel and Marx at their
worst). Yet Rorty and Bernstein put forward "thin" historical narratives that rarely dip into the
complex world of politics and culture. Both remain seduced by a kind of Lovejoy-like history of
ideas far removed from concrete historical processes and realities. "Thick" historical narratives,
such as those of Karl Marx, Max Weber, Simone de Beauvoir, W. E. B. Du Bois and Antonio
Gramsci, elude them.
In other words, Rorty and Bernstein hold at arm's length serious tools of social theory and
cultural criticism. Presently, Rorty's self-styled neopragmatism-much like Jacques Derrida's
poststructuralism-is creating waves in the academy. But these waves remain those of
departmental internecine struggles between old-style empiricists and new-style pragmatists,
argumentative realists and narrativistic historicists, establishmentarian humanists and the
professional posthumanists. These noteworthy conflicts within the discipline of philosophy in
the academy have yet to spill over into serious cultural and political debates regarding the larger
issues of public concern.
THE THEOLOGICAL DISCOVERY OF HISTORY
While professional philosophers lingered under the spell of the grand QuineGoodman-Sellars
breakthroughs, and academic theologians nested in Barthian cocoons or emulated logical
positivists and linguistic analysts, liberation theologians discovered history. This discovery did
not consist of systematic reflections on historicity, which has been long a priority of German-
trained theologians and Hei- deggerian-influenced philosophers, but rather of linking historical
processes in society to political praxis. In this sense the theological discovery of history by
Gustavo Gutierrez, Mary Daly and James Cone was qualitatively different from the recovery of
historicism by Richard Rorty and Richard Bernstein.s The former was philosophically
underdeveloped yet politically engaged and culturally enlightening; the latter, politically and
culturally underdeveloped and philosophically enlightening. Gutierrez was responding, in part,
to the hegemony of Jacques Maritain's integral humanism among liberal Latin American Catholic
elites and the "developmentalism" of U.S. foreign policy which masks corporate interests and
Latin American social misery. Daly and Cone were recuperating the experi ential and activist
dimensions of American thought. The early works of Daly are not simply religious critiques of
ecclesiastical and cultural patriarchy; they also explore-at the behest of Whitehead and James-
primordial forms of female experience that may empower victims of sexist oppression. Even in
her post-Christian texts, these experiential and activist dimensions remain. Similarly, the initial
works of Cone are not only sustained diatribes against Euro-American racism; they also probe
into the degraded and devalued modes of African American experience that promote and
encourage resistance against white-supremacist practices. Yet, for many of us, Daly's neo
Thomist metaphysics loomed too large and Cone's Barthian Christocentrism was too thick-and
their early one-dimensional social analyses were too parochial.
Notwithstanding their philosophical and social-analytical limitations, liberation theologians


--- PAGE 322 ---
put historical processes, social analyses and political praxis at the center of theological
discourse in seminaries and divinity schools. Their linking of historical consciousness to
present-day political struggles-to anti-imperialist, feminist and black freedom movements-
galvanized new intellectual energies throughout the religious academy. This intellectual upsurge
caught many neoorthodox theologians and liberal philosophers of religion unaware and
unequipped to respond adequately. Yet it is no accident that the two major theological responses
to liberation theology have come from process theologians: Schubert Ogden's Faith and Freedom
and John B. Cobb, Jr.'s Process Thought and Political Theology.
Just as Rorty's and Bernstein's historicism is philosophically groundbreaking yet lacking in
serious political substance, Gutierrez's, Daly's and Cone's liberation perspectives are
theologically groundbreaking yet lacking in serious philosophical substance. For example,
Guticrrez's conception of Marxist science is quite positivist. Daly's ontological arguments often
slide into mere cathartic assertions and Cone's religious claims reek of a hermetic fideism.
Unfortunately, the nonexistent dialogue between academic philosophers and theologians nearly
ensures an intellectual estrangement that permits the political insouciance of American
neopragmatists and promotes the philosophical insularity of liberation theologians. What is
needed is a rapprochement of the philosophical historicism of Rorty and Bernstein and the moral
vision, social analysis and political engagement of the liberation perspectives of Gutierrez, Daly
and Cone.
THE PRESENT NEED FOR THE PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION
American philosophy at its best has taken the form of philosophy of religion. This is so not
because philosophy of religion possesses some special privilege or wisdom as a discipline, but
rather because of the particular character of American philosophical thought. For complex
national reasons, when American philosophers turn their backs on religion, they turn their eyes
toward science. This usually results in muting their social and political concerns. My point here
is not that American philosophers become religious, but rather that they once again take religion
seriously, which also means taking culture and society seriously.
The contemporary tasks of a responsible and sophisticated philosophy of religion are
threefold. First, it must deepen the historicist turn in philosophy by building upon the Quine-
Goodman-Sellars contributions, and "thickening" the "thin" historicism of Rorty's and
Bernstein's neopragmatism by means of undogmatic social analysis and engaged cultural
criticism. Second, it should put forward moral visions and ethical norms that regulate the social
analysis and cultural criticism drawn from the best of available religious and secular traditions
bequeathed to us from the past. Third, it should scrutinize in a rational manner synoptic
worldviews of various religious and secular traditions in light of their comprehensive grasp of
the complexity, multiplicity and specificity of human experiences, and their enabling power to
motivate human action for the negation and transformation of structures of oppression.
The historicist turn in philosophy of religion must steer clear of the Scylla of transcendental
objectivism and the Charybdis of subjectivist nihilism. My particular version of philosophical
historicism is neither the neo-Kantian historicism (a la Wilhelm Dilthey) that presupposes a
positivist conception of the Naturwis- senschaften nor the Popperian-defined historicism that


--- PAGE 323 ---
possesses magic powers of social prediction and projection. Rather, the historicism I promote is
one that understands transient social practices, contingent cultural descriptions and revisable
scientific theories as the subject matter for philosophical reflection. Hence, social analysis and
cultural criticism are indispensable components of such reflection.
On the one hand, transcendental objectivism is precluded by rejecting all modes of
philosophical reflection that invoke ahistorical quests for certainty and transhistorical searches
for foundations-including most realist moves in ontology, foundationalist strategies in
epistemology and mentalistic discourses in philosophical psychology. On the other hand,
subjectivist nihilism is avoided by condemning all forms of philosophical activity that devalue
and disregard possibilities, potentialities and alternatives to prevailing practices. Wholesale
leveling and trashing of standards, criteria and principles that facilitate dialogue, conversation
and exchange result from subjectivist nihilism. Such nihilism is not simply parasitic on the
failures of transcendental objectivism; it also shuns historical consciousness and thereby
remains captive to the subjectivist turn. In this way transcendental objectivism is delusory
though not necessarily socially pernicious, whereas subjectivist nihilism is inescapably
insidious.
My version of historicism flows from the tradition of mitigated skepticism signified by
Sebastian Castellio of Basel, William Chillingworth and Pascal at the birth of modern
conceptions of knowledge and science. It is deepened and en riched by the tempered Pyrrhonism
of David Hume, the Hegelian-inspired historicisms of Kierkegaard and Marx, the demystifying
perspectivalism of Nietzsche and the enabling pragmatism of James and Dewey. Like Gadamer,
my version of historicism acknowledges the unavoidable character and central role of tradition
and prejudice, yet it takes seriously the notion of sound human judgment relative to the most
rationally acceptable theories and descriptions of the day. In this way, the historicism I promote
is akin to that of Rorty and Bernsteinand especially that ofJeffrey Stout.`'
My philosophical historicism is inextricably bound to undogmatic social analysis and engaged
social criticism, because if one is not nihilistic about history, one must be open to new
possibilities, potentialities and alternatives to present practices. In this view, the major role of
social analysis and cultural criticism is to understand these practices and discern forces for
betterment. Therefore, philosophical historicism-if logically consistent and theoretically
coherent-leads to "thick" historicism, to social and heterogeneous narratives that account for the
present and project a future.
Although social analysis and cultural criticism play central roles in my historicist philosophy
of religion, some forms of such analyses and criticisms are not acceptable. Adequate social
analyses and cultural critiques must be regulated by moral visions and ethical norms that are
ensconced in religious or secular traditions-shot through with their own set of presuppositions,
prejudgments and prejudices. A historicist philosophy of religion is not limited in an a priori
manner to religious traditions. Yet in its attempts to take seriously the human dimensions of
ultimacy, intimacy and sociality, it usually incorporates elements from religious traditions.
Secular traditions are indispensable, yet they have had neither the time nor the maturity to
bequeath to us potent cultural forms of ultimacy, intimacy and sociality comparable to older and


--- PAGE 324 ---
richer religious traditions.
Acceptable modes of social analysis and cultural criticisms are guided by moral visions and
ethical norms that flow from synoptic worldviews, including such crucial matters as the ideal of
what it is to be human, the good society, loving relationships and other precious conceptions.
These worldviews are to be rationally scrutinized in light of their capacity to illuminate the
complexity, multiplicity and specificity of human experiences and their ability to enable
oppositional activity against life-denying forces, be they biological, ecological, political,
cultural or economic forces.
Since I believe that the major life-denying forces in our world are economic exploitation
(resulting primarily from the social logic of capital accumulation), state repression (linked to the
social logic of state augmentation), bureaucratic domination lowing to the social logic of
administrative subordination), racial, sexual and heterosexual subjugation (due to the social
logics of white, male and heterosexual supremacist practices) and ecological subjection
(resulting, in part, from modern values of scientistic manipulation), I entertain a variety of social
analyses and cultural critiques that yield not merely one grand synthetic social theory, but rather
a number of local ones that remain international in scope and historical in content. My general
social-analytical perspective-deeply neo-Gramscian in spirit-is more influenced by the Marxist
tradition than by any other secular tradition, but it also acknowledges the severe limitations of
the Marxist tradition. By claiming that the Marxist tradition is indispensable yet inadequate, my
social-analytical perspective is post-Marxist without being anti-Marxist or pre-Marxist; that is,
it incorporates elements from Weberian, racial, feminist, gay, lesbian and ecological modes of
social analysis and cultural criticism.
I arrive at these analyses because the moral vision and ethical norms I accept are derived
from the prophetic Christian tradition. I follow the biblical injunction to look at the world
through the eyes of its victims, and the Christocentric perspective that requires that one see the
world through the lens of the Cross-and thereby see our relative victimizing and relative
victimization. Since we inhabit different locations on the existential, socioeconomic, cultural
and political scales, our victim status differs, though we all, in some way, suffer. Needless to
say, the more multilayered the victimization, the more suffering one undergoes. And given the
predominant forms of life-denying forces in the world, the majority of humankind experiences
thick forms of victimization.
The synoptic vision I accept is a particular kind of prophetic Christian perspective that
comprehensively grasps and enables opposition to existential anguish, socioeconomic, cultural
and political oppression and dogmatic modes of thought and action. I do not believe that this
specific version of the prophetic Christian tradition has a monopoly on such insights, capacities
and motivations. Yet I have never been persuaded that there are better traditions than the
prophetic Christian one.
My acceptance of the prophetic Christian tradition is rational in that it rests upon good
reasons. These reasons are good ones not because they result from logical necessity or conform
to transcendental criteria. Rather, they are good in that they flow from rational deliberation that
perennially scrutinizes my particular tradition in relation to specific problems of dogmatic


--- PAGE 325 ---
thought, existential anguish and societal oppression.
My reasons may become bad ones. For example, I would give up my allegiance to the
prophetic Christian tradition if life-denying forces so fully saturated a situation that all
possibility, potentiality and alternatives were exhausted, or if I became convinced that another
tradition provides a more acceptable and enabling moral vision, set of ethical norms and
synoptic worldview. I need neither metaphysical criteria nor transcendental standards to be
persuaded, only historically constituted and situated reasons.
Yet, presently, I remain convinced by prophetic Christian tradition. Its synoptic vision speaks
with insight and power to the multiform character of human existence and to the specificity of the
historical modes of human existence. Its moral vision and ethical norms propel human
intellectual activity to account for and transform existing forms of dogmatism, oppression and
despair. And the historicist turn in philosophy of religion helps us understand that we are forced
to choose, in a rational and critical manner, some set of transient social practices, contingent
cultural descriptions and revisable scientific theories by which to live. This historicist stress on
human finitude and human agency fits well, though it does not justify, my Christian faith. And, to
put it bluntly, I do hope that the historicist turn in philosophy of religion enriches the prophetic
Christian tradition and enables us to work more diligently for a better world.
SOURCE: From Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Rene in Amena, by Cornel West, pp. 119-134, 298-
299. Copyright © 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc. Originally appeared in Leroy
S. Rouner, ed., Knowing Religiously (Boston University Studies in Philosophy and Religion, Volume
7). Copyright CO 1985 The University of Notre Dame Press.


--- PAGE 326 ---
RELIGION AND T H E L E F T
This essay was the lead piece of 'a special double issue of Monthly Review (1984) on religion
and the Left. This issue was important because it marked the first time this leading Marxist
journal-secular and atheistic-had seriously broached the subject of religion. Ironically, Monthly
Review was initially funded primarily by money inherited by the great F. 0. Matthiessen from
his father. And Matthiessen was not only one of the towering literary critics of this century (and
Harvard professor for decades), but also a Christian socialist whose struggle over his
homosexuality led to suicide.
NOTWITHSTANDING THE SECULAR SENSIBILITIES of most leftist intellectuals and
activists, religion permeates and pervades the lives of the majority of people in the capitalist
world. And all signs indicate that the prevailing crisis in the capitalist world is not solely an
economic or political one. Recent inquiries into the specificity of racism, patriarchy,
homophobia, state repression, bureaucratic domination, ecological subjugation and nuclear
exterminism suggest that we need to understand this crisis as that of capitalist civilization. To
extend leftist discourses about political economy and the state to a discourse about capitalist
civilization is to accent a sphere rarely scrutinized by Marxist thinkers: the sphere of culture and
everyday life. And any serious scrutiny of this sphere sooner or later must come to terms with
religious ways of life and religious ways of struggle.
In this chapter I shall pose three crucial questions to contemporary Marxism regarding
religion. First, how are we to understand the character and content of religious beliefs and
practices? Second, how are we to account for the recent religious upsurges in Latin America, the
Middle East, Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe and the United States? And third, in which ways can
these upsurges enrich and enhance-or delimit and deter-the international struggle for human
freedom and democracy? In the present historical moment, these queries strike me as
inescapable and important.
RELIGION AND MARXIST THEORY
The classical Marxist understanding of religion is more subtle than is generally acknowledged.
Crude Marxist formulations of religion as the opium of the peo ple in which the religious masses
are viewed as passive and ignorant objects upon which monolithic religious institutions impose
fantasies of other-worldly fulfillment reveal more about Enlightenment prejudices and arrogant
self-images of petit bourgeois intellectuals than the nature of religion. Contrary to such
widespread crypto-Marxist myths about religion, Marx and Engels understood religion as a
profound human response to, and protest against, intolerable conditions. For Marx and Engels,
religion as an opium of the people is not a mere political pacification imposed from above, but
rather a historically circumscribed existential and experiential assertion of being (or
somebodiness) by dehumanized historical agents under unexamined socioeconomic conditions.
Marx and Engels characterized religion as alienation not primarily because it is "unscientific" or
"premodern," but rather because it often overlooks the socioeconomic conditions that shape and
mold its expression and thereby delimits human powers and efforts to transform these
conditions. In short, the classical Marxist critique of religion is not an a priori philosophical


--- PAGE 327 ---
rejection of religion; rather, it is a social analysis of and historical judgment upon religious
practices.
For Marx and Engels, religion often overlooks the socioeconomic circumstances that
condition its expression, principally because the religious preoccupation with cosmic vision,
ontological pronouncements on human nature and personal morality hold at arm's length social
and historical analysis. Hence religion at its worst serves as an ideological means of preserving
and perpetuating prevailing social and historical realities and at its best yields moralistic
condemnations of and utopian visions beyond present social and historical realities-with few
insights regarding what these realities are and how to change them. The Marxist point here is not
simply that religion alone is an impotent and inadequate form of protest, but also that without a
probing and illuminating social and historical analysis of the present, even the best-intentioned
religionists and moralists will impede fundamental social and historical transformation. In stark
contrast to crude Marxists, Marx and Engels do not claim that only a substitution of a rigid
Marxist science of society and history for false religion and glib moralism can liberate
humankind, but rather that a Marxist social and historical analysis can more effectively guide
transformative human praxis motivated, in part, by moral and/or religious norms of human
freedom and democracy.
This more nuanced understanding of religion has rarely surfaced in the Marxist tradition,
primarily owing to the early Eurocentric development of Marxism. In Europe-where the
Enlightenment ethos remained (and still remains) hegemonic among intellectuals and the literate
middle classes-secular sensibilities were nearly prerequisite for progressive outlooks, and
religious beliefs usually a sign of political reaction. The peculiar expression of critical
consciousness in Europe focused on a corrupt and oppressive feudal order which the
institutional church participated in, firmly supported and buttressed. And though the advent of
Marxism itself bears traces of this Enlightenment legacy, the deep sense of historical
consciousness nurtured and promoted by Marx and Engels led them to understand religious
beliefs as first and foremost cultural practices generated from conflictual and contradictory
socioeconomic conditions, rather than as ahistorical sets of philosophical arguments. Of course,
Kant, Fichte and especially Hegel and Feuerbach contributed to such an understanding.
The Marxism of the Second International-with its diverse forms of economic determinism,
Kantian moralism and even left social Darwinism-viewed cultural and religious issues in a
crude and reductionist manner. Karl Kautsky's monu- 'Christianity (1908) is an exemplary text in
this remental work the Foundations o gard. The major antireductionist voices in this
deterministic wilderness were those of the Italian Marxist Antonio Labriola and the Irish
Marxist James Connolly. Lenin and Trotsky indeed undermined the crudity and reductionism of
the Second International, but they confined their efforts to the realms of politics and the arts.
Neither provided serious and sustained antireductionist formulations in regard to ethics and
religion. In fact, the Third International remained quite reductionist on such matters.
The centrality of morality and religion loom large in the works of Antonio Gramsci. For the
first time, a major European Marxist took with utter seriousness the cultural life-worlds of the
oppressed. Though still tied to a rationalist psychology that neglected unconscious impulses and


--- PAGE 328 ---
a revolutionary teleology that uncritically privileged industrial working-class agency, Gramsci
highlighted the heterogeneous elements comprising the cultural ways of life of oppressed people
and the fragile, ever changing character of these elements in response to contradictory
socioeconomic circumstances.
Gramsci understood culture as a crucial component of class capacity. Like James Connolly
before him and Raymond Williams in our own time, Gramsci examined the ways in which
cultural resources enabled (and disenabled) political struggle among the exploited and excluded
in capitalist societies. While Lukacs disclosed the reified character of contemporary capitalist
culture-the way in which processes of commodification and thingification permeate bourgeois
thought, art and perception-Grarnsci focused on the cultural means by which workers and
peasants resisted such reification. While Karl Korsch enunciated his principle of historical
specificity-the need to acknowledge the materiality of ideology and the diversity of conflicting
social forces in a particular historical mo- ment-Gramsci applied this principle and specified
the nature of these conflicting social forces with his complex notions of hegemony and historical
blocs.
Ironically, the major figures of so-called Western Marxism were preoccupied with culture-but
none was materialist enough to take religion seriously. Whether it was Adorno and Marcuse on
the subversive character of highbrow music and poetry, Sartre and Althusser on the progressive
possibilities of avant-garde prose and theater or Benjamin and Bakhtin on the revolutionary
potential of film and the novel-all rightly viewed the cultural sphere as a domain of ideological
contestation. Yet none highlighted religion as a crucial component of this cultural sphere.
It is important to note that it has been primarily Third World Marxists-for whom issues of
praxis and strategy loom large-who have confronted the religious component of culture in a
serious way. Peru's Jose Carlos Mariategui, China's Mao Tse-tung, and Guinea-Bissau's
Amilcar Cabral were trailblazers on such matters. All three shunned the reductionism of the
Second International, eschewed the excessive hostility toward religion of the Third International
and transcended the Enlightenment prejudices of the Western Marxists. Mariategui, Mao and
Cabral-whose cultural concerns inspire black Marxists, feminist Marxists, gay and lesbian
Marxists in the First World-recovered and refined the classical Marxist insights regarding the
materiality and ambiguity, the relative autonomy and empowering possibilities of cultural and
religious practices by grasping the existential and experiential content of such practices under
capitalist conditions. In our own time, such Marxist historians as Christopher Hill and E. P.
Thompson in England, W. E. B. Du Bois and Eugene Genovese in the United States, Marc Bloch
and Henri Lefebvre in France, Manning Clarke in Australia and Enrique Dussel in Mexico have
begun to come to terms with the complex relation of religious practices to political struggle. In
other words, the age of crude Marxist reductionist treatments of religion-along with European
secular condescending attitudes that undergird them-is passing. Concrete social and detailed
historical analyses of the relation of religion to revolutionary praxis is now a major issue on the
agenda for contemporary Marxism.
RELIGION AND MARXIST POLITICS
The fundamental challenge of religion for Marxist politics is how we should understand


--- PAGE 329 ---
religious practices as specific forms of popular opposition and/or subordination in capitalist
societies. Recent religious upsurges around the world-in postindustrial, industrial and
preindustrial capitalist countries-call into question bourgeois theories of secularization and
crude Marxist theories of modernization. The world-historical social processes of
rationalization, commodification and bureaucratization have generated neither a widespread
"disenchantment with the world," a "polar night of icy hardness and darkness" nor a
revolutionary class consciousness among industrial workers. Instead, we have witnessed intense
revivals of nationalism, ethnicity and religion. Modern capitalist processes indeed have
transformed traditional religious worldviews, intimate Gemeinschaft--like arrangements and
customary social bonds, but these processes have not eliminated the need and yearning for such
worldviews, arrangements and bonds. Recent nationalist, ethnic and religious revivals constitute
new forms of these worldviews, arrangements and bonds, with existential intensity and
ideological fervor.
There are three basic reasons for this. First, the culture of capitalist societies has, for the most
part, failed to give existential moorings and emotional assurance to their inhabitants. The
capitalist culture of consumption-with its atomistic individualism, spectatorial passivity and
outlooks of therapeutic release-does not provide meaningful sustenance for large numbers of
people. So in First World countries, religious responses-often in nostalgic forms, but also in
utopian ones-are widespread. Given the relative lack of long-standing ties or traditional links to
a religious past, these responses are intertwined with the prevailing myths of European
modernity: nationalism, racism, anti-Semitism, sexism, anti-Orientalism and homophobia. This
is why religious (as well as nationalist and ethnic) revivals are usually dangerous-though they
also can be occasions of progressive opportunity. Such opportunity is significant in that religious
impulses are one of the few resources for a moral and political commitment beyond the self in
the capitalist culture of consumption. These impulses often require commitments to neighbor,
community and unknown others-though such commitments are ideologically circumscribed.
The second reason religious revivals emerge is that they constitute popular responses to
intense capitalist domination of more traditional societies. This is especially so in Third World
countries in which the cultural forms are either indigenous or colonial and the capital is
primarily external or international. The boom-town character of industrialization, urbanization
and proletarianization demands that cultural ways of life, usually religious, provide strategies
for new personal meaning, social adjustment and political struggle.
The emergence of the most important Third World development in religious practices-the
liberation theology movement-consists of such strategies of new personal meaning, social
adjustment and political struggle. This movement began in Latin America primarily in response
to rapid capitalist penetration, quick yet painful industrial class formation, rampant state
repression and bloated urbanization. This response was not only rooted in Christian thought and
practice; it also flowed from the major "free" space in these repressive regimes, the church. And
given the overwhelming Roman Catholic character of this movement-with the monumental
reforming impetus of Vatican 11 (1962-1965) and the groundbreaking counterhegemonic posture
of the Medellin Latin American bishops' meeting (1968)-these new strategies became more open
to personal meanings, social adjustments and political struggles informed by prophetic elements


--- PAGE 330 ---
in the Scriptures and ecclesiastical tradition as well as progressive social and historical
analyses.
Liberation theology in Latin America-embodied in the works of Gustavo Gutierrez, Reuben
Alves, Hugo Asmann, Jose Miguez-Bonino, Victorio Araya, Ernesto Cardenal, Paulo Freire,
Elsa Tamez, Jose Miranda, Pablo Richard, Juan Luis Segundo, Enrique Dussel, Beatrice Couch,
and others-is generated and sustained by popular religious opposition to the consolidation of
capitalist social processes in Latin America. It is, in part, an anti-imperialist Christian mode of
thought and action. Similar liberation theology outlooks-with their own contextual colorings-are
found in Africa (especially South Africa), Asia (especially the Philippines and South Korea),
the Caribbean (especially Jamaica) and the United States (especially among blacks and
feminists). Yet in terms of widespread concrete praxis, none yet rivals that of Latin America.
The last reason such religious revivals emerge is that they constitute anti-Western forms of
popular resistance to capitalist domination. This is especially so in those Third World countries
(or pockets in the First World, as with indigenous peoples) in which a distinct cultural and
religious way of life still has potency and vitality compared to Western modes of religion. For
example, in the Middle East and parts of Asia and Africa, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism or
traditional religions still have substance and life. Hence these religions serve as cultural sources
against not simply Western imperialism, but also much of Western civilization-especially
Western self-images, values and sensibilities. Such resistance, like all forms of resistance, can
be restorative and reactionary (as in Iran) or progressive and prophetic (as among many
Palestinians).
In short the religious revivals, along with nationalistic and ethnic ones, fundamentally result
from the inability of capitalist civilization to provide contexts and communities wherein meaning
and value can be found to sustain people through the traumas of life. And since there can be no
potent morality without such contexts and communities, these religious revivals represent an
ethical challenge to Marxism. Instead of the promised autonomy and progress of the European
Enlightenment, the modern West has bequeathed to the world-besides ingenious technological
innovations, personal liberties for some and comfortable living for the few-mere fragments and
ruins of a decaying and declining civilization. This decay and decline owes much to the captivity
of its ways of life to class exploitation, patriarchy, racism, homophobia, technocratic rationality
and the quest for military might. Of course, many of these remarks-and even more so in the realm
of personal liberties-can be made of "actually existing socialist" civilization. But our focus here
is the capitalist world. And as this capitalist world continues its deterioration, religious revivals
will more than likely persist. The great question is: Will such revivals enable or disenable the
Left in its struggle for human freedom and democracy?
RELIGION AND MARXIST STRATEGY
Religious upsurges in the Third World (and Second World, as in Poland) may quite clearly
contribute to the building of a left movement. As we have seen in Latin America-where over two
hundred thousand base Christian communities exist as concrete praxis centers for social change,
communal support and personal sustenance-and parts of Africa and Asia, religion plays an
important role in liberation struggles. The prophetic church in Nicaragua, with its tensions (both


--- PAGE 331 ---
healthy and unhealthy) with the state, is the best recent example of this crucial role.
The major contribution religious revivals can make to left strategy is to demand that Marxist
thinkers and activists take seriously the culture of 'the oppressed. This fundamental shift in the
sensibilities and attitudes of Marxists requires a kind of desecularizing and deEuropeanizing of
Marxist praxis, a kind of laying bare and discarding of the deepseeded Enlightenment prejudices
that shape and mold the perspectives and perceptions of most Marxists. This shift does not
demand a softening of critical consciousness, but rather a deepening of it. It does not result in an
antiscience stance, but rather in antiscientism (the idolizing of science). It does not yield an
antitechnology viewpoint, but rather an antitechnologism. Nor does it produce a rejection of
reason, but rather a specifying of liberating forms of rationality.
Such a shift is necessary because after over a century of heralding the cause of the liberation
of oppressed peoples, Marxists have little understanding and appreciation of the culture of these
people. This means that though Marxists have sometimes viewed oppressed people as political
or economic agents, they have rarely viewed them as cultural agents. Yet without such a view
there can be no adequate conception of the capacity of oppressed people-the capacity to change
the world and sustain the change in an emancipatory manner. And without a conception of such
capacity, it is impossible to envision, let alone create, a socialist society of freedom and
democracy. It is, in part, the European Enlightenment legacy-the inability to believe in the
capacities of oppressed people to create cultural products of value and oppositional groups of
value-that stands between contemporary Marxism and oppressed people. And it is the arrogance
of this legacy, the snobbery of this tradition, that precludes Marxists from taking seriously
religion, a crucial element of the culture of the oppressed.
Needless to say, shedding the worst of the Enlightenment legacy does not entail neglecting the
best of this European tradition. Relentless criticism and historical consciousness remain the
crucial ingredients of any acceptable emancipatory vision just as protracted class struggle and
an allegiance to socialist democracy remain indispensable features of any recognizable
Marxism. So the call for an overcoming of European bourgeois attitudes of paternalism toward
religion does not mean adopting religious viewpoints. Religious affiliation is neither the mark of
ignorance nor of intelligence. Yet it is the mark of wisdom to understand the conditions under
which people do or do not have religious affiliation. In this sense, science neither solves nor
dissolves the issue of religious beliefs. Instead, history provides us with traditions against which
we must struggle, yet in which we must critically abide. The grand quest for truth is a thoroughly
historical one that takes the form of practical judgments inseparable from value judgments on,
and social-analytical understandings of, prevailing socioeconomic realities. There indeed are
standards of adjudication, but such historically constituted standards include multiple
viewpoints worthy of adoption. Hence, the quest for truth continues with only human practice
providing provisional closure.
If Marxists are to go beyond European bourgeois attitudes toward the culture of the oppressed
without idealizing or romanticizing these cultures, it is necessary to transcend a hermeneutics of
suspicion and engage in hermeneutical combat. In other words, Marxists must not simply enact
negative forms of subversive demystification (and, God forbid, more bourgeois forms of


--- PAGE 332 ---
deconstruction!), but also positive forms of popular revolutionary construction of new personal
meanings, social adjustments and political struggles for human freedom and democracy. These
new forms can emerge only after traversing, transforming and building upon the crucial spheres
in society-religion, family, labor process, state apparatuses-in order to consolidate and unite
multiple organizational groupings for fundamental social change.
So to take seriously the culture of the oppressed is not to privilege religion, but to enhance
and enrich the faltering and neglected utopian dimension of left theory and praxis. It is to believe
not simply in the potential of oppressed peoples, but also to believe that oppressed people have
already expressed some of this potential in their actual products, their actual practices. To be a
person of the Left is not only to envision and fight for a radically free and democratic society; it
is also to see this society-in-the-making as manifest in the abilities and capacities of fleshand-
blood people in their struggles under conflictual and contradictory socioeconomic conditions not
of their own choosing. This is the fundamental message regarding the relation of religious
practices to a revolutionary praxis beyond capitalist civilization.
SOURCE: From Prophetic Fragments (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdnians Publishing Co.,
1988), pp. 13-21. Originally appeared in Monthly Review, July-August 1984.


--- PAGE 333 ---
ON E L I S A B E T H SCH USSLER F I O R E N Z A ' S I N 
MEMORY O F H E R
Elisabeth Schussler Fiorenza has been influential because of her ability to bring rigorous
feminist theory to religious studies. In Memory of Her (1983), Schussler Fiorenza masterpiece,
shows her profound commitment to the fill fledged humanity of women and to a view of .Jesus as
a "woman-identified man." And her scholarship is magisterial. Ten years after this essay
appeared, I am blessed to be a close colleague and friend of Elisabeth at Harvard, where we
still fight the battle for feminist scholarship and radical Christian love.
ELISABETH SCHUSSLER FIORENZA'S In Memory of Her is a groundbreaking work. For the
first time, we have a powerful defense of new theological emancipatory models of hermeneutics,
critical method and historical reconstruction and an application of these models in one book.
This intentional traversing of academic disciplines-theology, ethics, church history and biblical
studies-for the pursuit of knowledge and empowerment of women represents a coming of age for
liberation theology. In this chapter I shall focus solely on Schiissler Fiorenza's hermeneutical
and methodological formulations, without losing sight of her broader concerns.
Any major challenge to prevailing paradigms in scholarship must build upon the profound and
persuasive insights generated by mainstream scholars, yet call into question their uncritically
accepted presuppositions, prejudgments and prejudices that deter new breakthroughs. Schiissler
Fiorenza adopts this strategy with great effectiveness. She begins by accepting the starting point
of biblical historical criticism: the acknowledgment of biblical texts as neither verbally inspired
revelation nor doctrinal stipulations, but rather as historical responses within the context of
religious communities over time and space. Following the feminist claim that such contexts are
patriarchal and androcentric, Schiissler Fiorenza demystifies mainstream biblical scholarship by
revealing its captivity to androcentrism-its relative silence on and marginalization of women's
lives in the past and presentand by disclosing the oppositional Christian women's culture
concealed by traditional church his-story.
Schussler Fiorenza moves from this "hermeneutics of suspicion" to hermeneutical combat by
putting forward an alternative model of interpretive criteria and methodological orientation for
unearthing, understanding and undergirding women's individual and collective agency in the past
and present. This move is neither a glib attack on the cult of objectivity in the academy nor a
vulgar call for women's freedom. Rather, it is a sophisticated fusing of hermeneutics, social
theory, Christian ethics and church history that specifies standards for evaluation and
appropriation of past texts and histories, highlights gender system (women's oppression and
resistance) as a fundamental category of historical and social analysis and promotes Christian
women's heritage.
Schussler Fiorenza's feminist critical hermeneutics quickly dismisses the doctrinal and
historical exegetical models of biblical interpretation by rejecting the for- mer's ahistorical
claim of revelational immediacy in the Bible and the latter's positivistic commitment to "value-
free" inquiry. Of course, Schussler Fiorenza realizes that both models have been severely
criticized and thoroughly discarded by most twentieth-century biblical scholars-yet residues


--- PAGE 334 ---
such as the quest for timeless truth and an allegiance to detached, value-neutral investigation
persists. The model of dialogical-hermeneutical interpretation is predominant in biblical
scholarship. The philosophical influence of Heidegger, Gadamer and Ricoeur ensures biblical
interpretive sensitivity to the "otherness" of the text, the inescapable prejudices of the interpreter
and the pervasive web of language, tradition and community. For Schussler Fiorenza, this model
is important, yet limited. It is important because it takes historicity seriously by acknowledging
the temporal situating of the interpreter and the illuminating potential of the interpreter's biases.
Yet it is limited in that it does not take history seriously; that is, the model refuses to dig into the
depths of the cultural, political and societal contexts of texts and interpreters. Heidegger,
Gadamer and Ricoeur have taught biblical scholars to accent the existential interestedness of
interpreters while listening to the "strangeness" of past texts; but this important insight does not
encourage biblical scholars to examine also the social, political and economic interests of
interpreters contained in texts. The model of liberation theology highlights these interests and
brings to the surface the ideological commitments of interpreters and texts within the context of
class struggle, cultural/racial conflict and feminist resistance.
Schussler Fiorenza suggests that feminist Christian scholars-since Elizabeth Cady Stanton's
monumental The Women's Bible (1895)-have appropriated liberation themes without critically
examining the problems of the hermeneutical models they adopt. She focuses on two such
models: the neoorthodox model and the sociology-of-knowledge model. Feminists such as Letty
Russell, Phyllis Trible and Rosemary Ruether have put forward influential claims regarding the
patriarchal language of the Bible while holding that there is a nonpatriarchal content therein.
This apologetic move presupposes fundamental distinctions between revelatory essence and
historical accident, timeless truth and culturally conditioned language, constant Tradition and
changing traditions. The aim of such neoorthodoxy is to confront candidly the specter of
historical conditionedness without succumbing to historical relativism and to specify the biblical
grounds for Christian identity (by preserving Christocentric revelation) in the face of objections
by natural theologians.
Schiissler Fiorenza's critique of feminist neoorthodoxy is threefold. First, she argues that
neoorthodox models ultimately put the burden of historical agency on God, not women. The
worldly skepticism of neoorthodoxy can accommodate liberation themes, but it cannot rest
transformative powers in the praxis of oppressed peoples. Therefore the reinterpretation of the
gospel from a liberationist perspective can yield, at most, a moral ideal and an abstract
prophetic tradition with little grounding in the flesh-and-blood past and present of struggling
peoples. Second, this model-against the intentions of its feminist representatives-idealizes the
biblical and prophetic traditions by refusing to come to terms with the oppressive androcentric
elements of these traditions. This idealization produces rather romanticist claims about the
"liberating" effects of recuperating past prophetic traditions. The intent is admirable; yet the
effect is rather empty. To put it crudely, the model yields theological critique, moral outrage and
ahistorical tradition posturing, but not engaged empowerment of the downtrodden. Third,
neoorthodoxy posits an "Archimedean point" that attempts to meet secular (or religious post-
Christian) feminist objections regarding the patriarchal and even misogynist character of
Christianity: This "Archimedean point"-divine revelation in Jesus Christ-preserves the
liberating kernel within the patriarchal husk.


--- PAGE 335 ---
The sociology-of-knowledge model, best exemplified in Mary Daly's work, accents the
overwhelming sexism shot through biblical texts and church traditions. This model holds that
reconstruction and revision of such texts and traditions is anachronistic. Instead of disclosing a
liberating essence in such texts and traditions, the model calls for new construction and new
vision: the creation of feminist life-centers that will generate alternative ways of naming reality
and modes of women's empowerment. It assumes that the medium is the message, that patriarchal
language can yield only patriarchal content. Therefore new mediums and languages must be
constructed by feminists. Schilssler Fiorenza is enchanted by the audacity of this model,
especially with its willingness to push Christian feminists to the edge with its sober assessment
of patriarchy in Christian texts and traditions. Yet she refuses to construe complex Christian
practices as mere patriarchal enactments. Since the model focuses primarily on sexist language
and sado-ritual repetitions of Goddess repression and murder, it provides shock effects to the
novices (feminists-to-be). Yet it does not deal in any serious manner with concrete
socioeconomic structures of oppression and feminist opposition to these structures. The model
opts for marginality, "Otherworld sisterhood" and "sacred space," which reinforces the
peripheral status imposed upon women in patriarchal society and gives the "center," the "old
territory," namely, human history, to oppressive men and subjugated women. This model surely
heightens feminist awareness of patriarchy in history, but it elides specific historical forms of
patriarchy, abstracts from the social and historical relations that shape these forms and, most
important, denies the protracted struggles of women at the "center," in the "old territory," within
human history.
Schussler Fiorenza's new model of feminist critical hermeneutics of liberation moves the
focus from questions concerning the authority of biblical revelation to discussions regarding
feminist historical reconstruction of the background conditions under which biblical texts were
constituted-from androcentric texts to patriarchal-historical contexts in which women contest
and resist as well as defer and lose. Such reconstruction proceeds not only by delving into the
liberating impulse within the biblical texts, but, more important, by going beyond the texts to
examine women's struggle against patriarchal canonization. Since these texts are not objective,
factual reports of the past, but rather pastorally engaged responses to particular circumstances, it
is not surprising that they represent the views of (and for?) the "historical winners." By critically
scrutinizing the canonization process itself, Schussler Fiorenza goes beyond the neoorthodox
model as well as that of liberation theology. No longer can one simply turn to the canonical
Christian texts for insights and even imperatives for present social and political struggles.
Rather, the formation of the biblical texts becomes a terrain of ideological and historical
contestation. To start with the biblical texts, the final canon, and infer liberation themes,
deliverance motifs and salvific principles that then serve as sources to criticize the texts
themselves still dehistoricizes and depoliticizes the canonization process.
For Schiissler Fiorenza, the revelatory criteria for theological evaluation and appropriation of
the Christian past and present is transbiblical, that is, linked to biblical texts yet substantively
beyond them. At times, Schiissler Fiorenza nearly excludes the biblical texts and offers only
Christian women's struggle for liberation from patriarchal oppression. At other times, she admits
that this struggle in the past produced nonpatriarchal elements in the biblical texts. This
ambiguity is seen in her metaphor for biblical revelation as a historical prototype, not a mythic


--- PAGE 336 ---
archetype-as an all-too-human process open to critique and change rather than an ideal, timeless
form. The ambiguity arises in that if one locates revelation first and foremost in the Christian (or
non-Christian) feminist struggle for freedom, and if the biblical texts are fundamentally
androcentric, it is unclear why the adjective "biblical" is used in "biblical revelation."
This dilemma haunts Schiissler Fiorenza's hermeneutical and methodological discussion. Her
critiques of the prevailing interpretive models are often persuasive. And her attempt to analyze
seriously the historical context with gender system as a fundamental category as well as highlight
the ideological conflicts within the canonization process is welcome. Yet her model seems to
lead her into feminist history about Christian women rather than Christian feminist historical
reconstruction. Does she pull the Christian rug from under her project and relegate her work to
historical inquiry on Christian feminist women by failing to generate Christian normative criteria
to regulate her interpretation and appropriation of the past? I think not. She pushes us to the edge
of the Christian tradition precisely to help us understand it as a deeply historical yet revelatory
phenomenon.
Schiissler Fiorenza's conception of truth and justification-her implicit ontology and
epistemology-within her new hermeneutical model provides us with clues to her Christian
identity. In contemporary hermeneutics there are three basic philosophical strategies regarding
the separate yet related problems of truth and justification. The first strategy follows Hegel by
discerning Truth within the depths of the historical process. This discernment consists of keeping
track of the active, reflective, autonomizing Weltgeist who ultimately overcomes the historical
process in order to achieve absolute self-consciousness and self-transparency. Refined versions
of this perspective-put forward in religious form by Wolfgang Pannenberg and in Marxist form
by Georg Lukacs-holds that every hermeneutics requires some degree of transcendental, that is,
totalistic viewpoint. Therefore every hermeneutics, if honest about itself, presupposes a
philosophy of history and hence is but a disguised form of Hegelianism.
The second strategy incorporates Kierkegaardian insights regarding the radical transiency of
historical claims and the ultimate mystery (or utter "absurdity") of God's self-disclosure in Jesus
Christ. This strategy, developed by Barth and others, sits at the center of the neoorthodox model.
It employs sophisticated modes of historicist argumentation and, contrary to Schiissler
Fiorenza's claim (culled from Peter Berger) that it invokes an "Archimedean point," refuses to
look at the world sub specie aeternitatis. Yet this strategy claims that the existential power and
worldview generated by an encounter with Jesus Christ in the preached Word of the Christian
community warrants the truth-status of Christian revelation.
The last strategy rests on Gadamer's historicist perspective, which understands Truth as
revealment and concealment, as part and parcel of the perennial process of cultivating and
refining inescapable traditions in relation to particular situations and circumstances. On this
view there can be no transcendental standpoint, but there indeed are transcending possibilities
that build upon prevailing finite standpoints. The criterion for Truth here resides neither in
Hegelian transcendentalism nor in Kierkegaardian fideism, but rather in the regulative ideal of
the Vorgrijder V llkommenheit ("anticipation of perfection") -the openness to newness and
novelty on the way to a perennially deferred unity. Like Dewey's pragmatism, this strategy shuns


--- PAGE 337 ---
a Derridean unregulated free play of truth-effacing that lacks an applicatory praxis dimension
and any form of closure. Instead, this strategy promotes regulated historical praxis with only
provisional closure without a constitutive telos.
This third strategy runs deep throughout Schussler Fiorenza's philosophical discussion. Her
fundamental concern with human agency, the dialectical interplay of revealment and
concealment, the situating of texts within Wirkungsgeschichte (continuously operative and
influential history) shot through with social conflict and the conception of biblical texts and
subsequent interpretations as human practices are all compatible with Gadamer's historicism.
Yet Schussler Fiorenza refuses to go all the way down the historicist road. And if she did so, the
Christian locus of truth and justification would be sacrificed. Contrary to the perceptions of
many, the consequences of full-blown historicism are neither nihilistic relativism nor
promiscuous pluralism; but for the Christian, such historicism does result in a radical
deprivileging of Jesus Christ as rendered in the biblical texts. One can surely follow the
historicism of Gadamer and Dewey and sidestep vulgar relativistic traps. But for Christians to
follow such paths means giving up the unique status of Jesus Christ. This is so because if one's
historicism "goes all the way down" (like Hegel's) but resists Neoplatonic-like epistrophes
(unlike Hegel's and like Gadamer's), then Jesus Christ becomes not only a historical person but
also permeated by contradiction and imperfection. For the Christian, the historical status of
Jesus is crucial, but mere peer status of Jesus Christ is ultimately to reject the Hegelian and
Gadamerian strategies-and remain on Kierkegaardian terrain. This does not mean subscribing to
a neoorthodox model, simply that a neoorthodox element sustains one's Christian identity.
The privileged status of Jesus Christ looms large in Schussler Fiorenza's text. Given her shift
from androcentric texts to patriarchal contexts, one would expect a thorough interrogation of the
patriarchal sensibilities and practices of Jesus, in and beyond the biblical texts. Instead, we are
offered a view of Jesus as a "woman-identified man" with a basileia vision of a discipleship of
equals, as if a reincarnate Jesus would join the contemporary feminist struggle against
patriarchy. Such a presentist reading of the synoptic Gospels reeks of Christian confessionalism
and ahistorical moralism-the very charges Schussler Fiorenza makes against feminist
neoorthodox Christian scholars.
My point here is neither to promote a secular deprivileging of Jesus Christ nor to return to
prefeminist readings of biblical texts and the Christian tradition. Rather, my point is to
acknowledge the degree to which the KierkegaardianBarthian touchstone of modern Christian
identity remains intact in Schussler Fiorenza's work. I applaud this element in her text, but I
remain unconvinced that it follows from her new hermeneutical model. The irreducible life,
death and resurrection ofJesus Christ-whose power and perspective is always found in human
communities in dialogical form-is the mark of modern Christian identity. Schussler Fiorenza's
presentist portrait of Jesus Christ affirms this mark. Given her deep feminist commitments, this
portrait becomes her way of preserving the privileged status ofJesus Christ. Without this status,
the struggle for women's liberation has no Christian normative source. The struggle may warrant
support, but there would be no Christian grounds to arrive at this conclusion. I believe that
Christian texts and traditions-without a presentist reading ofJesus Christ yet while preserving the
irreducibility of Jesus Christ justify feminist liberation movements. But this justification is a


--- PAGE 338 ---
historically informed moral one.
Is it contradictory and disempowering that Jesus Christ (male in human form) normatively
grounds women's fight for freedom? I think not. Just as it is not contradictory that Jesus Christ
Jewish in ethnic origins) normatively grounds Arabs' struggle for human dignity in Israel-even as
it grounds any struggle for human dignity. Only in an age obsessed with articulations of
particularities (e.g., gender, race, nation) often relegated to the margins by false universalities
(e.g., technocratic rationality, value-free and value-neutral inquiry) could such questions arise
with potency. And only with a sophisticated emancipatory hermeneutics can a new conception of
differential universality emerge that provides the framework for new perspectives and practices.
Schiissler Fiorenza's powerful Christian interpretation and reconstruction of the biblical texts
and early church move us closer to such a conception.
SOURCE: Prophetic Fragments (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1988), pp.
250-256. Originally appeared in Religion Studies Review, January 1985; review of Elisabeth
Schussler Fiorenza. In Memory of Her: A Feminist Tluological Reconstruction of'Christian Ongriu
(New York: Crossroad, 1983).


--- PAGE 339 ---
O N L E S Z E K K O L A K O W S K I
Leszek Kolakowski c radical Pascalian Christian views overlap with my own Chekhovian
Christian way of being-though my sense of the comic wards off some of his unbearably sad
religion. His best book on his own constructive work is Religion: If There Is No God ... On
God, the Devil, Sin and Other Worries of the So-called Philosophy of Religion (1982). I also
highly recommend his recent book God Owes Us Nothing (1997).
LESZEK KOLAKOWSKI IS A unique and fascinating figure on the American intellectual scene.
Born in Poland, he was expelled from Warsaw University in 1968 owing to his self-styled
humanist Marxism and oppositional political commitments-represented in his influential book
7owards a Marxist Humanism. His writings cover a broad range of subjects, from Spinoza,
Husserl, Anglo-American positivism and seventeenth-century sectarian movements to his recent
controversial three-volume history of Marxist thought. He also has written three books of tales
and some plays.
Since the early 1970s, Kolakowski has energetically and persistently defended religious
experience within the secular world of English-speaking highbrow intellectual culture. In
valuable contributions to Encounter, London Times Literary Supplement, Salmagundi and
numerous other periodicals, he has tried to convince his peers that religious insights are
indispensable for understanding the major events of this century.
In his book Religion: If There Is No God ... On God, the Devil, Sin and Other Worries of the
So-called Philosophy ofReligion (Oxford, 1982), Kolakowski makes his strongest case for
religious experience. Although the book appears in Frank Kermode's Masterguides series and is
intended to be an introductory treatment of the discipline of philosophy of religion, Kolakowski
puts a deeply personal stamp on it. In fact, the book is not so much a standard introduction to
philosophy of religion as a collection of philosophical fragments on being religious. The text
indeed provides illuminating encounters with classical perspectives in the Western and Eastern
traditions of religious thought. But it also contains brilliant existential insights and words of
wisdom about life. There are few sustained positive philosophical arguments primarily because
Kolakowski spends much time attempting to show why philosophical arguments are
inappropriate for understanding religious experience. In short, this text is in the tradition of
Montaigne, Pascal and Kierkegaard, not Descartes, Kant and Hegel.
For Kolakowski, the primary task of philosophy of religion is neither rationally to ground
particular religious beliefs nor comprehensively to systematize existing religious doctrines.
Rather, the role of the philosopher of religion is to preserve the integrity and irreducibility of
forms of "socially established worship of eternal reality," that is, religion. This task of
preservation entails sidestepping the dilemmas created by both religious liberals and
fundamentalists and showing how the major religions speak to the most basic feature of human
existence, namely, the need to cope with powerlessness, helplessness, weakness and frailty.
Kolakowski does not believe that philosophical inquiry can persuade or dissuade one from
adopting particular religious worldviews. But rational discourse can help in pointing out what is
at stake in adopting one worldview over another.


--- PAGE 340 ---
I rather tend to accept the law of the infinite cornucopia which applies not only to philosophy but
to all general theories in the human and social sciences: it states that there is never a shortage of
arguments to support any doctrine you want to believe in for whatever reasons. These arguments,
however, are not entirely barren. They have helped in elucidating the status quaestionis and in
explaining why these questions matter, and this is what I am concerned with here. (p. 16)
What is ultimately at stake is one's sanity, that is, the ability to make sense of a deeply tragic
and flawed existence without succumbing to meaninglessness and hopelessness. Kolakowski's
defense of religious experience holds that human beings must learn how to be failures and how
to cry for help while acknowledging that this very capacity to learn and wisdom to cry out is a
form of empowerment from a Reality greater than human beings that keeps people struggling and
living. The major foes are self-deception, for example, forms of happiness that are really types
of bad faith, and self-deification, for example, the refusal to acknowledge the need for divine
help or aid.
From the vantage point of this Augustinian framework, Kolakowski examines the question of
evil in the world, the various gods of the philosophers, mystical traditions in Christianity,
Judaism, Islam and Eastern religions, the relation between fear of death and religious faith and
the uniqueness of the language of the Sacred within the context of worship. Kolakowski is most
provocative and profound on the issues of theodicy and mysticism. Both sections are powerful
tours de force in and of themselves.
Kolakowski links the religious conception of learning how to be a failure yet avoiding
insanity to God's inability to commit suicide. This crucial divine inability (even Nietzsche has
God killed by humans!) confines evil to a separation from God-that is, Sin-that is moral, not
ontological. The world is viewed as essentially good, yet existentially evil. On this Christian
view, a deep sense of the tragic is required, yet the world is not inherently tragic.
For religious traditions, be they Christian, Islamic, Buddhist or whatever, the problem of evil
cannot be "solved" or even understood theoretically. Rather, it can only be met with a practical
response: trust God or go insane. This basic trust or confidence is based neither on an objective
reading of history nor the workings of nature. Rather, it is an unconditional trust, a nonfalsifiable
assent that ensures continued sanity, that is, meaning and hope. In other words, some form of
such trust is requisite for psychic health, yet there are no philosophical grounds for such trust.
To summarize this part of the discussion: an acceptance of the world as a divinely ordered
cosmos wherein everything is given a meaning is neither self-contradictory nor inconsistent with
empirical knowledge, and yet it can never be a consequence of such knowledge, however vastly
expanded. Both moral evil and human suffering, including everybody's inevitable failure in life,
can be accepted and mentally absorbed, but it would be preposterous to pretend that, starting
with the terrifying chaos of life, we can, as a result of logically admissible procedures, end up
with a cosmos full of sense and of purpose. The act of faith and trust in God has to precede the
ability to see His hand in the course of events and in the sadness of human history. In brief:
credo ut intelligam. (pp. 53-54)
Kolakowski highlights the anthropocentric character of Judaic and Christian thought on evil


--- PAGE 341 ---
and suffering. Eastern traditions affirm the unity and sanctity of all life, whereas Jews and
Christians uphold the dignity of human life while promoting the human right to master and exploit
nonhuman organisms, especially animals. Furthermore, Christian perspective implies that there
is some unredeemable evil, that some forms of suffering and hardship stand outside the domain
of redemption and punishment. In this regard, the absurdity of the world or insanity in life seeps
in even from a religious (in this case, Christian) perspective.
In the section on mysticism, Kolakowski reaches an interesting conclusion: "that it is not
inconsistent or monstrous to be a sceptic and a mystic at the same time" (p. 145). In
epistemological matters, both skeptic and mystic claim that knowledge is essentially a practical,
not cognitive, affair; that is, silence is the appropriate response to whether we can really know
that we know, yet since out of necessity we must speak and act knowledge becomes a tool to
cope with reality, not a mirror that depicts reality.
Kolakowski's experiential attitude and skeptical approach to religious experience would seem
to imply that he is either a closet pragmatist stripped of the privileging of the scientific method in
all cognitive matters or a full-blown conventionalist informed by a sociology of knowledge. Yet
one would be wrong to accept such implications. Kolakowski indeed possesses a deep sense of
historical contingency and a critical disposition toward all philosophical traditions. But he also
is fearful of relativism, nihilism and cynicism. At moments in his text he moves toward a
philosophical transcendentalism in order to defend the possibility of God's existence. At the
heart of the book, he claims:
I will try to argue for the following, quasi-Cartesian assertion: Dostoyevski's famous dictum, "If
there is no God, everything is permissible," is valid not only as a moral rule but also as an
epistemological principle. This means that the legitimate use of the concept "truth" or the belief
that "truth" may even be justifiably predicted of our knowledge is possible only on the
assumption of an absolute Mind. (p. 82)
Thus I follow the Cartesian formula insofar as it asserts that human claims to truth are empty
without reference to the divine being. No reference to God's veracity is thereby implied; but I
admit that the predicate "true" has no meaning unless referred to the all-encompassing truth,
which is equivalent to an absolute mind. The transcendental approach is thus far vindicated.
The argument has nothing to do however with the proofs of God's reality: it can neither reinforce
nor enfeeble any of the arguments in existence. Its aim is not to show that God does exist, but to
expose the dilemma which we seem to face when we cope with the question of truth and of the
very possibility of an epistemology: either God or a cognitive nihilism, there is nothing in
between. (Pp. 90-91)
Yet he finally must reject any such philosophical transcendentalism, since we have no access
to an Archimedean point that would permit us to adjudicate rationally between the conflicting
perspectives: "My point is negative: since we have no key to the treasury of transcendental
rationality, all restrictions imposed on the implicit everyday criteria of meaning are royal
commands issued ex nihilo by philosophers and carry no other legitimacy; they are enforceable
only to the extent of the philosophers' sheer power" (p. 164).


--- PAGE 342 ---
I suggest that Kolakowski's struggle between the Scylla of transcendentalism and the
Charybdis of nihilism yields a unique philosophical position-a religious form of cultural
ontology that shuns a glib objectivism and stresses the contingency of human cultural practices,
yet holds out for convergence and unity in the long run. This convergence and unity is not simply
a regulative ideal, but rather features of a humanly incomprehensible God. Like Charles Peirce's
conservative version of pragmatism (and similar to Hilary Putnam's recent work), Kolakowski
wants to preserve a bedrock notion of Reality and Truth by means of an eschatology. Unlike
Peirce and Putnam, his eschatology is not a matter of the scientific community ultimately
grasping Truth, that is, convergence as rational agreement, but rather of religious persons
ultimately "being in Truth," that is, convergence as existential deliverance. I find the makings of
such a viewpoint in the following statements.
Jesus' saying that the truth will make us free does not mean that the mastery of technical skills
will lead to a desirable result; for Him, and for all great religious teachers, people realize the
nature of their bondage in the same act of illumination that includes the means of shaking it off
and the understanding of the divinely ordained destiny of the world....
No philosophical speculation can perform this task. In spite of the claims of philosophical
transcendentalism it is only by reference to the all-knowing and eternal mind that the
convergence of goals and knowledge is attainable....
It would be utterly wrong to infer from the foregoing discussion that the conflict between the
Reason of the Enlightenment and religious certitudes or, on a larger scale, between the Profane
and the Sacred, may be in my view explained in terms of logical mistakes, conceptual confusion
or misconceived ideas about borderlines between knowledge and faith. Such an approach would
appear to me grotesquely inadequate. The conflict is cultural, not logical, and it is arguably
rooted in the persistent, irreconcilable claims imposed on us by various forces within human
nature.... Do we have to do with an accidental collision or rather with a fundamental conflict
which might have remained latent here and there yet was bound to emerge as a result of the sheer
growth in human abilities to master the world?
The factual elements which are required to answer such a question would encompass the
complete history of all religions, whereas its unavoidable speculative components must
necessarily be derived from the ontology of culture. (pp. 219, 220, 224)
This embryonic religious version of cultural ontology builds on the best of the skeptical,
pragmatic and historicist traditions without succumbing to theoretical self-contradiction or
internal inconsistency. It is neither tied to a particular religious set of doctrines nor even
confined to Western forms of religiosity-yet it preserves the integrity and irreducibility of
religious experience.
I find this perspective highly attractive. Yet I remain unconvinced that this view can do
anything more than project possible kinds of convergence and unityhence function essentially as
regulative ideals. Favoring Dewey's version of pragmatism over that of Peirce, I hold that there
can be no ontological assurance of convergence and unity without our reading into cultural
practices the very projected convergence and unity presupposed by our own perspectives, that


--- PAGE 343 ---
is, vicious circularity. So all we can have, as cultural agents and historical beings, is regulative
ideals of convergence and unity dependent on our own perspectives. This view still avoids
vulgar relativism and nihilism, but it stops short of any sort of ontology. It keeps us in history
and culture without history and culture-as Kolakowski rightly desires-disposing and casting our
dignity and worth "in the wanton and boundless sea of chance." In this way, Kolakowski helps us
deepen the historicist turn in philosophy of religion while holding on to the profound insights of
the multiple religious traditions of humankind.
SOURCE: "On Leszek Kolakowski's Religion," Prophetic Fiagmenls (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B.
Eerdmans Publishing Co.. 1988), pp. 216-221. Originally appeared in Old Westbury Review, Fall
1986; review of Leszek Kolakowski. Religion (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982).


--- PAGE 344 ---
O N L I B E R A T I O N THEOLOGY: S E G U N D O A N D 
H I N K E L A M M E R T
Liberation theology-the view that God sides with the struggles of oppressed peoples to free
themselves-is one of the most gallant efforts to keep alive the prophetic Christian witness in this
century. First put forward by black American James Cone and joined by Latin American thinkers
like Gustavo Gutierrez, Juan Luis Segundo, Hugo Assman, Rosemary Ruether, Franz
Hinkelammert and others, this worldly theology changed the landscape of twentieth-century
theological education, especially in the Western Hemisphere. I spent the summer of 1980
teaching in the famous Departmento Ecumenico de Investigaciones in San lose, Costa Rica-and
in dialogue with the leading liberation theologians in Latin America. I also lectured throughout
Brazil and Jamaica, further rooting myself in the soil of liberation theology.
ON JUAN Luis SEGUNDO's FAITH AND IDEOLOGIES
LIBERATION THEOLOGIES ARE THE principal forms of Christian prophetic thought and
action in our contemporary age. They present the ways of life and struggle of Christians around
the world who have convinced remnants of the church to open its eyes to human misery and
oppose socioeconomic systems and political structures that perpetuate such misery. Like all
serious modes of inquiry, liberation theologies are predicated on crisis-on human situations of
tremendous danger and incipient possibility. Such concrete crises invariably generate forms of
critical consciousness. Liberation theologies are the predominant forms of critical consciousness
within the Christian church that respond to the dangers of class, racial and sexual privilege and
project the possibility of class, racial and sexual equality.
Black, feminist, Native American, Hispanic and especially Latin American versions of
liberation theology have made major contributions to Christian thought and the life of the church.
The theological theme of God's identification with the poor and oppressed now resounds
throughout out seminaries, takes shape in some of our ecclesiastical agencies and regulates the
practices in a select few of our churches. The methodological mandate for systemic social
analysis of structures of domination in light of the good news ofJesus Christ is forcing many the
ologians, preachers and laity to take seriously the works of Karl Marx and Max Weber, Simone
de Beauvoir and W. E. B. Du Bois, Anthony Giddens and Christopher Lasch. In short, liberation
theologies have pushed religious thinkers beyond their usual parochial concerns and challenged
churches to become more enlightened participants in the great political and economic issues of
our time.
But beneath this intense intellectual ferment and heated political discourse lurks a hidden
truth: The high moment of liberation theology has passed. Original texts of James Cone, Mary
Daly and Gustavo Gutierrez spawned widely diffused and dispersed theological currents. As
with all groundbreaking upsurges, liberation theologies emerged with impressive power and
insight and presently have evolved in diverse and multiple forms.
This evolution of liberation theologies is particularly noteworthy in that these theologies
ushered forth from an academic discipline that suffers from an immense identity crisis. Hence,


--- PAGE 345 ---
the early enthusiasm for liberation theologies can be attributed not only to the relevance of their
perspectives for the oppressed, but also to the hope that these theologies would breathe new life
into a fading and faltering mode of intellectual reflection. To put it crudely, liberation theologies
were expected to both change the world and keep theology alive.
Yet as the zenith of liberation theological reflection fades, we witness the proliferation of
philosophical investigations, cultural critiques, social analyses and historical reconstructions
from Christian liberationist perspectives. The theological concerns of liberation theology are
now shifting to their philosophical, cultural, social-analytical or historical concerns. This move
requires not only rigorous interdisciplinary tools, but also more intense interaction with secular
colleaguesthereby facilitating more religious participation within the larger public conversation
in society and culture at large.
This positive dialogue and candid alliance with both the academy and political movements
helps break down the walls of demarcation between divinity schools and universities, preachers
and political activists. But it also could result in a new kind of theological evasion, a refusal to
take seriously the difficult task of specifying Christian identity in a pluralistic world. And as the
tentacles of secular professionalism and vulgar politicization further pervade our seminaries and
divinity schools, even the theological task itself could become passe.
In regard to this precarious though pregnant situation, liberation theologies more than likely
will move in one of four directions. They will: (1) relapse into traditional kinds of systematic
theology equipped with new themes, motifs and insights-as in Jon Sobrino's Christology at the
Crossroads; (2) retreat into versions of philosophical anthropology (i.e., a philosophy of human
existence) that appeal to Kant, Hegel, Feuerbach or the early Marx and thereby subvert
systematic theology-as in Juan Luis Segundo's The Liberation of Theology; (3) spill over into
social theory, cultural criticism and historical reconstruction, which may take either Christian or
post-Christian forms-as in Elisabeth Schiissler Fiorenza's In Memory of Her or Mary Daly's
Gynecology, respectively; or (4) resort to practical writings in journalistic styles that attempt to
reach the general literate laity and clergy-as in James Cone's My Soul Looks Back.
The first alternative is essential but limited; it preserves precious links with elements of the
tradition and church, but at the inescapable expense of intellectual marginality in our secular
intellectual milieu. The second option, philosophic anthropology, is a trap to be avoided by both
theologians and philosophers alike; it succumbs to a seductive quest for universal categorical
schemas that yield either formal results too empty for usefulness or transcendental frameworks
that conceal their historicity. The third line of development is the most fruitful and challenging; it
sidelines many narrowly trained theologians and gives prominence to Christian and secular
social theorists, cultural critics and historians. The last direction performs a crucial
propagandistic role, but provides little, if any, intellectual depth.
Juan Luis Segundo's Faith and Ideologies exemplifies the second option. This book builds on
his earlier work and puts forward a full-blown philosophical anthropology-a detailed
specification of "the universal dimensions of human beings." Segundo is the most ambitious and
audacious of the Latin American liberation religious thinkers. He disregards the traditional
intellectual division of labor in the university and eagerly pursues a daring idea, no matter how


--- PAGE 346 ---
half-baked that idea may be. In this book, Segundo's ambition and audacity lead to organizational
fragmentation and philosophical confusion.
Segundo's aim in this text is threefold: first, to infuse new content in the categorical notions of
faith and ideology; second, to explore how these two ideas relate to one another, using
Christianity and Marxism as interlocutors; and third, to examine the concrete situation of
present-day Latin America in light of his philosophical perspective. Like Immanuel Kant and
Matthew Arnold, Segundo wants to preserve the transcendent character of moral conduct, yet
create a comprehensive secular discourse that subsumes religion. In short, his primary intention
is to displace theology and put forward a new philosophical anthropology.
But in Chapter 1, entitled "Toward a New Statement of the Problem," it becomes quite clear
that Segundo's philosophical anthropology is not new at all. Rather, it is a warmed-over version
of neo-Kantianism-much less refined than those found in Wilhelm Dilthey or Jurgen Habermas.
Segundo's two "basic anthropological dimensions" are faith and ideology. He understands
"faith" to be the human acquisition of meaning and value principally by means of socialization.
"Ideology" is taken to be the human techniques of efficacy and predictability necessary to
actualize one's value-laden ends or goals.
Following Gregory Bateson's Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Segundo defines faith as a
"partially self-validating" set of "epistemological and ontological premises" which human
beings impose on "the flux of happenings" for purposes of order and coherence. Since these
"premises" circumscribe the limits of human knowledge, they are immune from rational
validation, hence "self-validating." Yet Segundo also defines faith as a "certain type of
knowledge." Here confusion sets in. Can faith be a set of "premises" that delimit what we can
and do know and also be a certain type of knowledge? Is the latter a transcendental form of
knowledge, a special kind of knowledge that enables us to know the premises that constitute
preconditions for knowledge? Is this not viciously circular? Or does Segundo mean that the
premises are socially derived and hence we know them through social and historical analysis? If
so, then can he consistently claim that faith is "an anthropological dimension as universal as the
human species itself"? Surely not. He must either fall back on neo-Kantianism and provide an
account of faith as an anthropological dimension or adopt a Mannheimian sociology of
knowledge and give up talk about such dimensions. At one point in his text, Segundo endorses
Mannheim's "real sociology of knowledge," yet still characterizes the indispensable
unconditional absolute as a value, a "transcendent datum." Like Kant of the Critique of'Practical
Reason, philosophical anthropology has solely a self-validating, that is, a moral basis. But,
following Mannheim, if morality is socially constituted, philosophical anthropology is undercut.
To add more confusion, Segundo understands faith as "the fund of saved energy on which all
human planning is based." In addition to this technocratic image of faith, Segundo's attempt to
link this conception of faith to his overarching theory of evolution-with its desirable homeostatic
mechanisms and the "best energy calculus"-is utterly unconvincing. Owing to his imprecise and
amorphous definitions of faith, it is difficult to follow his comparative criticisms of Pannen-
berg's notion of trust and Tracy's conception of religion.
In his discussion of faith, Segundo relies upon a pre-Wittgensteinian view of language; that is,


--- PAGE 347 ---
in contrast to Wittgenstein's view that language constitutes our social world, Segundo holds that
language expresses private worlds. In order to make clear how people "express in words their
values-structure, their meaningworld," Segundo engages in some close readings of poems-
especially Gustavo Adolfo Becquer's famous Rime. After a rather idiosyncratic though
interesting interpretation, Segundo highlights human "access, through the medium of language, to
the vast, structured realm of meaning and values." This neo-Kantian vocabulary, found in Ernst
Cassirer and Susanne K. Langer, is highly suspect. Yet, ironically, Segundo persists with this
expressivist view of language even after invoking the work of the later Wittgenstein, which
precludes any such view. At this point one is forced to conclude that Segundo's intellectual
project yields philosophical confusion.
Similar to Habermas, Segundo fears that meaning-structures (faith) are "structured in terms of
efficacy (ideology) alone"; That is, issues involving value are re duced to technical matters. And
this fear is justified. But is not his own technocratic conception of faith a reduction of meaning to
mere use, planning and efficacy? If so, he promotes the very program he fears. Segundo rightly
exposes the dimension of faith in modern and postmodern science-a point noted by David Hume
and refined by Michael Polanyi-yet his means-ends mode of philosophical and political analysis
reeks of technocratic rationality. Even John Dewey, no friend of modern Luddites like Martin
Heidegger, grappled more seriously with the reductionist implications and managerial
consequences of crude means-ends analyses.
The second and third parts of Segundo's book are much better than the first. The section on
Christianity and Marxism is, though far from original, competent. His claims regarding Marx's
rejection of philosophy for science and opposition to ontological materialism are persuasive.
Yet his defense of Erich Fromm's claim that Marx put forward a philosophical anthropology-
which is true for the early Marx, but rejected by the later Marx-is perplexing. Segundo rightly
suggests that the continuity between the early and later Marx consists of his "ideal conception of
the human being." But does such an ideal constitute a philosophical anthropology? Does the mere
possession of values mean that one adheres to a philosophical anthropology? Surely not. So why
defend Fromm's exorbitant claim?
The last section of Segundo's book is a sketch of "a Latin American anthro- pology"-a reading
of Latin American realities from 1950 to 1975 in light of his philosophical perspective. After
brief generalizations of the periods of consciousness-raising, violent action and repression,
Segundo tries to go beyond mere economic and political analysis and accents "the ecological
state of human beings" in relation to nature, the state and class exploitation. He ends his book
calling for the creation of "an effective cultural tradition"-a task to be achieved only if the
supreme evolutionary quality, flexibility, is internalized and transmitted to the younger
generation of freedom fighters.
In stark contrast to The Liberation of Theology, Segundo's Faith and Ideologies is more a
phenomenon than an event, a symptom of the second alternative in the evolution of liberation
theologies rather than a mover and shaker on the contemporary scene. His book illustrates the
severe limitations of opting for a full-blown philosophical anthropology. And even if one
decides to do so, it is better to revise already refined versions rather than create one's own out


--- PAGE 348 ---
of thin air or derived from anthropologists and psychologists.
In my opinion, the major intellectual task of liberation theologians is to continue to reexamine
and reshape the traditional doctrines of the church, engage in more serious efforts of social
theory, cultural criticism and historical reconstruction and write palpable and intelligible essays
and texts for the nonacademic literate laity and clergy. Needless to say, these three activities
require different persons working on different terrains. Church theologians are not likely to put
forward sophisticated social analyses, just as more broadly engaged social theorists cannot
possibly do justice to the complexities of church theology-though both can write for a wider
audience.
Furthermore, if liberation theologies have taught us anything, it is that Christian thinkers must
be organically linked with prophetic churches and progressive movements. An uncommitted and
detached liberation theologian is a contradiction in terms. Without some form of ecclesiastical
and political praxis, critical consciousness becomes as sounding brass and theological reflection
a tinkling cymbal.
ON FRANZ HINKELAMMERT'S THE IDEOLOGICAL WEAPONS OF DEATH
Liberation theology at its best is a worldly theology-a theology that not only opens our eyes to
the social misery of the world, but also teaches us better to understand and transform it.
Academic theology in the First World, true to its priestly role, remains preoccupied with
doctrinal precision and epistemological pretension. It either refuses to get its hands dirty with
the ugly and messy affairs of contemporary politics or pontificates at a comfortable distance
about the shortcomings of theoretical formulations and practical proposals of liberation
theologians. Yet for those Christians deeply enmeshed in and united with poor people's
struggles, theology is first and foremost concerned with urgent issues of life and death,
especially the circumstances that dictate who lives and who dies.
Franz Hinkelammert's The Ideological Weapons of Death marks a new point of departure for
liberation theology. First, it is the first product of a unique institutional setting-the renowned
Departmento Ecumenico de Investigaciones (DEI) in San Jose, Costa Rica-that is intentionally
interdisciplinary and explicitly political. Shunning the narrow confines of the intellectual
division of labor in academic institutions, DEI rejects the compartmentalized disciplines of our
bureaucratized seminaries and divinity schools. Instead DEI promotes and encourages
theological reflection that traverses the fields of political economy, biblical studies, social
theory, church history and social ethics. In this way, DEI reveals the intellectual impoverishment
of academic theologies that enact ostrichlike exercises in highly specialized sand-with little
view to the pressing problems confronting ordinary people in our present period of crisis.
Second, Hinkelammert's book is significant in that it tries to ground liberation theology itself
in a more detailed social-analytical viewpoint and a more developed biblical perspective. For
too long liberation theologians have simply invoked Marxist theory without a serious
examination of Marx's own most fecund analysis of capitalist society-namely, his analysis of
fetishism. As Georg Lukacs noted in his influential book History and Class Consciousness
(1923), the Marxist analysis of fetishism in Capital brings to light hidden and concealed effects


--- PAGE 349 ---
of commodity relations in the everyday lives of people in capitalist societies. These effects
result from the power-laden character and class-ridden structure of capitalist societies which
make relations between people appear as relations between things. This deceptive appearance
presents capitalist realities as natural and eternal. A Marxist analysis of this veil of appearance
discloses these realities to be transient historical products and results of provisional social
struggles.
Hinkelammert's book takes as its point of analytical departure the three central stages of
Marx's analysis of fetishism-the commodity fetishism, money fetishism and capital fetishism. The
magical power people ascribe to commodities produced, money acquired and capital expanded
has idolatrous status in capitalist societies-a status not only rarely questioned, but, more
important, hardly analyzed and understood by Christians. Too often Christians merely condemn
seductive materialism or pervasive hedonism with little or no grasp of the complex relations of
the conditions under which commodities are produced, the ways in which money is acquired and
the means by which capital is expanded. Positing these complex relations as objects of
theological reflection is unheard of in contemporary First World theology. Yet, if theologians
are to come to terms with life-anddeath issues of our time, there is no escape from reflecting
upon and gaining an understanding of these complex relations.
Such a monumental step requires a grounding in the history of economic thought and
contemporary social theory. In this regard, working knowledge of the classical economic
theories of Adam Smith and David Ricardo, the neoclassical economic formulations of Alfred
Marshall and Stanley jevons, the intricate debates between followers of Karl Marx, Max Weber
and Emile Durkheim in social theory and the present-day viewpoints of Milton Friedman, Paul
Samuelson and Ernest Mandel become requisite for serious theological engagement with the
burning life-and-death issues of our day. Needless to say, the immediate intellectual risk is a
debilitating dilettantism that obfuscates rather than illuminates. Yet to refuse the risk is to settle
for an arid academicism that values professional status and career ambitions at the expense of
trying to lay bare the richness of the Christian gospel for our time. Therefore Hinkelammert's text
may seem strange to First World Christians-with his analyses of the links between Milton
Friedman's thought and the economic policies of the Chilean dictator Pinochet or his critique of
the Trilateral Commission's recommendations for the Third World. In fact, many First World
academic theologians may balk at such exercises that seem to fall outside more tame theological
investigations. Yet, it should be apparent after reading Hinkelammert's text that he simply is
attempting to come to terms with the array of ideological weapons of death deployed against the
wretched of the earth-and the books and blueprints of academic and political elites are not
spared.
His critiques also apply to contemporary biblical scholarship in the First World. This
culturally homogeneous guild of highly trained yet narrowly socialized academicians have, in
many ways, yet to enter the postmodern age of epistemological disarray, cultural upheaval and
ideological contestation. This guild remains the last bastion of First World male hegemony over
the methods and results of a branch of theological investigations. Most biblical scholars remain
uncritically and unjustifiably wedded to sophisticated models of research-models that emerged
from problematics of a bygone period. Hinkelammert boldly contests the complacency of this


--- PAGE 350 ---
guild by putting forward a highly controversial and provocative reading of Pauline conceptions
of life and death in light of his own analysis of fetishism. Whatever one's views are on the
complexity of Pauline theology, this perspective cannot but broaden the conversation in New
Testament studies and thereby deepen our readings of Paul's Letters.
Last, Hinkelammert examines the implications of his views on modern Catholic thought.
Recent pastoral letters from the Catholic and Methodist churches in the United States have
alerted us to the crucial role of denominational pronouncements on social and political issues.
These pronouncements cannot be fully understood without some knowledge of the history of the
churches' social teachings. This is especially so in regard to the issue of private property-an
often uncritically examined cornerstone of much of these teachings. As Hinkelammert notes, the
aim is not simply to substitute socialist notions of property for earlier conceptions of private
property, but rather to interrogate the very act of hypostasizing property as such. Historical
questions concerning how private property became an unquestioned presupposition of Christian
social ethics, the relation of churches to social systems based on slave and wage labor and
theoretical issues about the relation of conceptions of personhood to private property and the
links between slaves and women to rights of property possession loom large here.
Hinkelammert's book provides neither full-fledged solutions nor panaceas to the broad range
of issues it raises. Rather, it is a groundbreaking work-in-progress that alerts us to contemporary
forms of captivity to which most First World theologies are bound. Like the first wave of
liberation theologies from Latin America, Asia, Africa and First World women and minorities
(especially Afro-Americans), his book opens new discursive space in our theological work. The
seriousness with which Hinkelammert takes Marxist analyses of fetishism, biblical studies,
modem Catholic social ethics and the current shortcomings of liberation theologies indeed may
initiate a second wave-I hope a tidal wave-that fundamentally transforms how we do theology
and act out our precious Christian faith.
SOURCE: "On Juan Luis Segundo's Faith and Ideologies," Prophetic Fragments (Grand Rapids,
Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1988), pp. 197-202; originally appeared in Commonweal,
January 27, 1984; review ofJuan Luis Segundo. Faith and Ideologies (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis, 1983).
"On Franz Hinkelammert s The Ideological Weapons of Death," Prophetic Fragments (Grand Rapids,
Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1988), pp. 203-206; originally appeared as the foreword to
the Orbis edition, 1986.


--- PAGE 351 ---
CHRISTIAN LOVE A N D H E T E R O S E X I S M
The evils of heterosexism and homophobia, strongly supported by institutional religion, are two
of the most dicult and delicate issues of our time. After lecturing around the country in churches
and participating in the historic film All God's Children, I sat down and reflected at length on
these issues in my life and our society with Mary Y.en- yatta and others at the Harvard School of
Education. This is my clearest statement on the plight of gay brothers and lesbian sisters (of all
colors) and the responsibility of socalled straight folk like myself. My stance has generated
anger and rage from many Christians, including those who agree with me on many issues. But I
do not write or act to win popularity contests.
IN THE FALL OF 1995, deep in the midst of shaping and developing this special issue, several
Harvard Educational Review editorial board members had the opportunity to hear philosopher
and scholar Dr. Cornel West speak at the Harvard Graduate School of Education. They
enthusiastically reported back to us that in his- talk, West, who is professor of Afro-American
Studies and of the philosophy of religion at Harvard, drew explicit and repeated connections
between white supremacy, patriarchy and heterosexism. At the time, we were searchingfor an
article that would illuminate the deep ties between d/erent forms of _ oppression in the United
States. We envisioned an article that would serve as a bridge from the diverse topics
represented within this special issue to broad systems of power, privilege and domination.
Inspired by Dr. West's articulation of the above issues, as well as by his focus on democratic
struggles for liberation, we asked him if he would be willing to be interviewed for our special
issue.
Dr. West agreed, but he expressed concern that, as a heterosexual, he not displace "any of the
gay, lesbian, or transgender voices." He went on to say:
For me it is a privilege and really a blessing to be part of the issue, because the issue that you're
raising is very important. But as you know, it's important as well that one not come in from the
outside, as it were. It is important not to push aside any of the voices that come from inside of
the movement itself.
It was precisely his respectful concern that compelled us to request an interview with Dr.
West. I n a d d i t i o n , we f o u n d i t v e r y powerjid, p a r t i c u l a r l y i n l i g h t o f our l a
r g e l y heterosexual r e a d e r - s h i p , t h a t a heterosexual activist and scholar would r e p e
a t e d l y take a s t r o n g position a g a i n s t hel- erosexism. When cast in a way that made
clear that this was an opportunity to reach out to other heterosexuals and say to them, `If you're
serious about being a democrat or a radical, then this piece of our struggle is essential," West
readily agreed to participate.
In this interview with HER editorial board members Pitka Eisen and Mary Kenyatta, Carnet
West offers a vision of a democratic struggle that is inclusive of lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender people. He places heterosexism within the context of capitalism, establishing
connections to other forms of oppression. He also reminds us that, as democratic educators, we
continually have to examine the ways in which we may internalize, and therefore perpetuate,
patriarchy and homophobia in our lives and our teaching. West shares some of his personal


--- PAGE 352 ---
struggle facing his own homophobia, and he emphasizes the importance of 'so-called straight
people joining their gay and lesbian brothers and sisters in the effort to dismantle heterosexism
and other systems of oppression.
Vitka Eisen and Mary Kenyatta: We've often heard you speak about the connections among
homophobia, patriarchy and racism. Why do you talk about these issues, and how do you see
them linked? And would you also talk about some of the personal challenges you face as a
heterosexual black man, in taking such a vocal stance against heterosexism?
Cornet West: My own understanding of what it means to be a democrat (small (~, partly what it
means to be a Christian, too, but especially what it means to be a democrat, is that you're
wrestling with particular forms of evil.' It seems to me that to talk about the history of
heterosexism and the history of homophobia is to talk about ways in which various institutions
and persons have promoted unjustified suffering and unmerited pain. Hence, the questions
become: How do we understand heterosexism? Why is it so deeply seated within our various
cultures and civilizations? We could talk primarily about America, but we can talk globally as
well. I think it fundamentally has to do with the tendency human beings have to associate persons
who are different with degradation, to associate those who have been cast as marginal with
subordination and devaluation. So in order to be morally consistent and politically consistent, I
think democrats have to focus on particular forms of unjustified suffering across the board, be it
patriarchy, vast economic inequality, white supremacy or male supremacy or heterosexism. It's
just a matter of trying to be true to one's own sense of moral integrity.
Eisen and Kenyatta: You've taken a very visible, very public stance against heterosexism and
homophobia. Are there personal challenges for you in taking that stance?
J st: Well, no doubt, no doubt. Any time you offer a serious critique of the systems of power and
privilege, be it compulsory heterosexuality, be it white supremacy or what have you, you're
going to catch some hell. There's no doubt, both within the black community and the black
church, as well as outside, that I tend to catch hell on this issue. There's no doubt about it. But
for me, it's fundamentally a matter of trying to highlight the moral ideals that serve as a basis of
the critique of homophobic behavior, heterosexism as a whole, as well as their political
consequences. I don't think that one can actually engage in serious talk about the fundamental
transformation of American society-that is, the corporate elites, the bank elites, the white
supremacists, the male supremacists, as well as the heterosexists-without talking about hitting
the various forms of evil across the board. The interesting thing is that some of the critiques
almost have to take an ad honcinem form. A person might think, wait a minute, why is he so
concerned about homophobia? There must be something going on in his personal life, and so
forth.
My view is that I have to recognize deep homophobia inside of me, because I grew up in the
black community, in the black church, on the black block, and there's a lot of homophobia in all
three sites. So I'm quite candid about the internal struggle that I undergo because of my own


--- PAGE 353 ---
homophobic socialization. How do you deal with the feelings of either threat or fear-and, I think,
for many homophobes-outright hatred? I don't think I ever, even as a young person, hated gay
brothers or lesbian sisters. I think I did associate it early on with something that was alien. And
I've often, even in movies, seen lesbian love as very different. I think that, in a patriarchal
society, for a man to see two women involved in lesbian activity is less threatening than seeing
two men involved in gay activity. When I've seen gay activity on the screen, for example, it does
hit me viscerally as very alien and different. That's where my moral struggle comes into play, in
terms of acknowledging that difference from my perspective, but not associating it with
degradation or disgust. Rather, it is just a particular mode of human expression that I have been
taught to associate with degradation. I simply acknowledge it as different, but I don't have to
make that connection with degradation per se. And in doing so, I have been honest with myself.
In an interesting way, people say, well, you're so interested in this issue, maybe you've got a
secret life or something. And I say, you know, if one is gay or lesbian, one should be proud of it.
There's nothing to hide in that regard, it seems to me. And if one isn't gay or lesbian, one may
just acknowledge that others make certain kinds of choices and have different orientations, and
so forth. So-called straight persons can go on about the business of living and still fight an
antihomophobic struggle along with gay and lesbian comrades.
Eisen and Kenyatta: Your earlier comment about the homophobia you witnessed growing up in
the black community reminds me that there's a certain lore about communities of color-not all
communities of color, but particularly religious communities of color-that suggest that there is
more overt homophobia within these communities than in dominant white communities. Can you
speak about this perception? How much of this lore is an attempt on the part of the Right to force
divisions where there might be alliances?
West: Yeah, that's a tough question. That's a very tough question, because degrees of intolerance
and tolerance and degrees of hatred and openness are very difficult to measure. I know when I
was growing up in the black community, most people knew that, let's say, the brother who played
the organ in the church was a gay brother. People would say, oh, that's soand-so's child. You
know, he's that way. And they'd just keep moving. There wasn't an attempt to focus on his
sexuality; he was an integral part of the community. It wasn't a matter of trying to target him and
somehow pester him or openly, publicly degrade him. Those who said he's "that way" didn't
believe that way was desirable, but they just figured that's just the way he was, that's just his
thing, you know. But one of the ways in which he chose to function was to be part of his
community. People knew it, but he just didn't make a big deal out of it.
For me, however, it's very important that even closeted sexuality be something that's seriously
interrogated, because it can lead toward a kind of internalized homophobia within gay or lesbian
persons themselves. I think you get some of that in the great James Baldwin, in his struggles over
whether he wants to be gay in identity or to highlight his particular sexual orientation as a public
feature of his identity. And that's a tough question. But when I was growing up that tended to be
the attitude.
I had always thought that even though homophobia was thick, it was dealt with in such a way that
it did not disunite the black community because this was a community under siege, dealing with


--- PAGE 354 ---
institutional terrorism, Jim Crow, Jane Crow, and so forth-you had to accent commonality. At the
same time, we have seen an increase in so-called gay bashing and lesbian bashing in the country
as a whole, including the black community and other communities of color. Here, of course, as
you get a slow shattering of community, in this case the black community, then a lot of the
paranoid dispositions become more salient and more visible. One of those forms is violence
against gays and women, and this is also the case when we consider violence against sisters in
the black community. We've always had that, but we've seen also an exponential increase in this
violence as the community disintegrates. So I'm a little reluctant to say homophobia is actually
more rampant in the black community than it is in the larger white community. My hunch is that it
runs pretty deep in both. But in the past, it was cast in such a way that it was subordinate to the
survival of the black community as a whole. As that community now undergoes a very, very deep
crisis, if not slow dissolution, we see the scapegoating of the most vulnerable: black women,
gays, and lesbians.
Eisen and Kenyatta: With highly charged political and moral issues such as sexuality, how do
democratic educators balance a respect for diverse community values with respect for their own
democratic ideals, particularly where community values may run counter to them?
West: I think it's a tough call. Partly it's just a matter of a certain kind of practical wisdom,
because I don't think there are any abstract principles that would allow us to make various
judgments in each case. There are going to be tensions anytime you're dealing with very rich
notions of individuality. And by individuality I don't mean the rugged, ragged, rapacious
individualism of American capitalism, but of free choices that people make that help them make
and remake themselves as persons within a community. Individuality within a community always
has a certain kind of tension. I think as democrats, as radical democrats, it's very important that
we keep alive a subversive memory of critique and resistance and therefore, when we talk about
sexuality, we understand it as a particular discourse, a particular institutional practice over time
and space that has reinforced certain systems of power and privilege. At the same time, there's a
tradition of resistance against that system of power and privilege.
Foucault and others have pointed out that the very construct of homosexuality itself comes from
the medical community (you know, Westphal's work in 1870) and, as such, is constituted as a
disease and, of course, as a crime, legally and politically.' This is a shift from the discourse of
sodomy, which was viewed as a sin against nature. Now this is a very important move because
it's an attempt by a set of elites to exert a certain kind of control over how people view their
bodies, what they do with their bodies, what the state does with their bodies and how those
bodies are scarred and bruised, internally and externally. But this shift is also connected to other
systems of power and privilege, white supremacists, the rule of capital and so on.
What you actually have then is an attempt to keep alive a certain subversive memory for a
democrat. For me it's impossible to be a democrat and not have a very deep sense of
remembrance of the freedom fighters who came before and what they were up against. What was
the nature of the systemic oppression that they were responding to? And at the same time you've
got a number of these different traditions, each with its strengths and its weaknesses. You've got
the black freedom struggle that has historically focused on white supremacy; it has not said


--- PAGE 355 ---
enough on issues of vast economic inequality and has hardly said enough when it comes to
homophobia and heterosexism. Then you've got a gay/lesbian freedom struggle that has focused
primarily on heterosexism and homophobia and at times has not said enough about white
supremacy.
I think in the U.S. context there's always tension when it comes to the legacy of white supremacy,
which cuts through every tradition of resistance and critique. That's why somebody like Audre
Lorde for me was, and in memory is, such a towering figure. It's so rare to have such a deep
artist, on the one hand, and a sophisticated political activist, on the other. She was also a
progressive humanitarian who could speak to the depths of human suffering and pain that cut
across the various forms of oppression and create a common space, a radical democratic
common space. That doesn't happen too often; it doesn't happen often at all. To think through the
notion of difference in such a way that it becomes a source of strength, rather than a set of
obstacles and impediments that reinforce our own paranoid disposition, is rare. We all have the
paranoid dispositions. For me the important thing, as a Christian, is to recognize that the evil is
inside each and every one of us, in part because of that treacherous terrain called history that has
shaped, socialized and acculturated us. Consequently, it's not ever a matter of one group feeling
as if they don't have some white supremacy, male supremacy, or homophobia inside of them.
Because we've been socialized in the white-supremacist, patriarchal society, those residues are
there no matter how liberated one thinks one actually is. It's a perennial struggle, and that's one
of the reasons why there has to be a collectivity. You have to organize and mobilize to keep each
other accountable. That's part of the democratic ethos within radical democratic groups, because
we have to prefigure, in some way, the kind of society that we're talking about within our own
movement. The only way we deal with these evils inside of us is to keep each other accountable.
I'm not sure we ever fully eliminate them. Audre Lorde says, look inside and then name the forms
of oppression working therein, and, at the same time, never be paralyzed by them, never be
debilitated by them. She's so honest about her internal struggle against oppression.
Eisen and Kenyatta: What do you see as the limits of identity politics and the struggle for
democratic ideals, and what are the strengths? How can people mobilize across and through
identity politics?
West: I think identity politics, on the one hand, are inescapable and, on the other hand, still too
limited. It's inescapable primarily because we have such underdeveloped class-based politics in
America. The power of corporate and bank elites is such that it has made it very difficult for
fellow citizens to believe that class-based politics can be sustained in a way that these politics
would actually meet head-on the tremendous entrenched power of the rule of capital.
Consequently, a person falls back on her or his own particular ethnic, racial, sexual identities as
a way of sustaining some critique against this deeply conservative society, in which the rule of
capital is almost a precondition for democracy to flower and flourish. On the other hand, we
have a society that has been so deeply rooted in white supremacy that it makes it very difficult to
talk about class-based politics without talking about just how central race and racism have been
in the constitution of American identity, culture and society.
You get a lot of reductionist formulations from the Left about this issue. The argument goes: it's


--- PAGE 356 ---
really a class issue, it's got to be just a class issue. To engage in that reductionist formulation is
partly an attempt to sidestep the challenge of race when we've had this long history of racebased
slavery and race-based Jim Crow.
And so I think identity politics have lost sight of a class-based analysis, which makes it
impossible for people to conceive of a fight for the fundamental democratic transformation of
American society toward more egalitarian distribution of goods and resources. It's impossible to
conceive of that fight without beginning with one's own conception of one's pain and suffering as
it relates to the most visible scars. The most visible source of those scars for people of color are
white supremacists. For women, it has been patriarchy. For gays and lesbians, it has been
heterosexism and homophobia. Although beginning there, I think one ultimately has to reach a
space where there's some overlapping consensus regarding the way in which these various
systems of oppression operate. In the economic sphere, you have to have coalition because the
powers that be are so strong that individuals will be crushed. We've seen that over and over and
over again. For example, anytime a gay or a lesbian activist attempts both to accent the critique
of heterosexism and homophobia and then to link them to other oppressions, the powers that be
be come even more hostile. That is true of the black movement, and it is true of the feminist and
womanist movement. Democracy-radical democracy in all of its forms-tries to accent the variety
of institutional and individual forms of evil and constitutes the most formidable threat to the
powers that be. Very much so. And the powers that be are quite serious. No doubt about that.
They've got a lot of resources at their disposal to crush people. No doubt.
Eisen and Kenyatta: The question about identity politics is linked to a question about destructive
divisions between liberation struggles for people of color and liberation struggles for gays and
lesbians. The hierarchy of oppressions-"my oppression is worse than your oppression"-gets in
the way of coalition building. What can be done to foster coalition?
West: I think the fundamental issue is the difficulty of forging bonds of trust between various
communities of resistance. The reason why it's difficult to generate those bonds of trust is, I
think, precisely because, at the psychocultural level, the forms of fear and insecurity and anxiety
associated with others come from the prevailing systems that socialize us in a way that
reinforces the fears and anxieties and insecurities associated with the "other," for example, gay,
lesbian, black, brown, red, and so forth. The powers that be know that as long as there are no
bonds of trust or very, very weak bonds of trust, there won't be any effective coalition-building
or any substantive alliances among communities of resistance. And they're right. The only way
bonds of trust can be forged is when you have enough courageous activists, so-called leaders
and so-called followers, who are willing to violate prevailing lines of demarcation that are in
place. But to violate and transgress those lines of demarcation means that those persons have to
struggle deeply within themselves to wrestle honestly with their own insecurities and the anxiety
that they associate with other people. There's a certain kind of existential honesty and
intellectual candor that must go with political courage, both with leadership and so-called
followership, if we're ever going to forge the kinds of bonds of trust necessary to create the
coalitions that can present at least a substantive challenge to the powers that be. There's still no
guarantee even after the bonds of trust are forged-they've got armies and tanks and a whole lot of
other things-but at least the chances are better.


--- PAGE 357 ---
Eisen and Kenyatta: What does that candor look like?
West: The candor? Well, it's painful, it's very painful. When I start with the homophobia in me,
it's painful. One is ashamed of oneself in terms of how one has been socialized. How does one
attempt to overcome it? I would think in white brothers and sisters, when they actually look at
the white supremacy in them, it's got to be painful if they're serious democrats, if they're serious
about struggle. You overcome it by not just wrestling with it, but also by fusing with others in a
context that will keep you accountable in such a way that you will remain vulnerable and, hence,
open for growth and development, rather than simply debilitated, paralyzed and therefore frozen.
I think this is true in a variety of the different contexts that we've talked about: the patriarchy
inside of us, the class arrogance inside of us and the homophobia inside of us.
Eisen and Kenyatta: All of that requires a certain level of political courage. So where's the
base?
West: That's very true. I think the political courage is based on a profound commitment. If you're
fundamentally committed to dealing with the suffering and pain, you will be willing to put
yourself through some processes. One sign of commitment, for me, is always the degree to which
one is willing to be self-critical and self-questioning, because that's a sign that you're serious
about generating the conditions for the possibility of overcoming the suffering that you're after.
Commitment is fundamentally about focusing on the suffering and trying to overcome it, trying to
understand where it comes from, its causes, its effects. At the same time, it is about trying to
prepare oneself to sacrifice and to serve in such a way that one attempts to overcome the
suffering.
In addition to that, there is a serious intellectual dimension, and that has to do, again, with
historical consciousness and that dangerous memory, that subversive memory. Because one of
the ways in which one views oneself in process is to realize that you're part of a larger process
and tradition that has been going on, and that persons who have raised the same kind of questions
you raise struggle in their own ways. You can see it in their lives, their growth, their
development and their conscienticization. It is a complex and a perennial process, but it's worth
it. I think one of the things we have to convey is that even given all the pain and suffering
associated not just with being victimized, but also with being agents against that victimization, is
that there's also a deep joy and ecstasy in struggle. It is a desirable way of being in the world,
because it does, in fact, give you a sense of meaning and purpose. It gives you a sense of
camaraderie, connectedness and relatedness. And a decadent civilization such as our own
suffers from what Arthur Miller called the disease of unrelatedness, where people quest for
relations and intimacy and suffer a lack of community and solidarity. It's just a spiritually
impoverished way of being in the world. My good friend Stanley Hauerwas says that capitalism
tends to produce rather s-h-i-t-t-y people, and he's absolutely right. He's absolutely right.
Nonmarket values of love and care and service and laughter and joy run counter to that
seriousness of maximizing personal preferences and maximizing profits. It's just a very
impoverished way of being human, you see. I think that one of the things we democrats, radical
democrats, have to acknowledge is this joy and ecstasy in pain-ridden struggles. So you get this
fascinating juxtaposition of the joy and the pain and the despair and the hope all linked together.


--- PAGE 358 ---
But that's what it begins with anyway.
Eisen and Kenyatta: Living out paradox ...
West: That's exactly right. Living in time and space, and that's where for me, the Christian
perspective comes in, you see. To my mind, the best of Christianity has been that of a quest to be
an existential democrat. See, what the Palestinian Jew named Jesus was all about was, "I'm
going to overturn various forms of hierarchy that stand in the way of being connected with you
compassionately." You see? And so the common eating, wherein all hierarchies of cuisine are
called into question. Everybody come. Everybody use your hands. The same was true of free
healing.
The ruling elite in the Roman Empire had to put him to death for a political crime. Why?
Because he went straight to the temple. The temple was the center of life. And he turned the
tables on the money lenders. Why? Because this market activity, this buying and selling. was
getting in the way of a loving, compassionate, sympathetic, empathetic relation with human
beings. And you know, he knew he was in trouble; he was in deep trouble. He's got the Roman
elites. He's got the top slice ofJewish aristocracy. He's violating their laws and he's speaking to
their working classes, right there in the midst of the exploitation of the peasants occurring there
across the board, among Jews and non Jews. So you get this particular Jewish figure who comes
in and reforms a dominant tradition of Judaism, provides a critique of the Roman Empire, and
ends up on a cross. And his followers come up with a narrative that says that cross is based on
his blood that flows, which is that pain and suffering. But love still seems to be piercing through,
even at a moment when it seems God is silent and the good is impotent. It still seems to pierce
through. And for democrats, existential democrats, that's all we have. The question is: How do
we keep that love piercing through our communities in our attempts to create full solidarity? To
keep alive traditions of resistance and critique, so that from Stonewall in June 1969, a high
moment, a transformation of consciousness, a certain tradition has been kept alive that had been
inchoate, but now it's consolidated in a new kind of way, you see.3 There's this wonderful book
by Robert Goss, called 3esus Acted Up, that talks about this conception of God, love-making
and just doing, in light of this tradition that I'm talking about.4 It's one of the most powerful
statements that I've read that links my own conception of what it means to be an existential
democrat and a radical democrat from the Christian point of view, to the context of the
gay/lesbian liberation movement. But Christians have no monopoly on this. The questions are:
How do I endure compassionately? How do I continue to bring critique to bear in a loving way
with no naive utopian notions that somehow things are going to get better without struggle, or that
somehow struggle itself can produce perfectibility, but still be sustained in the midst of very,
very dark and difficult times? And, of course, secular traditions have as much access to that
compassionate love as religious traditions do, just as religious and secular traditions also
bastardize and reinforce systemic oppression.
Eisen and Kenyatta: So how do you reconcile your Christianity with the contemporary
Christianity that says love the sinner, hate the sin, when sin is read as "queer"?
West: Well, you do have to go back to the various claims to authority that are invoked. That
means going back to the Scripture, going back to the church fathers, and looking at all of the


--- PAGE 359 ---
various ways in which the richness of Christianity has been so thoroughly debased and
bastardized in the name of promoting forms of unjustified suffering. For example, in the
Scripture itself, when one actually looks at the nine references to socalled homosexuality or
sodomy, most of them allude to male, same-sex sexual activities-there is only one reference to
female. And part of these references are to tribal proscriptions, and part of them refer to male
prostitution within Canaanite cults vis-a-vis Judaism. But, at the same time, there are deeply
patriarchal, as well as homophobic, elements shot through those who wrote the text. That
homophobia has to be teased out as well, in light of the claims of mercy and the claims of justice
that are also in the text. As such, the text itself, of course, is polyvalent; it is ambiguous in that
regard. For example, the apostle Paul is concerned about lust and concerned about dehumanized
relationships-no matter whether gay or lesbian, or so-called straight. This makes good sense.
You want to treat each other as ends rather than means. There's no doubt about it. But, on the
other hand, Paul himself is shot through with deeply patriarchal and homophobic sensibilities,
being the person he was in his particular time. Now, of course, what's interesting is that most of
the religious Right, and the religious persons who use Scripture to justify homophobia, don't like
to admit that Jesus is not only silent on the issue, but he goes about engaging in forms of touch
and intimate relation, not sexual that we know of, but in intimate relation in the best sense of
sensual, across the board, from Mary to Lazarus, you see. People have said, well, if
homosexuality is such a burning issue, how come Jesus doesn't say anything about it? Because if
he did, it would have been at least constituted within the writings of the synoptic Gospels, you
see. And that's very upsetting, very upsetting indeed to right-wing Christian brothers and sisters!
Eisen and Kenyatta: You could catch hell for this one too.
West: If Jesus was proclaiming a certain kind of love-centered state of existence that is
impinging upon the space and time in which we live, impinging upon history, and if this issue of
homosexuality and homoeroticism was such a fundamental sin, he certainly would have
highlighted it. And so again, what we get, as in so many other cases, is an attempt to project
various conceptions of the gospel that followed after the life and death and resurrection of Jesus,
in an attempt to reinforce the very thing that he himself was fighting against. That goes from
empire, to vast economic inequality, to the good Samaritan. My God, people don't realize how
subversive that was in his day. That's like treating "niggers," gays and lesbians and so forth as if
they're really part of the family. Now you see, that's just too big a challenge for most Christians
who are holding on to such thin and impoverished conceptions of the gospel. And yet, if Jesus
would come back and say that the good Samaritan in the latter part of the twentieth century was
treating these so-called niggers, and treating these gays and lesbians, and treating these poor
white brothers whom you associate with trash as part of the family, he would then reveal the
depths of their idolatry. He would show that, in fact, what they're really tied to is a set of idols
rather than that blood that flowed at that cross from the body of Jesus. It is a very important
dialogue in which I think people like Peter Gomes and others have played a very important role:
highly visible persons of integrity who bring critique to bear on this particular form of evil.'
Eisen and Kenyatta: The last question we have for you is, what do you think a lesbian and gay
struggle brings to the struggle for a radical democracy?


--- PAGE 360 ---
West: There's a new dimension that gay brothers and lesbian sisters bring to the struggle, and
that is a conception of the erotic linked to bodies that forces us to accent the cultural as well as
the political and economic dimensions of our radical democratic movement. You see, America
itself, of course, begins with indigenous peoples being dispossessed of their land, the
subordination of indigenous peoples, and hence an attempt to create a puritanically based
conception of a nation with a city on a hill that's special and exceptional. Since the very
beginning, Americans have been very, very uneasy with their bodies, and have associated the
erotic with the different, the other, the alien. That attempt to escape from one's body and to be
open to the variety of different pleasures that can flow from that body has always been
associated with anarchy and disorder. This Puritanical culture cuts across race and class and
region in America; and even though it has undergone a fundamental transformation, it's still
around.
Even when you had a Marxist-based movement, they didn't want to talk about the erotic; the
Communist party was often as Puritanical as the YMCA. The big difference was that they
allowed for so-called crossracial relations, which was subversive, culturally subversive. But it
still wasn't as subversive as allowing the erotic itself to play a fundamental role. It is partly
because the erotic itself has this Dionysian energy that overflows beyond the rational. In that
regard, the erotic offers a much deeper critique of radicalisms that are linked to the
Enlightenment. To be a serious gay and lesbian activist, or to have learned from gay and lesbian
liberation movements, is to engage at this level of a critique of Enlightenment sensibility thinking
that it's all about rational control and a rational project. I'm not trashing reason, or trashing the
rational. However, the erotic forces us to acknowledge that our radicalism ought to be much
more open and much more self-critical. Now there's a sense in that the black movement brought
this to bear as well, with the crucial role of the body, partly as a result of an African culture that
is much less uncomfortable with the body than a Puritanical one. But, even the African and Afro-
American traditions did not accent the degree to which the erotic could be found in same-sex
relationships. And that, to me, is a crucial contribution, and also to someone like myself, a
challenge, a crucial challenge. Here again, Audre Lorde and others have noted the ways in
which the erotic can be empowering and ennobling, enabling and ennobling, and can actually
release in us energies that, I think in the end, are indispensable for struggle because they also
become forces for hope in a situation in which there is not a lot of hope.
The interesting question is the relationship between the ethical and the erotic. The erotic without
the ethical can become just thoroughly licentious in the most flat hedonistic sense. But the erotic
fused with the ethical means there is respect for the other, and that respect for the other also
means being attentive to the needs of the other given their erotic energies. These kinds of issues
seem to me to be fundamental ones because, of course, they affect every relationship. I mean,
even in friendships that are nonsexual, there's an erotic dimension. And as teachers of students
we know there's an erotic dimension, but it has got to be severed from any use of power for
subordination, sexual pleasure, sexual manipulation and so forth. But if one is honest in one's
own humanity and is concerned with a qualitative relation with any significant other, I think one
has to acknowledge that there is an erotic dimension. And it's precisely this dimension, among
others, but especially within this dimension, that I think gay and lesbian movements have made a
major, major advance in radical thought and in radical action.


--- PAGE 361 ---
Eisen and Kenyatta: Thank you so much for contributing to this special issue on lesbians, gays,
bisexuals and transgender people and education. We acknowledge your courage and integrity,
and we appreciate your commitment to a democratic struggle for social transformation that
includes lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgender people as well as all other oppressed people.
SOURCE: The Editors, "Cornel West on Heterosexism and Transformation: An Interview," Harvard
Educational Review 66, no. 2 (Summer 1996), pp. 356-367. Copyright © 1996 by the President and
Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 362 ---
A P H I L O S O P H I C A L VIEW O F E A S T E R
This piece is a favorite of mine, even though I now r ject wholeheartedly its salvationhistory
perspective. The centrality of Good Friday-and especially Holy Saturday, when God is as dead
for Christians as God was for Nietzsche-for me now prevents me from embracing Easter too
quickly. The condemnation of one thief may lead to despair just as we are condemned to life and
death. The salvation of the other thief may lead to hoe- ust as we are saved every day from life
and death. But within this paradox hang we sufering, shuddering and struggling creatures.
I
THE JOYFUI, ATTITUDE OF a Christian toward the resurrection claim that `Jesus arose from
the dead" seems to preclude the philosophical dispositions of disinterest, detachment and
distance. Yet, as a Christian and philosopher, I believe that the resurrection claim can be both
dispassionately defended and enthusiastically exalted. In this brief chapter I will suggest
philosophical strategies for such a defense and existential reasons for such an exaltation. In my
treatment of the resurrection claim, I shall move from its philosophical testability to my own
personal testimony.
There are three basic aspects of the resurrection claim, namely, its truth-value, its epistemic
status and its significance. First, we must ask what it means to say that the resurrection claim is
true or false. Second, how do we know whether the resurrection claim is true or false? Third,
what significance should the resurrection claim have for us as Christians?
II
Before we begin to examine what it means to say that the resurrection claim is true or false, we
must have some idea of what it means to say that any claim is true or false. A commonsensical
view would be that a claim is true or false if it can be correlated with a particular set of
experiences or observations such that all and only members of that set are evidence for or
against the claim. For example, the resurrection claim would be true if we could persuasively
demonstrate that re liable observers saw Jesus physically dead, put in Joseph's tomb and either
arise from the dead or alive after his death.
There are two major problems with this commonsensical view. First, it rests upon the
reliability of those friends and disciples of Jesus who are purported to have made observations
that may serve as evidence for the veracity of the resurrection claim. David Hume's powerful
essay on miracles convincingly renders this reliability problematic. Second, this view assumes
that the resurrection claim is the kind of claim whose truth-value can be determined by a
particular set of observations. This assumption is questionable because it presupposes the
dogma of sentential reductionism, namely, the view that sentences have their evidence for or
against their truth or falsity isolated from and independent of other sentences.
I will suggest that the truth-values of crucial claims or important sentences in the two major
kinds of descriptions, versions or theories of the self, world and God-religion and science-can
be determined neither in isolation from other sentences nor by a particular set of observations.


--- PAGE 363 ---
My suggestion rests upon the insight put forward by the Catholic philosopher of science Pierre
Duhem and popularized in our time by W. V. Quire and Thomas Kuhn: that the truth-value of our
claims about the self, world and God are determined by marshaling evidence for or against the
descriptions, versions or theories of which these claims are a part. This insight leads us to
examine the truth-value of particular descriptions, versions or theories of the self, world and
God, not isolated claims or sentences within these particular descriptions, versions or theories.
If we hold to the dogma of sentential reductionism and observational criterion in determining
the truth-value of claims or sentences in scientific descriptions, versions or theories of the self,
world and God, we reach the same dead end that Hume reached in his narrow dogmatic
rejection of the resurrection claim in Christian descriptions, versions or theories. The dogma of
sentential reductionism for scientific descriptions amounts to the claim that any scientific
statement could be reduced to an equivalent statement consisting solely of observation terms or
observables. But the most important sentences in any scientific description, version or theory
contain nonobservation terms, such as disposition terms, metrical terms and theoretical terms.
For example, terms such as recessive trait, conductor of heat, magnetic or elastic are not
observable characteristics of objects, but rather dispositions of objects to behave in certain
ways under specific circumstances. Terms such as length, mass, temperature or electric charge
are numerically measurable quantities that also cannot be reduced to observable attributes of
objects. And terms such as force, pressure, electron or black holes are neither observable
characteristics of objects nor observable objects, but rather theoretical constructs whose
positing within a theory is warranted by the explanatory and predictive power the theory yields.
I suggest that just as it is inappropriate to apply the dogma of sentential reduc tionism and the
observational criterion to the most important claims or sentences in scientific descriptions, so it
is inappropriate to apply this dogma and criterion to the resurrection claim in Christian
descriptions. We must acknowledge that truth-values pertain to bodies of knowledge,
descriptions, versions or theories of the self, world and God, not to atomic sentences,
autonomous statements or isolated claims. If we do not acknowledge this Duhemian insight, then
we must admit that it is impossible to determine the truth-value of scientific laws (which contain
nonobservation terms) in scientific theories and the resurrection claim in Christian descriptions.
So, in reply to our first question about what it means to say that the resurrection claim is true
or false, we conclude that to raise the question of the truth-value of this claim is to raise the
question of the truth-value of Christian descriptions, versions or theories of the self, world and
God of which the resurrection claim is central.
III
Now that we have some idea of what it means to say that the resurrection claim is true or false,
how do we know whether the resurrection claim is true or false? Since the truth-value of the
resurrection claim is inseparable from the truth-value of particular Christian descriptions,
versions or theories of which this claim is central, the crucial question becomes, how do we
know particular Christian descriptions are true or false?
It is important to point out here different senses of "know" or kinds of knowledge in the


--- PAGE 364 ---
various scientific and religious language games we play. For example, when one puts forward
knowledge claims from the viewpoint of a scientific description, version or theory about the
self, world and God, one is attempting to support or defend a particular description, version or
theory that tries to provide reliable predictions and trustworthy explanations of future experience
in light of past experience. When one puts forward knowledge claims from the vantage point of a
religious description, version or theory about the self, world and God, one is attempting to
support or defend a particular description, version or theory that tries to promote the valuing of
certain insights, illuminations, capacities and abilities in order honestly to confront and
effectively to cope with the inevitable vicissitudes and unavoidable limit situations in life.
In drawing this distinction between scientific "knowing" and religious "knowing," I do not
want to suggest that science and religion require different methodologies or different standards
by which to adjudicate conflicting descriptions. Rather, I am suggesting that both consist of
social practices and human activities with different aims to achieve and different problems to
address. I make this distinction between scientific practices and religious practices in order to
avoid category mistakes, such as asking science to achieve the aims or address the problems of
religion or vice versa.
In coming to terms with the question of how we know particular Christian descriptions,
versions or theories of the self, world and God are true or false and hence whether the
resurrection claim within these descriptions, versions or theories is true or false, we are forced
to acknowledge that there are no ultimate courts of appeal presently available to us. Every
penultimate court of appeal is linked to a particular description, version or theory of the self,
world and God. To confine ultimate courts of appeal to the spheres of either science or religion
is reductionistic. To believe that Truth is a property solely of scientific theories that yield
reliable predictions and trustworthy explanations is to fall prey to a narrow positivism. To
believe that Truth is an attribute solely of religious descriptions that promote certain insights and
capacities for living is to fall prey to an expedient existentialism. And to believe that there is a
description-free, version-free, theoryfree standard that enables us to choose the true
descriptions, versions or theories in science and religion is to fall prey to an Archimedean
objectivism.
Since we should neither reduce Truth to the spheres of either science or religion nor assume
we can view the world sub species aeternitatis, we must acknowledge our finitude, fallenness
and sinfulness as human beings. This acknowledgment entails that when we say we "know" that a
particular scientific or religious description, version or theory of the self, world and God is true,
we are actually identifying ourselves with a particular group of people, community of believers
or tradition of social practices. There indeed may be good reasons why we identify ourselves
with particular groups, communities or traditions. But there are, ultimately, no reasons with the
force of logical necessity or universal obligation that could rationally compel others to join us.
In this sense, there is no true description, version or theory of the self, world and God that all
must and should acknowledge as inescapably true, but rather particular descriptions, versions or
theories put forward by various people, groups, communities and traditions in order (usually) to
make such views attractive to us.


--- PAGE 365 ---
At this point, it is appropriate for me to cast off my dispassionate philosophical disposition
and openly acknowledge my own membership in the Christian community. This "casting off" is
essentially a rejection of the conception of philosophy, which does not permit one openly to
acknowledge the particular tradition and community from which one speaks. By accepting a
particular (i.e., Kierkegaardian) Christian description and therefore accenting our fallenness, I
am led to adopt a radical historicist view that renders all "truth-talk" a contextual affair, always
related to human aims and human problems, human groups and human communities.
As a self-avowed Christian, it seems redundant to say that a particular Christian description
of the self, world and God is true. But, more important, it is mis leading to say this. Christians
believe in various Christian descriptions that do not claim their descriptions are true, but rather
that these descriptions are acceptable and possibly sufficient for their aims. Christian
descriptions hold that our fallenness will never permit our Christian descriptions to grasp the
Truth. This is so because, for Christians, Jesus Christ is the Truth, and Jesus Christ always rests
outside our particular Christian descriptions.
The philosophical implication of this view is that, for Christians, Truth is not a characteristic
of a description, not even of a Christian description. Rather, Jesus Christ is the Truth or Reality
and can only be existentially appropriated by fallen human beings caught in their finite
descriptions. And the fact that this view itself is but part of a finite Christian description only
further accents our fallenness and supports the view.
I am suggesting that the primary test for the "truth-value" of particular Christian descriptions
and their resurrection claim is their capacity to facilitate the existential appropriation of Jesus
Christ. This means that any "true" Christian description makes the Reality of Jesus Christ
available, that it promotes and encourages the putting of oneself on the line, going to the edge of
life's abyss and finding out whether the Reality ofJesus Christ, though understood through one's
finite Christian description, can sustain and support, define and develop oneself in one's
perennial struggle of becoming a fuller and more faithful self in Christ.
So, in reply to our second question about the epistemic status of the resurrection claim or how
we know that particular Christian descriptions and their resurrection claim are true or false, we
conclude that truth claims about descriptions in science and religion are contextual and that for
Christians "truth-talk" precludes disinterest, detachment and distance because Jesus Christ is the
Truth, the Truth which cannot be theoretically reified into a property of an abstract description,
but only existentially appropriated by concrete human beings in need.
N
What significance should the resurrection claim within particular Christian descriptions of the
self, world and God have for us as Christians"? This question can be adequately addressed only
after we have some notion of what the biblical understanding of the resurrection claim is. How
did the first Christians view the resurrection claim? What significance did it have for them?
These questions take us into the muddy waters of New Testament scholarship. But this need
not discourage us, for such controversy indicates that first-rate Christian minds are still


--- PAGE 366 ---
grappling with the meaning of the resurrection claim. Following the powerful and penetrating
1955 Ingersoll Lecture by Oscar Cullmann, I believe it is first important to point out that the
resurrection claim should not be confused with the Greek claim about the immortality of the soul.
The Christian resurrection claim assumes that the sting of death was once deadly, that its power
was once definitive, whereas the Greek immortality claim presupposes that the soul is
intrinsically eternal, hence death is a release, a liberation for the soul out of the prison of the
body. On the Christian view, the sting and power of death is conquered and overcome by the
death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. On the Greek view, this victory over death is superfluous
and unnecessary since the soul has always belonged to the eternal world, the world of Being and
Essence.
The radical character of the Christian resurrection claim is found in its salvation-history
perspective. The Christian claim that `Jesus arose from the dead" or that Jesus is "the firstborn
from the dead" is a proclamation of a divine miracle of creation in that God has called back to
life a new creature from the old, a new creation from the old, a new history from the old. In this
sense, the resurrection claim essentially refers to the inauguration of a new future, a future that
promises redemption and deliverance.
The resurrection claim should mean to us that Jesus' victory over death ushered in a new age,
an age in which the almighty power of God is already fulfilled but not yet consummated, an age
in which death is conquered but not yet abolished. This new age is an interim period in which
this divine power in the form of the Holy Spirit is at work among us. In this interim period, this
Holy Spirit can be understood as the Reality of Jesus Christ to be existentially appropriated by
fallen human beings for life sustenance, self-formation, self-maturation and societal
transformation.
The significance of the resurrection claim within "true" Christian descriptions of the self,
world and God is that, despite how tragic and hopeless present situations and circumstances
appear to be, there is a God who sits high and looks low, a God who came into this filthy, fallen
world in the form of a common peasant in order to commence a new epoch, an epoch in which
Easter focuses our attention on the decisive victory of Jesus Christ and hence the possibility of
our victory over our creaturehood, the old creation and this old world, with its history of
oppression and exploitation. So to be a Christian is to have a joyful attitude toward the
resurrection claim, to stake one's life on it and to rest one's hope upon its promise-the promise of
a new heaven and a new earth.
SOURCE: From Prophetic Fragments (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.,
1988), pp. 260-266. Originally appeared in Dialog: A journal of Theology, Winter 1980.


--- PAGE 367 ---



--- PAGE 368 ---
ON GIBSON WINTER'S ECOLOGICAL 
E C U M E N I S M
One of the major lacunae in my work is the crucial ecological challenges of our timeabuse of
nature, cruelty to sentient nonhuman, possible nuclear annihilation. In this essay, I examine the
fascinating project of Gibson Winter, Hope for the Earth." Winter is one of the few Christian
thinkers to confront ecological issues with a deeply philosophical and broadly historical
perspective.
GIBSON WINTER'S "HOPE FOR the Earth: A Hermeneutic of Nuclearism in Ecumenical
Perspective" is the most provocative and powerful meditation I have read on the urgent issues of
possible nuclear annihilation and actual nuclear weaponry buildup. Based on his ontological
framework set forth in Liberation Creation: Foundations of Religious Social Ethics, Winter
argues that nuclearism is not simply a logical consequence of Western technological
development; it also is an effect of the modern Western way of Dasein-in-der- Welt ("being-in-
the-world"). This fundamental insight permits Winter to go beyond the usual confinement of
nuclearism to the concerns of peace activists and move toward making crucial links to U.S. and
Soviet forms of imperialism and colonialism. Furthermore, like Nietzsche, Winter discerns a
basic will to power at the heart of the modern Western project that posits an autonomous,
calculating Subject that defies and degrades historicity, temporality, spatiality and sociality for
the purposes of mastery and manipulation.
The work of Robert J. Lifton, Richard Falk, George Kerman and Jonathan Schell have
informed and alerted the public to various dimensions of nuclearism. Winter's reflections move
to the archaeological dimension of this matter; that is, he provides a philosophical excavation of
the ontological terrain wherein the hegemony of modern European techne has reigned since
Descartes and Hobbes. Winter's inquiry cuts deeper than a mere history of ideas, depiction of
possible nightmares and prescriptions of Realpolitik primarily because it attempts to lay bare
the hermeneutical horizons and existential symbols that promote and encourage dispositions of
destruction and annihilation. His perspective not only provides a profound characterization of
the philosophical depths of nuclearism; it also suggests a new way of Being-in-the World which
takes seriously openness to the disclosure of Divine Mystery, thereby facilitating a periagoge
("turning") toward a historically informed humility, a spatially anchored sociality and an
ecumenically oriented communality.
I applaud Winter's motivations. For too long the political and moral aspects of nuclearism
have been accented at the expense of its religious aspects. Surely, issues concerning the common
good and normative character of nuclear weaponry warrant close attention. Yet our conceptions
of goodness, power and ultimacy in relation to nuclearism also demand our rational scrutiny. In
this regard, Winter has performed a valuable service.
I also deeply resonate with Winter's intentions. His attempt to elevate the dialogue to a more
sophisticated level of investigation is salutary. And I believe he has succeeded well in
rearranging the domain in which discourses on nuclearism take place.


--- PAGE 369 ---
Yet, I disagree in significant ways with Winter's perspective. First, my conception of the
Western project is more radically pluralist and heterogeneous than his. I find the roots of
Western nuclearism in far more than the mechanistic tradition of Descartes and Hobbes. In fact, I
find some of these roots in the organicist tradition of which Winter is a product. Second, I am not
persuaded that the valorization of a root metaphor of poesis or phronesis avoids the Western
will to power. Third, the particular way in which periagoge comes about in Winter's perspective
remains quite vague, with hints of mere moral persuasion and idealist reflection.
Winter is right to ground the modem Western will to power in the disembodied and
deracinated cogito of Descartes and in the psychological hedonism of Hobbes. The autonomous
world-seeking and power-hungry Subjects of the exemplary early modern thinkers indeed
constitute a kind of prototype of the destructive monstrous forces now haunting us-as Mary
Wollstonecraft Shelley's Frankenstein illustrates. But I suggest that there are many other possible
grounds for the modern Western will to power. These grounds include the organicist and
historicist traditions.
The organicist tradition-from Herder to Hitler, Hegel to Heidegger-usually incorporates a
mystical dimension, which promotes an openness to the mystery of Geist, Volk, Being, Presence
or the Whole that sits well with authoritarian subordination and passive submission. My point
here is not that Winter's beloved Heidegger was a Nazi for a few months, but rather that the
organicist tradition bears as much intellectual responsibility for our present predicament as the
mechanistic tradition of Descartes and Hobbes. In his book, Winter calls for a new synthesis of
the creative powers of the mechanistic tradition and the participatory communitarianism of the
organicist tradition. Yet, I remain unconvinced that the kind of radical democratic participatory
values Winter and I favor are rooted in the organicist tradition. As Jacques Derrida, Gilles
Deleuze and Michel Foucault have pointed out, organicist notions of unity, harmony and totality
have led not only to the unhappy consciousness of the modern West, but also to premature
closures and debilitating constraints that arc but forms of the Western will to power. Such
dangerous notions often elude and elide difference and heterogeneity (the very ingredients for
radical participatory democracy), which results in dominating and destructive dispositions.
Similarly, the historicist tradition-from Nietzsche to Gadamer, Marx to Gram- sci-which tries
to take seriously historicity, sociality and community bears some culpability for nuclearism. The
discovery of history in the modern West-principally a nineteenth-century affair-meant the control
of and mastery over historical forces. As Engels noted, freedom is the recognition of necessity
and necessity is history as Ananke, as preexistent material to shape and mold for human
purposes. Again the modern Western will to power looms large.
In short, I am not disagreeing with Winter's powerful critique of the mechanistic tradition. I
am merely extending it to other precious traditions in the modern West, including his own. My
point here is simply that the major traditions in the modern West fall prey to his critique-none
are free of spot or wrinkle. Furthermore, these traditions (though some more than others) contain
elements useful for launching such critiques. For example, the mechanistic tradition-though
worthy of devastating criticism and ultimate rejection-produced Hume's associationism, which
bequeathed to us a valuable mitigated skepticism that promoted a fallibilism requisite for an


--- PAGE 370 ---
acceptable historicism. The organicist tradition-though limited and romantic-yielded the rich
system of Hegel and the profound insights of Heidegger, which made possible penetrating
critiques of technological rationality. Lastly, the historicist tradition-which I prefer, though still
criticize-gave us Marx's illuminating social analyses and Gramsci's revisions, which still partly
guide our conception of and activities against modern forms of oppression. Yet, despite these
grand contributions, these traditions contribute in significant ways to the modern European will
to power and our present nuclear predicament.
I support Winter's claim that the complex linking of Cartesian and Hobbesian epistemologies
to modern techne more readily results in dominating dispositions. But I am not convinced-by
either Winter, Maclntyre, Gadamer or Bernsteinthat its replacement by some notion of poesis or
phronesis will in itself necessarily or probably void the Western will to power or dilute the
nuclearism in our world. In fact, Nietzsche may be right: the very attempt to recover and
recuperate our Greek heritage-both pre-Socratic and post-Socratic notions-is debilitating and
reveals our parochialism. I do not follow Nietzsche in such a direction, but his radical
viewpoints warrant serious attention. To put my cards on the table, I hold that a particular
religious and political form ofphronesis-a practical wisdom linked to specific prophetic
religious and progressive political movements-might redirect the Western will to power and
constrain the nuclearism in our world. But this position remains a hope and a risk. Even
openness to the disclosure of Divine Mys tery does not guarantee it. For there is, in my Christian
view, the slight chance that Christianity might be false.
In other words, Winter must spell out in more detailed terms the concrete political content of
his alternative to Cartesian and Hobbesian technes. I find his characterization of the effects of
these technes persuasive. But precisely what the relation of "dwelling" is to political praxis and
"sharing" is to movement building remains unclear. Furthermore, I think such praxis and
movement building can be done without assuming that "the rhythms and energies of the play of
life lend a common base to human aspirations and struggles." Such romantic naturalism is not
warranted by the commonsensical or scientific evidence we have, and surely no transcendental
justification can stand the scrutiny of Winter's historicist sentiments. So what does sustain such
an optimistic assumption? Like Whitehead's consequent nature of God, it is an understandable
but unacceptable naturalist leap of faith. The impossible possibility of Divine Grace might
sustain and enable such a leap, but not "the relational processes of species life."
Lastly, Winter's account of how the periagoge is to take place is underdeveloped. At one
point, he suggests this to be the role of the "servant church." Yet "in the Between" even this
cloud of witnesses "has no special protection from the painful rupture of power and goodness."
At another point, he suggests that the choice of life over death "can come when people begin to
reflect on where the path of deterrence is leading."
My point here is not that Winter should put forward elaborate strategies and tactics to resist
and overthrow nuclearism, but rather that he must specify more clearly the conditions under
which new ways of being-in-the-world-with their concomitant new hermeneutical horizons and
existential symbols-come about. To put it bluntly, the pedagogical dimension of his perspective
remains vagueand there can be no periagoge without a distinct paideia.


--- PAGE 371 ---
In conclusion, Winter's essay elevates the contemporary discourse on nuclearism in an
admirable and impressive manner. His critique is powerful-yet its scope needs broadening. His
alternative is pregnant-though it lacks historical concreteness. And his pedagogy is
perspicacious-but it remains rudimentary. We all should be grateful to Professor Winter for his
meditation-his grand vision, acute analysis and propitious praxis-because he surely helps us to
think more clearly and work more effectively for the preservation and humanization of the earth.
SOURCE: "Winter in the West," Prophets( Fragments (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdrnans
Publishing Co., 1988), pp. 246-249. Originally appeared in Religion and Intellectual Life, Spring
1984.


--- PAGE 372 ---
P R O P H E T I C C H R I S T I A N A S O R G A N I C 
INTELLECTUAL: MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.
I delivered this address at the unveiling of a bust of Martin Luther King, Jr., at the U. S. Capitol
in October 1986. This poignant moment in my life provided an occasion to reflect on the
exemplary prophetic Christian of our time. I shall never forget the firm and affirming handshake
of Coretta Scott King immediately after my presentation-a soft and sweet gesture to cement a
rededication to the legacy of this organic intellectual in the prophetic Christian and democratic
tradition.
I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies. Though ye offer me
burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them: Neither will I regard the peace
offerings of your fat beasts. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the
melody of thy viols. But let justice run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.
-Amos 5:21-24
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he
hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised.
-LUKE 4:18
I've seen the lightning flash, I've heard the thunder roll, I've felt sin breakers dashing trying to conquer
my soul. But I heard the voice of Jesus saying still to fight on. He promised never to leave, never to
leave me alone.
-NEGRO SPIRITUAL
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., was the most significant and successful organic intellectual in
American history. Never before in our past has a figure outside of elected public office linked
the life of the mind to social change with such moral persuasiveness and political effectiveness.
An adequate account of why and how King emerged as such a figure must consider the
distinctive historical conditions of post-World War II America-with its supreme world-power
status, unprecedented economic boom and apartheid-like structures of racial domination in the
South-that set the stage for the moral vision, personal courage and political determination of
King and those who struggled alongside him.
In this essay, I shall focus principally on the intellectual and existential sources that inform
King's thought-that is, intellectual and existential sources that are preeminently religious in
character and prophetic in content. I suggest that there are four major sources in King's thought.
The first-and most important-source was the prophetic black church tradition that initially and
fundamentally shaped King's worldview. The second consisted of a prophetic liberal
Christianity King encountered in his higher education and scholarly training. The third source


--- PAGE 373 ---
was a prophetic Gandhian method of nonviolent social change that King first encountered in a
sermon by Mordecai Johnson (president of Howard University) and that he later used in his
intense intellectual struggle with the powerful critiques of the Christian love ethic by Karl Marx
and Friedrich Nietzsche. The last source was that of prophetic American civil religion, which
fuses secular and sacred history and combines Christian themes of deliverance and salvation
with political ideals of democracy, freedom and equality. I shall argue that these four religious
sources constitute the major pillars of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s, thought. Let us start at King's
beginnings-that is, in the bosom of the black Baptist church.
The black church-a shorthand rubric that refers to black Christian communities of various
denominations that came into being when African American slaves decided, often at the risk of
life and limb, to "make Jesus their choice" and to share with one another their common Christian
sense of purpose and Christian understanding of their circumstances-is unique in American
culture. This is so because it is the major institution created, sustained and controlled by black
people themselves; that is, it is the most visible and salient cultural product of black people in
the United States. The profound insights and petty blindnesses, immeasurable depths and
immobilizing faults, incalculable richness and parochial impoverishment of that complex hybrid
people called Afro-Americans surface most clearly in the black church.
And let us be very clear and let us never forget that the great American prophetic figure of our
time, Martin Luther King, Jr., was a child of the black church-an individual product of the major
institutional product of black people in this country. The black church was created under
economic conditions of preindustrial slavery and socioeconomic circumstances of "natal
alienation" (Orlando Patterson's term in Slavery and Social Death to describe a form of social
death in which people have no legal ties of birth in both ascending and descending generations,
no right to predecessors or progeny). Hence black people were confined to a perpetual and
inheritable state of domination and defined as dishonored persons with no public worth, social
standing or legal status-only economic value, mere commodities to be bought, sold or used. In
this regard, the black church signified and signifies the collective effort of an exploited and
oppressed, degraded and despised, dominated and downtrodden people of African descent to
come to terms with the absurd in America and the absurd as America. The black church was a
communal response to an existential and political situation in which no penultimate reasons
suffice to make any kind of sense or give any type of meaning to the personal circumstances and
collective condition of Afro-Americans.
With the "death of the African gods" (to use Albert Raboteau's phrase in his book Slave
Religion), black people creatively appropriated a Christian worldviewmainly from such
dissenters in the American religious tradition as Baptists and Methodists-and thereby
transformed a prevailing absurd situation into a persistent and present tragic one, a kind of
"Good Friday" state of existence in which one is seemingly forever on the cross, perennially
crucified, continuously abused and incessantly devalued-yet sustained and empowered by a hope
against hope for a potential and possible triumphant state of affairs. The ground of this hope was
neither rationally demonstrable nor empirically verifiable. Rather, it was existentially
encountered in an intense personal relationship with Jesus Christ, whose moral life, agonizing
death and miraculous resurrection literally and symbolically enacted an ultimate victory over


--- PAGE 374 ---
evil-collective slavery and personal sin-a victory that had occurred but was not yet
consummated, with evil conquered but not yet abolished. The Christocentric language of the
black church-of Jesus as the bright and morning star against the backdrop of the pitch darkness of
the night, as water in dry places, a companion in loneliness, a doctor to the sick, a rock in a
wearied land-exemplifies the intimate and dependent personal relationship between God and
individual and between God and a world-forsaken people.
The important point here is not simply that this is the broad black Christian worldview that
King heard and adopted at his father's church, Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia, but
also that this worldview put the pressing and urgent problem of evil-the utterly and undeniably
tragic character of life and history-at its center. Furthermore, the major focus of the prophetic
black Christian worldview was neither an escapist pie-in-the-sky heaven nor a political
paradise on earth. Rather, the stress was on marshaling and garnering resources from fellowship,
community and personal strength (meditation, prayer) to cope with overwhelmingly limited
options dictated by institutional and personal evil. In short, this black Christian perspective
indeed affirmed a sustaining eschatology (that is, a heaven-orientation) and a moral critique of
pervasive white racism-but its emphasis was on survival and struggle in the face of an
alternative of absurdity and insanity.
The principal African resources in black Christianity were threefold. First, a kinetic orality
permeated black sermons and songs, black prayers and hymns. A sense of community was
constituted and reinforced by an invigorated rhetoric, rhythmic freedom and antiphonal forms of
interaction. Fluid, protean and flexible oral stylizations of language gave black church life a
distinctively African American stampa stamp that flowed from black cultural agency in a society
that tried to deny and downplay any form of black agency and black creativity. Second, a
passionate physicality accented black control and power over the only social space permitted to
them in American society-that is, their bodies. Self-assertion of somebodiness enacted by bodily
participation in stylized forms of spiritual response in black church liturgy signified a sense of
honufulness for an exilic people. Last, a combative spirituality was promoted and promulgated
by the central roles of preacher, deacon and choir. Each had to meet a weekly challenge of
feeding the flock, encouraging the discouraged and giving hope to the downhearted. This stress
on the performative and the pragmatic, on pageantry and the histrionic put a premium on
prospective moral practice or forward-looking ethical struggle for black Christian parishioners.
This sense of struggle paradoxically cultivated a historical patience and subversive joy, a sober
survival ethic and an openness to seize credible liberation opportunities.
The theology of the black church was, for the most part, traditionally Augustinian with an
African American difference. It accented the traditional Protestant Christian doctrines of divine
majesty, sovereignty, mystery, sin and grace, forgiveness and love filtered through the black
experience of oppression. This filtering linked God's plan of salvation to black liberation-
inseparable, though not identical-and bestowed upon black people a divine source for self-
identity-for example, as children of God-that stood in stark contrast to the cultural perceptions
and social roles imposed upon them by a racist American society.
This African American difference not only highlighted the dignity of a people (as unique


--- PAGE 375 ---
individuals) denied such dignity in their surroundings, but also accented the strong universalist
and egalitarian Christian imago dei notion of all persons having equal value and significance in
the eyes of God. In this way, the black church put forward perspectives that encouraged both
individuality and community fellowship, personal morality and antiracist political engagement, a
gracecentered piety and a stress on Christian good works. To put it crudely, the black church
attempted to provide a theological route through the Scylla of a quietistic, priestly American
Christianity that legitimated racism and the Charybdis of a secular (self-righteous) Promethean
view that elevated human powers at the expense of divine grace and divine aid. The black
church tried to hold together both the dignity and depravity of persons in such a way that God-
like Yahweh with the children of Israel-identifies with the disinherited and downtrodden, yet
even the disinherited and downtrodden are sinners in need of conversion and sanctification.
Human beings can change and be changed-both individuals and societiesyet no individual or
society can fully conform to the requirements of the Christian gospel, hence the need for endless
improvement and amelioration.
This complex dialectical interplay of human finitude and human betterment in predominant
black church theological perspectives makes Afro-American Christianity more evangelical than
fundamentalist. This is so because fundamentalist Christianity is preoccupied with the claims of
science and historical criticism of biblical texts; it views the Bible not only in literalist terms,
but, more important, in the form of propositions in light of a notion of closed revelation-only
certain biblically derived propositions constitute divine revelation. By contrast, black
evangelical Christianity is primarily concerned with human fallenness, including our readings of
the Bible. Biblical texts indeed remain the authoritative guide to Christian life, yet the focus is
on moral conduct and spiritual development in light of continued revelation-that is, openness to
divine purpose, especially through the Holy Spirit-grounded in the Bible and appropriated by
individuals and communities in the present. In short, fundamentalist Christianity is rationalistic
in orientation and legalistic in effect, hence it leans toward bibliolatry, whereas black
evangelical Christianity is dramatic in orientation and moralistic in effect, hence it affirms a
biblically informed perspective.
My claim is that black church viewpoints not only fundamentally shaped King's thought, but
also regulated the themes and motifs, aspects and elements he accentuated in his encounters with
liberal Christianity (at Morehouse College, Crozer Theological Seminary, the University of
Pennsylvania, Boston University and Harvard University), Gandhian conceptions of love and
social change and American civil religion. In this way, the black church's influence on King's
views is the most primordial and decisive source of his thought. In his own writings and
sermons, he simply presupposed this influence and always assumed that his being a black
Baptist minister spoke for itself regarding this black church influence. For example, his choice
of Georg Wilhelm Hegel as his favorite philosopher was not because King was convinced of the
necessary developments of the Weltgeisi put forward in The Phenomenology ooJ Spirit, but
rather because Hegel held that "growth comes through struggle"-a view King was quite disposed
to, given his formation in the black church. Furthermore, King's preferred method of looking for
partial truths in opposing positions, in rejecting extremes and affirming a creative synthesis of
opposing views in a tension-ridden harmony is, on the surface, Hegelian. But it is, on a deeper
level, rooted in the dialectical mediation of the dualistic character of the self (spirit/nature) and


--- PAGE 376 ---
world (history/eternity)-a mediation both King (in an Afro-American context) and Hegel (in a
German Lutheran context) inher ited from Christian thought. The point is not that King did not
learn much from Hegel, but rather that Hegel was a supplement to King's black church influence.
This supplementary character of intellectual sources subsequent to King's black church
formation can be seen quite clearly in his encounter with liberal Christianity in his formal higher
education and training. For example, at Morehouse College, King's concentration in sociology
reinforced his theological and moral condemnation of the hypocrisy of Southern white racist
Christians and their alleged adherence to the Christian gospel. Walter Chivers, his sociology
professor, conducted detailed empirical investigation of lynchings in the South in light of a self-
styled ethical critique of American capitalism. More pointedly, under George D. Kelsey (head
of the Department of Religion) and Dr. Benjamin Mays (Morehouse College president), King's
black church prospectives were refined. By avoiding fundamentalist traps, shedding parochial
images of mere cathartic preaching and linking sophisticated intellectual pursuit to serious
Christian commitment, King became convinced at Morehouse that his vocation lay in becoming a
minister in the black Baptist tradition.
King's response to the Euro-American Christian academic world was to select those
viewpoints that gave philosophical and theological articulation to deeply held themes and
beliefs he acquired in the black church. The four central religious themes were the dignity and
sanctity of human persons; the moral obligation and social responsibility of Christians to resist
institutional evils such as racist segregation; the significance of personal immortality; and the
power of Christian love to make a difference in personal and social life. At Crozet, King took
nearly one-third of his courses under George Davis. In a way similar to black church
perspectives, Davis conceived of God as a deity intimately and intricately involved in human
history-a "working, toiling God" who labors through human beings to realize the ultimate end
and aim of history. This end and aim was the recognition and appreciation of the value of human
personality and the brotherhood of man. Influenced by the social gospel of Walter Rauschen-
busch, Davis linked his personalism to political and social engagement.
Yet it was the work of L. Harold DeWolf at Boston University that provided the liberal
Christian resources most congenial and amenable to King's refined black church perspectives. In
his six courses with DeWolf and in writing his doctoral dissertation (on the conception of God
in Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman) under the guidance of DeWolf, King found an
acceptable and respectable academic theology that best expressed the major themes and beliefs
of his black church background. DeWolf's personalism provided King with a professional
theological language that put forward the four basic themes King had inherited from the black
church tradition. During his years in graduate school, King did tentatively adopt limited liberal
Christian ideas about the natural goodness of people and the progressive direction of human
history. Yet later in the heat of bat tle, King fell back on more classical Christian ideas of sin,
grace and hope within the context of the black struggle for freedom. In short, Davis and DeWolf
supplemented King's black church viewpoints, supplements that resulted in slight revisions,
emendations and new academic forms for his evangelical content. King indeed called himself an
evangelical liberal-an apt description after adopting Kelsey's nonliteralist, dramatic reading of
the biblical texts, Mays's Christian modernist view of educated and engaged black ministers,


--- PAGE 377 ---
Davis's stress on human history as the crucial terrain for divine activity and DeWolf's full-blown
personalism that undergirded a social gospel.
The major challenges to King's black church formation came from the critiques of religion put
forward by Karl Marx and Friedrich Nietzsche as, for example, Marx's claim (based on Ludwig
Feuerbach's views) that religion was the opiate of the people-the instrument of those who rule in
that it disinvests people of their own powers by investing God with all power and thereby
rendering them submissive and deferential toward the status quo. Furthermore, Marx's claim of
the vast economic disparity between the rich and poor-for instance, the class inequality in
America between 1 percent of the population who owned 28 percent of the wealth and the
bottom 45 percent of the population who owned 2 percent of the wealth-made an important
impact on King. King's black church formation led him to conclude that many forms of religion
did render people submissive, but also that prophetic Christianity could empower people to fight
against oppression and struggle for freedom and justice. King remained convinced all of his life
that there was a need for a redistribution of wealth and a deemphasis on material possessions in
a profit-oriented capitalist society. And later in life, King endorsed some forms of (indigenous)
American democratic and libertarian socialism that preserved a constitutional rule of law and
protected individual liberties in order to secure and promote a "person-centered rather than
property-centered and profitcentered" economy. In regard to his response to Marx, King wrote:
I read Marx as I read all of the influential historical thinkers-from a dialectical point of view,
combining a partial yes and a partial no. Insofar as Marx posited a metaphysical materialism, an
ethical relativism, and a strangulating totalitarianism, I responded with an unambiguous "no"; but
insofar as he pointed to weaknesses of traditional capitalism, contributed to the growth of a
definite selfconsciousness in the masses, and challenged the social conscience of the Christian
churches, I responded with a definite "yes."
In short, King succumbed to neither a knee jerk negative reaction to Marx without reading and
grappling with him nor an uncritical acceptance of Marx's atheism, which overlooked the
contribution of prophetic religious people to struggles for freedom.
Nietzsche's view of Christian love as a form of resentment and revenge of the powerless and
impotent toward the powerful and the strong led King briefly to "despair of the power of love in
solving social problems." Following both the black church tradition and liberal Christianity,
King had concluded that the Christian love ethic applied only to individuals' relationships-not to
group, nation or class conflicts. And if Nietzsche was correct, even individual relationships of
love were but power struggles masquerading as harmonious interactions. The Gandhian method
of love-motivated (agapic) nonviolent resistance provided King with a response to Marx and an
answer to Nietzsche. The love ethic of Jesus Christ was a moral and practical method-a way of
life and way of struggle in which oppressed people could fight for freedom without inflicting
violence on the oppressor, humiliating the opponent, and hence possibly transform the moral
disposition of one's adversary.
For King, this method of nonviolent resistance required more internal moral discipline than
that of Marxist revolutionaries, because one had to accept suffering without retaliation, to
receive blows without striking back. For him, this was not cowardice but courage, not fear but


--- PAGE 378 ---
fortitude. Nonviolent resistance also went beyond Nietzschean resentment and revenge in that
resistance was directed at the forces of evil, rather than against persons who commit the evil.
The enemy is injustice and oppression, not those who perpetuate the injustice and oppression.
Needless to say, this Gandhian viewpoint goes against our common instincts and moral
intuitions. In this sense, the application of the love ethic of Jesus Christ in the social sphere
requires not only tremendous moral discipline and fortitude, but also profound trust in the
redemptive power of love and in the salvific plan of God. This trust presupposes that the
unearned suffering of agapic nonviolent resisters can educate, transform and even convert one's
opponents. The aim is not simply to rely on the moral sense or conscience of the adversary but,
if need be, to force the adversary to develop such a sense and conscience. And if one concludes
that no such development is possible, then we simply must admit that we are doomed to an
unending cycle of violence and oppression-with the old victims of violence soon to become new
perpetrators of violence. Such a nightmare-an inevitable conclusion for Marx and Nietzsche in
King's view-radically calls into question the very power of the love ethic of Jesus Christ. For
King, if one accepts such a nightmare, then only self-destruction awaits us. To accept such a
view-for individuals, groups or nations-is to acquire and preserve "power without compassion,
might without morality, and strength without sight."
The last major resource for King's thought was American civil religion-that complex web of
religious ideals of deliverance and salvation and political ideals of freedom, democracy and
equality that constitute the evolving collective selfdefinition of America. This first new nation-
born liberal, born modern and born bourgeois-gave birth to a grand social experiment
unprecedented in human his tory. Its Declaration of Independence constituted, for King, a great
moral event and document. King's appropriation and interpretation of American civil religion
led him creatively to extend the tradition of American jeremiads-a tradition of public exhortation
that joins social criticisms of America to moral renewal and calls America back to its founding
ideals of democracy, freedom and equality. King was convinced that, despite the racism of the
founding fathers, the ideals of America were sufficient if only they were taken seriously in
practice. Therefore, Kings condemnation of and lament for America's hypocrisy and oppression
of poor whites, indigenous peoples, Latinos and black people was put forward in the name of
reaffirming America's mission of embodying democracy, freedom and equality. King did not
support and affirm the bland American dream of comfortable living and material prosperity.
Rather, he put forward his own dreamgrounded and refined in the black church experience,
supplemented by liberal Christianity and implemented by Gandhian methods of nonviolent
resistancerooted in the American ideals of democracy, freedom and equality.
King's thought remains a challenge to us principally in that he accented the anticolonial, anti-
imperialist and antiracist consequences of taking seriously the American ideals of democracy,
freedom and equality. He never forgot that America was born out of revolutionary revolt and
subversive rebellion against British colonialism and imperialism and that although much of
white America viewed the country as the promised land, black slaves saw it as Egypt, that just
as Europe's poor huddled masses were attracted to America, the largest black mass movement
(led by Marcus Garvey) was set on leaving America! Through his prophetic Christian lens, King
saw just how far America had swerved away from its own revolutionary past. In its support of


--- PAGE 379 ---
counterrevolution in Vietnam, Guatemala, Colombia, Jamaica and South Africa-and today we
can add Chile, Nicaragua and South Korea-the United States betrayed its own ideals. King
acutely observed in 1968:
The greatest irony and tragedy of all is that our nation, which initiated so much of the
revolutionary spirit of the modern world, is now cast in the mold of being an arch anti-
revolutionary. We are engaged in a war that seems to turn the clock of history back and
perpetuate white colonialism.
King's universal and egalitarian religious and moral commitments, as well as his historical
consciousness, led him to internationalize the American ideals of democracy, freedom and
equality and thereby measure not only domestic policies, but also U.S. foreign policy by these
ideals. And he found both sets of policies wanting. He knew some progress had been made-yet
so much more progress was needed, and even present gains could be reversed, as we have
witnessed in the past few years. Regarding the domestic front, King proclaimed: "If the prob lem
[of injustice to the poor and blacks] is not solved, America will be on the road to its self
destruction." And on the eve of his murder, he again warned regarding the international scene:
"And also in the human rights revolution, if something isn't done, and in a hurry, to bring the
colored peoples of the world out of their long years of poverty, their long years of hurt and
neglect, the whole world is doomed."
The unique status and legacy of Martin Luther King, Jr., is that, as a black Baptist minister, he
embodies the best of American Christianity; as an organic intellectual, he exemplifies the best of
the life of the mind involved in public affairs; as a proponent of nonviolent resistance, he holds
out the only slim hope for social sanity in a violence-ridden world; as an American prophet, he
commands the respect even of those who opposed him; and as an egalitarian internationalist, he
inspires all oppressed peoples around the world who struggle for democracy, freedom and
equality. What manner of man was he, this child and product of the black church open enough to
learn from others and rooted enough in his own tradition to grow, who now belongs to the nation
and the world-a nation and world still "not able to bear all his words" even as they try to honor
him?
SOURCE: "Martin Luther King, Jr.: Prophetic Christian as Organic Intellectual," Prophetic Fragments
(Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1988), pp. 3-12. An address delivered at a
King symposium at the U.S. Capitol, October 1986.


--- PAGE 380 ---
S U B V E R S I V E JOY AND R E V O L U T I O N A R Y 
PATIENCE I N BLACK C H R I S T I A N I T Y
I wrote this piece for a French audience. It highlights the tragic elements of Afro-American
Christianity and the liminal dimensions of black music. I see in retrospect that in 1984 my
struggle with the tragicomic character of black life and the human predicament was central to my
work.
PROFOUND PREOCCUPATION WITH THE Christian gospel is a distinctive feature of Afro-
American culture. This near obsession with the "good news" proclaimed by Jesus of Nazareth is
rooted in the unique Afro-American encounter with the modern world. And like every
understanding of the gospel, the black Christian perspective is shaped by a particular history and
culture.
The trauma of the slave voyage from Africa to the New World and the EuroAmerican attempt
systematically to strip Africans of their languages, cultures and religions produced a black
experience of the absurd. This state of "natal alien- ation"-in which Africans had no right to their
past or progeny-prevented widespread transmittance of tradition to American-born Africans.
Such alienation was more pervasive in the United States than in other parts of the New World
principally because of a low ratio of blacks to whites, which facilitated more frequent and
intense black-white interaction. Only 4.5 percent of all Africans imported to the New World
came to North America, though an incredibly high rate of slave reproduction (or induced
breeding) soon quadrupled this percentage figure. Therefore second- and third-generation
Africans in the United States made sense of and gave meaning to their predicament without an
immediate relation to African worldviews and customs.
With the slow but sure "death of the African gods," many blacks creatively appropriated the
Christian gospel peddled by religious dissenters in American life, that is, by Methodists and
Baptists. The evangelical outlook of these denominations stressed the conversion experience,
equality of all people before God and in stitutional autonomy. The conversion experience often
resembled African novitiate rites in which intense emotional investment and ecstatic bodily
behavior signified vital faith. This experience equalized the status of all before God, thereby
giving the slaves a special self-identity and self-esteem in stark contrast with the inferior roles
imposed upon them in American society. Institutional autonomy ensured black control over the
central organization in the Afro-American community-a crucial characteristic that sets blacks in
the United States apart from other New World Africans in Catholic Latin America and the
Anglican Caribbean.
The black interpretation of the Christian gospel accented the tragedy in the struggle for
freedom and the freedom in a tragic predicament. The African slaves' search for collective
identity could find historical purpose in the exodus of Israel out of slavery and personal meaning
in the bold identification ofJesus Christ with the lowly. Furthermore, the slaves empathized with
the senseless persecution of Job and the deep despair of Ecclesiastes. Afro-American
Christianity is Christocentric to the core-yet Jesus Christ is not simply understood as an agent of
deliverance, but also a human exemplar of pain and agony. The crucified Christ looms as large


--- PAGE 381 ---
as the risen Christ.
The conception of freedom prevalent in Afro-American Christianity possesses three
dimensions: the existential, the social and the eschatological. Existential freedom is a mode of
being-in-the-world that resists dread and despair. It embodies an ecstatic celebration of human
existence without affirming prevailing reality. Like many pagan religions, this celebration
consists of a rejoicing in the mere fact of being alive; yet like Christianity, it contains a critical
disposition toward the way the world is.
Existential freedom in black Christianity flows from the kinetic orality and affective
physicality inherited from West African cultures and religions. This fullfledged acceptance of
the body deems human existence a source of joy and gaiety. Physical participation and bodily
involvement in religious rituals epitomizes this kind of freedom. In short, black Christianity has
a strong Dionysian element.
The tension and anxiety produced by the harsh conditions of oppression accentuates this
Dionysian aspect. Rhythmic singing, swaying, dancing, preaching, talking and walking-all
features of black life-are weapons of struggle and survival. They not only release pressures and
desperation, they also constitute bonds of solidarity and sources for individuality. For example,
the famous loud "cry" of black religious and secular singers or the guttural "shout" of preachers
are simultaneously groans of hurt, acts of communal catharsis and stylizations of unique vocal
techniques. The heartfelt groans acknowledge the deplorable plight of a downtrodden people.
The cathartic acts provide emotional and physical relief from the daily scars of humiliation and
degradation. The individual stylistic vocals assert the sense of "somebodiness" in a situation that
denies one's humanity.
The first artistic gift of Afro-Americans to the world-the spirituals-exemplify existential
freedom in action. At the level of form, these "sorrow songs" contain subtle rhythmic elements
alongside brooding melodies. They invoke deep passions not of self-pity or self hatred, but of
lament and hope. The spirituals give artistic form to the frustrations and aspirations of a battered
people constantly under siege with few human allies. The lyrical focus is often the liberating
power of God, but the stylistic forms stress the self-invested moan, the risky falsetto and the
nuanced syncopation. Often confused with mere circumlocution and repetition. the lyrics and
styles of the spirituals directly confront existential dread and despair with the armor of vocal
virtuosity, rhythmic facility and faith in God. Subsequent developments such as the blues, jazz
and gospel music may reject or revise the Christian commitment, vocalize instruments and add
more complex rhythms, but the cultural crucible of such developments rests in the distinct
musical articulation of Afro-American Christianity.
Religion, rhythm and rhetoric have been the three spheres in which Afro-American existential
freedom has taken root. Oppression excluded other areas. Black preaching of the gospel is
rhythmic, cathartic and full of moans and groans. Black rhythm is rooted in religiosity, liminality
and full of call and response. And the gospel is understood in terms of existential self-
involvement, moral flexibility and political improvisation.
The social dimension of the freedom predominant in black Christianity does not primarily


--- PAGE 382 ---
concern political struggle, but rather cultural solidarity. The politics of the black church is highly
ambiguous, with a track record of widespread opportunism. Yet the cultural practices of the
black church embody a basic realitysustained black solidarity in the midst of a hostile society.
Black Christianity is not merely a reaction to white exclusion; rather, it is a distinct culture that
revels in its own uniqueness. This uniqueness-displayed in black existential freedom-is the mark
of black identity and a guide for future black church development. Black people do not attend
churches, for the most part, to find God, but rather to share and expand together the rich heritage
they have inherited. This heritage, sustained by close familial relationships and friendships,
evolves around a personal dependence on God that facilitates a communal fellowship. The
common black argument for belief in God is not that it is logical or reasonable, but rather that
such belief is requisite for one's sanity and for entree to the most uplifting sociality available in
the black community.
The eschatological aspect of freedom in black Christianity is the most difficult to grasp. It is
neither a glib hope for a pie-in-the-sky heaven nor an apocalyptic aspiration that awaits world
destruction. Rather, it is a hope-laden articulation of the tragic quality of everyday life of a
culturally degraded, politically oppressed and racially coerced labor force. Black Christian
eschatology is anchored in the tragic realism of the Old Testament wisdom literature and the
proclamation of a coming kingdom by Jesus Christ. Anthropologists have observed that there is a
relative absence of tragic themes in the ancient oral narratives of West Africa. Is it no accident
that the black understanding of the gospel stresses this novel motif, the utterly tragic character of
life and history?
Yet the black Christian conception differs from more traditional tragic perspectives. It
promotes a tragic sense of life that affirms the workings of evil forces beyond human control
while promoting struggle against particular forms of evil in the world. In sharp contrast to
notions of tragedy that yield conservative politics, the black Christian tragic sense of life focuses
on resistance and opposition in the here and now against overwhelming odds. The regulative
ideal for such resistance is a kingdom beyond history, but this kingdom is ultimately brought
about by divine intervention. So this tragic sense of life, with deferred triumph, vastly differs
from either Greek conceptions of tragedy or modern notions of the tragic vision.
Tragedy is, of course, a literary form inherited from the Greeks. It usually entails an initial act
of shame or horror that violates the moral order. This act results in conscious and intense
suffering that yields some transcendent knowledge of what it is to be human. This knowledge-
often an affirmation of the ultimate worthwhileness of life and a perception of the objective
character of the moral order-is the only saving grace for the hero, who is crushed by the
intractable limits of his or her situation. The basic assumptions are that there is a moral order,
that suffering is meaningful and that heroic effort is noble. For black Christianity, this
perspective is unacceptable because its mode of closure elevates Fate and its positive form of
knowledge remains contemplative.
The modern tragic vision is a truncated version of Greek tragedy. The purpose of suffering is
rendered problematic and the knowledge resulting from suffering is suspect. The very notion of a
moral order is called into question and displaced by a preoccupation with the consciousness


--- PAGE 383 ---
occupying the suffering, the details of the context in which the suffering occurs and the ways in
which suffering is evaded or tolerated. This viewpoint has little persuasive power for black
Christianity in that its rejection of any end or aim of human existence discourages purposeful
struggle, especially communal and collective struggle. Such a viewpoint tends to presuppose
luxury in that it may stimulate the ironic consciousness of a declining petite bourgeoisie, but it
spells suicide for the downtrodden. Like Greek tragedy, it may generate profound insights, but it
is disenabling for degraded and oppressed peoples.
The tragic sense of life in black Christian eschatology views suffering as a stepping-stone to
liberation. Yet liberation does not eradicate the suffering in itself. Therefore suffering is
understood only as a reality to resist, an actuality to oppose. It can neither be submitted to in
order to gain contemplative knowledge nor reified into an object of ironic attention. Rather, it is
a concrete state of affairs that produces discernible hurt and pain, hence requiring action of some
sort. Black Christian eschatology focuses on praxis against suffering, not reflection upon it,
personal and collective resistance to suffering, not a distancing from it. And ultimately, with the
aid of divine intervention, suffering is overcome.
The radically comic character of Afro-American life-the pervasive sense of play, laughter and
ingenious humor of blacks-flows primarily from the profound Afro-American Christian
preoccupation with the tragedy in the struggle for freedom and the freedom in a tragic
predicament. This comic release is the black groan made gay. Yet this release is neither escapist
nor quietistic. Rather, it is engaged gaiety, subversive joy and revolutionary patience, which
works for and looks to the kingdom to come. It is utopian in that it breeds a defiant
dissatisfaction with the present and encourages action. It is tragic in that it tempers exorbitant
expectations. This perspective precludes political disillusionment and its product, misanthropic
nihilism.
The gospel in Afro-America lauds Calvinistic calls to transform the world, yet shuns
puritanical repression. It promotes the Pascalian wager, yet transcends Jansenist self-obsession.
Life is viewed as both a carnival to enjoy and a battlefield on which to fight. Afro-American
Christianity promotes a gospel that empowers black people to survive and struggle in a God-
forsaken world.
SOURCE: From Prophetic F,a4nteats (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans publishing Co.,
1988), pp. 161-165. Originally appeared in Le Monde Diplontatique, October 1984.


--- PAGE 384 ---



--- PAGE 385 ---
CRITICAL REFLECTIONS ON ART
This essay appeared in Art Forum in 1989. It attempted to address the crisis in art criticism as
the tides of new historicism and poststructuralism escalated. My aim was to preserve the
integrity of art, to keep track of its powers in academic discussions of its historical contexts and
political uses. I also had a chance to inject Harold Rosenberg, the powerful art critic of days
past, into the discussion.
Knowledge of art is not enough to make one a critic, any more than knowledge of art is enough to
make one an artist. The student who turns to art in order to avoid reflecting upon his condition may
become a specialist, a scholar, a connoisseur, but not a critic. For the latter exists through curiosity,
indignation, and the widest practice of intellectual freedom.
-HAROLD ROSENBERG
THE DAYS OF ART criticism's eclectic and accessible generalists-like Clement Greenberg and
Harold Rosenberg-are long gone. Certainly this has something to do with the increasing
professionalization of the practice of criticism in general, for the funneling of the creative energy
of young critics through academic channels has tended to produce specialists with little sense of
(or interest in) synthetic perspectives. And needless to say, this academicization is related in
complex ways to the commercialization of art, the ubiquitous commodification of culture in our
day.
Yet even given the deadening potential of these processes in all fields, art criticism has
lagged behind the theoretical moves made in other branches of cultural criticism. In recent years,
there simply have not emerged art critics who have commanded serious intellectual attention on
a par with their colleagues in the literary arena. The predominance and preeminence of the grand
art historians (E. H. Gombrich, for example) in the highbrow humanist mode has cast a long and
troublesome shadow. While literary critics, from the beginning of our century, could draw
energy from the erudite analyses of T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound, springboards that freed them
(from old historicist encumbrances) to leap boldly into the Modernist literature of their own day,
art critics like Roger Fry, Wynd ham Lewis and Herbert Read remained tethered, despite their
admirable attempts to engage with the present, to a backward-looking glance. It is no accident
that many noteworthy nonacademic art critics-those who wrote for a wider public, not only for
"trade" journals-took their inspiration from Eliot.
This problem was exacerbated after World War II, as the center of the art world shifted from
Paris to New York-to a country whose Puritan origins and instrumentalist bent ill equipped its
intelligentsia to take painting, photography and sculpture seriously. It is not surprising, then, that
the first generation of formidable modern art critics in America were recent European
immigrants or the products of immigrant subcultures-like Greenberg and Rosenberg. And these
critics looked to European resources-Trotsky, Freud, Rimbaud, Baudelaire, Picasso-to grasp the
new developments in postwar American art.


--- PAGE 386 ---
The entrance of art critics into the academy produced a generation crippled by a collective
inferiority complex vis-a-vis the scholarly humanist tradition of oldstyle art historians, art critics
who stood by in utter amazement at the self-confidence of post-Eliot literary critics. And since
the slow demise of New Criticism, the brief moment of Northrop Frye's myth criticism and the
French invasion of Jacques Derrida and Michel Foucault in literary criticism, art critics have
principally played catch-up. Yet seeking to overthrow, or to undermine, the received tenet that
the work of art is, at some fundamental level, independent of the social, political, psychological
world in which its creator operates (certainly a worthy goal), the basic thrust of contemporary
art criticism has been to deaestheticize (or historicize, sociologize or psychologize) art objects
in order to render them worldly. Hence the major battles in aesthetic theory have been those that
pit Kantians of various stripes against different kinds of Hegelians, Marxists or Freudians. These
debates have been and can be fascinating and illuminating-but in the end they prove simply
parochial and provincial.
This is so because they presuppose contexts and consensuses that no longer exist. The
received modem world of differentiated autonomous spheres, a teleology based on Eurocentric
notions of history, determining productive forces and ego-centered subjects-once legitimate
assumptions from which to proceed-has now given way to a world characterized by global
commodification; postcolonial and New World histories; nationalist, religious, and xenophobic
revivals; and hybrid subjects with shattered superegos. Thus we must now proceed as did Kant,
Hegel, Marx, and Freud in their day, namely, by acknowledging the ways in which the very act
of criticism must construct the new contexts and consensuses in which we should operate. As
Rosenberg warned in "Criticism and Its Premises:"
Unless critical discussion achieves the intellectual scale of our revolutionary epoch, it cannot be
taken seriously. In practical fact, current writing on art consists largely of opportunistic
sponsorship of trivial novelties and of assertions of per sonal tastes for which support is sought
in pedantic references to art history... As a result, art criticism today is looked down upon by
other forms of critical thinking as an unintelligible jargon immersed in an insignificant
aestheticism.'
Young art critics today would, no doubt, contest Rosenberg's claim by trotting out their new
historicism and discursive materialism, inspired by Foucault, Clifford Geertz, Julia Kristeva and
others. And one does find in the recent work of art critics obligatory appeals to history, society,
culture and the role of power. Yet I suggest that this new wave of art criticism is itself another
form of aestheticism in disguise. This is so not only because the ironic consciousness that
informs this decentering, deconstructing and dismantling of highbrow European art objects and
perspectives is the reflection, in part, of an aestheticizing of art history through the cloudy lens of
liberal anti-imperialist guilt, but, more important, because it refuses to give an account of how
the present historical context shapes its own "historicizing" efforts. If most of our art critics
offered such an account, it would be quite apparent that they are actually recycling new forms of
Eurocentric parochialism and provincialism in the name of a professional avant-gardism-and
one far removed from much of the interesting work of contemporary artists themselves.
The fervent post-Modernism debate in art criticism is a good example of how new


--- PAGE 387 ---
historicists, textualists and materialists wax eloquent about power and subordination, yet
provide no analyses of their own deployment of power in regard to what their debate excludes
or is silent about. Robert Storr rightly notes:
To be sure, much postmodernist critical inquiry has centered precisely on the issues of
"difference" and "otherness." On the purely theoretical plane the exploration of these concepts
has produced some important results, but in the absence of any sustained research into what
artists of color and others outside the mainstream might be up to, such discussions became
rootless instead of radical.2
We might add that the rootlessness-that is, the ahistorical character-of the postModernism debate
dovetails neatly with aestheticist "weightlessness "-namely, the failure to examine who bears the
cost of the "absences" present in one's discourses and in one's exercise of authority and power.
Part of the problem here is simply the rather racially segregated and discriminatory practices
of the art world-much more so than the literary world-which make it much riskier for critics to
take seriously art outside the white mainstream. Yet the aesthetic historicism of the new wave of
art criticism-which refuses to examine the operations of power at the present historical juncture
and what role their own ironic stance is playing in this juncture-tends to reduce this kind of
demand to mere moral finger-pointing and pleas for inclusion (as does the belletristic stance of
"give-us-back-the-good-old-days" critics like Hilton Kramer).
My point here is not to trash the new historicists-they are often insightful and instructive.
Rather, my aim is to emphasize that to be a critic is to do more than reinterpret isolated
historical moments with dazzling descriptions or to cull other disciplines for stunning
juxtapositions of cultural and artistic practices. To be a critic is to muster the available
resources to respond to the crisis of one's own time-in light of one's view of the past.
The challenge is a formidable one. Walking the tightrope between the Scylla of aestheticism
and the Charybdis of reductionism is difficult. And those few critics who pull it off do so when
they are summoned by the power of the art objects that engross their curiosity, not when they
follow the dictates of even the most subtle methodology. In this sense, evaluation is never an end
in itself (to preserve some eternal canon or further a political cause), but rather an integral by-
product of a profound understanding of an art object, of how its form and content produce the
multiple effects they do and of the role it plays in shaping and being shaped by the world of
ideas, political conflicts, cultural clashes and the personal turmoils of its author and audience.
The future of art criticism, then, lies in a more thorough turn toward history, with each step in
this turn making possible the next. First, we must require of ourselves a more ambitious
structural analysis of the present cultural situation (embracing a wholesale inquiry into both the
personal and the institutional operations of power within the academy, the mass media and the
museum and gallery networks). Only then can we focus on the specific art object, according
creativity its integrity while conceiving of each artwork's distinctive form and style as a
response to the cultural present and to past artistic styles. And finally, in examining how
significant art objects (those that are accorded stature in the articulated canon and those that are
not) offer insights into the human condition in specific times and places, but also shape our view


--- PAGE 388 ---
of the current cultural crisis, we will hear the silences and see through the blind spots that exist
alongside those insights. Art criticism is art history, but much intellectual baggage must be shed
if we are to have a criticism commensurate with the complexities and challenges of our epoch, if
we are to make history as well as to mine it.
SOURCE: Artforum, November 1989, "Critical Reflections on Art." by Cornel West.


--- PAGE 389 ---
H O R A C E PIPPIN'S C H A L L E N G E TO A R T 
C R I T I C I S M
Music often overshadows painting in American culture, and this is especially so in the black
American arts world. So I jumped at the opportunity to write about a major black painter,
Horace Pippin, when Judith Stein asked me to contribute to her cata- loguefor the Pippin
exhibition at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts. In this essay, I situate Pppin within the
Emersonian grain of American culture and use his rich work to reevaluate the Harlem
Renaissance and elevate his artistic soul mates like Sterling Brown and Bessie Smith. This
piece also exemples my belief that superb art-refined, sophisticated wrestlings with form and
content in serious depictions of the world-is to be found among everyday folk.
THE ART OF HORACE Pippin poses grave challenges to how we appreciate and assess
artworks in late twentieth-century America. A serious examination of Pippin's place in art
history leads us into the thicket of difficult issues that now beset art critics. What does it mean to
talk about high art and popular culture? Do these rubrics help us to evaluate and understand
visual artifacts? Is folk art an illuminating or oxymoronic category? Can art be more than
personal, racial or national therapy in American culture? Has the commercialization of art
rendered it a mere commodity in our market-driven culture? Can the reception of the work of a
black artist transcend mere documentary, social pleading or exotic appeal?
These complex questions often yield Manichaean responses-self-appointed defenders of high
culture who beat their breasts in the name of craftsmanship and quality, and self-styled avant-
gardists who call for critique and relevance. The former tend to use the monumental touchstones
of the recent past-especially those of high modernism-to judge the present. The latter reject
monumentalist views of art history even as they sometimes become highly paid celebrities in the
art world. Pippin's work shows this debate to be a sterile exchange that overlooks much of the
best art in the American grain: high-quality craftsmanship of art objects that disclose the
humanity of people whose plight points to flaws in American society. Pippin's paintings are
neither monumentalist in the modernist sense nor political in a postmodernist way. Rather, they
are expressions of a rich Emersonian tradition in American art that puts a premium on the
grandeur in the com monplace, ordinary and quotidian lives of people. This tradition promotes
neither a glib celebration of everyday experiences nor a naive ignorance of the tragic aspects of
our condition. Rather, Pippin's Emersonian sensibility affirms what John Dewey dubbed
"experience in its integrity."' Pippin's so-called folk art boldly exclaims with Emerson: "I ask
not for the great, the remote, the romantic; what is doing in Italy or Arabia; what is Greek art, or
Provencal minstrelsy; I embrace the common, I explore and sit at the feet of the familiar, the low.
Give me insight into day and you may have the antique and future worlds."2
This artistic affirmation of everyday experiences of ordinary people is anti-elitist, but not
anti-intellectual-that is, it shuns a narrow mentality that downplays the joys and sufferings of the
degraded and despised, yet it heralds high standards for how these joys and sufferings are
represented in art. Pippin's paintings-as a grand instance of the Emersonian tradition in
American art-attempt to democratize (not denigrate) the aesthetic by discerning and displaying
tragedy and comedy in the ordinary experiences of common folk. In this way, his work echoes


--- PAGE 390 ---
the Emersonian sensibility of John Dewey:
In order to understand the aesthetic in its ultimate and approved forms, one must begin with it in
the raw; in the events and scenes that hold the attentive eye and ear of man, arousing his interest
and affording hint enjoyment as he looks and listens.... The sources of art in human experience
will be learned by him who sees how the tense grace of the ball-player infects the onlooking
crowd; who notes the delight of the housewife in tending her plants, and the intent interest of her
goodman in tending the patch of green in front of the house; the zest of the spectator in poking the
wood burning on the hearth and in watching the darting flames and crumbling coals.3
We see such precious moments in Pippin's Harmonizing (1944), with black men joyfully singing
on the block, or in Domino Players (1943), with black women enjoying a domino game. We also
realize that Pippin's link to Abraham Lincoln is not so much a link to the president as
emancipator of black people or to the president as hypocrite, but rather to Abe as the folk hero
who is believed to have said that God must have loved common folk since he made so many of
them. Abe Lincoln, The Good Samaritan (1943) fuses this Emersonian sensibility of Lincoln
with a Christian theme of concern for the disadvantaged ("Let Christianity speak ever for the
poor and the low" ).$
Yet Pippin's Emersonian practice-which sidesteps the sterile "quality versus diversity"
debate-lends itself to establishmentarian abuse. A genuine artistic concern with the common
easily appears as an aspiration for authenticity-especially for an art establishment that puts a
premium on the "primitive" and hungers for the exotic. The relative attention and support of the
self-taught Pippin at the ex pense of academically trained black artists reflects this
establishmentarianism abuse. This situation is captured by Richard J. Powell in his pioneering
book Homecoming: The Art and Life of William H. Johnson, when he discusses the response of
Alain Locke and a local critic to Johnson's new "primitive" works in the summer of 1940 at the
Exhibition of the Art of the American Negro (1851-1940) for the American Negro Exposition in
Chicago:
For both the reviewer in Chicago and Alain Locke, Johnson's flirtation with images and forms
that suggested naivete was symptomatic of the art world's thencurrent fascination with self-
trained "daubers," "scribblers," and "whittlers," whose creative lives had been spent (for the
most part) outside of the art world proper. One of the most celebrated of these folk artists, black
American painter Horace Pippin, worked in a somewhat similar manner to Johnson, with oil
paints applied in a thick, impasto consistency, and visual narratives punctuated by strong, solid
areas of pure color. Schooled and dedicated artists like Johnson must have felt a little envious of
these self-taught painters such as Pippin who, in only a few years, had several museum and
gallery exhibitions to their credit.
As Johnson's past comments about primitivism and folk culture demonstrate, he acknowledged
the innate power and spirituality that emanated from the art of common people and had decided
to allow that part of his own folk heritage to assert itself in his work. Although no less eager to
have his own work seen and appreciated, Johnson no doubt accepted the broad appeal of those
folk artists then deservedly enjoying the art world's spotlight.'


--- PAGE 391 ---
This institutional dilemma regarding the dominant white reception of Pippin's work raises
crucial issues about the trials and tribulations of being a black artist in America. In Pippin's
case, being a self-taught black artist in America in the Emersonian tradition complicates the
matter. On the one hand, a professional envy- among highly trained black (and white) artists is
understandable, given the limited slots of visibility-and given the history of racist exclusion of
black artists in the art world. On the other hand, the absence of professional training does not
mean that there is no quality in Pippin's art. Even Alain Locke, the elitist dean of African
American art in mid-century America, described Pippin as "a real and rare genius, combining
folk quality with artistic maturity so uniquely as almost to defy classification.."'' Yet the relation
of the politics of artistic visibility to the quality of visible artworks requires critical scrutiny. As
James Clifford rightly notes, "The fact that rather abruptly, in the space of a few decades, a large
class of nonWestern artifacts came to be redefined as art is a taxonomic shift that requires
critical historical discussion, not celebration.."' Clifford does not have Pippin's work in mind
here-especially since Pippin's art was recognized as such, as seen in the inclusion of four of his
works in a Museum of Modern Art exhibit called Masters of Popular Painting in 1938.8 But
Pippin's works can easily be tarred with the brush of "primitivism," even "exoticism,"
highlighting his lack of schooling and his subject matter, rather than the quality of his art.
In her discussion of the Primitivism show at the Museum of Modern Art in 1984, Michele
Wallace shows how these issues surrounding the reception of Pippin's work remain alive in our
time:
Black criticism was blocked from the discussions of Modernism, which are defined as
exclusively white by an intricate and insidious cooperation of art galleries, museums and
academic art history, and also blocked from any discussion of "primitivism," which has been
colonized beyond recognition in the space of the international and now global museum. At this
juncture one is compelled to ask, "Is multiculturalism, as it is being institutionally defined,
occupying the same space as `primitivism' in relationship to Post-modernism?" For me, a
response to such a question would need to include a careful scrutiny of the history of black
popular culture and race relations, and account for the sexualization of both, thus defining the
perimeters of a new knowledge which I can only name, at this point, as the problem of the visual
in Afro-American culture.9
Is a black artist like Pippin caught in a catch-22 dilemma-unjustly excluded owing to his
blackness qua "inferior" (artist) or suspiciously included due to his blackness qua "primitive"
(artist)? Is this especially so for those black artists in the Emersonian tradition, such as Sterling
Brown in poetry or Bessie Smith in music? These questions get at the heart of what it is to be a
black artist in America.
To be a black artist in America is to be caught in what I have called elsewhere "the modern
black diasporan problematic of invisibility and namelessness." 10 This problematic requires
that black people search for validation and recognition in a culture in which white-supremacist
assaults on black intelligence, ability, beauty and character circumscribe such a search. Pippin's
example is instructive in that, unlike the other two celebrated mid-century black artists in this
country-Richmond Barthe and Jacob Lawrence-Pippin lived and functioned outside the


--- PAGE 392 ---
cosmopolitan art world. Like the early blues and jazz artists in American music, Pippin's art
remained rooted in black folk culture, yet also appealed to the culture industry of his day. He
indeed gained significant validation and recognition from the white art establishment-but at what
personal and artistic cost? Do all American artists in our market culture bear similar costs?
Unlike William H. Johnson and Beauford Delaney, Pippin did not go mad. But his wife did
spend her last months in a mental institution after a breakdown. Pippin did drink heavily-yet we
do not know whether this was related directly to his art career. So in regard to the personal
costs, our answer remains open-ended. The artistic cost paid by Pippin is best summed up in this
brief characterization of his career by a leading art historian in 1956:
Horace Pippin (1888-1946), an unschooled Negro of West Chester, Pennsylvania, unfitted for
labor by a war wound, turned to painting. "Pictures just come to my mind," he explained, "and I
tell my head to go ahead," an explanation of his innocent art which needs no further comment.
His discovery and exploitation as a painter in 1937 did not change his art, although it was too
much for him as a human being. I I
This view of Pippin as an "innocent autodidact" chimes well with the image of the black artist
lacking sophistication and subtlety. We cannot deny the poignant simplicity of Pippin's art-yet
simplicity is neither simplistic nor sophomoric. Rather, Pippin's burden of being a black artist in
America required that he do battle with either primitivist designations or inferiority claims about
his art. This struggle is best seen in the words of one of Pippin's black artistic contemporaries,
William H. Johnson, quoted by the distinguished abstract sculptor of African descent, Martin
Puryear: "I myself feel like a primitive man-like one who is at the same time both a primitive
and a cultured painter."12
This sense of feeling like a primitive and modern person-artist is one form of the black mode
of being in a white-supremacist world-a world in which W. E. B. Du Bois claimed that the black
person and artist is
born with a veil, and gifted with second-sight in this American world,-a world which yields him
no true self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself through the revelation of the other
world. It is a peculiar sensation, this doubleconsciousness, this sense always looking at one's
self through the eyes of others, of measuring one's soul by the tape of a world that looks on in
amused contempt and pity. One ever feels his twoness,-an American, a Negro; two souls, two
thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged
strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
The history of the American Negro is the history of this strife-this longing to attain self-
conscious manhood, to merge his double self into a better and truer self. In this merging he
wishes neither of the older selves to be lost. He would not Africanize America, for America has
too much to teach the world and Africa. He would not bleach his Negro soul in a flood of white
Americanism, for he knows that Negro blood has a message for the world. He simply wishes to
make it possible for a man to be both a Negro and an American, without being cursed and spit
upon by his fellows, without having the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in his face.13


--- PAGE 393 ---
This classic characterization of being black in xenophobic America means that black artists are
always suspect for not measuring up to rigorous standards or made to feel exotic in a white
world that often associates blackness with bodily energy, visceral vitality and sexual vibrancy.
Pippin's art is a powerful expression of black spiritual strivings to attain self-conscious
humanhood-to believe truly one is fully human and to believe truly that whites can accept one's
black humanity. This utopian endeavor indeed is crippled by black self-hatred and white
contempt, yet the underlying fire that sustains it is not extinguished by them. Rather, this fire is
fueled by the dogged fortitude of ordinary black folk who decide that if they cannot be truly free,
they can, at least, be fully themselves. Pippin's art portrays black people as "fully themselves"-
that is, as they are outside of the white normative gaze that requires elaborate masks and intricate
posturing for black survival and sanity. This does not mean that behind the masks one finds the
"real faces" of black folk or that beneath the posturing one sees the "true gestures" of black
bodies. Instead, Pippin's art suggests that black people within the white normative gaze wear
certain kinds of masks and enact particular kinds of postures, and outside the white normative
gaze wear other kinds of masks and enact different sorts of postures. In short, black people tend
to behave differently when they are "outside the white world"-though how they behave within
black spaces is shaped by their battles with self-hatred and white contempt.
As I noted earlier, Pippin's art reminds one of Sterling Brown's poetry or Bessie Smith's
music, in that all three artists reject the two dominant models of black art in the white world at
the time: black art as expressive of the "new Negro" and black art as protest. Instead, they build
on the major paradigm of black art in the black. world: black art as healing, soothing yet
humorously unsettling illuminations of what it means to be human in black skin in America.
Pippin's work appears a decade or so after the celebrated Harlem Renaissance. This
fascinating moment in black culture remains a highly contested one in regard to what it was and
what it means. A renaissance is a rebirth by means of recovering a classical heritage heretofore
overlooked or ignored. Do the works of the major artists of the Harlem Renaissance-Countee
Cullen, Claude McKay, Nella Larsen, Jessie Fauset, Rudolf Fisher, Wallace Thurman, early
Aaron Douglas and others-engage in such a recovery? I think not. Instead of serious and
substantive attempts to recover the culturally hybrid heritage of black folk, we witnessed the
cantankerous reportage of a black, middle-class identity crisis. The Harlem Renaissance was not
so much a genuine renaissance, but rather a yearning for a renaissance aborted by its major
artists owing to a conscious distance from the very cultural creativity they desired. In this sense,
the Harlem Renaissance was a self-complimentary construct concocted by rising black middle-
class artistic figures to gain attention for their own anxieties at the expense of their in dividual
and social identities, and to acquire authority to impose their conceptions of legitimate forms of
black cultural productions on black America.
The dominant theme of romanticizing the "primitivism" of poor black folk and showing how
such "primitivism" fundamentally affects the plights and predicaments of refined and educated
black middle-class individuals (Claude McKay's best-seller Home to Harlem is paradigmatic
here) looms large in the Harlem Renaissance. This theme fits in well with the crisis in European
and American civilization after World War I. The war was the end of an epoch-an epoch
regulated by nineteenth-century illusions of inevitable progress and perennial stability for


--- PAGE 394 ---
emerging industrial societies. With the shattering of European self-confidence-as history is
viewed no longer as a train for smooth amelioration, but rather as Joyce's "nightmare" or Eliot's
"immense panorama of futility and anarchy"-ap- petites for "primitivism" were whetted. With the
rise of non-Western nationsJapan's victory over Russia (1905), revolutions in Persia (1905),
Turkey (1907), Mexico (1911), China (1912)-ferocious nationalisms appealed to
machismodriven myths of virility and vitality as Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points squared off
against Lenin's doctrine of national self-determination. The economic boom in the United States,
facilitated by economic expansionism abroad (especially the takeover of Latin American
markets from Britain after the war) and protectionism at home, ushered in mass communications
(radio, phonograph and talking film) and mass culture for the middle classes-a mass culture
already saturated with black cultural products. The great talents of George Gershwin, Jerome
Kern, Benny Goodman and Paul Whiteman rest in large part on the undeniable genius of Louis
Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey. Lastly, the great migration of black
people from the Jim and Jane Crow South to the industrial urban centers of the North produced
not only social dislocation, cultural disorientation and personal disillusionment; it also
contributed to the makings of a massive political movement (Marcus Garvey's Universal Negro
Improvement Association) and the refinement of the great black cultural renaissance actually
taking place far removed from most of the Harlem Renaissance artists and criticsthe evolution of
jazz in New Orleans, St. Louis, Memphis and Chicago.
Like its European counterpart in France (the Negritude movement led by Leopold Senghor),
the Harlem Renaissance conceived of black art as the refined expressions of the new Negro. In
the exemplary text of the Harlem Renaissance, The New Negro (1925)-"its bible," as rightly
noted by Arnold Rampersad11-black art is conceived to be the imposition of form on the rich
substance of black folk culture. Influenced by the high modernisms of Europe and suspicious of
art forms already operative in black folk culture (e.g. blues, dance, sermon, sports-none of
which are examined in The New Negro) Locke states: "There is ample evidence of a New
Negro in the latest phases of social change and progress, but still more in the internal world of
the Negro mind and spirit. Here in the very heart of the folkspirit are the essential forces, and
folk interpretation is truly vital and representative only in terms of these.."1, These "essential
forces" of the folk, primitive, raw, coarse, and unrefined, require the skills of cultivated and
educated artists to disclose black life to the world.
In the only essay on jazz in The New Negro, J. A. Rogers's `Jazz at Home," this Lockean
aesthetic attitude is amplified:
Yet in spite of its present vices and vulgarizations, its sex informalities, its morally anarchic
spirit, jazz has a popular mission to perform. Joy after all, has a physical basis.... Moreover,
jazz with its mocking disregard for formality is a leveller and makes for democracy. The jazz
spirit, being primitive, demands more frankness and sincerity.... And so this new spirit of joy
and spontaneity may itself play the role of reformer. Where at present it vulgarizes, with more
wholesome growth in the future, it may on the contrary truly democratize. At all events, jazz is
rejuvenation, a recharging of the batteries of civilization with primitive new vigor. It has come
to stay, and they are wise, who instead of protesting against it, try to lift and divert it into nobler
channels.16


--- PAGE 395 ---
For Rogers, jazz is not a distinct art form with its own integrity and cultivated artists. Instead it
is a primitive energy in search of political funnels that will expand American democracy. In fact,
he claims that jazz is popular because, after the horrors of the war, "in its fresh joyousness men
found a temporary forgetfulness, infinitely less harmful than drugs or alcohol."" Locke would not
go this far in his therapeutic view of folk culture and his modernist conception of art-yet Locke
and Rogers agree that popular culture is not a place where art resides, but rather provides raw
material for sophisticated artists (with university pedigrees and usually white patrons) to create
expressions of the "New Negro."
Pippin's Emersonian sensibility rejects this highly influential view of black arta view that
shaped the crucial activities of the Harmon Foundation.'s And although Locke recognized
Pippin's genius in 1947, it is doubtful whether he would have in 1925.'`•' Like Sterling Brown or
Bessie Smith, Pippin is less concerned about expressing the sense of being a "New Negro" and
more focused on artistic rendering of the extraordinariness of ordinary black folk then and now.
The "New Negro" still seems too preoccupied with how black folk appear to the white
normative gaze, too obsessed with showing white people how sophisticated they are, how
worthy of white validation and recognition. For Pippin, such validation and recognition is fine,
yet only if it does not lead him to violate the integrity of his art or blind him to the rich
experiences of ordinary black folk while trying to peddle the black experience" to white
America.
The next dominant conception of black art as protest emerged after the collapse of the Harlem
Renaissance, principally owing to the depression. The great black literary artwork of protest
was Richard Wright's Native Son (1940). This conception of black art displaced the
sophisticated and cultivated New Negro with the outraged and angry Mad Negro. Gone were the
attempts to distance oneself from the uncouth, "primitive" black masses. In place of the
sentimental journeys behind the veil to see how black folk live and are, we got the pervasive
physical and psychic violence of black life turned outward to white America.
The irony of the view of black art as protest-as description of the inhumane circumstances of
much of black life and as heartfelt resistance to these circumstances-is that it is still preoccupied
with the white normative gaze, and it reduces black people to mere reactors to white power.
Pippin's Mr. Prejudice (1942) contains protest elements, yet it refuses to view the multilayered
character of black life as a reaction to the sick dictates of xenophobic America. Pippin's
Emersonian orientation refuses to cast art as a primary agent for social change or a central
medium for protest-even when he shares the values of those seeking such change or promoting
such protest. This kind of redemptive culturalism-the notion that culture can yield political
redemption-flies in the face of Pippin's view of black art as those ritualistic activities that heal
and soothe, generate laughter and unsettle dogmas with such style and form that they constitute
black ways of being human. To pursue such a conception of black art in a white world obsessed
with black incapacities and atavistic proclivities means to run the risk of falling into the traps of
"primitivism."
Nearly fifty years after his death, Pippin's art still reminds us of how far we have not come in
creating new languages and frameworks that do justice to his work, account for his narrow


--- PAGE 396 ---
receptions and stay attuned to the risks he took and the costs he paid. The Horace Pippin
exhibition (January 1994) courageously and meticulously mounted by the Pennsylvania Academy
of Fine Arts once again puts American art criticism on trial-not for its verdict on Horace Pippin,
but for how our understandings of Pippin's art force us to reconceive and reform the art world as
it now exists.
SOURCE: From KeepingFaitli: Pltilosojtlay and Race in America, by Cornel West, pp. 55-66, 295-
296. Copyright © 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc. Originally appeared in I Yell
My Heart: the Art of Horace Pippin (Universe publishing, 1993); copyright © Pennsylvania Academy
of the Fine Arts, Philadelphia, 1993.


--- PAGE 397 ---
RACE AND ARCHITECTURE
I spent more time on this essay than on any other piece in this volume-I worked on it for over
five years. I delivered earlier versions in architecture departments at Harvard, Princeton,
UCLA, Montreal and Chicago and incorporated critical responses to it. My fiends Darell Fields,
Kevin Fuller and Milton Curry at Appendix, the only journal of black architectural theory,
encouraged me to think about the connection between power/authority and architecture. I believe
I make crucial connections between black bodies and European ed/ces in this piece, yet I have
not been able to pursue this subject further. This essay was sheer fun to write.
THERE I S A NEW energy and excitement among the younger generation of architectural critics.
Theory is now fashionable, and interdisciplinary studies an absolute necessity. The next decade
promises to be a period of intellectual ferment in precincts once staid and serene.
Architecture-the "chained and fettered art"'-is the last discipline in the humanities to be
affected by the crisis of the professional and managerial strata in American society. This crisis
is threefold-that of political legitimacy, intellectual orientation and social identity. Like their
counterparts in critical legal studies in law schools, feminists, poststructuralists and Marxists in
universities and liberation theologians in seminaries, oppositional architectural critics are
turning to the works of Antonio Gramsci, Raymond Williams, Stuart Hall, Michel Foucault,
Edward Said, Sheila Rowbotham and other cultural critics to respond to this crisis. And though
we are in the embryonic stage of this response, intense interrogations of architectural practices
will deepen.
The political legitimacy of architecture is not a question of whether and why buildings should
be made. Rather, it has to do with how authority warrants or does not warrant the way in which
buildings are made. Architecture-viewed as both rigorous discipline (science) and poetic
buildings (art)-is often distinguished from other arts by its direct dependence on social
patronage and its obligation to stay in tune with the recent developments in technology.' Yet
architectural critics are reluctant to engage in serious analyses of the complex relations between
corporate firms, the state and architectural practices. The major fear is that of falling into the
trap of economic determinism-of reducing the grandeur of precious ar chitecture to the grub of
pecuniary avidity. And surely the forms, techniques and styles of architecture are not reducible
to the needs and interests of public or private patrons. But this deadly reductionist trap should
not discourage architectural critics from pursuing more refined investigations into how economic
and political power help shape how buildings are made-and not simply how they come to be.
Needless to say, Manfredo Tafuri's Architecture and Utopia: Design and Capitalist De-
velopinent (1973) is a move in this direction, yet even this work stays a bit too far removed from
the ground where detailed historical work should focus.
A plausible objection to this line of reasoning is that architectural critics do not have the
historical and analytical training to do such analyses. So it is better to leave this work to be done
by cultural historians and even economists. This objection leads us to the crucial issue of the
political legitimacy of architectural critics-namely, why are they trained as they are, how are
they reproduced, and what set of assumptions about history, economics, culture and art inform


--- PAGE 398 ---
the curriculum and faculties that educate them? Gone are the days of Montgomery Schuyler,
George Shepperd Chappell and the great Lewis Mumford. The professionalization of
architectural criticism-which has its own traps of insular jargon, codes and etiquette for the
initiated-requires genealogies of the changing frameworks and paradigms that become dominant
at particular historical moments and of how these frameworks and paradigms yield insights and
blindnesses for those who work within them. These genealogies should highlight not simply the
dynamic changes of influential critical perspectives in the academy, but also how these
perspectives shape and are shaped by the actual building of edifices and how these perspectives
relate to other significant cultural practices, for instance, painting in Le Corbusier's early work
and populism in Venturi's thought. What Aaron Betsky calls "the trivialization of the
architectural profession" and James Wines dubs its "failure of vision"3 must be unpacked by
means of structural and institutional analyses of what goes into molding architects and their
critics.
In this way, the issue of the political legitimacy of architecture is posed neither in a nostalgic,
moralistic manner that translates the will of an epoch into space, nor in a sophomoric, nihilistic
mode that promotes an easy and lucrative despair. Rather, the challenge is to try to understand
architectural practices as power-laden cultural practices that are deeply affected by larger
historical forces, for instance, markets, the state, the academy, but also as practices that have
their own specificity and social effects-even if they are not the kind of effects one approves of.
This is why the kind of Miesian nostalgia of Roger Kimball will not suffice.`
The political legitimacy of architecture is linked to an even deeper issue: the intellectual
crisis in architectural criticism. The half-century predominance of the international styles in
architecture left critics with little room to maneuver. Robert Venturi's groundbreaking
Complexity and Contradiction (1966) -with its empirical, relativistic and anti-Platonic
approach-created new space for critics. Yet its treatment of the semantic dimension of
architecture remained wedded to the Olympian Platonism of the great modernists; that is, his
truncated perspective covered only the conventional styles and "extrinsic" factors such as poor
design. As Alan Colquhoun perceptively notes, "The book does not exclude the possibility that
the general principles of the modern movement were sound and might still form the basis of a
complex and subtle architecture.."' Yet Venturi indeed opened Pandora's box. Architectural
criticism has been a Towel of Babel ever since.
The intellectual crisis in architectural criticism is primarily rooted in the modernist promotion
of what Lewis Mumford called "the myth of the machine." This myth is not simply an isolated
aesthetic ideology, but rather a pervasive sociocultural phenomenon that promotes expert
scientific knowledge and elaborate bureaucratic structures that facilitate five P's-power,
productivity for profit, political control and publicity.' Architecture is distinct from the other arts
in that it associated its own modernist avant-garde movements-its formalism and newness-with
the myth of the machine. For Colquhoun, "Modern architecture conflated absolute formalism
with the actual productive forces of society. There was in Modern architecture an overlap
between nineteenth-century instrumentalism and modernist formalism which did not occur in any
of the other arts."7


--- PAGE 399 ---
This is why modernism in architecture enthusiastically embraced technology in an excessive
utopian manner, whereas modernism in literature put a premium on myth (over against science
and technology) in a dystopian way. Le Corbusierwith his complex bundle of tensions between
architecture as machine production and architecture as intuitive expression-proclaimed in his
epoch-making manifesto Towards a New Architecture (1923): "The Modern age is spread
before them [engineers and others], sparkling and radiant.."s Yet James Joyce's Stephen in
Ulysses (1922) sees history as a nightmare from which he is trying to awake and T. S. Eliot
perceives, in his review of Joyce's text, modern history as an "immense panorama of futility and
anarchy."
My point here is not simply that the early Le Corbusier and fellow Modernists in architecture
were naive and duped, but, more important, that the distinctive development of architecture
produced such an idealizing of technology and industry. The subsequent collapse of this
utopianism into a sheer productivism with a Platonic formalism that sustains an architectural
monumentality (as in the genius of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, transplanted from Germany to
Chicago) set the framework of our present intellectual crisis in architectural criticism.``-'
Needless to say, the call for irony and ambiguity that focuses on the symbolic content (not space
or structure) in the populism of Robert Venturi, the forms of historical eclecticism in the
postmodernism of Charles Jencks, or the plea for communication in the public art of James
Wines's de-architecture provide inadequate responses to this crisis."' This is primarily because
all three provocative responses fail to grasp on a deep level the content and character of the
larger cultural crisis of our time.
The recent appropriations of the ironic skepticism ofJacques Derrida (as in the provocative
writings of Peter Eisenman) and the genealogical materialism of Michel Foucault (as with the
criticism of Anthony Vidler and Michael Hayes) can be viewed as the awakening of
architectural criticism to the depths of our cultural crisis. Although deconstructivist architecture
is, as Mark Wrigley rightly observes, more an extension of and deviation from Russian
constructivism than a blanket architectural application of Derrida's thought,' 1 it does force
architectural critics to put forward their own conception of the current cultural crisis-even if it
seems to amount to mere sloganeering about "the end of Western metaphysics" or the
omnipresence of "the disciplinary order." In short, the French invasion of architectural criticism-
twenty years after a similar affair in literary criticism-has injected new energy and excitement
into a discipline suffering a cultural lag. Yet this invasion has led many architectural critics to
the most deadly of traps: the loss of identify as architectural critics.
The assimilation of architectural criticism into literary criticism or the immersion of
architectural objects into larger cultural practices has led, in many cases, to a loss of the
specificity of architectural practices and objects. Such a loss results in the loss of the
architectural dimension of what architectural critics do. The major virtue of the French invasion
is that new possibilities, heretofore foreclosed, are unleashed; the vice is that architectural
critics lose their identity and focus primarily on academicist perspectives on the larger crisis of
our culture-a focus that requires a deeper knowledge of history, economics, sociology and so on
than most architectural critics have or care to pursue. My point here is not that this task should
be abandoned by architectural critics. Rather, I am claiming that what architectural critics do


--- PAGE 400 ---
know-the specificity of the diverse traditions of architectural practices (from the nitty-gritty
matters of calculations to artistic styles, perspectives, visions and links to structures of power)-
should inform how we understand the present cultural crisis.
None of us have the definitive understanding of the complex cultural crisis that confronts us,
though some views are better than others. My own view is that an appropriate starting point is a
reexamination of what the modernists valorized: the myth of the machine. Hence, the work of
Lewis Mumford is indispensable. Yet, since faith in progress by means of expanding productive
forcesbe it the liberal or Marxist version-is a secular illusion, the myth of the machine must be
questioned in new ways. This questioning must go far beyond a playful explosion of modernist
formalism that heralds ornamentation and decoration of past heroic efforts. It also must be more
than a defense of the autonomy of architectural discourse in the guise of its textualization-an
outdated, avant-gardist gesture in a culture that now thrives and survives on such fashionable and
faddish gestures.
Rather, the demystifying of the machine can proceed-thanks, in part, to the insights of
poststructuralist analyses-by examining the second term in the binary opposition of machine-
nature, civilized-primitive, ruler-ruled, ApollonianDionysian, male-female, white-black in
relation to architectural practices. This examination should neither be a mechanical
deconstructive operation that stays on the discursive surfaces at the expense of an analysis of
structural and institutional dynamics of power, nor should it result in a mere turning of the tables
that trashes the first terms in the binary oppositions. Rather, what is required is a sophisticated,
architectural-historical inquiry into how these notions operate in the complex formulations of
diverse and developing discourses and practices of actual architects and critics. Such an inquiry
presupposes precisely what contemporary architectural criticism shuns: a distinctive
architectural historiography that sheds light on the emergence and development of the current
cultural crisis as it shapes and is shaped by architectural practices. As Mark Jarzombek rightly
states:
Architects have read too many history books and have not done enough onlocation history of
their own. It used to be, from the Renaissance on, that architects told the historians what was
important about a building of the past and what was not. Now it is historians who tell architects.
That architects so willingly give up their birthright marks, perhaps, the dawning of a new age in
architectural history. The Pre-modern Post-modern used the past to create a historiographic
understanding of the present. Once the ancient ruins had all been studied and the archaeologists
took over, the modernists were free to turn the same historiographic principles used by earlier
generations against history itself. The postmodern historicists now use history to kill
historiography. There may not be much left to talk about when the next generation of architects
comes along.12
These remarks hold from the Adorno-informed pessimism of Tafuri through the presentist
populism of Venturi to the "classical" postmodernism of Jencks.
The major challenge of a new architectural historiography is that its conception of the "past"
and "present" be attuned to the complex role of difference-nature, primitive, ruled, Dionysian,
female, black and so on. In this sense, the recent talk about the end of architecture, the exhaustion


--- PAGE 401 ---
of the architectural tradition, the loss of architecture as a social force and so on is a parochial
and nostalgic talk about a particular consensus-and its circumstances-that indeed no longer
exists. This consensus rests upon certain governing myths (machine), narratives (Eurocentric
ones), design strategies (urban building efforts) and styles (phallocentric monuments) that no
longer aesthetically convince or effectively function for us. This "us" is a diverse and
heterogeneous one-not just architects and their critics.
The case of the great Le Corbusier may serve as an illustration. His serious grappling with the
binary oppositions above reaches a saturation point in his critique of the classical theory of
architectural design (Vitruvius) in the form of the Modulor. This new form of measure derived
not just from the proportions of the human figure but, more specifically, from women's bodies-
especially fat, "primitive," "uncivilized," non-European, Dionysian-driven, black, brown and
red women's bodies. It is no secret that Le Corbusier's paintings and pencil sketches in the early
1930s began to focus on the shapes of women's bodies, highlighting the curves of buttocks and
shoulder arches. This preoccupation is often viewed as a slow shift from a machine aesthetic to
a nature aesthetic. Like Picasso's use of "primitive" art to revitalize the art of the new epoch, Le
Corbusier turns toward female and Third World sources for demystifying-not simply displacing-
the myth of the machine he had earlier heralded. Le Corbusier's move toward these sources was
not a simple rejection of the myth of the machine. As Charles Jencks notes: "Le Corbusier found
in Negro music, in the hot jazz of Louis Armstrong, 'implacable exactitude,; 'mathematics,
equilibrium on a tightrope' and all the masculine virtues of the machine.."'s And in regard to
Josephine Baker's performance on board the Julius Caesar on a trip to South America in 1929,
Le Corbusier writes:
In a stupid variety show, Josephine Baker sang "Baby" with such an intense and dramatic
sensibility that I was moved to tears. There is in this American Negro music a lyrical
"contemporary" mass so invincible that I could see the foundation of a new sentiment of music
capable of being the expression of the new epoch and also capable of classifying its European
origins as stone age just as has happened with the new architecture.'4
Although Baker is, for Le Corbusier, "a small child pure, simple and limpid," more than mere
European male paternalism is at work here. Rather, he also is in search of new forms of space,
proportion, structure and order in light of the products, bodies and sensibilities of those
subsumed under the second terms of the aforementioned binary oppositions-natural, primitive,
ruled, Dionysian, female and people of color. "I look for primitive men not for their barbarity
but for their wisdom.."", "The columns of a building should be like the strong curvaceous thighs
of a woman."16 "I like the skin of women..""
Le Corbusier's Ronchamp chapel in eastern France, the Unite at Marseille and his Carpenter
Center at Harvard all bear this so-called brutalist stamp. Like Mumford's subtle nostalgia for the
medieval "Garden Village," Le Corbusier's search for non-European and female sources was
intimately linked to his conception of architectural practices as forms of and means for
collective life-a life he associated first and foremost with hierarchical religious communities
such as the monastic order of the Carthusians.
The efforts of Le Corbusier's "middle" period can be neither imitated nor emulated. Yet his


--- PAGE 402 ---
gallant yet flawed attempt to come to terms with difference-with those constituted as Other-must
inform any new architectural historiography in our postcolonial world and postmodern culture of
megamachines, multinational corporations, nation-states and fragmented communities. Where
then do we go from here?
The future of architectural criticism rests on the development of a refined and revisionist
architectural historiography that creatively fuses social histories of architectural practices and
social histories of technology in light of sophisticated interpretations of the present cultural
crisis. This historiography must be informed by the current theoretical debates in the larger
discourse of cultural criticism. Yet the benefits of these debates are in the enabling
methodological insights that facilitate history writing and cultural analyses of specific past and
present architectural practices, not ontological and epistemological conclusions that promote
mere avant-gardist posturing. Theory is not historiography, though no historiography escapes
theory. Yet the present obsession with theory must now yield to theory-laden historiography if
architectural criticism is to have any chance of grasping the impasse that now engulfs us. There
are no guarantees for any resolutions, but there are certain routes that weaken our efforts to move
beyond this fascinating, and possibly fecund, moment in architectural criticism.'8
SOURCE: "A Note on Race and Architecture," Keeping Faith: Philosophy and Race in America, by
Cornel West, pp. 45-54, 294-295. Copyright © 1993. Reproduced by permission of Routledge, Inc.


--- PAGE 403 ---
THE SPIRITUALS AS LYRICAL POETRY
In this piece written for nay friend and brother Richard Newman 'c Go Down, Moses (1998), I
examine the tragic elements of exemplary spirituals in light of two lyrical giants of European
poetry-Russia's Fyodor T utchev and Ita y's Giacomo Leopardi. Both T utchev and Leopardi
from the margins of Western Europe-add new existential darkness and historical substance to the
lyrical genre in poetry. Vie spirituals also do so as poetry and music.
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN SPIRITUAL is the unique cultural creation of New World
modernity. As the distinguished historian Richard Newman (my friend and brother) rightly notes,
the spirituals of American slaves of African descent constitute the first expression of American
modern music. How ironic that a people on the dark side of modernity-dishonored, devalued and
dehumanized by the practices of modern Europeans and Americans-created the fundamental
music of American modernity. Yet we still wonder and wrestle with what it is that makes these
songs so modern-so powerful and poignant, so upsetting and unsettling, so soothing and
comforting-to us late moderns.
As I grow older, I find it more and more difficult to read the heart-piercing lyrics of the
spirituals. They not only invoke precious memories of beloved family and friends in those soul-
stirring moments of my black church life; these songs also remind me of how difficult it is to
engage in a deep-sea diving of the soul-a diving that may yield, if one is strong enough,
bloodshot eyes and a tear-stained hope. When the slaves sang "Go Down, Moses," they put
forward a political message of freedom and a hope for endurance in the face of death and
despair after one arrives in the penultimate promised land of these United States. In short, the
spirituals challenge any Enlightenment notion of human autonomy. They force us to confront the
paradox of human freedom: We must be strong enough to resist the prevailing forms of bondage,
yet honest enough to acknowledge our weaknesses in the face of death and disappointment. This
honesty about our weakness is itself a supreme form of strength that precludes paralysis and
impotence.
Even more than the incredible blues and jazz of black people, the spirituals enact the initial
"soul-making" of New World Africans. I deliberately use the Keatsian term here because the
spirituals embody the creativity of courageous human beings who engaged the world of pain and
trouble with faith, hope, spirit-and a kind of existential freedom even in slavery. The great W. E.
B. Du Bois was the first public intellectual to grasp the significance of this complex "soul-
making" of a people. In the last chapter of his classic The Souls of Black Folk (1903), Du Bois
probed the character of "the sorrow songs." He found a depth of articulate anguish unbeknownst
in early American history. He also discovered a level of questioning about the nature of
suffering that was alien to American culture. Du Bois was on the right track. The spirituals not
only reveal the underside of Americain all of its stark nakedness; they also disclose the night
side of the human condition-in all of its terror and horror. But they do so through an unequivocal
Christian lens. So we often leap to the religious consolation of the spirituals without lingering
for long on sadness and melancholia.
The African American spirituals constitute the most sustained phenomenology of New World


--- PAGE 404 ---
evil. In stark contrast to most artists and intellectuals of European descent, the illiterate,
articulate slaves were obsessed with the problem of evil as it pertained to the most undeniable
darkness of America-slavery. And though their resources were primarily religious, their
existential insights go far beyond Christian dogma and doctrine.
Like Shakespeare's Hamlet, the spirituals are preoccupied with the memory of those beloved
ones who have died and the desire for revenge against those who prosper from their evildoings.
The major themes consist of mourning, suffering, resisting. Yet unlike Hamlet, who after much
soul-searching commits murder, the heroes of the spirituals-namely, Jesus, Daniel, and Moses-
triumph because they find great strength in an all-embracing love and mercy.
The spirituals have perplexed critics primarily because of this uncanny tension between a
profound pagan sense of the tragic and a deep Christian sense of justice. Ironically, both
understandings assume the intractability of white supremacy in American life-be it slavery, Jim
Crow, or postmodern cultural put-down-and view the preservation of the human soul under such
dishonored conditions as the major challenge. Emerson was concerned with developing the
human character through self-reliance within an American context of numbing conformity; the
spirituals, on the other hand, focus on forging human integrity through selfrespect within an
American context of white hatred and fear of black folk.
I find it useful to compare the spirituals-the grand lyrical expressions at the initial moments of
American self-definition-with the great lyrical poets of marginalized European peoples. In fact,
two of the greatest lyrical poets of modern Eu- rope-Fyodor Tyutchev of Russia and Giacomo
Leopardi of Italy-have fascinating elective affinities with the spirituals. Both are rooted in
Christian soils-Russian Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism-yet sprout their poetic wings far
above it. Both are distrustful of European arrogance and Enlightenment illusions and are
obsessed with the night side of Western civilization. In regard to form, both deploy a kind of
rhythmic repetition that plays with linguistic pacing, revealing an obsession with human time.
This obsession often yields a privileging of silence by means of poetry, a call for music and
song that goes beyond mere language.
The slaves' own self-conscious grasp of their inability to capture in language the depths of
"Deep River" resonates with the spirit of Tyutchev's classic "Silen- tium!" (1829).


--- PAGE 405 ---



--- PAGE 406 ---
Tyutchev's animation of nature and celebration of the landscape seem to suggest a latent
pantheism alien to the spirituals. But Tyutchev neither worships nature nor equates God with it.
Like the spirituals, he uses the majesty of God manifest in nature to highlight the misery of
humankind. Like his friend and intellectual mentor Friedrich Schelling, all forms of idealism,
romanticism or pantheism run headlong into the bedrock, the recalcitrant reality, of evil.
Tyutchev's poetry wrestles with the dark questions of Schelling's classic work on theodicy, On
the Essence of Human Freedom (1809): Does the seeming ineradicability of the nonrational
signify the triumph of the absurd? Does the apparent intractability of the unfathomable point to
the victory of evil? Are there countervailing forces-divine and human-that offset and overcome
"the veil of sadness which is spread over all nature, the deep, unappeasable melancholy of all
life"?
These foundation-shaking queries rendered Schelling silent for over forty years, pushed some
slaves to sing sorrow songs and drove Tyutchev to write in "Our Age" (1851):
If Fyodor Tyutchev represents a useful comparison to the religious nature of the spirituals,


--- PAGE 407 ---
then Giacomo Leopardi may yield insights into the tragic nature of the spirituals. Haunted by a
sense of his own ugliness (he was a disfigured hunchback) and overwhelmed by unrequited love,
Leopardi's poetry-like the spirituals-soars to the sky on the wings of incredible grief and
unbearable sorrow. He begins his famous "Night Song of a Nomadic Shepherd in Asha" (1830):
Later in the poem he writes:
Leopardi ends the poem with echoes of Sophocles, job and the slave author of "Am I Born to
Die?"


--- PAGE 408 ---
Similar to the slave author's lament "Lord, I wish I had never been born," Leopardi pursues this
tragic theme in "Sappho's Last Song" (1822):


--- PAGE 409 ---
Leopardi's pagan humanism departs from the Christian sense of providence found in the
spirituals. Yet the passionate questioning and desperate seeking of the spirituals reveal, at times,
an anger with God. For Leopardi, this anger fueled by unjustified grief yields a spiritual humility
in a godless universe, an eternal silence in an infinite space. In "Dream" (1828), he cries:
And random sujering cancels all Such raw, unripened knowledge.-Hush, I said, my poor dear, hush ...
... But alas, what is This thing called death? It seems, if ever, I should be able this day to say for sure,
and so Guard this helpless self against heartless stars.
For the spirituals, this anger fanned by unmerited misery offers a spiritual humility in a
Christian world, an uncanny spirit of combat on a treacherous terrain ruled by a majestic yet
mysterious God of love and mercy. Just as the epigraph of Leopardi's masterpiece, "Broom or
the Flower of the Desert" (1836), isJohn 3:19, "And men loved darkness rather than light," so
the epigraph of one the greatest spirituals, "Didn't My Lord Deliver Daniel," could be John 3:16,
"God so loved the world that He sent His only begotten son . . ." The spirituals knew that humans
loved darkness yet they held out for a light of deliverance in a vanquishing and vanishing world.
Says Leopardi in "Broom":
Nothing but ruins now left Where this sweet flower takes root And, it seems, takes pity On the
suffering of others, filling The air with fragrance, a touch Of consolation in the wasteland ...
For the slaves, God's revelation in Christ is the sole flickering candle against the darkness of
American slavery and human finitude. Their social "blackness" (shame) and existential
"emptiness" (anxiety) find help only in divine deliverance (Christ). For Leopardi, only empathy
and social solidarity can push back the darkness of oppression and death, yet even heroic efforts
may be "built on sand." Speaking to both deserted persons and desert flowers, Leopardi
concludes his greatest poem:


--- PAGE 410 ---
The greatest spiritual, "Nobody Knows the Trouble I See, Lord," speaks to dishonored
persons whose humanity had been rendered invisible by physical chains and psychic blinders.
As in Leopardi, this human condition is one of darkness. The spiritual explicitly asks for prayer-
for empathy and social soli- darity-"to drive old Satan away." This kind of support, one that
constitutes a loving tradition of resistance, yields a joy and even ecstasy because it is
undergirded by a Lord who is able to deliver Daniel. "Glory Hallelujah!" Yet prayer for the
slaves was much like the songs themselves-an artistic expression that gives form to the cry for
help in the midst of great trials and tribulations. Prayers, poetry, spirituals-all arc passionate
acts of will that honestly express the human need for help and support. The towering literary
artist of our own blood-drenched century, Franz Kafka, notes: "Art, like prayer, is a hand
outstretched in the darkness, seeking for some touch of grace which will transform it into a hand
that bestows gifts."
Is it mere accident that "A Love Supreme" (1964)-the masterpiece of the greatest musical
artist of our time and the grand exemplar of twentieth-century black spirituality, John Coltrane-is
cast in the form of prayer? The slave authors of the spirituals, Fyodor Tyutchev, Giacomo
Leopardi, Franz Kafka and John Coltrane all engaged in a Keatsian "soul-making" in that they
courageously confronted the darkness in and of modernity with artistic integrity and genuine
spirituality. They did so with, in the words of William James: "Not the conception or the
intellectual perception of evil, but the grisly blood-freezing heart-palsying sensation of it close
upon one.... How irrelevantly remote seem all our usual refined optimisms and intellectual and
moral consolations in presence of a need of help like this! Here is the real core of the religious
problem: Help! Help!"


--- PAGE 411 ---
The African American spiritual-with its motifs of homelessness, namelessness and hope
against hope-is the first modern artistic expression of this human outcry in the New World.
SOURCE: "Foreword," Go Down, Moses, by Richard Newman, pp. 9-17. Foreword copyright ©
1998 by Cornel West. Reprinted by permission of Clarkson N. Potter Publishers, a division of Crown
Publishers, Inc.


--- PAGE 412 ---
I N MEMORY O F M A R V I N GAY E
I was a regular columnist and reviewer for Christianity and Crisis for a, few wonderful years.
The moment I heard of the great Marvin Gaye's sad death I wrote this piece. Since then I have
received letters from teachers of writing exposition saying that they use it in their classes to
provoke and challenge their students. Since his death, Marvin Gaye has been immortalized by
the hip-hop generation. And rightly so.
MUCH OF THE SIGNIFICANT truth about the career of the Afro-American singer Marvin
Gaye may be obscured by the problems of his later life and the manner of his dying (he was shot
to death by his father April 1, 1984, in a tragic, and as yet unexplained, incident).
First and foremost, Gaye was a Christian artist. He was also one of the most gifted performers
produced by the Afro-American religious experience. Raised in his father's Pentecostal church,
located in the East Capitol projects in Washington, D.C., Gaye was imbued with a deep spiritual
sensitivity anchored in a Christcentered ethic of love. Initially this sensitivity was expressed in
his instrumental virtuosity-especially on the organ, piano and drums. Although Gaye sang in the
church choir, his vocal talent did not surface until he filled the first-tenor slot of Harvey Fuqua's
Moonglows, a smooth-harmony rhythm and blues group. When Gaye's silky and soulful voice
caught the attention of Berry Gordy, Jr.-the founder of Motown Recording Company-in a Detroit
nightclub in 1961, he was immediately offered a contract. The public career of Marvin Gaye had
begun.
Motown was the Jackie Robinson of black popular music: after crossing the color line in its
field, it went on to excel and to win the hearts of vast numbers of nonblack Americans. As with
other Motown stars-Diana Ross, Lionel Richie and Michael Jackson-Gaye's relationship with
Motown enabled his talent to become visible to the world. Unlike these other artists, Gaye's
musical and philosophical roots remained in the Afro-American Christian tradition. His first
classic recordings were neither adolescent, rhythmic dance records (as with the Supremes and
the Jackson Five) nor funky rock renderings (as with Lionel Richie's Commodores). Rather,
Gaye's great early achievements-sung with the incomparable Tammi Terrell-were poignant and
powerful love songs, written by the team of Nickolas Ashford and Valerie Simpson of White
Rock Baptist Church in New York City. These classics-such as "Your Precious Love," "Ain't
Nothing Like the Real Thing," "You're All I Need to Get By" and "Ain't No Mountain High
Enough"-were the pivotal songs that directed the Christian religiosity of black church music into
the secular spirituality of Afro-American popular music. For the first time in American history,
the musical depth of the black church was let loose into the mainstream of American society.
And American popular music would never again be the same.
Upon the tragic death of Tammi Terrell, who collapsed in Gaye's arms during a performance
in 1967, Gaye went into hiding. Despite his success as a solo performer ("I'll Be Doggone,"
"Ain't That Peculiar," and "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" all reached the Top Ten), Gaye
became reclusive, melancholic and deeply dissatisfied with his music. He would not perform
publicly for five years.
"WHAT'S GOING ON"


--- PAGE 413 ---
Yet Gaye's tortuous struggle with the sudden death of Tammi Terrell, his younger brother
Frankie's firsthand accounts of atrocities in Vietnam, the escalation of the civil rights movement
into black power advocacy, the widespread invasion of drugs among unemployed black youth
and the rise of ecological consciousness produced the greatest album in Afro-American popular
music: What's Going On (1971). This groundbreaking album was not only the first conceived
and enacted by the artist (as opposed to studio staffers), but also the first concept album that
hung together by means of a set of themes-themes concerned with socioeconomic critique and
Christian outlook.
Gaye's critique of American society was explicit. "Rockets, moon shots," he wrote in "Inner
City Blues," "Spend it on the have-nots." With "radiation underground and in the sky," he saw
birds and animals dying in "Mercy, Mercy Me (The Ecology)." Instead of brutality, he asked
attention: "Talk to me, so you can see" ("What's Going On"). And in such songs as "Save the
Children," "God Is Love" and "Wholly Holy," he explicitly evoked the love ethic of Jesus Christ
as the basis for negating and transforming the world: If we learn from the bookJesus left us, we
can rock the world, we can "holler love across the nation."
What's Going On was not only the best-selling album in Motown history at the time; it also set
standards of Afro-American popular music that remain unequaled. Only Gaye's marvelously
gifted pupil, Stevie Wonder, has attempted to exceed such standards by fusing the spiritual
richness of Afro-American music, the sense of social engagement and the love ethic of Jesus
Christ.
What's Going On was the peak of Gaye's career. He continued to produce popular albums and
hits. Yet, principally owing to two painful divorces, Oedipal obsessions, paranoiac fits and
suicidal impulses, Gaye became captive to a form of bondage he admonished others to avoid:
drugs. His songs still portrayed a long ing for transcendence, but instead of the agapic praxis of
communities he highlighted erotic communion-as in his albums Let's Get It On (1973) and I Want
You (1976) and his Grammy Award single "Sexual Healing" (1982).
In his last years, Gaye oscillated between earthly pessimism and eschatological hope: from
the notion that nuclear holocaust was imminent to a faith that only Jesus can save us. During his
sporadic bouts with suicide, Gaye is reported to have viewed Jesus and sins that would never be
forgiven as the primary motivations to live. And, at the height of this turmoil, the last words he
wrote for his last album, Midnight Love (1982), were "I still love Jesus, all praises to the
Heavenly Father." May this troubled musical genius, deeply immersed in the Afro-American
religious experience and genuinely sensitive to the harsh realities of American society. rest in
peace. And may his artistic Christian witness live forever.
SOURCE: From Prophetic Fragnunls (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.,
1988), pp. 174-176. Originally appeared in Christianity and Cridd, June 11, 1984.


--- PAGE 414 ---



--- PAGE 415 ---
O N AFRO-AMERICAN MUSIC: FROM B E B O P T O 
RAP
This essay has had an amazing life of its own. Originally written for the avant-garde journal
Semiotexte (1982), then extended for the French paper, for which I wrote as an American
correspondent for four years, Le Monde Diplomatique (1983), this piece has been reprinted in
numerous collections and anthologies on American music. I thoroughly enjoyed writing it, but it
just skimmed the surface of what I wanted to say. With such fine music critics as Peter
Guralnick, Stanley Crouch, Nelson George, Armond White, Brian Ward, Michael Eric Dyson,
Jon Spencer and others, I have little need to say more.
THE SALIENT FEATURE OF popular music in First World capitalist and Third World
neocolonialist societies is the appropriation and imitation of Afro-American musical forms and
styles. The Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse-with its polyphonic, rhythmic effects and
antiphonal vocal techniques, kinetic orality and affective physicality-serves as a major source
for popular music in the West. This complex phenomenon, the Afro-Americanization of popular
music, prevails owing to three basic reasons. First, the rise of the United States as a world
power focused international attention more pointedly on native U.S. cultural forms and styles.
Second, vast technological innovations in mass media and communications facilitated immediate
and massive influence of certain forms and styles upon others. Third, and most important, Afro-
American music is first and foremost, though not exclusively or universally, a countercultural
practice with deep roots in modes of religious transcendence and political opposition. Therefore
it is seductive to rootless and alienated young people disenchanted with existential
meaninglessness, disgusted with flaccid bodies and dissatisfied with the status quo.
Afro-American popular music constitutes a crucial dimension of the background practices-the
ways of life and struggle-of Afro-American culture. By taking seriously Afro-American popular
music, one can dip into the multileveled lifeworlds of black people. As Ralph Ellison has
suggested, Afro-Americans have had rhythmic freedom in place of social freedom, linguistic
wealth instead of pecuniary wealth. I make no attempt here to come to terms with the complexity
of the evolving forms and content of Afro-American popular music. Rather, I simply try to
provide a cognitive mapping of the major breaks and ruptures in Afro-American popular music
in light of their changing socioeconomic and political contexts from bebop to rap, from Charlie
Parker to the Sugarhill Gang.
Our starting point is the grand break with American mainstream music, especially imitated
and co-opted Afro-American popular music, by the so-called bebop jazz musicians-Charlie
Parker, Theolonius Monk, Dizzy Gillespie and others. Their particular way of Africanizing
Afro-American jazz-with the accent on contrasting polyrhythms, the deemphasis of melody and
the increased vocalization of the saxophone-was not only a reaction to the white-dominated,
melody-obsessed "swing jazz"; it also was a creative musical response to the major shift in
sensibilities and moods in Afro-America after World War II. Through their technical facility and
musical virtuosity, bebop jazz musicians expressed the heightened tensions, frustrated
aspirations and repressed emotions of an aggressive yet apprehensive Afro-America. Unlike the
jazz of our day, bebop jazz was a popular music, hummed on the streets, whistled by shoeshine


--- PAGE 416 ---
boys and even danced to in the house parties in urban black communities.
Yet the bebop musicians, like Thomas Pynchon in our time, shunned publicity and eschewed
visibility. Their radical nonconformist stance-often misunderstood as a repetition of the avant-
garde attitude of the fin de siecle artists-is reflected in their famous words "We don't care if you
listen to our music or not." Their implicit assumption was that, given the roots of their music,
black folk could not not listen to it and others had to struggle to do so. Yet as the ferment of the
short-lived "bebop era" subsided into the "cool" style of the early 1950s, it was clear that bebop
had left an indelible stamp on Afro-American popular music. Despite the brief ascendancy of
black "cool" artists such as (the early) Miles Davis and John Lewis and white "cool" musicians
like Chet Baker and David Brubeck, the AfroAmerican spiritual-blues impulse (always alive
and well in Count Basle's perennial band) surfaced quickly in the sounds of Charles Mingus,
Ray Charles and Art Blakey's hard bebop jazz Messengers, who all paved the way to the era of
soul and funk.
Needless to say, most black folk in the 1950s listened weekly to spiritual and gospel music in
black churches-sung by young choir members such as Sam Cooke, Curtis Mayfield, Dionne
Warwicke, Aretha Franklin, Gladys Knight and Lou Rawls. With increased strata and class
differentiation in the ever blackening urban centers throughout the United States, secular attitudes
proliferated and financial rewards for nonreligious and nonjazz black popular music escalated.
On the one hand, jazz-under the influence of John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Ornette Coleman and
others-became more and more a kind of highbrow, "classical" avant-garde music its originators
and innovators abhorred. On the other hand, black churches turned their theological guns on "the
devil's music" (traditionally pointed at the blues), resulting in more and more marginality for
black religious music. So the stage was set for a black popular music that was neither jazz nor
gospel: soul music.
Soul music is more than either secularized gospel or funkified jazz. Rather, it is a particular
Africanization of Afro-American music with intent to appeal to the black masses, especially
geared to the black ritual of attending parties and dances. Soul music is the populist application
of bebop's aim: racial self-conscious assertion among black people in light of their rich musical
heritage. The two major artists of soul music James Brown and Aretha Franklin-bridge the major
poles in the AfroAmerican experience by appealing to agrarian and urban black folk, the
underclass and working class, religious and secular men and women. Only the black upper
middle class of long standing-and most of white America-initially rejected them. Ironically,
though unsurprisingly, none of James Brown's and few of Aretha Franklin's gold records were or
are played by nonblack-oriented radio stations. Yet their influence, including white
appropriations and imitations, flourished.
As the black baby boom catapulted and black entrepreneurial activity in mass communications
expanded, it became apparent that a youthful black market could support a black recording
industry. In the South, Otis Redding, the great soul singer, had moved far along on this road, yet
white power stubbornly resisted. So when in 1958 Berry Gordy, a black industrial worker in
one of Detroit's Ford plants, decided to establish Motown, black popular music took a
tremendous leap forward. Far ahead of black literary artists and scholars in this regard, major


--- PAGE 417 ---
black popular musicians, writers, singers and producers could now work in a production unit
owned by and geared toward black people.
Motown was the center of Afro-American popular music in the 1960s and early 1970s-with
the phenomenal success of over 75 percent of its records reaching the Top Ten rhythm and blues
tune charts in the mid-1960s. The musical genius of Stevie Wonder, Michael Jackson and Lionel
Richie; the writing talents of Smokey Robinson, Nicholas Ashford, Valerie Simpson, Norman
Whitfield, Barrett Strong, Eddie and Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Marvin Gaye; and the
captivating performances of the Temptations, the Miracles, the Supremes, the Four Tops, Gladys
Knight and the Pips, the Jackson Five and the Commodores set Motown far above any other
recording company producing Afro-American popular music.
Motown was the Jackie Robinson of black popular music: It crossed the color line for the first
time, then proceeded to excel and thereby win the hearts and souls of vast numbers of nonblack
folk. The most successful Motown figuresDiana Ross, Stevie Wonder, Michael Jackson and
Lionel Richie-now have secure status in mainstream American popular music. And outside of
Motown, the only black singers or groups to achieve such transracial acceptance are Nat King
Cole, Louis Armstrong, Johnny Mathis, Dionne Warwicke, Jimi Hendrix, Sly and the Family
Stone, Lou Rawls and Earth, Wind and Fire.
Like Jackie Robinson, Motown reflected the then stable, persevering, upwardly mobile
working class in Afro-America. At its height, Motown produced smooth, syncopated rhythms,
not funky polyrhythms (like James Brown or the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band); restrained
call-and-response forms, not antinomian antiphonal styles (as with Aretha Franklin or the late
Donny Hathaway); and love-centered romantic lyrics, not racially oriented social protest music
(like GilScott Heron or Archie Shepp). Yet Motown delicately and wisely remained anchored in
the Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse.
There is little doubt that Motown produced some of the great classics in AfroAmerican and
American popular music. The Temptations' "My Girl," "Since I Lost My Baby," "You're My
Everything"; the Miracles' "000 Baby Baby," "Choosey Beggar," "Here I Go Again"; Marvin
Gaye and Tammi Terrell's "Your Precious Love," "If This World Were Mine," "Ain't Nothing
Like the Real Thing"; Stevie Wonder's "For Once in My Life," "My Cherie Amour," "You Are
the Sunshine of My Life"; and Gladys Knight and the Pips' "Neither One of Us" all will stand the
test of time.
As Motown became more commercially successful with the larger white American audience,
it began to lose ground in Afro-America. On two musical fronts-fast funk and mellow soul-
Motown faced a serious challenge. On the first front, Motown had never surpassed James
Brown. Yet Motown had produced music for AfroAmerica to dance-to twist, jerk, boogaloo,
philly dog and skate. With the appearance of George Clinton's innovative Funkadelic and
Parliament, a new wave of funk appeared: technofunk. Never before had black folk heard such
deliberately distorted voice and contrapuntal rhythmic effects filtered through electronic
instrumentalities. Building principally on James Brown, the Funkadelic's "I Wanna Know If It's
Good to You," "Loose Booty" and "Standing on the Verge of Getting It On" sounded musically
revolutionary to the ears of the masses of black folk. Motown quickly moved into technofunk


--- PAGE 418 ---
with the Temptations' successful "Cloud Nine," "I Can't Get Next to You" and "Psychedelic
Shack," but it was clear that the change of image (and personnel) could not give Motown
hegemonic status on fast funk.
On the second front, that of mellow soul, Motown had no peer until the riseprecipitated by the
roaring success of the Delfonics-of the Philly Sound at Sigma Sound Studio in Philadelphia. The
poignant music and lyrics of Kenneth Gamble and Leon Huff, Thom Bell and Linda Creed,
Joseph Jefferson, Bruce Hawes and Yvette Davis, Norman Harris and Allen Felder surfaced in
the late 1960s and early 1970s with force and potency, as witnessed by the popular songs sung
by the O jays, the Spinners, Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes, Blue Magic, Teddy Pendergrass,
Major Harris, the Jones Girls, Lou Rawls and even Johnny Mathis. Furthermore, the noteworthy
presence of Harlem's Main Ingredient, Chicago's ChiLites, Detroit's (non-Motown) Dramatics,
Jersey City's Manhattans and Los Angeles's Whispers on this front yielded a more diverse
situation.
The early 1970s witnessed slightly more political overtones in Afro-American popular music.
Surprisingly, the political ferment of the late 1960s did not invoke memorable musical responses
on behalf of popular Afro-American musicians, with the exception ofJames Brown's "Say It
Loud I'm Black and I'm Proud." The youthful black market thrived on music for dance and
romance; and such music was the mainstay of the late 1960s. As the Vietnam War intensified
(with over 22 percent of its U.S. victims being black), the drug culture spread and black elected
officials emerged, recordings such as the Temptations' "Ball of Confusion," the Chi-Lites' "Give
More Power to the People," James Brown's "Funky President (People, It's Bad)" and the Isley
Brothers' "Fight the Power" revealed more explicit concern with the public life and political
welfare of Afro-America. Ironically, this concern was exemplified most clearly in the greatest
album produced by Motown: Marvin Gaye's What's Going On. True to their religious roots,
Afro-American popular musicians and writers couched their concerns in highly moralistic
language, devoid of the concrete political realities of conflict and struggle. Marvin Gaye's
classical recording openly evoked Christian apocalyptic images and the love ethic ofJesus
Christ.
The watershed year in Afro-American popular music in this period was 1975. For the first
time in Afro-American history, fast funk music seized center stage from mellow soul music. In
the past, it was inconceivable that a black rhythm and blues group or figure-no matter how funk-
oriented-not possess a serious repertoire of slow mellow, often ballad, music. It is important to
remember that James Brown's early hits were mellow soul, such as "Please, Please, Please,"
"Bewildered," "It's a Man's World." Given the demand for nonstop dance music in discotheques
in the early 1970s and the concomitant decline of slow dancing and need for mellow soul, black
dance music became dominant in Afro-American popular music. Barry White's sensual upbeat
tunes, Brass Constructions' repetitive syncopations, Kool and the Gang's distinctive Jersey funk
and Nile Rogers and Bernard Edwards's classy chic are exemplary responses to the disco scene.
Yet the most important Afro-American response to this scene occurred in 1975 when George
Clinton and William "Bootsy" Collins released two albums: Parliament's Chocolate City and
Mothership Connection.


--- PAGE 419 ---
By building directly upon Clinton's Funkadelic, such as deploying the same musicians,
Parliament ushered forth the era of black technofunk-the creative encounter of the Afro-
American spiritual-blues impulse with highly sophisticated technological instruments, strategies
and effects. Parliament invited its listeners, especially the dwellers of "Chocolate cities" and to
a lesser extent those in the "Vanilla suburbs," to enter the "Fourth World," the world of black
funk and star wars, of black orality, bodily sensuality, technical virtuosity and electronic
adroitness. The cover of the first Parliament album, Chocolate City, portrayed Washington,
D.C.'s Lincoln Memorial, Washington Memorial, Capitol Building and White House melting
presumably under the heat of black technofunk and the increasing "chocolate" character of the
nation's capital. The album contained only one mellow soul song ("I Misjudged You"), a mere
ritualistic gesture to the mellow pole of Afro-American popular music. The second album,
Mothership Connection-now joined with the leading saxophonists of James Brown's band,
Maceo Parker and Fred Wesley-literally announced the planetary departure to the "Fourth
World" on the mothership, with not one earthbound mellow love song.
The emergence of technofunk is not simply a repetition of black escapism or an adolescent
obsession with "Star Trek." In addition to being a product of the genius of George Clinton,
technofunk constitutes the second grand break of AfroAmerican musicians from American
mainstream music, especially imitated and co-opted Afro-American popular music. Like Charlie
Parker's bebop, George Clinton's technofunk both Africanizes and technologizes Afro-American
popular music-with polyrhythms on polyrhythms, less melody and freaky electronically distorted
vocals. Similar to bebop, technofunk unabashedly exacerbates and accentuates the "blackness"
of black music, the "Afro-Americanness" of Afro-American music-its irreducibility,
inimitability and uniqueness. Funkadelic and Parliament defy nonblack emulation; they assert
their distinctiveness-and the distinctiveness of "funk" in Afro-America. This funk is neither a
skill nor an idea, not a worldview or a stance. Rather, it is an existential capacity to get in touch
with forms of kinetic orality and affective physicality acquired by deep entrenchment in-or
achieved by pretheoretical styles owing to socialization in-the patterns of Afro-American ways
of life and struggle.
Technofunk is a distinctive expression of postmodern black popular music; it constitutes a
potent form of the Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse in the pervasive computer phase and
hedonistic stage of late capitalist U.S. society. Ironically, the appeal of black technofunk was not
a class-specific phenomenon. Technofunk invigorated the "new" politicized black middle class
undergoing a deep identity crisis, the stable black working class fresh out of the blues-ridden
ghettos, the poor black working class hungry for escapist modes of transcendence and the
hustling black underclass permeated by the drug culture. Black technofunk articulated black
middle-class anxieties toward, yet fascination with, U.S. "hi-tech" capitalist society; black
working-class frustration of marginal inclusion within and ineffective protest against this
society; and black underclass self-destructive dispositions owing to outright exclusion from this
society. For black technofunk, in a period of increasing black strata and class divisions, there
are no fundamental cleavages in Afro-America, only the black nation. The cover of George
Clinton's 1978 Funkadelic album, One Nation Under a Groove, portrays black folk from all
walks of life hoisting up Marcus Garvey's Afro-American liberation flag (of red, black, and
green stripes) with "R & B" printed on it-the initials not for "rhythm and blues," but "rhythm and


--- PAGE 420 ---
business." In vintage black nationalist patriarchal fashion, the inside of the album contains a
beautiful naked black woman lying on her back, signifying the biological source and social
"backbone" of the black nation.
Again like bebop, technofunk's breakthrough was brief. Its intensely Africanizing and
technologizing thrust was quickly diluted and brought more and more into contact with other
nonblack musical currents, as witnessed in Prince's creative Minneapolis sound and Midnight
Star's "freakazoid funk." Since 1975, four noteworthy trends have surfaced: the invasion of Afro-
American popular music by ex-avant-garde jazz musicians, the meteoric rise of Michael Jackson
(aided by Rod Temperton and especially Quincy Jones) as a solo performer, the refreshing
return of gospel music, and the exuberant emergence of black rap music.
Miles Davis's canonical album, Bitches Brew, in 1970 already displayed the influence of soul
music on jazz; his admiration of the California funk of Sly and the Family Stone is well known.
Yet by the late 1970s the influx of bona fide jazz musicians-most notably George Benson, Quincy
Jones, Herbie Hancock and Donald Byrd-into Afro-American popular music (rhythm and blues)
was phenomenal. The motivation was not simply financial; it also was symptomatic of perceived
sources of vitality and vigor in black music in late capitalist U.S. society and culture. In avant-
garde jazz, Ornette Coleman's and John Coltrane's free jazz-like Arnold Schoenberg's atonal
music in the Western classical traditionsymbolized both grand achievements and dead ends. For
example, Pharaoh Sanders, who briefly upheld the rich legacy of Coltrane's "new wave" jazz,
was soon recording with B. B. King, the great blues singer and musician, at the Fillmore East. In
short, jazz musicians were not only making a monetary bid for musical popularity; more
important, they were acknowledging the legitimacy of the music of the black masses. In short,
they were reaffirming the original vision of the great revolutionary figure in jazz, Louis
Armstrong. White middlebrow audiences and black old-timers continued to support the great
jazz singers-such as Ella Fitzgerald, Sarah Vaughan, Carmen McRae, Billy Eckstine and Joe
Williams-but jazz instrumentalists could hardly make it. In many ways, this continues to be so,
though the youthful genius of Wynton Marsalis may rearrange the terrain of jazz itself.
Notwithstanding the present predicament of jazz musicians, George Benson, a superb jazz
guitarist, acquired immediate fame as a Motown-like smooth, mellow soul singer; Herbie
Hancock, a "cool" jazz pianist with the early Miles Davis, moved into his own brand of
technofunk; and the Van Gelder studio group-Bob James, Grover Washington, Eric Gale and
others-produced an ingenious "pop jazz," often based on rhythm and blues tunes. The most
successful jazz musician turned rhythm and blues producer, Quincy Jones, joined his immense
talent with that of the leader of the most beloved of black singing groups-Michael Jackson of the
Jackson Five.
The distinctive talent of Michael Jackson is that he combines the performative showmanship
of James Brown (whom he imitated in his first 1968 exhibition to gain a contract with Motown),
the lyrical emotional intensity of Smokey Robinson, the transracial appeal of Dionne Warwicke
and the aggressive though attenuated technofunk of the Isley Brothers. In this regard, Michael
Jackson stands shoulders above his contemporaries. He is the musical dynamo of his generation.
This became quite clear with his highly acclaimed 1979 Off the Wall album and further
confirmed by his record-setting 1982 Thriller album. The point here is not simply that the


--- PAGE 421 ---
albums sell millions of copies and stay on top of the tune charts for several months. Rather, the
point is that Michael Jackson is the product of the Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse, which
now has tremendous international influence, thereby serving as a major model for popular music
in the world, especially First World capitalist and Third World neocolonialist countries. Like
Muhammed Ali-and unlike most of his musical contemporaries-Michael Jackson is an
international star of grand proportions, the most prominent worldhistorical emblem of the Afro-
American spiritual-blues impulse.
Ironically, and unlike the only other comparable figure, Louis Armstrong, Michael Jackson is
not a musical revolutionary within Afro-American history. Rather, he is a funnel through which
flow many of the diverse streams and currents of the Afro-American musical tradition. It is
precisely his versatility and diversity-from old funk, technofunk and mellow soul to ballads with
the ex-Beatle Paul McCartney-that marks his protean musical identity. The only contemporary
figure comparable to Michael Jackson is Stevie Wonder, and though Stevie Wonder is more
musically talented and daring (as well as more politically en- gaged),Jackson possesses a more
magnetic magic on stage and in the studio. Yet neither Wonder norJackson explore the musical
genre that exploded on the scene in the late 1970s and early 1980s: gospel music.
The black church, black-owned and black-run Christian congregations, is the fountainhead of
the Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse. Without the black church, with its African roots and
Christian context, Afro-American culture-in fact, Afro-America itself-is unimaginable. Yet, as
should be apparent, the black church has suffered tremendous "artistic drainage." The giant
talents of Mahalia Jackson, James Cleveland and Clara Ward prove that the black church can
keep some of its sons and daughters in the artistic fold, but for every one who stayed with the
gospels, there have been four who went to rhythm and blues. In the late 1960s Edwin Hawkins's
"Oh Happy Day" received national visibility, but the gospel explosion-partly spawned by the
Pentecostal thrust in the black religious community-did not take off until the reunion of James
Cleveland and Aretha Franklin in their historic 1972 double album set Amazing Grace. The
towering success of this live concert at the New Temple Missionary Baptist Church in Los
Angeles convinced many reluctant recording companies that gospel music was marketable. And
soon superb albums such as Andrae Crouch's T ke Me Back and Walter Hawkins's (Edwin's
brother) Love Alive and Love Alive II proved them cor rect. Although gospel music remains
primarily a black affair-written and performed by and for black people-the recent Christian
conversions of the popular Deneice Williams and disco queen Donna Summers may broaden the
scope.
The most important development in Afro-American popular music since 1979 is black rap
music. This music has been performed on ghetto streets and between stage acts during black
concerts for many years. In 1979, Sylvia Robinson, the major songwriter for the mellow soul
group The Moments (recently renamed Ray, Goodman and Brown), decided to record and
release "Rapper's Delight" by Harlem's Sugarhill Gang. Within months, black rap records were
filling record shops around the country. Most of the first black rap records were musically
derived from big hits already released and lyrically related to adolescent love affairs. Yet as
more sophisticated rap performers, such as Kurtis Blow and Grandmaster Flash and the Furious
Five, emerged, the music became more original and the lyrics more graphic of life in the black


--- PAGE 422 ---
ghetto. Kurtis Blow's "The Breaks" and "125th Street" and Grandmaster Flash and the Furious
Five's "The Message" and "New York, New York" are exemplary in this regard.
Black rap music is more important than the crossover of jazz musicians to rhythm and blues,
the rise of the "older" Michael Jackson and the return of gospel music because, similar to bebop
and technofunk, black rap music is emblematically symptomatic of a shift in sensibilities and
moods in Afro-America. Black rap music indeed Africanizes Afro-American popular music-
accenting syncopated polyrhythms, kinetic orality and sensual energy in a refined form of raw
expressiveness-while its virtuosity lies not in technical facility, but rather street-talk quickness
and linguistic versatility. In short, black rap music recovers and revises elements of black
rhetorical styles-some from black preaching-and black rhythmic drumming. In short, it combines
the two major organic artistic traditions in black America-black rhetoric and black music. In this
sense, like bebop and technofunk, black rap music resists nonblack reproduction, though such
imitations and emulations proliferate.
Yet unlike bebop and technofunk-and this is a crucial break-black rap music is primarily the
musical expression of the paradoxical cry of desperation and celebration of the black underclass
and poor working class, a cry that openly acknowledges and confronts the wave of personal
coldheartedness, criminal cruelty and existential hopelessness in the black ghettos of Afro-
America. In stark contrast to bebop and technofunk, black rap music is principally a class-
specific form of the Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse that mutes, and often eliminates, the
utopian dimension of this impulse. The major predecessors of black rap music were the political
raps of Gil-Scott Heron and the powerful musical poems of the Last Poets over a decade ago;
their content was angry, funky and hopeful. Black rap music is surely grounded in the Afro-
American spiritual-blues impulse, but certain versions of this music radically call into question
the roots of this impulse, the roots of transcendence and opposition. Without a utopian
dimension-without transcendence from or opposition to evil-there can be no struggle, no hope,
no meaning.
Needless to say, the celebratory form of black rap music, especially its upbeat African
rhythms, contains utopian aspirations. But this form is often violently juxtaposed with lyrical
hopelessness of the oppressed poor people of Afro-America. My hunch is that the form (the
funky rhythms) have basically a ritualistic function: music for cathartic release at the black
rituals of parties and dances. In short, even the rhythms conceal the unprecedented phenomena in
Afro-American life of the slow but seemingly sure genocidal effects upon the black underclass
and poor working class in late capitalist U.S. society and the inability of poor black folk to
muster spiritual, let alone political and economic, resources to survive. This is especially so for
young black people. The black suicide rate among eighteen to thirty year olds has tripled in the
past two decades; black homicide is the leading cause of death among young black men; over 50
percent of black households are headed by abandoned and abused young black women; the black
prison population has doubled since the 1960s; and black churches, led by either rip-off artists
like Rev. Ike, devout denominational leaders such as Rev. Jemison of the National Baptist
Convention or dedicated prophets like Rev. Daughtry of the National Black United Front-do not
reach the vast majority of young black people.


--- PAGE 423 ---
Black rap music is the last form of transcendence available to young black ghetto dwellers,
yet it, tellingly, is often employed to subvert, undermine and parody transcendence itself. Such
artistic strategies-play, silence, and performanceare typical postmodern ones in which petit
bourgeois artists, philosophers and critics wallow. Yet the indigenous proliferation of these
strategies among the (once most religious) now most degraded and oppressed people in the
urban centers of the richest country in the history of humankind signifies a crisis of enormous
proportions for Afro-America.
It is ironic that the Afro-Americanization of popular music around the world occurs at the time
that the transcendent and oppositional roots of the Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse are
radically challenged from within the Afro-American musical tradition. This challenge occurs not
simply because of lack of will or loss of nerve, but primarily because of treacherous ruling-
class policies, contemptuous black middle-class attitudes and the loss of existential moorings
due to the relative collapse of family structures and supportive networks. To put it bluntly, the
roots of the Afro-American spiritual-blues impulse are based on the supposition that somebody-
God, Mom or neighbors-cares. Some expressions of black rap music challenge this supposition.
The future of the Afro-American spiritualblues impulse may well hang on the quality of the
response to this challenge. In this sense, the vitality and vigor of Afro-American popular music
depends not only on the talents of Afro-American musicians, but also on the moral visions,
social analyses and political strategies that highlight personal dignity, provide political promise
and give existential hope to the underclass and poor working class in Afro-America.
SOURCE: "On Afro-American Popular Music: From Bebop to Rap," Prophetic Fragments (Grand
Rapids, Mich.: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1988), pp. 177-187. Originally appeared in
Semiotexte (1982).


--- PAGE 424 ---
O N ANNA D E A V E R E SMITH'S F I R E S I N T H E 
M I R R O R
Anna Deavere Smith is one of the towering artists of our time. Her work explores the human
dimensions of dehumanizing situations from black Jewish hostilities in Brook and riotous
animosities in Los Angeles to presidential scandals in Washington, D. C. I was honored to write
the foreword to her powerful drama Fires in the Mirror.
THE CONTEMPORARY BLACK JEWISH dialogue suffers from three basic shortcomings.
First, we often appeal to an abstract humanism and faceless universalism that refuse to confront
the concrete conflicts that divide us. Second, we usually conduct the conversation as if the
tensions between black and Jewish men are exactly the same as those between black and Jewish
women. Third, we attempt to conduct the exchange in a public space equally appealing to both
blacks and Jews-yet fail to recognize that Jews seem to be much more eager to inhabit this
public space than blacks.
Anna Deavere Smith's powerful work, Fires in the Mirror, is the most significant artistic
exploration of blackJewish relations in our time, precisely because she takes us beyond the three
basic shortcomings. In the midst of the heated moment of murder, mayhem and madness of the
Crown Heights crisis, she gives us poignant portraits of the everyday human faces that get caught
up in the situation. Her sensitive renderings of the tragic and comic aspects of the reactions and
responses of blacks and Jews to the Crown Heights crisis give our universal moral principles a
particular heartfelt empathy. Her ability to move our passions not only takes us beyond any self-
righteous condescension toward parochial Hasidism and provincial black urbanites, but also
forces us to examine critically our own complicity in cultural stereotypes that imprison our
imaginations and thereby make us parochial and provincial. In the best tradition of tragedy,
Smith explores the possibilities of human choices in an urgent crisis that yields limited options.
Not to choose "sides" is itself a choice-yet to view the crisis as simply and solely a matter of
choosing sides is to reduce the history and complexity of the crisis in a vulgar Manichaean
manner. In the best tradition of comedy, Smith exposes the ordinary foibles of human responses
to this serious crisis, which signify our own imperfect and tension-ridden views about the
Crown Heights episode. Her funny characterizations-that for some border on caricatures-
provoke genuine laughter even as we know that laughter is an inadequate response to the pain,
cruelty and sheer absurdity of the crisis. We laugh, not only because her characters are in some
fundamental ways like us-human, all-too-human-but also because we refuse to give pain, cruelty
and absurdity the last word. Once again, Fires in the Mirror is testimony to how art can take us
beyond ourselves as we examine ourselves even in an ugly moment of xenophobic frenzy.
For too long the blackJewish dialogue has been cast in masculine terms by principally male
interlocutors. Is it no accident that the major issues of contention-affirmative action and the
security of the state of Israel-tend to highlight the power struggles of men in the public spaces of
jobs and the military? Smith explodes this narrow framework by taking us into the private
spheres of American society where the complex discourses of women often take place in
patriarchal America. This is especially so in Hasidic and black America where the access of
women to public space-especially major leadership roles-is frowned upon. Yet Smith neither


--- PAGE 425 ---
romanticizes nor idealizes Hasidic, black or secular Jewish women. Instead, she humanizes the
blackJewish dialogue by including the diverse and often conflicting voices within black and
Jewish America. This kind of polyphony of perspectives is rarely aired and heard in the
blackJewish dialogue. It should not surprise us that most Jewish women are less disposed to
oppose affirmative action than many Jewish men, that strong Jewish women's voices are heard in
the Peace Now movement in Israel or that black women's critiques of black nationalist Sonny
Carson are persuasive. In short, the gendered character of the blackJewish dialogue often
produces obstacles that compound the problems and render us more paralyzed. Smith's
deepening of this dialogue by de-patriarchalizing our conversation is a major contribution in this
regard.
Fires in the Mirror is a grand example of how art can constitute a public space that is
perceived by people as empowering rather than disempowering. What I mean by this is that
many blacks are deeply suspicious-or even downright pessimistic-about entering a blackJewish
dialogue. This is especially so for young black people who are reluctant to engage with Jews
who often perceive themselves as underdogs yet who usually are middle-class Americans. This
issue of Jews as victims in an American context unsettles many African Americans. Needless to
say, the Jewish experience in America is quite atypical in Jewish history. Yet, for many black
people, theJewish experience in America is theJewish experience that counts most in the present
situation. And since the black experience in America is much worse than the Jewish experience
in America, the notion of two oppressed groups in America coming together for dialogue smacks
of a dishonesty and even a diversion.
And, to complicate the situation even more, the degradation of the public sphere by
conservative elites in the past two decades has exacerbated distrust be tween any group or
constituency-especially progressive ones. This degradation has principally taken the form of
associating the public sphere with the faults of black people. For example, public housing,
public education and even public transportation are associated in the American mind with the
faults of black people. Is it not the case that the very mention of public provisions-not tax breaks
or subsidies for corporate America, but subsistence support-evokes images of lazy black men
and welfare queens? The political success of playing this insidious racial card has led to a
large-scale gutting of public life that has yielded a balkanized populace with little sense of
public-mindedness and a narrow obsession with one's constituency and identity. If one cannot
trust people as citizens in the public sphere, one must close ranks and trust only those in one's
tribe, and tribal strife in America is usually racial in content.
In black America, this tribal mentality has often focused on those who are the public face of
the larger system. The relatively invisible WASP corporate and bank elites are rarely targeted
since they are so far removed from the everyday life of black people. Instead, the most visible
beneficiaries of black consumption, e.g., shop owners and landlords in black communities, or
the most vociferous critics of black strategies for progress, e.g., conservative opponents of
affirmative action, loom large as objects of black rage.
In Jewish America, this tribal mentality has often highlighted those who make the loudest
noise about Jewish conspiracy and Jewish control. The relatively quiet, covert anti-Semites in


--- PAGE 426 ---
high places in American life tend to receive more genteel treatment, while the most vocal anti-
Semites garner the bulk of Jewish rage.
In this scenario, WASP corporate and bank elites receive little attention regarding how they
promote policies and programs that contribute to black poverty, and covert anti-Semitic elites
get off relatively scot-free in regard to maintaining impediments to Jewish mobility. And since
the public sphere is racialized, any entry of black people in a public dialogue often means that
they-we-are on the defensive. So black people must give an account of our faults, condemn some
of our xenophobic spokespersons, explain the "silence" of black moral voices and so on. This
sense of black people having to do much of the "work" and bear most of the burden in public
dialogues generates a deep distrust of any such public dialogue for many black people.
Furthermore, any hint of a double standard at work in such a public dialogue spoils the
conversation. This is why those black people who do enter public dialogues are eager to hear
the faults, e.g., xenophobia, of other communities as well as that of black communities.
Smith's Fires in the Mirror is not only aware of this delicate set of issues, but also responds to
them with the kind of risk and sensitivity that sets black people at ease. She lets black people
know that a fair treatment of all our faults will transpire-so we can confront, examine, parody
and maybe begin to overcome these faults. And she is keenly aware that these activities will
never get off the ground without a clearing of the air so that bonds of trust can be forged.
As a citizen, Smith knows that there can be no grappling with black anti-Semitism and Jewish
anti-black racism without a vital public sphere and that there can be no vital public sphere
without genuine bonds of trust. As an artist, she knows that public performance has a unique
capacity to bring us together-to take us out of our tribal mentalities-for self-critical examination
and artistic pleasure. Fires in the Mirror is one sure sign, an oasis of hope, that human art can
triumph in the face of a frightening urban crisis-a crisis symptomatic of a national tragedy. It
provides us with a glimpse of what we need and what we must do if we are ever to overcome
the xenophobic cancer that threatens to devour the soul of the precious yet precarious democratic
experiment called America.
St)URCE: `Foreword- by Cornet West, copyright CO 1993 by Cornet West. From Frei in the Mirror
by Anna Deavere Smith. Used by permission of Doubleday, a division of Random House, Inc.


--- PAGE 427 ---
O N WALT W H I T M A N
This short piece on the greatest American poet was written for a French audienceone whose
perspective on the riches of Whitman's free verse and variable foot is often hampered by a
neoclassical lens that favors the fixed foot of the ancient line. This brief essay reflects a distinct
change in my view f Whitman compared to the one put forward in my initial reading of him in my
first book. The powerful work of Pr fis- sor George Kateb at Princeton led to a deeper
appreciation of Whitman's genius. N'edless to say, Whitman's Democratic Vistas remains the
secular bible for radical democrats.
WALT WHITMAN IS NOT only America's most original poet; more important, he is, in the
words of David Thoreau, "the greatest democrat the world has ever seen." His most profound
and poignant poems-"Song of Myself," "To Think of Time," "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry," "Out of
the Cradle Endlessly Rocking" and his famous homage to Abraham Lincoln, "When Lilacs Last
in the Dooryard Bloomed"-enact the heroic endeavor to make and remake a dynamic and
empathetic self. They attempt to sing in his words, "the song of a great composite democratic
individual." Similarly, his prosaic masterpiece of cultural criticism, Democratic Vistas (1871),
is the landmark text in modern democratic thought. It belongs alongside John Stuart Mill's On
Liberty (1859), W. E. B. Du Bois's The Souls of Black Folk (1903) and John Dewey's The
Public and Its Problems (1927) as a classic in the defense of individuality and social justice.
What sets Whitman the poet apart from his nineteenth-century contemporaries is his uncanny
ability to perfect the Wordsworthian revolution of writing poetry based on the spoken language
and everyday life. And what sets Whitman the critic apart from his fellow men and women of
letters is his enervating faith in democracy as a way of life and mode of being in the world-not
simply as a form of governance. It was only Whitman in his day who took up the exciting yet
frightening risk of living, thinking and feeling democratically; for him, democracy had deep
ontological, existential and social implications.
The unique experience of reading Whitman's poetry is that of a heartfelt presence of intimacy
solicited by a powerful voice that fuses soul, mind and body. His poetry resembles an oracular
epic that deploys dramatic speech, gesture and tone without any vulgar sense of the didactic and
sermonic. Yet it aims to convince and convert as well as to energize and provoke. Whitman's
intention is to release the creative powers of his readers to make and remake themselves, just as
his poetic style exemplified this creative process in Whitman himself. It is no accident that his
artistic models tended to be drawn not from literature, but rather the theater, music (especially
Italian opera and other popular forms) and, to some extent, charismatic religious rhetoric (of the
prophetic sort). He writes as if literature did not exist, with no quotations, no references to any
other writers or allusions to the classics or ancients. And he realizes that such writing has to be
an extremely self-conscious act of high craftsmanship to achieve this effect-the effect of touching
the hearts, moving the souls and changing the lives of his readers.
Like Nietzsche, Whitman associated this effect with life-enhancing selfscrutiny and heightened
self-creation. Unlike Nietzsche, Whitman located this effect in the moral and intellectual
capacities of common people. Similar to fellow countryman Ralph Waldo Emerson, Whitman


--- PAGE 428 ---
believed that every person was a potential Prometheus, a possible Napoleon of the spirit. His
democratic faith rests upon the pillars of voluntarism, fallibilism and experimentalism. His kind
of voluntarism accented a willful self-making and self-mastery that required great discipline and
energy. His kind of fallibilism stressed the Peircean slogan of never blocking the road to inquiry
or, in the words of George Kateb, "Nothing is for keeps." Lastly, his kind of experimentalism
promoted an existential risk that wagered on the abilities of common people to control their own
individual and collective destinies. In this sense, democracy for Whitman was never a static end
in itself, but rather a dynamic means for the cultivation and encouragement of the potentialities
and possibilities of unique individuals. In Democratic Vistas he states:
For it is not that democracy is of exhaustive account, in itself. It is that, as we see, it is the best,
perhaps only, fit and full means, formulator, general callerforth, trainer, for the million, not for
grand material personalities only, but for immortal souls. To be a voter with the rest is not so
much; and this, like every institute, will have its imperfections. But to become an enfranchised
man, and now, impediments removed, to stand and start without humiliation, and equal with the
rest: to commence or have the road clear'd to commence, the grand experiment of development,
whose end, (perhaps requiring several generations) may be the forming of a full-grown man or
woman-that is something ... the democratic formula is the only safe and preservative one for
coming times.
For Whitman, our present-day capitalist democracies-now in a self-congratulatory mood after
the collapse of repressive Communist regimes in Eastern Europe-are but initial steps in his
adventure of democracy, because too many "impediments," e.g., class, racial and sexual ones, to
self-development remain. Hence, his democratic challenge to us still requires a substantive
response.
SOURCE: From Beyond Eurocentrism and Multiculturalism, Vol. 1: Prophetic Thought in
fbstmoclern limes (Monroe, Me.: Common Courage Press, 1993), pp. 167-169.


--- PAGE 429 ---



--- PAGE 430 ---
ON AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
My friend and brother George Curry-visionary and courageous editor ofEmerge magazine-
convinced me to write this essay for his volume on affirmative action (the best such volume we
have . Afrmative-action policies, I believe, are inadequate, yet they remain one of the most sign
fuant ways of confronting the ug y legacy of white supremacy in American life. I thought it urgent
to provide a historical perspective on affirmative action because our public discussion had
ignored why it emerged and also had reduced it to "unqualed people of color getting jobs or
slots they didn't deserve." I felt it was important to shatter such amnesia and mendaci y.
TODAY'S AFFIRMATIVE-ACTION POLICY is not the appropriate starting point for a
substantive debate on affirmative action. Instead, we must begin with the larger historical and
moral context of the recent controversy. Why was the policy established in the first place? What
were the alternatives? Who questioned its operation, and when? How did it come about that a
civil rights initiative in the 1960s is viewed by many as a civil rights violation in the 1990s?
Whose civil rights are we talking about? Is there a difference between a right and an
expectation? What are the limits of affirmative action? What would the consequences be if
affirmative action disappeared in America?
THE AIM OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
The vicious legacy of white supremacy-institutionalized in housing, education, health care,
employment and social life-served as the historical context for the civil rights movement in the
late 1950s and 1960s. Affirmative action was a weak response to this legacy. It constituted an
imperfect policy conceded by a powerful political, business and educational establishment in
light of the pressures of organized citizens and the disturbances of angry unorganized ones.
The fundamental aim of affirmative action was to put a significant dent in the tightly controlled
networks of privileged white male citizens who monopolized the good jobs and influential
positions in American society. Just as Catholics and Jews had earlier challenged the white
Anglo-Saxon Protestant monopoly of such jobs and positions, in the 1960s blacks and women
did also. Yet since the historical gravity of race and gender outweighs that of religion and
ethnicity in American society, the federal government had to step in to facilitate black and
female entry into the U.S. mainstream and malestream. This national spectacle could not but
prove costly under later, more hostile circumstances.
The initial debate focused on the relative lack of fairness, merit and public interest displayed
by the prevailing systems of employment and education, principally owing to arbitrary racist and
sexist exclusion. In the 1960s, class-based affirmative action was not seriously considered,
primarily because it could easily have been implemented in such a way as to perpetuate
exclusion, especially given a labor movement replete with racism and sexism. Both Democratic
and Republican administrations supported affirmative action as the painful way of trying to
create a multiracial democracy in which women and people of color were not second-class
citizens. Initially, affirmative action was opposed by hard-line conservatives, usually the same
ones who opposed the civil rights movement led by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Yet the
pragmatic liberals and conservatives prevailed.


--- PAGE 431 ---
THE NEOCONSERVATIVE OPPOSITION
The rise of the neoconservatives unsettled this fragile consensus. By affirming the principle of
equality of opportunity yet trashing any mechanism that claimed to go beyond merit,
neoconservatives drove a wedge between civil rights and affirmative action. By claiming that
meritocratic judgments trump egalitarian efforts to produce tangible results, neoconservatives
cast affirmative-action policies as reverse racism and the major cause of racial divisiveness and
low black self-esteem in the workplace and colleges.
Yet even this major intellectual and ideological assault did not produce a wholesale
abandonment of affirmative action on behalf of business, political and educational elites. The
major factor that escalated the drive against affirmative action was the shrinking job
possibilities-along with stagnating and declining wagesthat were squeezing the white middle
class. Unfortunately, conservative leaders seized this moment to begin to more vociferously
scapegoat affirmative action and to seek its weakening or elimination.
Their first move was to define affirmative action as a program for "unqualified" women and,
especially, black people. Their second move was to cast affirmative action as "un-American," a
quota system for groups rather than a merit system for individuals. The third move was to claim
that antidiscrimination laws are enough, given the decline or end of racism among employers.
The latest move has been to soothe the agonized consciences of liberals and conservatives by
trying to show that black people are genetically inferior to whites in intelligence; hence, nothing
can be done.
The popularity-distinct from the rationality-of these moves has created a climate in which
proponents of affirmative action are on the defensive. Even those of us who admit the excesses
of some affirmative-action programs-and therefore call for correcting, not eliminating, them-give
aid and comfort to our adversaries. This reality reveals just how far the debate has moved in the
direction of the neoconservative and conservative perceptions in the country. It also discloses
that we need far more than weak policies like affirmative action to confront the legacies of white
supremacy and corporate power in the United States-legacies visible in unemployment and
underemployment, unaffordable health care and inadequate child care, dilapidated housing and
decrepit schools for millions of Americans, disproportionately people of color, women and
children.
The idea that affirmative action violates the rights of fellow citizens confuses a right with an
expectation. We all have a right to be seriously and fairly considered for a job or position. But
calculations of merit, institutional benefit and social utility produce the results. In the past, those
who were never even considered had their rights violated; in the present, those who are
seriously and fairly considered yet still not selected do not have their rights violated but rather
have their expectations frustrated.
For example, if Harvard College receives more than ten thousand applications for fourteen
hundred slots in the freshman class and roughly four thousand meet the basic qualifications, how
does one select the "worthy" ones? Six thousand applicants are already fairly eliminated. Yet


--- PAGE 432 ---
twenty-six hundred still will not make it. When considerations of factors other than merit are
involved, such as whether candidates are the sons or daughters of alumni, come from diverse
regions of the country or are athletes, no one objects. But when racial diversity is involved, the
opponents of affirmative action yell foul play. Yet each class at Harvard remains about 5 to 7
percent black-far from a black takeover. And affirmative action bears the blame for racial
anxiety and division on campus in such an atmosphere. In short, neoconservatives and
conservatives fail to see the subtle (and not so subtle) white-supremacist sensibilities behind
their "color-blind" perspectives on affirmative action.
THE LIMITS OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
Yet it would be myopic of progressives to make a fetish of affirmative action. As desirable as
those policies are-an insight held fast by much of corporate America except at the almost lily-
white senior-management levels-they will never ameliorate the plight and predicament of poor
people of color. More drastic and redistributive measures are needed in order to address their
situations, measures that challenge the maldistribution of wealth and power and that will trigger
cultural renewal and personal hope.
If affirmative action disappears from the American scene, many blacks will still excel and
succeed. But the larger signal that sends will be lethal for the country. It is a signal that white
supremacy now has one less constraint and black people have one more reason to lose trust in
the promise of American democracy.
SOURCE: "Affirmative Action in Context," by Cornel West, in The Affirmatiae Action Debate,
edited by George E. Curry, pp. 31-35. Copyright © 1996 by George E. Curry. Reprinted by
permission of Perseus Books Publishers, a member of the Perseus Books Group.


--- PAGE 433 ---
O N BLACK-BROWN RELATIONS
Black-brown relations will continue to pose a major challenge for American race matters in the
next century. In Los Angeles, .New York rk City and Washington, D. C., my friend and brother
Professor Jorge Klor de Alva and I engaged in public dialogues about these urgent issues. This
Harper's Magazine interview, conducted in April 1996, generated great controversy. Harper's
was flooded with letters accusing Jorge of stripping me of my blackness and claiming I gave too
much weight to racism in American life.
This CONVERSA71ON TOOK PLACE at the Colombe d'Or restaurant in Manhattan.
Jorge Klor de Alva U* the Class of 1940 Professor of Comparative Ethnic Studies and
Anthropology at the University of ' Cal f rnia at Berkeley. He is the author or editor of fourteen
books on anthropology, history and interethnic relations in the Americas. He is presently at work
on The Norton Anthology of Indigenous Mesoamerican Literature.
Earl Shorris is a contributing editor of 'Harper's Magazine and the author of 'ten books,
including Latinos: A Biography of the People; Ofay, a 1966 novel about a black-white love
affair; and Under the Fifth Sun: A Novel of Pancho Villa.
Cornel West is a professor of Afro-American Studies and Philosophy of Religion at Harvard
University. He is the author of eleven books on philosophy, African-American studies and
religion, including Race Matters. His latest book is The Future of the Race, coauthored with
Henry Louis Gates, Jr.
Earl Shorris: To begin, would you both answer one question with a yes or no, no more than that?
Cornel, are you a black man?
Cornet West: Yes.
Shorris: Jorge, do you think Cornel is a black man?
Jorge Klor de Alva: No, for now.
Shorris: Apparently we have something to talk about. Jorge, can you tell me why you say, "No,
for now"?
Klor de Alva: To identify someone as black, Latino or anything else, one has to appeal to a
tradition of naming and categorizing in which a ques tion like that can make sense-and be
answered with a yes or a no. In the United States, where unambiguous, color-coded identities
are the rule, Cornel is clearly a black man. Traveling someplace else, perhaps in Africa, Cornel
would not necessarily be identified as black. He might be seen as someone of mixed African
descent, but that's different from being identified as black. Cornel is only black within a certain
reductionist context. And that context, where color is made to represent not so much the hue of
one's skin as a set of denigrated experiences-and where these experiences are applied to
everyone who ever had an African ancestor-is one I consider to be extremely negative.


--- PAGE 434 ---
West: I think when I say I am a black man, I'm saying first that I am a modern person, because
black itself is a modern construct, a construct put forward during a particular moment in time to
fit a specific set of circumstances. Implicit in that category of "black man" is American white
supremacy, African slavery and then a very rich culture that responds to these conditions at the
level of style, mannerism, orientation, experimentation, improvisation, syncopation-all of those
elements that have gone into making a new people, namely, black people.
A hundred years ago I would have said that I was a "colored man." But I would still have been
modern, I'd still have been New World African, I'd still have been dealing with white
supremacy and I would still have been falling back on a very rich culture of resistance, a culture
that tried to preserve black sanity and spiritual health in the face of white hatred and job
ceilings. I think Jorge and I agree that we're dealing with constructs. And I think we agree in our
objections to essentialist conceptions of race, to the idea that differences are innate and outside
of history.
Klor de Alva: What advantage has it been, Cornel, for blacks to identify themselves as blacks?
West: For one, that identification was imposed. We were perceived as a separate people-
enslaved, Jim Crowed and segregated. To be viewed as a separate people requires coming to
terms with that separateness. This category "black" was simply a response to that imposition of
being a separate people, and also a building on one's own history, going back to Africa, yes, but
especially here in the United States. So when I say, for example, that jazz is a creation of black
people, I'm saying that it's a creation of modern people, New World African people. And we've
come up with various categories, including black, as a way of affirming ourselves as agents, as
subjects in history who create, initiate and so forth. So in that sense there have actually been
some real benefits.
Klor de Alva: When the Europeans arrived in Mexico, they confronted people whose level of
social organization was not unlike that of the Romans. Before millions died from newly
introduced diseases, the Europeans called them naturales, or "natural people." Afterwards the
survivors came to be called "Indians," a term the natives did not use until the nineteenth century,
preferring to identify themselves by their tribal group. And to the extent that they were able to do
that, they managed to maintain a degree of cultural integrity as separate groups. When that ended,
they were all seen as despised Indians.
The general label only helped to promote their denigration. Now, I agree that group designations
help build a sense of community, but as free and enslaved Africans took on the general labels
that oppressed them, they also helped to legitimize their being identified as one irredeemable
people. In the United States this unwillingness to challenge what has come to be known as the
one-drop rule-wherein anyone who ever had an African ancestor, however remote, is
identifiable only as black-has strengthened the hand of those who seek to trap them, and other so-
called people of color, in a social basement with no exit ladder.
West: When we talk about identity, it's really important to define it. Identity has to do with
protection, association and recognition. People identify themselves in certain ways in order to
protect their bodies, their labor, their communities, their way of life; in order to be associated


--- PAGE 435 ---
with people who ascribe value to them, who take them seriously, who respect them; and for
purposes of recognition, to be acknowledged, to feel as if one actually belongs to a group, a
clan, a tribe, a community. So that anytime we talk about the identity of a particular group over
time and space, we have to be very specific about what the credible options are for them at any
given moment.
There have been some black people in America who fundamentally believed that they were
wholehearted, full-fledged Americans. They have been mistaken. They tried to pursue that
option-Boom! Jim Crow hit them. They tried to press that option-Boom! Vanilla suburbs didn't
allow them in. So they had to then revise and recast their conception of themselves in terms of
protection, association and recognition. Because they weren't being protected by the police and
the courts. They weren't welcome in association. Oftentimes they were not welcome in white
suburbs. And they weren't being recognized. Their talents and capacities were debased,
devalued and degraded. "Black" was the term many chose. Okay, that's fine, we can argue about
that. But what are the other options? "Human being?" Yes, we ought to be human beings, but we
know that's too abstract and too vague. We need human communities on the ground, not simply at
the level of the ideal.
CONSTRUCTING HUMANS
Klor de Alva: Nobody is born black. People are born with different pigmentation, people are
born with different physical characteristics, no question about that. But you have to learn to be
black. That's what I mean by constructedness.
West: But are people born human? Is "human" itself constructed, as a category?
Klor de Alva: Certainly as a category, as a social, as a scientific category, of course it's a
construct. The species could have been identified in some other fashion. Since Columbus's
landfall you had very extensive debates as to whether indigenous peoples in the Americas were
human, like Europeans, or not. The priest Montesinos posed that question to the Spanish
colonists in 1511, and Las Casas, a fellow priest, and the theologian Sepulveda debated the
issue at mid-century before Emperor Charles V.
West: You see, this historical process of naming is part of the legacy not just of white
supremacy, but of class supremacy. Tolstoy didn't believe his peasants were actually human until
after he underwent conversion. And he realized, "My God, I used to think they were animals;
now they're human beings. I have a different life and a new set of lenses with which to view it."
So it is with any talk about blackness. It's associated with subhumanness, and therefore when we
talk about constructed terms like "black" or "peasant" or "human," it means that the whole thing's
up for grabs in terms of constructedness. And if that's so, then all we have left is history.
Klor de Alva: All identities are up for grabs. But black intellectuals in the United States, unlike
Latino intellectuals in the United States, have an enormous media space within which to shape
the politics of naming and to affect the symbols and meanings associated with certain terms.
Thus, practically overnight, they convinced the media that they were an ethnic group and shifted
over to the model of African-American, hyphenated American, as opposed to being named by


--- PAGE 436 ---
color. Knowing what we know about the negative aspects of naming, it would be better for all of
us, regardless of color, if those who consider themselves, and are seen as, black intellectuals
were to stop participating in the insidious one-drop-rule game of identifying themselves as
black.
West: If you're saying that we are, for the most part, biological and cultural hybrids, I think
you're certainly right. But at the same time there's a danger in calling for an end to a certain
history if we're unable to provide other options. Now, because I speak first and foremost as a
human being, a radical Democrat and a Christian, I would be willing to use damn near any term
if it helped to eliminate poverty and provide adequate health care and child care and a job with
a living wage, some control at the workplace and some redistribution of wealth downward. At
that point, you can call all black people colored. That's fine with me.
Shorris: Are you saying that you're willing to disappear?
West: Well, I would never disappear, because whatever name we would come up with, we're
still going to have the blues and John Coltrane and Sarah Vaughan and all those who come out of
this particular history. And simply because we change the name wouldn't mean that we would
disappear.
Klor de Alva: I think that's the wrong emphasis. I think what has happened is that much of the
cultural diversity that Cornel mentions has, in fact, disappeared behind this veil that has
transformed everybody with one drop of African blood into black. That reductionism has been a
much more powerful mechanism for causing diversity to disappear.
West: Well, what do you mean by disappearance at this point?
Klor de Alva: Let me answer your question from a slightly different perspective. We have, in the
United States, two mechanisms at play in the construction of collective identities. One is to
identify folks from a cultural perspective. The other is to identify them from a racial perspective.
Now, with the exception of black-white relations, the racial perspective is not the critical one
for most folks. The cultural perspective was, at one time, very sharply drawn, including the
religious line between Catholics and Protestants, Jews and Protestants, Jews and Catholics,
Jews and Christians. But in the course of the twentieth century, we have seen in the United States
a phenomenon that we do not see anyplace else in the world-the capacity to blur the differences
between these cultural groups, to construct them in such a way that they became insignificant and
to fuse them into a new group called whites, which didn't exist before.
West: Yes, but whiteness was already in place. I mean, part of the tragedy of American
civilization is precisely the degree to which the stability and continuity of American democracy
has been predicated on a construct of whiteness that includes the subordination of black people,
so that European cultural diversity could disappear into American whiteness while black folk
remain subordinated.
Klor de Alva: But everything, even whiteness, must be constructed and is therefore subject to
change.


--- PAGE 437 ---
West: Categories are constructed. Scars and bruises are felt with human bodies, some of which
end up in coffins. Death is not a construct. And so, when we're talking about constructs having
concrete consequences that produce scars and bruises, these consequences are not constructed,
they're felt. They're very real. Now, in light of that, I would want to accent the strengths of the
history of black resistance. One of the reasons why black people are so integral a part of
American civilization is because black people have raised a lot of hell. That's very important,
especially in a society in which power and pressure decide who receives visibility. By raising
hell I mean organization, mobilization, chaos-producing capacity, as in rebellion. That's a very
important point. Why is it important? It's important for me because what's at stake is the quality
of American civilization, whether it actually survives as a plausible idea.
That's why a discourse on race is never just a discourse on race. Richard Wright used to say that
the Negro is America's metaphor. It means you can't talk about one without talking about the
nature of the other. And one of the reasons we don't like to talk about race, especially as it
relates to black folk, is because we're forced to raise all the fundamental questions about what it
means to be an American, what it means to be a part of American democracy. Those are
exhausting and challenging questions.
The best of the black intellectual and political tradition has always raised the problem of evil in
its concrete forms in America. People like Frederick Douglass, Martin Luther King, Jr. and Ella
Baker never focused solely on black suffering. They used black suffering as a springboard to
raise issues of various other forms of injustice, suffering and so forth that relate to other groups-
black, brown, white workers, right across the board, you see. During the '80s, the major
opposition to rightwing Reaganism was what? Jesse Jackson's campaigns. Opening up to
workers, gay brothers, lesbian sisters, right across the board. Black suffering was a springboard.
Why? Because a question of evil sits at the heart of the American moral dilemma. With the stark
exception of its great artists-Melville, Faulkner, Elizabeth Bishop, Coltrane, Toni Morrison-
American society prefers to deny the existence of its own evil. Black folk historically have
reminded people of the prevailing state of denial.
ANGLOS MAY BE OF ANY RACE
Shorris: We've just demonstrated one of the tenets of this conversation. That is, we have
discussed almost exclusively the question of blacks in this society. But we started out saying we
would have a black-brown dialogue. Why does that happen? And not only in the media. Why did
it happen here, among us?
Klor de Alva: Part of the answer, as Cornel was pointing out, is that blacks are the central
metaphor for otherness and oppression in the United States. Secondly, in part I take your
question, when focused on Latinos, to mean, Don't Latinos have their own situation that also
needs to be described if not in the same terms, then at least in terms that are supplementary?
I'm not sure. The answer goes to the very core of the difference between Latinos and blacks and
between Cornet and myself: I am trying to argue against the utility of the concept of race. Why?
Because I don't think that's the dominant construct we need to address in order to resolve the
many problems at hand. Cornel wants to construct it in the language of the United States, and I


--- PAGE 438 ---
say we need a different kind of language. Do you know why, Earl? Because we're in the United
States and blacks are Americans. They're Anglos.
West: Excuse me?
Klor de Alva: They're Anglos of a different color, but they're Anglos. Why? Because the critical
distinction here for Latinos is not race, it's culture.
West: Speaking English and being part of American culture?
Klor de Alva: Blacks are more Anglo than most Anglos because, unlike most Anglos, they can't
directly identify themselves with a nation-state outside of the United States. They are trapped in
America. However unjust and painful, their experiences are wholly made in America.
West: But that doesn't make me an Anglo. If I'm trapped on the underside of America, that doesn't
mean that somehow I'm an Anglo.
Klor de Alva: Poor whites similarly trapped on the underside of America are also Anglos.
Latinos are in a totally different situation, unable to be captured by the government in the "five
food groups" of racial classification of Americans. The Commerce Department didn't know what
to do with Latinos; the census takers didn't know what to do with Latinos; the government didn't
know what to do with Latinos, and so they said, "Latinos can be of any race." That puts Latinos
in a totally different situation. They are, in fact, homologous with the totality of the United States.
That is, like Americans, Latinos can be of any race. What distinguishes them from all other
Americans is culture, not race. That's where I'm going when I say that Cornel is an Anglo. You
can be a Latino and look like Cornel. You can be a Latino and look like you, Earl, or like me.
And so, among Latinos, there's no surprise in my saying that Cornel is an Anglo.
West: But it seems to me that "Anglo" is the wrong word.
Klor de Alva: Hey, I didn't make it up, Cornel.
West: "Anglo" implies a set of privileges. It implies a certain cultural formation.
Klor de Alva: I'm trying to identify here how Chicanos see "Anglos."
West: But I want to try and convince those Latino brothers and sisters not to think of black folk
as Anglos. That's just wrong. Now, they can say that we're English-speaking moderns in the
United States who have yet to be fully treated as Americans. That's fine.
Klor de Alva: My friend, Cornel, I was speaking of one of the more benign Latino names for
blacks.
West: Let's hear some of the less benign then, brother.
WHAT COLOR Is BROWN?


--- PAGE 439 ---
Klor de Alva: Do you think of Latinos as white?
West: I think of them as brothers and sisters, as human beings, but in terms of culture, I think of
them as a particular group of voluntary immigrants who entered America and had to encounter
this thoroughly absurd system of classification of positively charged whiteness, negatively
charged blackness. And they don't fit either one: They're not white, they're not black.
Shorris: What are they?
West: I see them primarily as people of color, as brown people who have to deal with their
blackness-whiteness.
Shorris: So you see them in racial terms.
West: Well, no, it's more cultural.
Shorris: But you said "brown."
West: No, it's more cultural. Brown, for me, is more associated with culture than race.
Shorris: But you choose a word that describes color.
West: Right. To say "Spanish-speaking" would be a bit too vague, because you've got a lot of
brothers and sisters from Guatemala who don't speak Spanish. They speak an indigenous
language.
Klor de Alva: You have a lot of Latinos who aren't brown.
West: But they're not treated as whites, and "brown" is simply a signifier of that differential
treatment. Even if a Latino brother or sister has supposedly white skin, he or she is still Latino in
the eyes of the white privileged, you see. But they're not treated as black. They're not niggers.
They're not the bottom of the heap, you see. So they're not niggers, they're not white, what are
they? I say brown, but signifying culture more than color. Mexicans, Cubans, Puerto Ricans,
Dominicans, El Salvadorans all have very, very distinctive histories. When you talk about black,
that becomes a kind of benchmark, because you've got these continuous generations, and you've
got very common experiences.
Now, of course, blackness comprises a concealed heterogeneity. You've got West Indians,
you've got Ethiopians. My wife is Ethiopian. Her experience is closer to browns'. She came here
because she wanted to. She was trying to get out from under a tyrannical, Communist regime in
Ethiopia. She's glad to be in a place where she can breathe freely, not have to hide. I say, "I'm
glad you're here, but don't allow that one side of America to blind you to my side."
So I've got to take her, you know, almost like Virgil in Dante's Divine Comedy, through all of
this other side of America, so that she can see the nightmare as well as the dream. But as an
Ethiopian, she came for the dream and did a good job of achieving it.


--- PAGE 440 ---
Klor de Alva: So you are participating in the same process as the other Americans, other
Anglos-to use that complicated term-that same song and dance of transforming her into a highly
racialized American black.
West: It wasn't me. It was the first American who called her "nigger." That's when she started
the process of Americanization and racialization. She turned around and said, "What is a
nigger?"
Klor de Alva: And you're the one who explained it.
LBJ's OTHER DILEMMA
Shorris: How do you see yourself, Jorge?
Klor de Alva: I'm an American citizen. What are you, Cornel?
West: I am a black man trying to be an American citizen.
Klor de Alva: I'm an American citizen trying to get rid of as many categories as possible that
classify people in ways that make it easy for them to be oppressed, isolated, marginalized. Of
course, I'm a Chicano, I'm a Mexican-American. But for me to identify myself that way is not
much help. More helpful is my actually working to resolve the problems of poor folks in the
United States.
If I were black, I would heighten the importance of citizenship. Why? Because every time we've
seen huge numbers of immigrants enter the United States, the people most devastated by their
arrival, in terms of being relegated to an even lower rung on the employment ladder, have been
blacks.
Shorris: Are you defining "black" and "Latino" as "poor"?
Klor de Alva: No, no. I'm not defining them that way at all.
West: What's fascinating about this issue of race is the degree to which, in the American mind,
black people are associated with instability, chaos, disorder-the very things that America
always runs from. In addition, we are associated with hypersexuality, transgressive criminal
activity-all of the various stereotypes and images.
Shorris: We all know LBJ's comment about affirmative action. He said that it's the right thing to
do but that it will destroy the Democratic party. There certainly is every likelihood that it has
destroyed the Democratic party as it's traditionally been understood, that the Democratic party's
base in the South has disappeared, that the white South now votes Republican and many blacks
don't vote at all. What does this mean about America and the likelihood of any kind of
affirmative action, or any program for social justice, succeeding, either for blacks or for
Latinos?
Klor de Alva: No matter what kind of policy you set in place, there has to be something in it for


--- PAGE 441 ---
everybody or the policy is not going to last very long. And I'm not even going to get into the issue
that affirmative action has been essentially an African American thing, not a Latino thing.
West: But who have the major beneficiaries been? White women. And rightly so. More of them
have been up against the patriarchy than black and brown people have been up against racism.
Klor de Alva: If you're right that white women are the main beneficiaries, and if I'm right that
African Americans were meant to be the primary beneficiaries, then we have to ask if
affirmative action is an effective strategy for the resolution of the Latinos' problems. And has the
failure of class organization been due primarily to the racial divisions in the society? If so, then
race is a lamentable category for any kind of progressive organization, and we need an
alternative to affirmative action. I would remove the government from participation in the
naming game and its divisive racializing of identities.
West: To the degree to which the Democratic party cuts against a strong white-supremacist grain
in America and identifies with black people unequivocally, it will be destroyed. That's
essentially what the Republican strategy has been since 1968. The question then becomes, How
do we talk about these issues of class while also recognizing that any silence with respect to the
de facto white supremacy results in institutions that ought to be changed because they have little
moral content to them? If you're going to have a spineless, milquetoast Democratic party that
can't say a word against racism, it doesn't deserve to exist anyway.
Klor de Alva: Affirmative action has had the capacity to create a black middle class. Many of
these folks also have been the dominant group in the civil rights arena and in other human rights
areas. The net effect has been to create a layer, essentially of African Americans, within the
public sphere that has been very difficult for Latinos to penetrate and make their complaints
known.
West: That's true, and I think it's wrong. But at the same time, blacks are more likely to register
protests than Latinos are. That's what I mean by raising hell, you see. Black people are more
likely to raise hell than brown people.
Mor de Alva: But having been blocked from the public sector, I am concerned that Latinos
turning to the private one will buy deeply into U.S. concepts of race and will be even less
willing than Anglos to employ blacks. So for me, any new social or public policy must begin
with dismantling the language of race.
West: It's important not to conflate overcoming racial barriers with dismantling racial language.
I'm all for the former; I'm not so sure about the latter, because it ignores or minimizes the history
of racism. Most of human history is a history of oligarchs, unaccountable elites, manipulating
anger, rage, setting working people against one another to enable those elites to maintain their
position. That's why democracies are so rare in human history.
Shorris: Let me ask you a question about oligarchies. There are wealthy blacks, middle-class
blacks and many poor blacks. There are wealthy browns, middle-class browns many poor
browns. Are we talking about two groups or six? Are we talking about economic self-interest


--- PAGE 442 ---
being greater than any kind of cultural or racial self-interest?
West: There is always going to be self-interest operating. The question is, How does it relate to
the common good and contribute to the production, distribution and consumption of goods and
services so that there's some relative equality? Now, the six groups that you're talking about
have to do with class divisions within brown and black America. The class divisions are there.
And they're going to increase, there's no doubt about that. We're going to see more conservatives
in black America, more conservatives in brown America, because the country in general is
tilting in that direction and it's nice to be on the bandwagon. Even though we claim to be with the
underdog, it's very American to want to be with the winners. So as those class divisions
escalate, you're going to get class envy and class hatred within brown America as well as within
black America. One of the purposes of a black-brown dialogue is to head off precisely these
kinds of hatreds and various forms of bigotry.
Klor de Alva: At the level of the working class, we're seeing a great deal of cooperation, but as
you move up the economic scale, you have progressively more turf wars-how many slots blacks
get for this, how many slots Latinos get for that. Once you get to mayors of towns or cities, you
have Latinos who aren't going to do terribly much for the black community or, if they're black,
not very much for the Latino community.
Hence my emphasis on a solution that addresses economics rather than race.
West: We do have some data in terms of voting behavior when it comes to brown-black contrast.
Ninety percent of whoever votes in the black community still votes Democratic, right? Cubans, a
million Cubans in America, vote for Republicans. We have 2.8 million Puerto Ricans. They vote
Democratic roughly 60-40. We have 17.1 million Mexicans. They vote, the majority, for the
Democratic party. Black Americans tilt much more toward the Democratic party than any other
group, a la LBJ's idea: It's going to destroy this party, all these black folk over here. You see,
once you get that racial divide, you can promote white anxieties and white fears, and you can use
that for all it's worth. And the Republicans are going to use that into the twenty-first century.
There's no doubt about it.
Klor de Alva: Cornel, you're going back to the question of this evil empire.
West: No, it's not evil. It's a civilization in which there is a problem of evil.
Klor de Alva: All civilizations have a problem with evil.
West: But some-like the United States-are in sustained denial even as they view themselves as
the embodiment of good.
Klor de Alva: I don't agree with that. I would say that one of the significant ideological
possibilities, a door that's always open in the United Statesand it goes back to that old contrast
between Mexico and the United States-is that the United States has an epic vision, a vision of
good against evil. Latinos supposedly have a tragic vision-a conflict between two goods. But in
the United States, evil is always right there, and its defeat, like its creation, can therefore be


--- PAGE 443 ---
imagined. Cornel, you represent evil if you take off your three-piece suit and walk out into the
street at three o'clock in the morning.
West: Brother, I represent evil now, as a savage in a suit. Because this is black skin, what we
started with. So I don't need to take off my suit. But the difference is this: The tragic view-of
Unamuno or Melville or Faulkner or Morrison or Coltrane-is a much more morally mature view
of what it is to be human. The triumphant view of good over evil, which is Manichaean, is
sophomoric, childish. It has been dominant in America because our civilization is so spoiled.
Klor de Alva: I would like to agree with you, were it not for the fact that that tragic vision is
also a kind of Hamlet vision. It makes it very difficult to move, to overcome evil.
West: But better Hamlet than Captain Ahab in Moby-Dick. And that's precisely what Melville
was getting at-this tremendous voluntaristic view of the world in which a will to power, based
on an absolute conception of good over evil, allows one to lead toward what? Nihilism, self-
destruction. I'd go with Hamlet any day.
Klor de Alva: Not me, not at the price of indecision and paralysis.
West: Now, Martin Luther King, Jr. was neither Hamlet nor Captain Ahab, you see. King was
something else. King actually comes out of a black tradition with a profound sense of the tragic.
When he has Mahalia Jackson sing "Precious Lord," that's not triumphalism. That is the deepest
sense of the tragic nature of this civilization, the same tragic sense at work in the spirituals and
the blues and jazz. King was not in any way a triumphalist. The great King insight is that,
because he rejects triumphalism, he knows that the evil is not simply external, that it's in him. He
knew that there was white supremacy in him. That's what allowed him to love Bull Connor even
as he opposed Connor's white supremacy. That's the great Christian insight.
Klor de Alva: I agree with you. The evil is here in the United States, but it can be challenged.
ONE NIGHT OF LOVE
Shorris: Cornel, what do you most worry about in the future?
West: I think my fundamental concern is the disintegration of American civilization as black
people become more and more insulated, isolated, targeted and hence subjected to the most
brutal authoritarian rule in the name of democracy. And that's exactly where we're headed, so it's
not just a fear.
Klor de Alva: I would say that what you've described for America would be true of just about
any nation I know, particularly any multicultural nation. It's not something that's unique to the
United States. My biggest fear, as this nation moves into an inevitable browning, or
hybridization, is that there will be a very powerful minority, overwhelmingly composed of Euro-
Americans, who will see themselves in significant danger as a consequence of the way
democracy works: winner-take-all. And they will begin to renege on some of the basic
principles that created the United States and made it what it is.


--- PAGE 444 ---
Shorris: We've been talking about conflicts. Let's stipulate, unless you disagree, that the
advantage to the people in power of keeping those at the bottom at each other's throats is
enormous. That's the case in all societies. So we have blacks and browns, for the most part, at
the bottom. And they are frequently at each other's throats. They're fighting over immigration,
fighting over jobs and so on. A group of young people comes to you and says, "Tell us how to
make alliances, give us a set of rules for creating alliances between blacks and browns." What
would you answer?
West: I'd appeal to various examples. Look at Ernesto Cortes and the Industrial Areas
Foundation in Texas or the Harlem Initiatives Together in New York City, which have been able
to pull off black-brown alliances of great strength, the "breaking bread" events of the
Democratic Socialists of America. Or I'd talk about Mark Ridley-Thomas in south-central Los
Angeles and look at the ways in which he speaks with power about brown suffering as a black
city councilman, the way in which he's able to build within his own organization a kind of black-
brown dialogue. Because what you really see then is not just a set of principles or rules, but
some momentum at work.
Shorris: But how do you do that? What's the first step?
West: Well, it depends on what particular action you want to highlight. You could, say, look at
the movement around environmental racism, where you have a whole host of black-brown
alliances. With Proposition 187 you had a black-brown alliance among progressives fighting
against the conservatives who happened to be white, black and brown. In the tradeunion
movement, look at 1199, the health-care workers union, here in New York City. You've got
brown Dennis Rivera at the top, you've got black Gerry Hudson third in charge, running things.
That's a very significant coordinated leadership of probably the most important trade union in the
largest city in the nation. So it depends on the particular issue. I think it's issue by issue in light
of a broad vision.
Shorris: What is the broad vision?
West: Democracy, substantive radical democracy in which you actually are highlighting the
empowering of everyday people in the workplace and the voting booth so that they can live lives
of decency and dignity. That's a deeply democratic sensibility. And I think that sensibility can be
found in both the black and brown communities.
Klor de Alva: Unless there's a dramatic shift in ideology, linkages between people who are
identified as belonging to opposing camps will last only for the moment, like the graffiti I saw
during the L.A. riots: "Crips. Bloods. Mexicans. Together. Forever. Tonite [sic]," and then next
to that, "LAPD" crossed out and "187" underneath. That is, the alliances will work only as long
as there's a common enemy, in this case the LAPD, whose death the graffiti advocated by the
term "187," which refers here to the California Criminal Code for homicide.
As long as we don't have a fundamental transformation in ideology, those are the kinds of
alliances we will have, and they will be short-lived and not lead, ultimately, to terribly much.
Clearly, the progressive forces within the United States must be able to forge ideological


--- PAGE 445 ---
changes that would permit lasting linkages. At the core of that effort lies the capacity to address
common suffering, regardless of color or culture. And that cannot be done unless common
suffering, as the reason for linkages across all lines, is highlighted in place of the very tenuous
alliances between groups that identify themselves by race or culture.
Shorris: Let's see if anything happened in this conversation. Cornel, are you a black man?
West: Hell yes.
Shorris: Jorge, is he a black man?
Klor de Alva: Of course not.
SOURCE: Our Next Race Question: The Uneasiness Between Blacks and Latinos." Copyright 1996
by Harper'' Magazine. Reproduced from the April issue by special permission.


--- PAGE 446 ---
ON BLACK SEXUALITY
In 1993 I published the best-seller Race Matters-a book that has now sold nearly 400, 000
copies. This text appeared owing to the editorial genius of Deb Chasman of Beacon Bess. My,
favorite chapter is about the often overlooked issue of black sexuality-the elephant in the room
no one dares mention. Yet race and sexuality have always been linked in loaded ways. We will
never understand and change the experiences and perceptions of black bodies in our world until
we break the taboo of confronting candidly black sexuality and its myths.
"Here," she said, "in this here place, weflesh; flesh that weeps, laughs; flesh that dances on bare feet
in grass. Love it. Love it hard. Yonder they do not love your flesh. They despise it. They don't love
your eyes; they d just as soon pick em out. No more do they love the skin on your back. Yonder they
flay it. And 0 my people they do not love your hands. Those they only use, tie, bind, chop off and
leave empty. Love your hands! Love them. Raise them up and kiss them. Y ouch others with them, pat
them together, stroke them on your face 'cause they don't love that either. You got to love it, Yost! ...
This is flesh I'm talking about here. Flesh that needs to be loved."
-TONI MORRISON, BELOVED (1987)
AMERICANS ARE OBSESSED WITH sex and fearful of black sexuality. The obsession has to
do with a search for stimulation and meaning in a fast-paced, market-driven culture; the fear is
rooted in visceral feelings about black bodies fueled by sexual myths of black women and men.
The dominant myths draw black women and men either as threatening creatures who have the
potential for sexual power over whites or as harmless, desexed underlings of a white culture.
There is Jezebel (the seductive temptress), Sapphire (the evil, manipulative bitch) or Aunt
Jemima (the sexless, long-suffering nurturer). There is Bigger Thomas (the mad and mean
predatory craver of white women), Jack Johnson (the super performerbe it in athletics,
entertainment or sex-who excels over others naturally and prefers women of a lighter hue), or
Uncle Tom (the spineless, sexless-or is it im- potent?-sidekick of whites). The myths offer
distorted, dehumanized creatures whose bodies-color of skin, shape of nose and lips, type of
hair, size of hips-are already distinguished from the white norm of beauty and whose feared
sexual activities are deemed disgusting, dirty or funky and considered less acceptable.
Yet the paradox of the sexual polities of race in America is that, behind closed doors, the
dirty, disgusting and funky sex associated with black people is often perceived to be more
intriguing and interesting, while in public spaces talk about black sexuality is virtually taboo.
Everyone knows it is virtually impossible to talk candidly about race without talking about sex.
Yet most social scientists who examine race relations do so with little or no reference to how
sexual perceptions influence racial matters. My thesis is that black sexuality is a taboo subject in
white and black America and that a candid dialogue about black sexuality between and within
these communities is requisite for healthy race relations in America.
The major cultural impact of the 1960s was not to demystify black sexuality, but rather to
make black bodies more accessible to white bodies on an equal basis. The history of such


--- PAGE 447 ---
access up to that time was primarily one of brutal white rape and ugly white abuse. The Afro-
Americanization of white youth-given the disproportionate black role in popular music and
athletics-has put white kids in closer contact with their own bodies and facilitated more humane
interaction with black people. Listening to Motown records in the 1960s or dancing to hip-hop
music in the 1990s may not lead one to question the sexual myths of black women and men, but
when white and black kids buy the same billboard hits and laud the same athletic heroes, the
result is often a shared cultural space where some humane interaction takes place.
This subterranean cultural current of interracial interaction increased during the 1970s and
1980s even as racial polarization deepened on the political front. We miss much of what goes on
in the complex development of race relations in America if we focus solely on the racial card
played by the Republican party and overlook the profound multicultural mix of popular culture
that has occurred in the past two decades. In fact, one of the reasons Nixon, Reagan and Bush
had to play a racial card, that is, had to code their language about race, rather than simply call a
spade a spade, is due to the changed cultural climate of race and sex in America. The classic
scene of Senator Strom Thurmond-staunch segregationist and longtime opponent of interracial
sex and marriage-strongly defendingJudge Clarence Thomas-married to a white woman and an
alleged avid consumer of white pornography-shows how this change in climate affects even
reactionary politicians in America.
Needless to say, many white Americans still view black sexuality with disgust. And some
continue to view their own sexuality with disgust. Victorian morality and racist perceptions die
hard. But more and more white Americans are willing to interact sexually with black Americans
on an equal basis-even if the myths still persist. I view this as neither cause for celebration nor
reason for lament. Anytime two human beings find genuine pleasure, joy and love, the stars smile
and the universe is enriched. Yet as long as that pleasure, joy and love is still predicated on
myths of black sexuality, the more fundamental challenge of humane interaction remains unmet.
Instead, what we have is white access to black bodies on an equal basis-but not yet the
demythologizing of black sexuality.
This demythologizing of black sexuality is crucial for black America, because much of black
self-hatred and self-contempt has to do with the refusal of many black Americans to love their
own black bodies-especially their black noses, hips, lips and hair. Just as many white
Americans view black sexuality with disgust, so do many black Americans-but for very different
reasons and with very different results. White-supremacist ideology is based first and foremost
on the degradation of black bodies in order to control them. One of the best ways to instill fear
in people is to terrorize them. Yet this fear is best sustained by convincing them that their bodies
are ugly, their intellect is inherently underdeveloped, their culture is less civilized and their
future warrants less concern than that of other peoples. Two hundred and forty-four years of
slavery and nearly a century of institutionalized terrorism in the form of segregation, lynchings
and second-class citizenship in America were aimed at precisely this devaluation of black
people. This white-supremacist venture was, in the end, a relative failure-thanks to the courage
and creativity of millions of black people and hundreds of exceptional white folk like John
Brown, Elijah Lovejoy, Myles Horton, Russell Banks, Anne Braden and others. Yet this white
dehumanizing endeavor has left its toll in the psychic scars and personal wounds now inscribed


--- PAGE 448 ---
in the souls of black folk. These scars and wounds are clearly etched on the canvas of black
sexuality.
How does one come to accept and affirm a body so despised by one's fellow citizens? What
are the ways in which one can rejoice in the intimate moments of black sexuality in a culture that
questions the aesthetic beauty of one's body? Can genuine human relationships flourish for black
people in a society that assaults black intelligence, black moral character and black possibility?
These crucial questions were addressed in those black social spaces that affirmed black
humanity and warded off white contempt-especially in black families, churches, mosques,
schools, fraternities and sororities. These precious black institutions forged a mighty struggle
against the white-supremacist bombardment of black people. They empowered black children to
learn against the odds and supported damaged black egos so they could keep fighting; they
preserved black sanity in an absurd society in which racism ruled unabated; and they provided
opportunities for black love to stay alive. But these grand yet flawed black institutions refused to
engage one fundamental issue: black sexuality. Instead, they ran from it like the plague. And they
obsessively condemned those places where black sexuality was flaunted: the streets, the clubs
and the dance halls.
Why was this so? Primarily because these black institutions put a premium on black survival
in America. And black survival required accommodation with and acceptance from white
America. Accommodation avoids any sustained association with the subversive and
transgressive-be it communism or miscegenation. Did not the courageous yet tragic lives of Paul
Robeson and Jack Johnson bear witness to this truth? And acceptance meant that only "good"
Negroes would thrive-especially those who left black sexuality at the door when they "entered"
and "arrived." In short, struggling black institutions made a Faustian pact with white America:
avoid any substantive engagement with black sexuality and your survival on the margins of
American society is, at least, possible.
White fear of black sexuality is a basic ingredient of white racism. And for whites to admit
this deep fear even as they try to instill and sustain fear in blacks is to acknowledge a weakness-
a weakness that goes down to the bone. Social scientists have long acknowledged that interracial
sex and marriage is the most perceived source of white fear of black people-just as the repeated
castrations of lynched black men cries out for serious psychocultural explanation.
Black sexuality is a taboo subject in America principally because it is a form of black power
over which whites have little control-yet its visible manifestations evoke the most visceral of
white responses, be it one of seductive obsession or downright disgust. On the one hand, black
sexuality among blacks simply does not include whites, nor does it make them a central point of
reference. It proceeds as if whites do not exist, as if whites are invisible and simply don't matter.
This form of black sexuality puts black agency center stage with no white presence at all. This
can be uncomfortable for white people accustomed to being the custodians of power.
On the other hand, black sexuality between blacks and whites proceeds based on underground
desires that Americans deny or ignore in public and over which laws have no effective control.
In fact, the dominant sexual myths of black women and men portray whites as being "out of


--- PAGE 449 ---
control"-seduced, tempted, overcome, overpowered by black bodies. This form of black
sexuality makes white passivity the norm-hardly an acceptable self-image for a white-run
society.
Of course, neither scenario fully accounts for the complex elements that determine how any
particular relationship involving black sexuality actually takes place. Yet they do accent the
crucial link between black sexuality and black power in America. In this way, to make black
sexuality a taboo subject is to silence discussion of a particular kind of power black people are
perceived to have over whites. On the surface, this "golden" side is one in which black people
simply have an upper hand sexually over whites given the dominant myths in our society.
Yet there is a "brazen" side-a side perceived long ago by black people. If black sexuality is a
form of black power in which black agency and white passivity are interlinked, then are not
black people simply acting out the very roles to which the racist myths of black sexuality confine
them? For example, most black churches shunned the streets, clubs and dance halls in part
because these black spaces seemed to confirm the very racist myths of black sexuality to be
rejected. Only by being "respectable" black folk, they reasoned, would white America see their
good works and shed its racist skin. For many black church folk, black agency and white
passivity in sexual affairs was neither desirable nor tolerable. It simply permitted black people
to play the role of the exotic "other"-closer to nature (removed from intelligence and control)
and more prone to be guided by base pleasures and biological impulses.
Is there a way out of this catch-22 situation in which black sexuality either liberates black
people from white control in order to imprison them in racist myths or confines blacks to white
"respectability" while they make their own sexuality a taboo subject? There indeed are ways
out, but there is no one way out for all black people. Or, to put it another way, the ways out for
black men differ vastly from those for black women. Yet, neither black men nor black women
can make it out unless both get out, since the degradation of both are inseparable though not
identical.
Black male sexuality differs from black female sexuality because black men have different
self-images and strategies of acquiring power in the patriarchal structures of white America and
black communities. Similarly, black male heterosexuality differs from black male homosexuality
owing to the self-perceptions and means of gaining power in the homophobic institutions of
white America and black communities. The dominant myth of black male sexual prowess makes
black men desirable sexual partners in a culture obsessed with sex. In addition, the Afro-
Americanization of white youth has been more a male than a female affair, given the prominence
of male athletes and the cultural weight of male pop artists. This process results in white youth-
male and female-imitating and emulating black male styles of walking, talking, dressing and
gesticulating in relation to others. One irony of our present moment is that just as young black
men are murdered, maimed and imprisoned in record numbers, their styles have become
disproportionately influential in shaping popular culture.
For most young black men, power is acquired by stylizing their bodies over space and time in
such a way that their bodies reflect their uniqueness and provoke fear in others. To be "bad" is
good not simply because it subverts the language of the dominant white culture, but also because


--- PAGE 450 ---
it imposes a unique kind of order for young black men on their own distinctive chaos and solicits
an attention that makes others pull back with some trepidation. This young black male style is a
form of self-identification and resistance in a hostile culture; it also is an instance of machismo
identity ready for violent encounters. Yet in a patriarchal society, machismo identity is expected
and even exalted-as with Rambo and Reagan. Yet a black machismo style solicits primarily
sexual encounters with women and vio lent encounters with other black men or aggressive
police. In this way, the black male search for power often reinforces the myth of black male
sexual prowess-a myth that tends to subordinate black and white women as objects of sexual
pleasure. This search for power also usually results in a direct confrontation with the order-
imposing authorities of the status quo, that is, the police or criminal justice system. The
prevailing cultural crisis of many black men is the limited stylistic options of self-image and
resistance in a culture obsessed with sex, yet fearful of black sexuality.
This situation is even bleaker for most black gay men who reject the major stylistic option of
black machismo identity, yet who are marginalized in white America and penalized in black
America for doing so. In their efforts to be themselves, they are told they are not really "black
men," not machismo-identified. Black gay men are often the brunt of talented black comics like
Arsenio Hall and Damon Wayans. Yet behind the laughs lurks a black tragedy of major
proportions: the refusal of white and black America to entertain seriously new stylistic options
for black men caught in the deadly endeavor of rejecting black machismo identities.
The case of black women is quite different, partly because the dynamics of white and black
patriarchy affect them differently and partly because the degradation of black female
heterosexuality in America makes black female lesbian sexuality a less frightful jump to make.
This does not mean that black lesbians suffer less than black gays-in fact, they suffer more,
principally owing to their lower economic status. But this does mean that the subculture of black
lesbians is fluid and the boundaries are less policed precisely because black female sexuality in
general is more devalued, hence more marginal in white and black America.
The dominant myth of black female sexual prowess constitutes black women as desirable
sexual partners-yet the central role of the ideology of white female beauty attenuates the
expected conclusion. Instead of black women being the most sought after "objects of sexual
pleasure"-as in the case of black men-white women tend to occupy this "upgraded," that is,
degraded, position primarily because white beauty plays a weightier role in sexual desirability
for women in racist patriarchal America. The ideal of female beauty in this country puts a
premium on lightness and softness mythically associated with white women and downplays the
rich stylistic manners associated with black women. This operation is not simply more racist to
black women than that at work in relation to black men; it also is more devaluing of women in
general than that at work in relation to men in general. This means that black women are subject
to more multilayered bombardments of racist assaults than black men in addition to the sexist
assaults they receive from black men. Needless to say, most black men-especially professional
ones--simply recycle this vulgar operation along the axis of lighter hues that results in darker
black women bearing more of the brunt than their already devalued lighter sisters. The psychic
bouts with self-confidence, the existential agony over genuine desirability and the social burden
of bearing and usually nurturing black children under these circumstances breeds a spiritual


--- PAGE 451 ---
strength of black women unbeknownst to most black men and nearly all other Americans.
As long as black sexuality remains a taboo subject, we cannot acknowledge, examine or
engage these tragic psychocultural facts of American life. Furthermore, our refusal to do so
limits our ability to confront the overwhelming realities of the AIDS epidemic in America in
general and in black America in particular. Although the dynamics of black male sexuality differ
from those of black female sexuality, new stylistic options of self-image and resistance can be
forged only when black women and men do so together. This is so not because all black people
should be heterosexual or with black partners, but rather because all black people-including
black children of so-called mixed couples-are affected deeply by the prevailing myths of black
sexuality. These myths are part of a wider network of white-supremacist lies whose authority
and legitimacy must be undermined. In the long run, there is simply no way out for all of us other
than living out the truths we proclaim about genuine humane interaction in our psychic and sexual
lives. Only by living against the grain can we keep alive the possibility that the visceral feelings
about black bodies fed by racist myths and promoted by market-driven quests for stimulation do
not forever render us obsessed with sexuality and fearful of each other's humanity.
SoURCI:: "Black Sexuality: The Taboo Subject." Race Matlrrs (Boston: Beacon Press, 1993), pp.
83-91.


--- PAGE 452 ---
O N BLACK N A T I O N A L I S M
In 1989 Michael Lerner invited me to a conference in New York City sponsored by his
prophetic Jewish magazine, Tikkun. We became close friends and genuine brothers. We worked
together with the marvelous Jane Isay f r three years on our book, Jews and Blacks: Let the
Healing Begin (1995). In black churches, ewish synagogues and colleges around the country we
conducted candid dialogues on black-Jewish relations. We remain special soul mates. In this
exchange we explore the complex meaning of black nationalism-a subject often ignored or
misconstrued by much of America, owing to white fears of black rage and revenge.
IN THE PERIOD AFTER the decline of the civil rights movement and the alliance it generated
between blacks and Jews, nationalist forces in each community have pushed against greater
cooperation and toward separation. In this chapter we explore the meaning of black nationalism
and its role in this dynamic.
Lerner: How do you think the Christian Jewish dynamic relates to the black Jewish one?
West: It's like this. In the black Christian world there is in a significant sense an accent on a love
that is universalistic and internationalist. This is a quite different emphasis from most or much
Christianity in the United States, and opens up the possibility of multiracial alliances. King's
movement was one manifestation of this. It's Christianity's universalistic ethic that enables it to
make it in the jaws of defeat and still afford some sense of agency or possible moral action,
which is important since the black sense of the tragic is very much at the center of black
Christianity.
I don't expect to see racism eliminated in American life, but we still fight against it. Never give
up combat till the end. Betterment is always possible. And no matter how secular Jews are, they
still have core elements of a progressive worldview that means they would not want to give up
on human amelioration in history. There's no doubt in my mind that those who will be on the
cutting edge of blackJewish dialogue on the ground will be the prophetic black churches.
Lerner: The black churches have elements of black nationalism in them also, don't they?
West: Not too much. We have to make a distinction between black cultural distinctiveness and
black nationalism.
Lerner: Tell me about that. What is black cultural distinctiveness?
West: It's a history of black styles and mannerisms: ways of singing, praying, worshipping and
communicating that have created a certain sense of community and sustained sanity. There's no
doubt that in syncopated styles, rhythmic styles and repetitive and antiphonal styles one sees a
distinctiveness among black folk in the United States. The black church plays a crucial role in
the creation of these styles and mannerisms. This is not black nationalism because nationalism is
an ideology.
Louis Armstrong had a black style. How he walked, talked, blew his horn and so forth: but he


--- PAGE 453 ---
wasn't a black nationalist. Wynton Marsalis in the same way comes deeply out of a tradition of
black cultural distinctiveness. In many ways he recognizes the degree to which black styles and
mannerisms have influenced his sense of who he is, but he's not a black nationalist. You can't
assume that anybody who revels in black cultural distinctiveness is a black nationalist.
Lerner: So a black nationalist is usually somebody who says what?
West: A black nationalist is somebody who says that black people must close ranks, be
suspicious of others and even hold them at arm's length. Primarily they stress black unity,
solidarity, togetherness in a quest for a black nation-a place of black safety and self-
determination. It's probably a good thing to have a certain healthy suspicion of others, because
black people can be used and abused, but if you want to get people to change, you have to give
openness a chance.
Lerner: Many people say that a primary task for blacks in this period is to discover their own
black authenticity and their own identity. That the primary way in which blacks have been
undermined, and continue to be undermined, is by the cultural materialism of the dominant
society. And that black nationalists are taking a leadership role in trying to reestablish a struggle
for black authenticity. I wonder if that's true. Where does this struggle for black authenticity and
black identity fit into your picture of what needs to happen for blacks?
West: Where I agree with black nationalism unequivocally and wholeheartedly is the attempt to
provide a sense of the history of African people-a history that's either been denied,
marginalized, degraded or denigrated. In that regard, black nationalists arc certainly attacking
the vicious legacy of white supremacy, and I agree with that entirely, as would you your self. We
want to strip the past of white-supremacist lies that have so often regulated much of Western
historiography about people of color who come to America-especially Africans.
Now of course in a market culture where a sense of history is increasingly farfetched and distant,
it's no accident that the sense of history can easily be displaced by very crude nostalgic myths
about the past. Some black nationalists have fallen into this trap: of just generating romantic
conceptions of the past to undergird self-esteem. I think that's short-sighted, and I think it
undermines the capacity of black people to critically confront our past.
This sense of history that the black nationalists call for, I agree with it, very much so. I don't like
the term "black authenticity" because it implies that's there has been and is one black essence,
one black core, one black center-and that one group has a monopoly on that center. That's
precisely what history is not. History is about the multiple strands of various traditions, about
communities clashing, quarreling, appropriating. Talking about "authenticity" is a way of
trumping any serious discussion about the black condition, past and present. Black nationalists
can fall into traps of nostalgia and romanticism as they attempt to generate their own myths, their
own fictions.
Lerner: We have those same things in certain versions of Zionism.
West: It's true in every group, every tribe and every nation. Look at the history of America in


--- PAGE 454 ---
terms of all the celebratory lies that tried to hide the realities, truths and facts they didn't want to
confront.
Lerner: The question is: What can replace that nationalism and still retain a commitment to
validating the needs of people for a cultural identity that is not defined solely in terms of their
relationship with the capitalist market? What's the answer to that? It seems to me that the
consciousness of the black community today is unbelievably permeated by the capitalist market-
and this gets reflected in popular culture in an obsession with fancy clothes, sexuality turned into
a commodity and salvation through consumption-with the possible exception of the black
churches.
West: Yes, we have in the black churches a community that sustains members. We have a style,
form, and level of content, definitely so. But as you know, it isn't completely unaffected by the
market. There's a lot of market religion in both the Jewish and the black community. T. S. Eliot
was absolutely right when he said you don't inherit a tradition, you have to obtain it by great
labor. The only way you preserve a sense of history is to have a community and tradition
struggling in the present to keep the best of the past alive. That's one of the real paradoxes in our
under standing of the past: It stays alive only to the degree to which persons in the present keep it
alive. Many church communities in the black community and religious communities in the Jewish
community are able to do that. Not them alone, but they are the dominant ones. Needless to say,
market religion that effaces the past is growing in both black and Jewish communities.
The struggle is amplified by the degree to which market forces become more and more powerful,
more and more erosive of historical memory. In place of historical memory you get either
nostalgia, a "fossilcollecting," antiquarian sensibility, or a kind of icon selection of the past,
where you simply talk about the "greatest hits"-the great figures who come back out of context
solely as the icons before whom you worship, rather than as live figures whom you learned
from, criticized and sympathized with.
Although it's sometimes hard to acknowledge it amongst narrow black nationalists, there is
actually such a thing as progressive black nationalism.
Lerner: What's the distinction?
West: A progressive black nationalist is like a progressive Zionist. They have a real solidarity
with their people, but they also want to accent the humanity of others who are engaging in
humane interaction across groupings. Their nationalism has an internationalist, universalistic
dimension. However, there's a big tension between the universalism they expound and the
nationalism they are forced to defend, so they are rarely the ones in power. They are, rather, the
prophetic critics of their fellow nationalists.
Lerner: How can we get people to spend less time listening to Farrakhan and more time listening
to progressive people?
West: We've got to institutionalize progressive voices in both communities so that they become
more visible and effective. There are a number of persons who right now sympathize with and


--- PAGE 455 ---
even follow Minister Farrakhan, who in the early part of the twenty-first century will be radical
democrats. These people are fundamentally concerned about black suffering; they go into
Farrakhan's organization because they are concerned about this suffering and in the end they feel
that it doesn't provide enough vision and insight and analysis. So they end up as progressives.
This is the trajectory of persons such as Malcolm X, Amiri Baraka, Sonia Sanchez. There is a
struggle going on over the minds, bodies and souls of young black Americans, some of whom
will go through Minister Louis Farrakhan's organization and end up as progressives. How soon?
It's hard to say. The pro gressive black nationalist position is the closest I come to, although I
personally don't consider myself a nationalist of any sort.
Lerner: Can you summarize your position on that?
West: Any kind of nationalism, for the most part, will be used in a way that ends up
dehumanizing folk. We all need recognition and some form of protection, but usually in these
dominant forms the quest for group unity results in attacking someone else. The history of
nationalism seems to be part and parcel of the history of tribalism. It tends to be deeply
patriarchal and homophobic with little sense of our common humanity. Black nationalism has
cone to be problematic because every black nationalist has to sooner or later have some relation
with territory or land. Black people in America are a people without land, that's part of our
heritage.
Lerner: Do you ever have a longing for land?
West: Yes. We have a house in Ethiopia. When I go to Ethiopia I feel in some sense at home. I
could certainly envision living there, because racial tension is virtually nonexistent. It's not
romantic, because tribal strife does exist; it's just a question of being in a country where black
humanity is taken so utterly for granted. But I'm still an outsider there.
Lerner: American Jews have programs whereby they can go to Israel for a year, or maybe just
for the summer. What would be wrong with having similar institutionalized ways of bringing
folk over to Africa?
West: I rather like that idea. But there is a trap of which I'm leery. There are very positive things
about Africa in terms of being comfortable, but negative things in terms of being New Worlders
in the Old World. A lot of blacks have romantic notions of Africa, and I would want to fight
against that. It's the same with Jews. You think you can go to Israel and, lo and behold, all the
tensions of being Jewish in Chicago or New York disappear. Or it's a guilt trip, almost an
appeal to machismo: "Come to where the real action is." This is an idolatrous trap, because of
course you want to contribute to Jewish survival, but it's easy to cheapen that and not recognize
that all of us are born into circumstances not of our choosing. You can't leapfrog out of your
circumstance in order to grab hold of some easy identity.
Lerner: So, on a personal level, do you feel you can be part of this society?
West: Yes and no. After 244 years of slavery and 87 years of Jim Crow, I think black people in
America will always have some sense of being outsiders. Yet there's a sense in which I am a


--- PAGE 456 ---
part of it, because the nation is unimaginable without black people in the culture, either past or
present. It's the tension between being an outsider and being more integral to America than 90
percent of Americans. It's what Du Bois called "double consciousness." I'm thirteenth-generation
American! That's about as integral as you can get.
Lerner: The twentieth century has been full of horrendous and disgusting national struggles. Right
now we have a picture in our mind of Serbs and Bosnians killing each other, and we see the
possibility of the same thing reemerging throughout Eastern Europe. A progressive person might
explain black nationalism as a response to the failure of society to give blacks equality: a
distorted response, but one they can understand. When black nationalism pops up in America
today and manifests in antiSemitic ways, Jews have a lot of questions about it. Was black
nationalism flourishing when blacks were slaves? Was there nationalism in Africa?
West: Nationalism per se is a modern phenomenon. It's a post-Napoleonic development in
modern Europe. Once organizing activity began to take place for the purpose of promoting self-
determination among black people, nationalism became one of the more attractive ideologies
that could attempt to mobilize them.
Lerner: When did it happen, this activity to organize black people?
West: Slave insurrections, hundreds of them. They were proto-black nationalist efforts. But
organizationally speaking, black nationalism doesn't really take off till you get Chief Sam's "back
to Africa" movement in Oklahoma trying to constitute a nation in a serious sense. By "serious" I
mean talking about land and territory, because so much of black nationalism avoids this
fundamental issue. Chief Sam's movement organized people to go back to Africa; they actually
went back to Sierra Leone.
Lerner: When was this?
West: Right after the attempt by a group of blacks to make Oklahoma an all-black state between
1900 and 1905. It wasn't successful, but it left a legacy. The first part of the legacy was black
municipalities scattered all over Oklahoma. The second part was the founding in 1896 of a
black/Judaic religious institution. That institution in Boley, Oklahoma, still exists today, but it
isn't as visible because of the black Hebrews in the urban centers. That black/Judaic movement
had a significant impact on black group thinking. It was nationalist thinking, but it used ajewish
model for organizing black people, with their own Temple, their own rabbis and so forth.
Lerner: They self-consciously modeled themselves on Jews?
West: It was very much based on the Old Testament-they shunned the New Testament. Curtis
Caldwell is writing the history of this fascinating group. Now as I said before, Chief Sam was
the third part of the legacy of the attempt to make Oklahoma an all-black state. He had a real
impact on Marcus Garvey, who reached the conclusion all black nationalists reach, which is
deep pessimism regarding America's will toward racial justice. They give up on the possibility
of ever living lives of dignity and decency in America, and they leave. This brother, Chief Sam,
organized folk in such a way that he took off in a boat with sixty-five people-which means he


--- PAGE 457 ---
was more successful than Marcus Garvey. Garvey never saw Africa, though he talked about it
every day. But when Garvey arrived in the States in 1915, he put together the largest mass
movement among black people ever. And it happened to be a thorough-going black nationalist
movement.
Lerner: Why did it catch on?
West: Garvey was able to speak to the deep sense of disillusionment and disappointment of
uprooted black people after their participation in the First World War. Many had risked their
lives. Of course we can't forget the major race riot in East St. Louis, July 1917. Tulsa,
Oklahoma, 1921, another race riot. In fact in the summer of 1919 there were over twenty major
race riots. Now keep in mind that at this period, "race riot" means white Americans murdering,
pillaging and plundering in black communities.
Lerner: Not like today's race riots, which arc largely blacks acting in response to their
oppression.
West: You started getting blacks on the aggressive on a grand scale with Watts in August 1965.
Though it's true there were exceptions, as in Harlem in 1943. Or, in Tulsa, Oklahoma, you had a
number of black soldiers who organized and began shooting at policemen. This was just mind-
boggling for most of white America. Anyway, there were black people becoming progressively
disillusioned in terms of the promise of American democracy, and giving up.
Lerner: After the compromise of 1876, when Reconstruction was dismantled, why were blacks
disillusioned then?
West: There was a majority of black people in the South, but it was difficult, if not impossible,
to organize politically, because they were silenced by terrorism. A number of voices emerged,
but they ended up swinging on trees. The level of terrorism was instilling fear into black hearts
and black souls, so that it was impossible to overcome it in order to get them to organize. That is
one of the reasons why Garvey's movement was centered in New York and the North. Garvey
himself had to meet the Ku Klux Klan in order to let them know that there were going to be some
Universal Negro Improvement Association branches in the South, and they ought not to mess
with those branches. Because these branches were afraid to meet. The NAACP, too; it was
basically an illegal organization, and if they met, the white reactionary forces would come down
hard.
Lerner: I'm not sure I understand. What do you mean, "if they met"?
West: If you formed an NAACP branch in one of a large number of Southern cities, the space
would be torched, the individuals would be hunted down.
Lerner: So why would the Klan listen to Garvey?
West: Well, that's very interesting. In some ways they were similar. Both believed in
segregation; both believed blacks ought to leave the country. Garvey continually made the same


--- PAGE 458 ---
three points. One: "You are a mighty race, you can do what you will." Two: "Our basic problem
is disorganization. Black people must organize and mobilize." Three: "Don't ever be duped into
believing that your white allies are reliable. Under conditions of economic, social, political and
sexual competition, every white person is a potential Klansman." When he invited the Klan and
the Anglo-Saxon Club to Liberty Hall in Harlem he said, "This is what white Americans really
think. Liberals don't want to believe it, but you push them far enough or desire their daughters
and they'll say the same things." So Garvey's appeal to blacks' postwar pessimism came at a
propitious moment. Black nationalism was predicated on deep pessimism, and on black people
understanding self-determination in a mode in which the issue of land was never seriously
addressed. Garvey wanted to but could not really address the issue of land. He would either
have to talk about colonizing Africa, the way it had been done with Liberia; or about getting the
Africans who were there to invite the African Americans over; or he had to go symbolic and talk
about a state of mind rather than a nation-state, which is primarily what he did. "Decolonize your
mind, your body, your soul." Which was very positive in terms of affirmation, and Garvey was
not a black supremacist. Garvey's movement, of course, was crushed by the U.S. government and
the disillusionment remained, to emerge again with Elijah Muhammad's movement.
Lerner: You seem to be giving black nationalism a pivotal role here.
West: Black nationalism is an integral part of black history, but I don't believe it is central to it.
That is because the pessimism on which black nationalism was predicated was never fully
embraced in an organizational sense. Black people usually still maintain some possibility for a
multiracial coalition, for trying to extend the scope of democracy in America. I think the role of
the black church has been crucial in this, because what it has done historically is steal the
thunder from the black nationalists. It highlights black cultural distinctiveness and, despite
calling for group cohesiveness, its message is universalistic. It has always been open to others
willing to work with us. By saying that self-love and self-affirmation arc key, it took center
ground over black nationalism. So the black church is much more central to black history than
black nationalism.
SOURCE: "Black Nationalism," Jews and Bleaki: A Dialogue on Race, Religion, and Culture in
America, by Michael Lerner and Gornel West, pp. 91-114. Used by permission of Putnam Berkley, a
division of Penguin Putnam Inc.


--- PAGE 459 ---
TENSIONS WITH JEWISH FRIENDS AND FOES
In 1997, my friend and brother lack Salzman and I published a coedited scholarly collection if
new essays (Struggles in the Promised Land) exploring the vexed history of black Jewish
relations, from the curse of Ham to Jews in the slave trade, coalitions in the civil rights and left
movements, blacks and Jews in Hollywood and tensions over affirmative action and Israel. My
essay represents my first and only response to vicious attacks on my work and life by a few
Jewish journalists and writers. I received strong support from many Jewish intellectuals and
solid backing from most of the black intelligentsia.
I GREW UP IN a black world withoutJews. Yet my evolving worldview about life and love,
faith and struggle was and is deeply shaped by the Jewish world-be it the Bible, Marx,
Durkheim, Freud, Kafka, Wittgenstein or Lukacs. Most of the flesh-and-blood Jews I have
encountered are descendants of Eastern European immigrants who arrived in America at the turn
of the century. And the vast majority of my Jewish friends tend to be progressive intellectuals
and activists. So my personal reflections on black Jewish relations preclude any broad
generalizations or monolithic formulations.
My first significant and sustained interaction with Jews-especially in college and graduate
school-was exciting and exhilarating. I had never been so impressed with such an engaging
group of white Americans so deeply concerned about white supremacy and other social evils. In
our numerous discussions in study groups, classes, cafes and political organizations, we
informed and inspired one another in regard to our democratic socialist visions, analyses and
strategies for social change. We also reveled in critical evaluations of artists and writers in
highbrow and popular culture. And though we never worshiped the New York intellectuals, I
always had a good word and strong argument for my favorites-Delmore Schwartz, Dwight
Macdonald, Harold Rosenberg, Irving Howe and Michael Harrington (two non Jews out of
five). Yet none of these figures compared to my major intellectual heroes at this young age-
Turgenev, Kierkegaard, Marx, Chekhov, Niebuhr, Wittgenstein, Du Bois, Baldwin, Ellison,
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche (two Jews out of eleven).
This period lasted roughly from the late 1960s to the mid-1970s. The rise of visible Jewish
neoconservative thinkers shattered my parochial perceptions of the Jewish intelligentsia. In stark
contrast to the cosmopolitan sensibilities of my Jewish progressive friends, I detected a strong
dose of tribalism in the complex, convoluted and hardly convincing arguments ofJewish
neoconservatives. Ironically, this postwar quest (1967, 1973 wars against Israel) for Jewish
identity was influenced by the post-civil rights quest for black identity-a quest predominant
among my black intellectual friends and comrades. On the domestic front, the astonishing entry
of many American Jews into the middle class produced a new cultural situation. Increasing
exogamous marriages, diluted Jewish rituals and dull suburban life raised crucial issues
ofJewish continuity and identity. On the Israeli front, the very survival of the country was at
stake, and U.S. support-financial and military-was indispensable for its sustenance. The pressing
issues of affirmative action (the relative weighing of merit, fairness and public interest) and
Zionism (the relative weighing of Jewish survival, secular democracy and Palestinian
subordination) loomed large-even among my Jewish progressive friends.


--- PAGE 460 ---
This painful and poignant struggle in the Jewish world perplexed me for two reasons. First, I
considered affirmative action neither a panacea to vicious racist practices of the past nor a fetish
to wipe clean class constraints in American life. Instead, I viewed affirmative action as a weak
strategy to break the back of a tight, well-to-do white male network that had disproportionate
access to power, wealth, status and influence. So retreat on affirmative action was a sure sign of
a progressive or liberal failure of nerve and commitment. Second, I was never a Zionist (like
Martin Luther King, Jr., Bayard Rustin and W. E. B. Du Bois). I strongly believe that Jewish
survival depends on statehood for security. But I also believe that in the long run only a secular
democratic state-with no special Jewish character-can secure Jewish survival. Hence, I was
confused by the intense secular argument for a full-fledged meritocracy in America and the
heartfelt Zionist claims for a Jewish state in Israel. As a radical democrat, my dilemma was how
to fight the subtle forms of white and male supremacy still operating alongside affirmative
action, shatter the silence on class constraints and put forward a moral critique of Zionism
without downplaying the need for Jewish survival or falling into antiSemitic traps. Needless to
say, most of my Jewish leftist friends were progressive Zionists. So we argued intensely and
respectfully as comrades.
In parts of the black world, my position was viewed with great suspicion: Why do you spend
so much time with Jewish progressives who will soon betray you on the altar ofJewish interests
and networks? Are not black Jewish alliances the occasion for black deference and Jewish
paternalism? Why do you engage Jewish Zionists in such a charitable manner when you put
forward such harsh criticisms of black nationalists? Is it possible to forge blackJewish
coalitions with integrity without attempting to create conditions under which black progressives,
liberals and nationalists can coalesce?
Since I take seriously the dual strategies of black operational unity and multiracial democratic
alliance, I struggled with these challenging questions. How does one remain true to radical
democratic ideals that oppose all forms of xenophobia and target corporate power for
downward redistribution of wealth, while always acknowledging the tremendous weight of
white supremacy in American society? I have worked with black nationalists since the late
1960s-in black united fronts, black political parties and black religious formations-precisely
because they rightly target the most explosive issue and rawest nerve in American life: white
supremacy. Yet I do so as a radical democrat, not as a black nationalist. Nationalism of any form
is for me a species of tribalism that warrants moral rejection. And since all forms of nationalism
I know are deeply patriarchal and homophobic, I have great suspicions of them. Just like
organized religion. Yet some good can come from them, so I selectively work with them.
My dilemma sharpened in the 1980s with the presidential campaigns of Jesse Jackson and the
rise of Minister Louis Farrakhan in the eyes of white America. Since then blackJewish relations
have worsened. Jackson's "Hymietown" remark set off waves of Jewish rage. Farrakhan's
response to Jewish threats against Jackson set off even more. And we all became locked into a
spiral of accusations and demonizations. In the Jewish world, Jackson could not say enough to
warrant forgiveness, and Farrakhan was dubbed the new Hitler. In the black world, Jackson and
Farrakhan were viewed as heaven-sent for sustaining forms ofJewish identity and fund-raising
predicated on anti-Semitism in America. The double standards for black and white anti-Semitic


--- PAGE 461 ---
rhetoric were appalling. Both worlds grasped only snippets of the truth-namely, that progressive
and liberal forces in general were collapsing in America while the two most progressive and
liberal groups (blacks and Jews) were involved in a heartfelt yet cathartic sideshow. The media
sensationalized it and projected a polarization more symbolic than real. Yet even symbols shape
reality after much media interference.
With the white media discoveries of Leonard Jeffries and Khalid Abdul Muhammad, the
obsession in the Jewish world with black anti Jewish rhetoric increased. And given the growing
influence of Howard Stern and other xenophobic loose-tongued Jewish talk-radio hosts, the
concern in the black world with Jewish anti-black rhetoric increased. In short, the paranoia of
two of the most paranoid groups in America was getting out of control-and clashing in ugly
ways. Candid dialogue was badly needed.
Michael Lerner and I saw this need in 1989 and acted on it. We worked for five years on our
book, Jews and Blacks: Let the Healing Begin (1995). We toured the country, lectured in over
twenty cities-in black churches, Jewish synagogues, bookstores, community centers, colleges,
high schools. The audiences were all multiracial. The responses were overwhelming. The spirit
of honest conversation, collective struggle and racial healing was inspiring. Yet we received no
financial support for our proposed blackJewish conference and we were trashed by both visible
neoliberal Jewish intellectuals and vociferous progressive black intellectuals. And with the
advent of the O J. verdict and Million Man March, our efforts for blackJewish healing were in
shambles. Lerner and I continued to agree to disagree, even as our agreements and disagreements
grew deeper, but as a twosome we felt more and more isolated.
The sheer viciousness of the intellectual attacks on my work and life from the Jewish world
caught me a bit by surprise. I've been on the battlefield for over two decades, so I am
accustomed to principled criticisms and ad hominem ones. But the recent wave of venom and
vitriol directed at me is new. Needless to say, I try to learn what I can from such contemptuous
criticisms, keep my stride and do my work. And with all of us being the cracked vessels that we
are, there will always be degrees of mendaciousness and tendentiousness, envy and jealousy,
misunderstandings and misinterpretations in our human exchanges. Furthermore, the degraded
state of public conversation in American culture leads us to lower our intellectual expectations
in regard to a spirit of empathy, charity or generosity. But the virtual absence of fair-mindedness,
the predominance of such intellectual obscenity and personal vulgarity bespeaks a
gangsterization of the mind that behooves all of us to resist. Even among tormented and tortured
journalists aspiring to serious intellectual work such as Leon Wieseltier, we expect more than
thirdrate hatchet jobs predicated on homework undone in the guise of lowbrow wit and
middlebrow wordplay. Similarly, we look for more than paternalistic rankings (Ellen Willis),
glib reputation assessments (Sean Wilentz), or weak efforts at mediation in leading liberal and
progressive weeklies and quarterlies (Andrew Delbanco). In other works, the degeneration of
blackJewish relations is suffocating certain pockets of our intellectual life. How sad!
This degeneration can be seen in the responses of some of my old Jewish friends to the
attacks. Silence. Avoidance. Evasion. Capitulation. Deference to power. Cowardly careerism.
In other words, hardly any serious grappling with my texts or actions just a shadow game with


--- PAGE 462 ---
close colleagues and tribal loyalties. Many of my supportive Jewish friends reach these same
conclusions. And most of my black friends simply say, we told you so.
For me, this painful situation raised a number of existential and vocational questions. What
were the fundamental reasons I persisted in promoting blackJewish coalitions? How would I
define the sources of hope for such unpopular efforts? What is the most wise and moral response
to such ugly disrespect and degradation? My fundamental commitments are to human decency,
mutual respect and personal integrity. The common thread of these commitments is compassion
or empathy. Needless to say, for a Christian, this thread flows from the love ethic ofJesus Christ;
for a human being, it serves as the basis of a democratic mode of being in the world. Those great
existential democrats-from Walt Whitman, Maurice Maeterlinck, John Dewey, Ida B. Wells-
Barnett, Louis Armstrong, Abraham Joshua Heschel, Audre Lorde, and John Coltrane-all
promoted forms of human connection mediated with compassion without dissolving diversity
and differences. My own investment in blackJewish alliances is not simply a political effort to
buttress progressive forces in American society. It also is a moral endeavor that exemplifies
ways in which the most hated group in European history and the most hated group in U.S. history
can coalesce in the name of precious democratic ideals-ideals that serve as the sole
countervailing force to hatred, fear and greed.
This political effort and moral endeavor will always cut against the grain. Jewish racism and
black anti-Semitism are not only as American as cherry pie; they also are human responses to
insecurities and anxieties. For a Christian and radical democrat like myself, the go-cart of
compassion is dialogue based on a fundamental respect for the "other." This dialogue requires
active listening and candid speaking. The aim is neither verbal conquest nor rational coercion;
rather, it is to provide an occasion for openness so that a spirituality of genuine questioning can
take root in one's mind, heart and soul. Such questioning is the vehicle for intellectual change
and existential transformation. The openness that precedes such questioning requires that we be
vulnerable enough-hence trusting enough-to be questioned in a transformative mode. This is why
no one should be refused to enter such openness. Or to put it another way, no one is so far
beyond the paleso worthy of utter disrespect and contempt-that we give up on them in our
dialogical efforts. Why so? Because of human fallibility and unpredictability. Dialogical
dogmatism is a form of intellectual exclusion that chooses interlocutors with whom one is
comfortable; it rests upon an unacknowledged ignorance of others and an undeniable arrogance
toward others. Dialogical dogmatism is ideologically promiscuous-it lies with liberal and
conservative, Left and Right, black and Jewish ideologues. The kind of dialogue I am calling for
will always transgress the "respectable" bounds of dialogical dogmatists-yet it is the lifeblood
of radical democracy and political breakthroughs. There is never any guarantee for success; yet
the sheer existence of such dialogue is already a kind of success-for it means that decency,
respect and integrity are still alive.
So in the midst of disrespect and degradation, I promote the practical wisdom of dialogue-that
thin reed in the whirlwind of our times doomed to strong lip service and weak action that stakes
a high moral ground in a cynical age. Like any- one's, my rage and anger flows and sometimes
overflows-yet my commitment to dialogical action, alongside other forms of democratic action,
is profound.


--- PAGE 463 ---
In regard to my defense of sustaining dialogue with black nationalists or my critical support of
the Million Man March, my Jewish critics are eager to put for ward loquacious utterances and
engaged editorials highlighting my wrongheadedness. Again, I try to listen and learn from their
criticisms, but I also recognize the double standards at work. I must denounce, isolate and make
no contact with xenophobic black nationalists, but certain progressive Jewish intellectuals have
no duty to identify and criticize the Negrophobic (or anti-Arab racist) sentiments of their
neoliberal or progressive friends. No serious or substantive blackJewish cooperation can
emerge on such a one-way street.
Where then do we go from here? BlackJewish relations-at the symbolic levelare in shambles.
Yet there are significant blackjewish efforts on the ground: in local communities between
churches and synagogues, in the trade-union movement, between the Anti-Defamation League
and black grassroots activists, among electoral coalitions and elected officiates. First, we have
to change our ways. We must stop playing games with one another. We must be candid in our
criticisms and respectful in our exchanges. Second, we must be more self-critical of ourselves,
our positions and our vantage points. What powers and influences do we actually have? How do
we use them? What are the major priorities in our agendas? Do we make them clear to others?
How do we rationally defend them? Are they subject to rational scrutiny? What are the
fundamental ideals we cherish? Are they the same ones we espouse publicly? Third, we must
focus on principles and realities bigger than the immediate interests of the black and Jewish
communities. BlackJewish cooperation can never be based on a cold calculation of black and
Jewish needs. Rather, it must be regulated by broad and universal ideals of democracy and
decency, fairness and dignity, justice and freedom for all. But these ideals are empty if we
continually treat those within and across our communities in a cold-hearted and mean-spirited
manner. The best of the Jewish tradition puts a premium on mercy and justice: the best of the
black heritage, on improvisation and experimentation. Both require bonds of trust and cords of
empathy. Without them, blackJewish cooperation is but sounding brass and tinkling cymbal.
SOURCE: "Walking the Tightrope: Some Personal Reflections on Blacks and Jews." by Cornel West,
copyright © 1997 by Cornel West, from St nrc;les in the Promised Land: Toward a History o%
Black-Jewish Relatimu in the United States, edited by,Jack Salzman and Cornel West, pp. 411-416.
Used by permission of Oxford University Press, Inc.


--- PAGE 464 ---
O N J A C K I E R O B I N S O N
One of my highest honors in life was to be chosen by Rachel Robinson to write the fore-
wordfor the new edition of Jackie Robinson 's autobiography-alongside Hank Aaron's
introduction. Rachel Robinson is one of the great first ladies of our time. And Jackie Robinson
was one of the giants of our century.
THREE FUNDAMENTAL EVENTS BETWEEN March andJune of 1947 in America changed
the course of world history in the twentieth century. On March 12, 1947, President Harry
Truman proclaimed in a historic speech before a special joint session of Congress the intention
of the U.S. government "to support free peoples who are resisting subjugation by armed
minorities or by outside pressures." This, the famous Truman Doctrine, was declared in
response to both the beginning of the collapse of the most powerful empire the world has ever
seen (the British empire) and the emergence of one of the most repressive, the Soviet empire. In
short, Truman announced the aim of the American empire to police the world in the light of its
democratic ideals and imperial interests.
On April 15, 1947, before 26,623 Americans (more than half of them black) at Ebbets Field
in Brooklyn, Jackie Robinson became the first African American to play professional, major-
league baseball. In this historic opening game against the Boston Braves, a dignified and heroic
descendant of American slaves and sharecroppers who wore number 42 on his Dodger uniform
played first base in one of the sacred spaces of American culture. More even than either
Abraham Lincoln and the Civil War or Martin Luther King, Jr., and the civil rights movement,
Jackie Robinson graphically symbolized and personified the challenge to the vicious legacy and
ideology of white supremacy in American history.
Soon afterward, on June 5, 1947, Secretary of State George C. Marshall delivered an address
at Harvard University's graduation ceremonies, in which he put forward an American plan for
European economic recovery with huge U.S. assistance in order to combat Soviet domination.
The basic requirements of the Marshall Plan were U.S. influence over the internal budgets of the
European recipient states and the disproportionate purchase of American exports for European
recovery.
These three events represent the most fundamental processes of this centurythe end of the Age
of Europe (and the preeminence of its last great empire), the acceleration of the challenge to
white supremacy (a pillar of European imperialism and American history) and the move of the
American empire to the center of the world-historical stage (in opposition to the Soviet empire).
In this way, a historic presidential speech, an unforgettable baseball game and an influential
commencement address take us to the very heart of the agony and anguish, the achievements and
accomplishments of our time.
With the surprising collapse of the Soviet empire in 1989, the Truman Doctrine has run its
course. And with the economic recovery of Europe-alongside the phenomenal growth of the U.S.
economy-between 1947 and 1973, the Marshall Plan did what it set out to do. Despite the
significant gains of the civil rights movement in the 1960s, the challenge to white supremacy in
America remains incomplete, unfinished. That is why, today, the life and work, the achievements


--- PAGE 465 ---
and suffering ofJackie Robinson continue to speak to us with such power and poignancy.
In 1947, Jackie Robinson not only symbolized all of black America on trial in the eyes of
white America and the expansion of the ideals of democracy, he also represented the best of a
traditional black quest for dignity, excellence and integrity. This quest was primarily a moral
effort to preserve black sanity and spirituality in the face of white-supremacist barbarity and
bestiality; it was a human attempt to hold on to dreams deferred and hopes dashed, owing mainly
to slavery and Jim Crow in America. The deep and devastating effects of psychic scars, physical
abuse and material deprivation could not suffocate the black tradition of moral struggle and
political resistance. When Jackie Robinson states that he "never had it made," he means, in part,
that he had to fight in a variety of ways and on a number of fronts to preserve both his sense of
dignity and his integrity; and in part that he was able to fight primarily because of the love and
support of those fighters who came before him and those who now stood by his side.
The most striking features of this marvelous book are its honesty, its courage and its wisdom.
Here is a great American hero who refuses to be a mythical hero. Instead. he tells the painful
truth about himself as a human being-someone who, like all of us, needs love, struggles with
insecurity, makes mistakes, revels in achievements and weeps in sorrow. Here is a transracial
figure beloved by blacks and whites who rails against the absurdities of white racism and the
seductive security of black xenophobia. Here is a celebrity who takes us on a journey through the
valleys and over the mountaintops of intimate relations with his family, friends and mentors.
Here is one of the greatest athletes of our century disclosing his developing sense of political
engagement and community empowerment as a liberal Republican in a right-wing Republican
party. Here is a black man and father-with a strong sense of his masculinity-who talks about his
maturity in terms of lessons painfully learned from his loving mother, his brilliant and self-
confident wife, his adventurous children and his supportive father figures. I reveled in his
exchanges-critical and respectful-with Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Jr., Richard Nixon,
William Buckley, Jr,. Black Panther leaders and Lewis Micheaux.
Jackie Robinson's life and book constitute an antiphonal "song of a great composite
democratic individual." This grand phrase of Walt Whitman captures the jazzlike character of
Jackie Robinson-his noble experiment in which restraint and performance, improvisation, and
discipline under severe pressure are exercised with excellence; his openness to others; his
generosity to others; and his relentless self-criticism without recourse to self-pity and self-
indulgence. And yet, his disillusionment with America is real. Robinson cannot stand and sing
the national anthem or salute the flag. His deep patriotism and his hatred of white supremacy
will not allow him to engage in such empty gestures of country worship. He knows that "money
is America's God" and that he is "a black man in a white world."
Jackie Robinson's historic challenge to white supremacy in America was not an attempt to
"prove" himself and his humanity to white America. Rather, it was to be himself, to allow his
God-given humanity to be seen, acknowledged and recognized by those who questioned it. He
gained respect because he so deeply respected himself, because he respected black people and


--- PAGE 466 ---
others. He willingly took on the awesome burden of symbolizing black humanity in the one arena
of fairness in a country predicated, in part, on unfairness to black people. And he bore this
burden with great dignity-not because he wanted to be somebody but, rather, because he was
already a great somebody in a land where all black folk were nobody to most white people. This
is why his grand example is, in the moving and wise words of George Will (with whom I rarely
agree!), "One of the great achievements not only in the annals of sports, but of the human drama
anywhere, anytime." This book reveals why and how Jackie Robinson's life was an exemplary
testimony of the black and human "Love Supreme"-the same moral and spiritual ideal toward
which Martin Luther King, Jr., Fannie Lou Hamer and John Coltrane asked us to aspire.
SOURCE: "Foreword," by Cornel West, from I Never Hail It Made by Jackie Robinson. Copyright
1995 by Rachel Robinson. Reprinted by permission of The Eco Press.


--- PAGE 467 ---
O N J U L I A N N E M A L V E A U X
Given all the chatter about public intellectuals in America, it is astonishing that the work and life
ofJulianne Malveaux do not receive more attention and admiration. She is an exemplary engaged
intellectual who thinks and acts with great courage and boldness. I constantly look to her
writings for insight and guidance. She is a national treasure.
JULIANNE MALVEAUX IS THE most provocative, progressive and iconoclastic public
intellectual in the country. Her writings not only unsettle prevailing prejudices and undo
conventional presuppositions; they also provoke passionate responses-positive or negative-
precisely because she is so direct, honest and hardhitting. Besides Noam Chomsky, Barbara
Ehrenreich, Manning Marable and a few others, Julianne Malveaux is the most well-known
progressive critic of contemporary American life. But she has yet to receive the serious attention
she deserves. Needless to say, she has thousands of loyal fans who hang on her every
transgressive word. Yet her powerful onslaught on economic inequality, white supremacy, male
supremacy and just plain social meanness is gaining a larger audience in the 1990s. And rightly
so. She is one of the last of a long line of American iconoclastic writers from Lydia Maria Child
through H. L. Mencken to C. Wright Mills. Like them, she radically cuts against the grain of
American culture and calls into question the reigning idols of American society.
Unlike most public intellectuals of our time, Julianne Malveaux possesses a Ph.D. in
economics. And unlike nearly every academic economist, she speaks to a popular audience
through the print and electronic media. She also is a powerful and poignant public speaker who
is quite popular on the lecture circuit. In the tradition of Thorstein Veblen, John Kenneth
Galbraith and Robert Lekachman, Julianne Malveaux writes in a clear and lucid prose that stays
in touch with the complex realities of everyday people. This means that she cuts through the
obscure jargon and remote dogma of neoclassical economists. She knows that perfect
competition models downplay the actual operations of power in the economy and that individual
consumers are not sovereign in markets often dominated by transnational corporations. She also
realizes that economic analysis is inseparable from politics and culture. And, of course, it is
impossible to understand the American economy, politics and culture without grasping the subtle
and not too subtle persistence of race and gender. Julianne Malveaux differs from most black
and feminist critics in that she puts a premium on economic issues. She knows that white and
male supremacy are forms of social pathology-a kind of societal sickness-yet she holds that
much of it has to do with economic power and material privilege. In other words, they are much
more than individual prejudices and less than inborn propensities. They are sustained by
institutions and structures that hide and conceal social misery and personal pain. And her
courageous critiques of fellow black and feminist intellectuals add much to the debate on race,
gender and justice in our time.
Last, Julianne Malveaux is unique among prophetic public intellectuals owing to her
undeniable humor and fury. She is the only progressive thinker on the scene with a profound
sense of the comic. This sense is shunned by most radicals primarily because genuine
acknowledgment of one's own foibles seems to disempower an already weak Left. Yet Julianne
Malveaux's grasp of the absurd character of the human condition and American life yields a


--- PAGE 468 ---
humorous treatment of serious problems that produce both laughter and lament. To put it bluntly,
I detect a Chekhovian strand in her social and cultural criticism-a strand that fuels comedy and
compassion. This deep comic sense is coupled with an existential furya kind of spiritual
indignation that remains on the surface. How rare it is to see battling inside the soul of a
progressive thinker an encounter of Chekhov's compassionate comedy with Billie Holiday's
empathetic rage! This painful yet productive battle-which goes deeper than Du Bois's "double-
consciousness" warring in the souls of black folk-yields a distinctive form of an informed and
inspiring "madness" rarely seen in the annals of American letters. God bless the child that got its
own-even in ward 6! To be a black woman intellectual with personal integrity and prophetic
commitment is to catch much hell-and raise some with a smile on one's face!
SOURCE: "Foreword," Sex, Lies and Stereotypes: Perspectives of 'a Mad Economist, by Julianne
Malveaux (Pines One Publications, 1994), pp. xiii-xiv.


--- PAGE 469 ---
CONVERSATION WITH BELL HOOKS
Ifirst met bell hooks at a Socialist Scholars' conference in 1983. We were close colleagues and
good friends at Yale for two years. We worked on our groundbreaking dialogical text, Breaking
Bread (1991), for another two years. T nya McKinnon, our superb editor at South End Press,
helped make it happen. bell hooks is the most probe intellectual of her generation-a bold and
courageous writer who probes the neglected dimensions and dark corners of our culture. It was a
challenge and delight to work with her and travel the country to do joint dialogues with her. Our
work together exemplifies black male and female solidarity-personal respect, critical scrutiny
and common goals.
bell hooks: Why do you think universities like Princeton, Duke, Harvard and any number of
schools we could name, which were once completely uninterested in creating a diverse
academic environment, are now engaged in promoting black studies? What's their agenda?
Com el West: Well, we live in a very different world now. We saw the collapse of Europe in
1945. We are seeing the decline of the American empire in the 1990s. We've seen the
dissolution of the Soviet empire in the latter part of the 1980s. It's a very different world-which
means then that the struggles, the sufferings and the contributions of those who were once on the
underside of these worlds: Third World people-Asia, Africa and Latin America-are emerging
now, becoming tremendous powers, culturally, intellectually, artistically, even more so than
politically and economically. And so these universities, which are in many ways repositories of
the different kinds of shifts going on in the world as expressed intellectually, must indeed
respond.
hooks: In some ways, that takes me back to comments we made about whether we can be
oppositional in the academy. Certainly, one of the most exciting experiences I've had as a
professor was teaching at Yale. And partially it was exciting because of the eagerness on the
part of students of all ethnicities to engage in what Foucault has called "the insurrection of
subjugated knowledges." To teach a course on black women writers and have hundreds of the
students signing up, that lets you know that there has been a transformation in the academy.
West: That's exactly right. And I think this hunger and thirst that you talk about has much to do
with not only the changing forces in the world, changing contexts in the world. We saw it in
music in the 1960s, where there's been a kind of Afro-Americanization of white youth, and that's
going on now internationally. And that in some ways prefigures what is farther down the road
when it comes to intellectual focus on issues of race and "otherness."
hooks: Well, can you speak about that? I know one of the things that I'm confronting increasingly
as a black academic is that often our black studies classes are peopled predominantly by white
students and students of diverse ethnicities-more Asian students from all Asian ethnicities, more
Chicanos, more Puerto Ricans and so on. What does this mean for the future of black studies'?
Does it mean that the nature of the discipline is changing? Or are we simply being more
inclusive?
West: No, I think it's a good sign. Afro-American studies was never meant to be solely for Afro-


--- PAGE 470 ---
Americans. It was meant to try to redefine what it means to be human, what it means to be
modern, what it means to be American, because people of African descent in this country are
profoundly human, profoundly modern, profoundly American. And so to the degree to which they
can see the riches that we have to offer as well as see our shortcomings, is the degree to which
they can more fully understand the modern and what modernity is all about, and more fully
understand the American experience.
hooks: At a conference sponsored by Men Stopping Violence and the National Organization for
Men Against Sexism, I tried to emphasize that all groups of men in the United States can
understand masculinity better by understanding black masculinity, rather than constituting black
masculinity as "other." Certainly, white men might learn more about the production of what it is
to be men by studying about black men and how black men experience life in this society. It
seems to me that in our liberatory pedagogies, we bring that kind of analysis of subjectivity to
bear which says that studying "the other" is not the goal, the goal is learning about some aspect
of who you are.
West: That's precisely right. Ralph Ellison used to make that point with great insight and
profundity. And to the degree to which not just Americans, but modern persons accept that to
understand themselves they must understand the Afro-American experience is the degree to
which Afro-American studies is, in part, successful.
hooks: Cornel, you are unique in that you come to black studies from phi losophy. Many of the
traditional movers and shakers in black studies have been historians, literary critics, social
scientists. Do you bring a different approach?
West: By being trained in philosophy?
hooks: Yes.
West: I think so. As a philosopher, I'm fundamentally concerned with how we confront death,
dread, despair, disappointment and disease. These are existential issues. And sociologists,
economists, social scientists, they are not primarily concerned with how individuals confront
their inevitable doom, their inescapable extinction. So that there is a sensibility I, and other
philosophers, bring to issues of meaning and value that other intellectuals may not have.
hooks: That focus on meaning and values is truly evident in your book The American Evasion of
Philosophy, which explores the importance of American pragmatism.
Now this book is in many ways a difficult book to read, a rigorous book. And I think people
should approach it with that understanding, because certainly the earlier works, Prophesy
Deliverance: Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity, which came out in 1982, and then
Prophetic Fragments, in 1988, are much more solidly rooted in a focus on black culture and
black tradition. Many black readers would come to these books with some awareness of the
fundamental ideas you are talking about-that might not be the case with the book on American
pragmatism. What does prophetic pragmatism mean? What are its implications for black
community?


--- PAGE 471 ---
West: It helps us to understand that we have to interpret both American civilization and the
modern West from our vantage point. This is what The American Evasion of'Philosophy actually
is, an interpretation of the emergence, the sustenance and the decline of American civilization
from the vantage point of an African American. It means then we have to have a cosmopolitan
orientation, even though it is rooted in the fundamental concern with the plight and predicament
of African Americans.
Now, what the text attempts to do is to argue that there are fundamental themes like
experimentation and improvisation that can be found in the works of Ralph Waldo Emerson, for
example, that are thoroughly continuous with the great art form that Afro-Americans have given
the modern world, which is jazz. And therefore to talk about America is to talk about
improvisation and experimentation, and therefore to talk about Emerson and Louis Armstrong in
the same breath.
hooks: That is why I was very moved by our talking about prophetic prag matism as "a form of
third-wave left romanticism," which you said, "tempers its utopian impulse with the profound
sense of the tragic character of life in history."
One of the things that seemed to me that you were trying to do in giving us this philosophical
framework is to say that black people must theorize our experience in such a way that we come
to understand our tragedies beyond solely the emotionally felt experience of that tragedy.
West: And the fact that when you look closely at jazz, or the blues, for example, we see a sense
of the tragic, a profound sense of the tragic linked to human agency. So that it does not wallow in
a cynicism or a paralyzing pessimism, but it also is realistic enough not to project excessive
utopia. It's a matter of responding in an improvisational, undogmatic, creative way to
circumstances in such a way that people still survive and thrive. This is a great tradition
intellectually; in fact, it has had tremendous impact on the way in which Americans as a whole
respond to the human condition, respond to their circumstances.
hooks: One unique aspect of your discussion with Bill Moyers was that you talked about "the
vocation of the intellectual as trying to allow suffering to speak." How do we transform the
meaninglessness that people feel into an effective form of struggle? It seems to me that right
there, when black intellectuals start trying to answer that question, we begin the process of
oppositionality in action, practice and theory.
West: That's right.
hooks: Could you say a little bit about the significance of theory?
West: Yes. Theory ought not to be a fetish. It does not have magical powers of its own. On the
other hand, theory is inescapable because it is an indispensable weapon in struggle, and it is an
indispensable weapon in struggle because it provides certain kinds of understanding, certain
kinds of illumination, certain kinds of insights that are requisite if we are to act effectively.
For example, the Marxist tradition has always meant much to me because of its notion of


--- PAGE 472 ---
commodification and the degree to which market forces have so fundamentally not only shaped
our economy, but the way in which we understand value and use. And so to talk about
multinational corporations, on the one hand, and talk about advertising, on the other, are
indispensable ways of understanding the modern world and thereby indispensable ways of trying
to locate and situate black people and give us some reasons for why we are catching so much
hell.
hooks: Part of the contemporary project for the oppositional black intellectual is to address the
significance of theory to our revisioning of black liberation struggle, in our attempts to address
both the crisis of black people and the crisis that we're having in the culture as a whole.
That brings us to the critical issue of what place does the theorizing of white, Eurocentric
intellectuals have for black people? I read Terry Ea- gleton's book, The Significance of Theory,
and what I liked very much about his particular essay on theory was that he tried to talk about
how everyone uses theory in their practical daily life, which is certainly what I've tried to stress
in my work, particularly when speaking to black students who are questioning the significance of
theory. What do you think about the fact that many of us are influenced these days by European
theorists Michel Foucault, Julia Kristeva, Derrida, Lacan, and Third World, nonblack theorists
like Edward Said, Gayatri Spivak, Homi Bhaba? What do those intellectuals outside black
experience have to teach us, say to us, that can in some way illuminate and enhance that struggle?
West: To be intellectual, no matter what color, means that one is going to be deeply influenced
by other intellectuals of a variety of different colors. When it comes to black intellectuals, we
have to, on the one hand, be very open to insights from wherever they come. On the other hand,
we must filter it in such a way that we never lose sight of what some of the silences are in the
work of white theorists, especially as those silences relate to issues of class, gender, race and
empire. Why? Because class, gender, race and empire are fundamental categories black
intellectuals must use in order to understand the predicament of black people. So there is, I
would say, a selective significance of white intellectuals to the critical development of black
intellectuals.
hooks: Concurrently, increasingly what we are seeing is that more and more white intellectuals
are making black culture and black experience the subject of their intellectual and discursive
practices. What do you think about that? Are these people our allies? Are we developing
coalitions? Or are we being appropriated yet again?
West: There is something positive and something negative here. Look at the work of Eugene
Genovese, a very important scholar on the subject of slavery. He is not always right, but often
very illuminating. He has made a great contribution, yet at the same time, one recognizes that
white scholars are bringing certain baggage with them when they look at black culture, no matter
how subtle and sophisticated the formulations. Therefore, we must always be on guard to bring
critique to bear on the baggage that they bring, even when that baggage provides certain insights.
hooks: Talk about it, Cornel.
West: So it's a positive and a negative thing. The thing we can't do is remain insular and think


--- PAGE 473 ---
that we have a monopoly on how to understand ourselves. Because that is not the case at all. But
we must be critical across the board.
hooks: As long as we, black academics and intellectuals, are doing work within the context of
white supremacy, often what happens is that white theorists draw upon our work and our ideas
and get forms of recognition that are denied black thinkers. The reality of appropriation has
produced a real tension between many black academics and those white scholars and colleagues
who want to talk with us. Often black scholars, especially feminist thinkers, tell me they fear
ideas will be "ripped off" and "they" (white scholars) will get the credit. Black folks are willing
to share ideas, but there is a feeling now that a white academic might take your idea, write about
it, and you'll never be cited. This is upsetting many black scholars.
West: It is the Elvis Presley syndrome applied to the academic terrain. Internal dynamics of
power make it very difficult for credits to be given where they are due, when that credit should
be given to an individual who comes from a marginal, subordinated group within this country. It
has to do with who has access to the legitimate and prestigious journals, who has access to the
publishing houses and so on. We have seen this phenomenon historically, and the best that we
can do to fight against it is to either establish our own institutional networks that would give our
texts visibility, or simply continue to bring critique to bear on the manipulation and the co-
optation that goes on in the mainstream.
hooks: We also have to be willing to confront, in a positive way, those of our white colleagues
who, in fact, see themselves as our allies. I once experienced a White woman scholar, whom I
respect, give a talk where I felt that, in fact, she was laying out my own analytical and theoretical
framework from Ain't I a Woman and getting credit. So I went to her and said I really felt that
what I was hearing was my work without ...
West: Acknowledgment.
hooks: Acknowledgment. And she, being a comrade in struggle, told me she would go back and
read my work to see if she had, in fact, unwittingly taken ideas from me without citing them as
mine. So I don't think we should always assume a negative intentionality. We all read things and
pick up things and don't always remember the source it came from, and within a racist context,
well, white people are accustomed to taking the labor of black people for granted. We have to
see that the same thing can happen with intellectual labor, so that sometimes confronting that
situation in a positive way can make for a meaningful critical intervention.
West: I absolutely agree.
hooks: Another thing that makes you unusual as a head of black studies is being both a scholar in
a highly traditional discipline like philosophy and your unique and profound engagement with
popular culture. You write about music and art-can you speak about how you think cultural
studies is linked to black studies?
West: That is a very difficult question. Let me say a few things about it. First, I focus on popular
culture because I focus on those areas where black humanity is most powerfully expressed,


--- PAGE 474 ---
where black people have been able to articulate their sense of the world in a profound manner.
And I see this primarily in popular culture.
Why not in highbrow culture? Because the access has been so difficult. Why not in more
academic forms? Because academic exclusion has been the rule for so long for large numbers of
black people that black culture, for me, becomes a search for where black people have left their
imprint and fundamentally made a difference in terms of how certain art forms are understood.
This is currently in popular culture. And it has been primarily in music, religion, visual arts and
fashion.
hooks: Don't you also think that those of us writing about popular culture are regarded with
skepticism by traditional black academics who have been more engaged with "high culture"?
Don't those black academics look at someone like you with skepticism, in the same way that
more conservative white colleagues might look at you and say, you know, he's not really a
philosopher, a real philosopher wouldn't be so interested in popular culture?
West: I think you are correct. What you have, on the one hand, is black scholars, who are deeply
preoccupied with receiving respect from their white peers, trying to resist all black stereotypes.
And, in many instances, running from some of the riches of black culture in order to convince
their white peers that they are not a part, in any way, of what has been so very important to black
people, black music, black speech, and black religion.
It is interesting that the history of black studies in the United States has been one in which black
religion and music have played a very, very small role, even though black religion and music
play a fundamental role in the history of black people. This has to do not only with the secular
orientation of black intellectuals, but because so many black intellectuals believe that any
association with black religion makes them look bad in light of the secular orientations of their
white colleagues. So they run away from it. It seems to me that what we have to do is undermine
all stereotypes while embracing what have been some of the very rich insights and contributions
of the black folk, intellectually, politically and culturally.
hooks: The role of poetry in traditional black community is a prime example of that. So many of
us came to performance art, to public speaking from both the black church and black high
schools under segregation.
West: Right. Right.
hooks: We also forget that in the nineteenth century there was a tremendous emphasis on the
oratory. And for a lot of black people that carried over and informed twentieth-century
construction of black culture. I was raised in a working class black family where, when the
lights went out and the candles were lit, my folks would say, get up and entertain us. Recite a
poem.
West: I want to argue that music and rhetorical practices, especially black preaching practices,
have been the two major traditions owing to the exclusion of black people in other spheres, even
though many of us venture in those fields.


--- PAGE 475 ---
hooks: You often say that U.S. mass culture is disproportionately influenced by black culture. I
think the critical question to ask is whether or not that influence is oppositional. Does black
culture radicalize white American culture, Asian American culture, the culture of other ethnic
groups?
West: It is oppositional, but there are different levels of oppositionality. There's what we call
"thin" opposition, and then there's "thick" opposition. Thin opposition is a critique of American
society that does not talk about the need for a redistribution of wealth, resources and power.
Thick opposition is an attempt to call into question the prevailing maldistribution of wealth in
this society. Thin opposition is important, but it is not sufficient. And black cultural influence has
played a role in that thin opposition. Just affirming the humanity of black people in America is
still, in many instances, a subversive act. Yet, "thick" opposition is rarely put forward openly in
black culture.
SOURCE: "Cornel West Interviewed by bell hooks," Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual
Life, by bell hooks and Cornel West (Cambridge Mass.: South End Press, 1991), pp. 31-39.


--- PAGE 476 ---



--- PAGE 477 ---



--- PAGE 478 ---
C H E K H O V, C O L T R A N E AND D E M O C R A C Y
David Lionel Smith: Thank you for agreeing to do this interview. Let's begin with the idea of the
public intellectual. In some ways this is almost a misnomer. That is, it makes a distinction
between intellectuals who operate within view of the public and other intellectuals. I wonder
how good a distinction you think that is. There's certainly a history to the concept. One thinks of
the "New York Intellectuals" and the left-liberal humanist agenda and commitments they
espoused. But I wonder, since you are always on the list of "public intellectuals," how good a
rubric you think this is and whether it makes distinctions that you consider valid.
Cornel West: First, let me say that it's always a pleasure to see and talk with you, David, and
thank you for inviting me to engage in this conversation. The term "public intellectuals" can be
misleading, because if we take seriously what it means to be an intellectual, and it goes back in
many ways to the Russian intellectuals of the 1830s, to Vassarion Belinsky, dealing with the
discrepancy between the social value and the social function of intellectual figures, who had
been trained but felt that they had no place and therefore felt that they had a critical role in
society. Or we might go back to the Dreyfus case in France, with Zola bringing his own critique
to bear on the vicious anti-Semitism. To be an intellectual really means to speak a truth that
allows suffering to speak. That is, it creates a vision of the world that puts into the limelight the
social misery that is usually hidden or concealed by the dominant viewpoints of a society.
"Intellectual" in that sense simply means those who are willing to reflect critically upon
themselves as well as upon the larger society and to ascertain whether there is some possibility
of amelioration and betterment.
On a deeper level, when we talk about intellectuals in the humanities, there is an even greater
challenge, because I take quite seriously paragraph twelve of Vico's The .Nezv Science, where
he says that "humanities" is derived from humanitas. That comes from the Latin humando,
meaning "burying." Thus, to be in the humanities means to begin with the mass bodies, buried,
that we have to come to terms with. We impose some intentional order on the world that
connects the living to the dead, the quick to the gone. Therefore there's a historical dimension
and an important role for traditions that try to consider the relation of those present to those past.
That's an even deeper level of understanding the role of the intellectual than we find in Belinsky
or Zola. It is the latter, Vico, to whom I feel closer. When you take the idea of the intellectual
and add the adjective "public," it becomes misleading, because it gives the impression that the
intellectual is someone who has a blueprint or is only functioning in a public sphere and is not
concerned with the deeper issues of death, dread and despair and how those relate to issues of
freedom and equality. Hence, I think it tends to misconstrue what one's fundamental calling is in
the humanities. It is very different in natural sciences, where the issues of mass bodies is
secondary, because you are fundamentally concerned with analyzing natural phenomena in light
of past experience or trying to gain some control over nature. That's a very different kind of
operation. I admire it, but it's not the kind of thing I do.
Smith: When this term is used by journalists or by activist intellectuals, it is often intended to
distinguish between conventional academics who operate strictly within the academy and those
who move beyond the walls of the academy. Must one operate beyond the academy to have


--- PAGE 479 ---
public impact as an intellectual?
West: It's both dangerous and misleading to make this distinction. To operate beyond the
academy can mean simply to be highly publicized or popular, that one attains notoriety, and that
can be vacuous and hollow, yet one may still be viewed as a public intellectual. Similarly, there
are those within the academy whose work has tremendous impact out in the broader world,
though they personally remain within the academy. Such people, in conventional terms, may not
be recognized as "public intellectuals," regardless of the impact of their work. I think of my
friend and teacher John Rawls, for instance, whose A Theory of Justice has profound influence.
It is work of great value. In my view, the exemplary intellectuals who move both within and
outside the academy would include people like Edward Said and Garry Wills. These are people
who have great influence in both worlds because of the integrity of their work. It is a matter of
quality and substantive impact on the public issues of our day. These figures transcend the glib
definitions of "public intellectual."
Smith: We are living in a culture that is increasingly a sound-bite culture, defined by short
attention spans and inability to comprehend complex arguments. The way the media are managed
leaves little space for having careful arguments or nuanced discourse. In such a culture, how
much impact can an intellectual have?
West: That's a very good question. One challenge for intellectuals today is to try to channel
wisdom, both intellectual and practical, into the televisual culture. By wisdom I mean eloquent
insights that disquiet us, unsettle us and challenge us to think. This a difficult challenge, but it is
possible. It requires one to speak in a language that is clear and palpable, yet nuanced and
difficult enough that it requires people to rethink the categories and modes in which they
understand the world. It is a critical orientation, but it also requires wisdom. Eloquence in a
Ciceronian or Quintillian sense is still a way of unsettling people and forcing them to think
differently. This can be done even in a televisual culture, and it is certainly what I aspire to do.
Smith: I think that anyone who has read your work or seen you lecture will recognize these
themes as fundamental to what you've tried to accomplish. I wonder if you see a significant
cadre of people who have that sense of calling for humanistic work in the terms that you are
describing, or is it only a few lonely voices?
West: No, I think that more and more persons aspire to this calling. The problem is that in our
market-driven culture, there are so many pitfalls and seductions. It is so easy to equate mere
publicity and visibility with substantive public impact. Visibility and celebrity status can be
confused with intellectual accomplishment, and these are delusions that all who aspire must be
wary to avoid. It's very tough, but it can and must be done. Those in the past such as Reinhold
Niebuhr, Hannah Arendt, James Baldwin and John Dewey managed to pull it off, but in our own
time it is so easy to be superficial, because so much of the culture is superficial.
Smith: As a humanist intellectual observing public discourse at the moment, what is your
assessment of the quality of discussions about politics and public life? For example, in the
recent discussions of President Clinton's troubles, I've been shocked by the absence of cogent
critical voices capable of helping us to understand the issues rather than just revel in the


--- PAGE 480 ---
sensational details. How would you assess what you see happening now in the media?
West: It's really demoralizing and depressing to see such low-quality public conversation. On
one hand, we have a lot of self-righteousness, reflected in the moralistic criticisms of the
president. On the other hand, we have a kind of smug complacency, as if nothing is at stake, as if
people can do anything and not be accountable for their actions. I make a strong distinction
between the moralistic condemnation of individual acts and the moral outrage that deplores child
poverty, the high incidence of AIDS, increasing inequality, the various kinds of backlash against
immigrants and brown and black people. These, for me, are kinds of issues that justify a
legitimate moral outrage within the democratic process that may spill over into political actions.
That is nowhere near the center of the current public conversation, but we instead get moralism
and smug complacency. These are the terms in which people are thinking about the activities in
the White House and the Congress; and they are such truncated, impoverished ways of thinking.
Maybe the downturn in the global markets will induce people to recognize that there are basic
institutional and structural arrangements in place that need to be changed. It may take a major
crisis, recession or depression on a global scale to make people focus on the fundamental
problems. America has an unfortunate history of always waiting until our backs are against the
wall to be begin facing our deeper problems.
Smith: It is depressing to note how deeply entrenched these forces are that distort and deflect the
legitimate moral passions and make impossible the adequate discussion of serious issues. I
wonder how you confront this reality without becoming depressed. I know that you are a deeply
religious man and have often spoken of religious faith as an important sustaining force in the face
of despair. As a humanist, do you find other resources of hope aside from religion?
West: Despair and hope are inseparable. One can never understand what hope is really about
unless one wrestles with despair. The same is true with faith. There has to be some serious
doubt, otherwise faith becomes merely a dogmatic formula, an orthodoxy, a way of evading the
complexity of life, rather than a way of engaging honestly with life. Therefore, for me as
Christian and humanist, I am reminded of Harold Goddard's splendid book on Shakespeare,
which says that the greatest poetry tends to portray the human condition as a citadel of nobility
threatened by an immense barbarism or a flickering candle in an infinite night. He doesn't say
that in a self-righteous way. He just means that the possibility of sustaining hope is always
difficult. If you are fundamentally committed to human dignitythis is true from Sophocles and
Aeschylus to Chekhov, Toni Morrison and John Coltrane-you know that you are cutting radically
against the historical grain. Any fundamental commitment to decency, dignity and democracy
means that you arc cutting even more fundamentally against the grain. You have to be aware of
this. You have to be willing to look at the worst to push for the best. This is the old Thomas
Hardy insight, stated in his "Tenebrac." I always resonated deeply with that. It means wrestling
with despair and doubt but never allowing them to have the last word.
Smith: You mentioned Chekhov. One thing many people don't know about you is how deep a
passion you have for Russian literature in general and for Chekhov in particular. What is it about
Russian writers that you find so congenial to your own thinking and your own condition?
West: For one thing, the emergence of modern Russian civilization was predicated upon the


--- PAGE 481 ---
quest for a national identity that remained fractured. It was fractured because of the Russian
imperial demands that made it difficult for the Russian national identity to be expressed. The
Russian writers-I mentioned Belinsky, but you also see it in Pushkin, Gogol, Dostoyevsky,
Tolstoy, Chekhov, Turgcnev, all the way up to Solzhenitsyn and Bitov-have understood that to
come to terms with Russian identity and Russian soul, they had to explore the fundamental issues
of what it means to be human: to wrestle with the problem of evil, to live an intense life in the
face of death, to grapple with democratic possibilities and with social justice. To be an
intellectual for them means to link the public and the existential issues. Those writers constituted
the public sphere, the essential conversation from the informal circles that go back to Belinsky,
all the way up to Pasternak and Solzhenitsyn, all under conditions of censorship, exploitation
and oppression. They understand that something serious is at stake in intellectual work. They are
meditating on death in its various forms: social death vis-a-vis the serfs, soul murder vis-a-vis
the squashing of a potential that could never be realized owing to social constraints, premature
physical death and so on.
I have been deeply attracted by these writers, because these are for me real soul mates: Chekhov
most of all. Chekhov for me is the great writer of compassion. He understands the essence of the
best of Russian orthodoxy: absolute condemnation of no one, forgiveness for all, compassion to
all. For me as a Christian, those principles cut very deep. Chekhov was an agnostic, but he
embodies in his writings-the great short stories, those four powerful plays, and especially Three
Sisters, which for me is the greatest of twentieth-century plays, though it was first performed in
January 1901, the first month of the century. Drama has been downhill ever since, though
Waiting for Godot is a fascinating footnote. The waiting of the three sisters and the waiting of
Didi and Gogo have some elective affinities, as critics have rightly noted. This at least is how it
appears for me as a person and thinker, rooted in the blues sensibility, the tragicomic sensibility
that you get from the great New World artists, blues musicians.
Smith: We have talked about a course you have planned to teach on Chekhov and John Coltrane.
Can you tell our readers about the course and when you plan to teach it?
West: I'm building toward it. I've been teaching a course on the tragic, the comic and the
political just to lay the foundation. I want to get a real han dle on the tragic, the comic and the
political. We read Sophocles' Antigone and Dante's I7firno, Shakespeare's Hamlet, Ibsen, Shaw,
Chekhov, O'Neill, Tennessee Williams, Lorraine Hansberry, LeRoi Jones and others as a way of
building toward Chekhov. I teach Chekhov a week in that course as a way of preparing myself
for a course in which we will read Chekhov for seven or eight weeks. At the same time, I'm
reading assiduously in the history of modern music in general and black music in particular so
that I can begin to situate Coltrane. Maybe in two or three years I will be ready to teach a course
featuring these two great artistic geniuses and spiritual figures. By "spiritual" I mean that they
understand the connection between intellectual seeking and life-risking loving. You get this in
the work of both. They are thus both not just great artists, they are spiritual figures of great
cultures, who represent deep tendencies of those cultures. Their work signifies something
profound in the cultures. Their work goes beyond technical virtuosity or their art and cuts very
deep into the heart, mind and soul of any person who interacts with their work. For the twenty-
first century this will be crucial. The worst scenario is the total triumph of market forces which


--- PAGE 482 ---
leads to the gangsterization of everyday life with revitalized tribal mentalities and no effective
countervailing forces against global capitalism. What Coltrane and Chekhov represent is the
how indispensable nonmarket values of love, care, concern, service to others, intimacy and
gentleness are to all of us who move from womb to tomb, pursuing any sense of meaning beyond
money making and profit taking. That's a crucial message as we move into the next century. Can
we avoid increasing forms of barbarism, or will the next century be as dark as the last?
Smith: Would you envision including other musicians in this course? I think of Charles Mingus,
whose music represents more of the comic side. He is very inclusive, certainly. Compassion and
religious feeling are present in his music, but the comic is more pronounced, just as in Coltrane's
music the transcendent religious dimension is more pronounced. Would such work be part of the
course?
West: Coltrane in so many ways is like the Hebrew Bible, which centers on hesed, loving-
kindness at its best, and the New Testament, which deals with a love that is so rich and deep; but
it doesn't really deal with an incongruity that sits at the center of the human predicament, which
is the raw stuff of the comic. Thus, even the greatness of Coltrane would have to be examined in
terms of what's missing. For me the sense of the comic is crucial, and there's no doubt that
Mingus brings that. Actually, Chekhov is the great poet of the comic of incongruity, but it is very
high comedy. He talks about failure and inadequacy of intelligence in the most sophisticated and
intelligent way. To accent heroic action that is always self-critical and that therefore accents
intellectual humility is tragic at its best. I understand tragic to refer to the freedom that humans
have to explore the possibility of even greater freedom, but against constraints, usually
constraints of which they are unaware. The comic is a way of acknowledging those limitations
and the incongruity between those high aspirations and where one actually ends up. With
Coltrane and Chekhov the tragic and the comic are in fascinating tension and hence they actually
need one another. With Mingus, within the black musical tradition, you already have a wrestling
with the most sophisticated forms of the comic, and of course I want to stress that the comic is in
no way reducible to the humorous or even the satirical. It cuts much deeper, though it often
embraces that.
Smith: As a teacher, when you present these concepts to young people, do they strike a resonant
chord or not? Do they understand and see the importance of these paradoxes, or are they simply
put off by them?
West: I think that they at first find this very alien. This kind of language cuts radically against the
categories that they bring. Often the categories are rooted in the televisual culture or in what they
expect academic life to be. Both are so predictable. Both are so flat that you have to awaken in
young people the sense of awe, curiosity and wonder-the kind of Faustian restlessness and
seeking. The language you use must become a part of that seeking. So we as teachers must ask
ourselves, how do we tease out that sense of awe and accent the wrestling with the mystery of
being? Once you do that and they are bitten by the bug of intellectual curiosity, it takes off in a
number of different directions. That's the first challenge, especially for those of us in the
humanities.
Smith: This points to another paradox in your work. On one hand your are it pragmatist, or at


--- PAGE 483 ---
least your epistemology is pragmatic. On the other hand, you are a kind of idealist. Those two
tendencies aren't usually linked, and a great deal of your work has been concerned with sorting
through the linkages between these two contradictory tendencies. Would you comment on the
response by critics to that aspect of your work? Do you feel that this aspect of your work has
been accurately understood, and has your thinking changed any regarding the possibility of
linking idealism to a pragmatic epistemology?
West: I appreciate that question because it involves so many fundamental issues. The first and
foremost factor in my appreciation for the pragmatist tradition from Emerson, through Peirce,
James and Dewey up through my friend, brother and mentor Richard Rorty, is its recognition that
human existence is fundamentally historically conditioned. The radical contingency, the
dynamism, the variability, these to me are indispensable ways of understanding who we are. On
the other hand, I am also taken by the heroic actions radically against the odds, against the limits,
which express courage, vision, the freedom to change ourselves and change the world.
Pragmatism at its best tries to keep track of both. The Marxist tradition means much to me
because it tells some fascinating stories about our historical conditionedess, the crucial role of
how the dynamics of power at the workplace curtails potential, the crucial role that banking and
corporate elites play, given their wealth and power, in making it difficult for working people
actually to fulfill their potentiality. That's just one story among others. The same is true for
narratives of white supremacy, male supremacy, homophobia. For me these are not categories of
"PC-ness." They represent our historical conditions. The question is how can we attenuate and
break out of these forms of conditionedness. There's a dialectical interplay between the
structural, institutional and personal constraints in which we find ourselves and our agency. We
are never totally suffocated by these. There's always some way of extending our courage and
vision, manifesting our freedom in ways in which we can at least create some space to operate
and expand the scope of possibility. Pragmatism at its best is able to do this.
My problem with pragmatism, given my Chekhovian Christian sensibility, is that it has no sense
of the tragic, no sense of the comic, and therefore it is too narrow existentially. It is
impoverished existentially. The one pragmatist who understood this tragic dimension is Josiah
Royce. I've been working on Royce for a while and have taught some courses on Royce and
Schopenhauer. I plan to write more on Royce. He didn't really have a sense of the comic, but his
understanding of the tragic was quite profound. He remained a pragmatist, but with an idealist
impulse. Personally, I'm less interested in being situated within the philosophical tradition and
much more interested in making sense of the world, pulling from whatever intellectual tradition I
can. I think that Montaigne makes more sense than all of them, even though I don't feel he has the
truth. He comes much closer than others because he understands both our historical
conditionedness, on the one hand, and the heroic agency we human beings have, on the other. But
he has a much darker Weltanschauung than any of the pragmatists, including Josiah Royce, who
has a profound sense of the tragic as a pragmatist, but also as a Christian.
Smith: In terms of your own work, the inquiry that you are describing begins in your doctoral
dissertation, The Ethical Dimensions of Marxist Thought and it continues through your book on
pragmatism, The American Evasion of Philosophy. Thus, this has been a central inquiry for you.
It has many parts, but also clear continuity. Just to continue with this line of thinking, some of


--- PAGE 484 ---
your recent work has been concerned with issues that are traditionally associated with the Right
rather than the Left, such as family issues. For instance, you recently coauthored The War
Against Parents with Sylvia Ann Hewlett. Some critics on the Left claim that you are becoming
more and more conservative. Is this a fair response to your work?
West: No. I'd draw a very sharp distinction between conservative and preservative. For me the
conservative has traditionally been much more concerned with order, hierarchy and privilege,
whereas the preservative has been concerned with preserving certain kinds of values that can be
used and deployed in the present in ways that expand democratic possibilities, the possibilities
of freedom. I take tradition very seriously, and unfortunately, some of the more profound thinkers
on tradition, like Edward Shils or Hans-Georg Gadamer or even T. S. Eliot-I've learned much
from them, but the tradition that they are trying to conserve is very much different from the
tradition that I am trying to preserve.
I am a radical democrat who believes that it is important to preserve those nonmarket values that
convince ordinary people that it's worth taking a risk to fight for democratic principles. In The
War Against Parents I am talking about those nonmarket values that need to be preserved. These
values were very much at work in the lives of my parents and grandparents and many others of
their generations. They weren't perfect. They were deeply shaped by patriarchal and
homophobic ideas that need to be called into question. Still, there is no doubt that they had a
depth of love and caring and service to something greater than themselves that needs to be
preserved. Conservatives have no monopoly on such values. On the contrary, they promote
unregulated markets that undermine such values. The book is in part about managerial greed and
the market run amok that make it difficult for parenting, that ultimate nonmarket activity of
nurturing and caring for young people, and render it more and more marginal. We've got to
preserve nonmarket values, and yet that can be done without falling into any of the narrow
conservative traps that end up promoting new forms of order, new forms of hierarchy, new forms
of privilege. So I can understand many of my progressive friends and leftist comrades thinking
that I have moved onto a terrain that conservatives have previously monopolized, yet I think that
that is where progressives belong. We must get people to see that conservatives have no
monopoly at all on values that are worth preserving.
Smith: Where do you see your work going? You mentioned the work on Chekhov and Coltrane,
the cross-cultural inquiry into traditions of the oppressed-the "frog's eye perspective," to invoke
Nietzsche and Benjamin. What other projects do you have in the near term and the longer term?
West: I've got a book coming out next year called Heart of American Darkness, and it's a book
on the doings and sufferings of people of African descent. It is a very different take on Afro-
American culture, its emergence and its development over time. It is much more centered around
issues of different forms of death and ways in which this generates an intense sense of life and
its relation to democracy. The issues of varieties of death and the possibilities of democracy
loom large in the text. I am also working on an intellectual autobiography, going back to
Sacramento, where I grew up, my struggles with the Black Panther Party-I was never a member,
but I worked so closely with them-all the way up to where I am now. I've got a book that I've
been working on about David Hume, which I think will be a very novel approach on the finest


--- PAGE 485 ---
philosophical mind in the English language.
Smith: What aspects of Hume are you working on?
West: Well, it has much to do with Hume as the first exemplary modern European man of letters.
I've got some background on Erasmus and others, but Hume, who emerges at a time when he was
born a colonial subject in Scotland, before the Union Act of 1707, dealing with the metropole in
London, unable to get excited about the academy and dropping out early. He was so precocious,
writing the Treatise Concerning Human Nature in his twenties and then having a nervous
breakdown when it was not received well. He was never able to teach in a university, so he
became a diplomat and a tutor, but he wrote the most sophisticated works, philosophically and
culturally, of the day. He was of course a white supremacist, who would play an important role
in reinforcing some of the worst racist tendencies of Europeans, but on the other hand, there is
the radical historicist, in some ways naturalist, not a solely but a thoroughgoing skeptic, which
goes beyond skepticism. He lays bare the trajectories that would follow him, beginning with
Kant, who could not read him well in English, to Hegel and Nietzsche. I am actually ending with
Schopenhauer, the only great German philosopher of the nineteenth century who read English
fluently. He actually translated Hume's work and wrote a long introduction to it. Schopenhauer
thought that besides Kant and Plato Hume was the most important philosopher he had ever read.
He never published any of this, which is fascinating. So even before you get to Nietzsche, that
fascinating disciple of Schopenhauer, you really have to come to terms with Hume. Why is it that
we don't understand the centrality of Hume in this broader sense and not just as an academic
philosopher? He has been so domesticated. Livingstone and others are beginning to address this-
scholars who have read Hume's History ofEngland.
In addition, I have been writing a book on Royce, which I mentioned before. I want to write a
book on how central Josiah Royce ought to be. It's very interesting that the first graduate course
in philosophy in America was taught by Royce. It was a graduate seminar on Schopenhauer at
Johns Hopkins University. Royce knew that this was a historic moment, and he probably couldn't
do a more un-American thing than to teach a course on the great German pessimist philosopher.
What is it about Royce that makes him so profoundly American, yet he believed that
Schopenhauer was the greatest philosopher since Plato, as he said in his 1892 book, The Spirit
ofPhilosophy?
Smith: I think a lot of readers will be astonished to discover your interest in the great skeptical
philosopher David Hume and the great pessimist philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer.
West: They're crucial. I don't think that anyone should stop there, but they are brooks of fire that
we must pass through if we hope to come up with anything that is substantive in terms of a
discourse on faith or hope or possibility or democracy.
Smith: This brings to mind another question about your work, concerning your eclecticism. Some
critics have suggested that your eclecticism reflects a kind of shallowness. Sometimes this is
combined with comments on your charismatic speaking style, asserting that you are simply a
skillful speaker who has borrowed bits of knowledge here and there, but not really thought them
through carefully or mastered any discipline. This strikes me as an obtuse and grossly unfair


--- PAGE 486 ---
response to your work, but let me ask you, how do you respond to this criticism?
West: One is that if what people are looking for is some kind of systematic, architectonic
project, I can understand their criticism. My sensibilities are so Kierkegaardian, so Pascalian,
so antisystem and anti-architectonic, that my work can look as if it is just a smattering of various
sources. For me, figures like Emerson, Arnold, the early Du Bois are inspirations. They are all
thoroughly eclectic, they are antisystem, they write wisdom literature. There is a sense in which
I do aspire to wisdom. I think Sophocles is right. That's the best we can do. I think Isaiah Berlin
is the finest European man of letters of our time; George Steiner is a close second. He has
always been for nie a tremendous source of inspiration. Like Emerson and Arnold, people said
the same thing about him. I do not claim to be in the same class as Berlin, Emerson or Arnold
and really don't care about that. I don't view intellectuals as race horses; I'm just trying to make
sense of the world and love folks before I die. But there's no doubt that many of my inspirations
are thoroughly eclectic. Berlin is totally essayistic, and I take very seriously the form that he
chose to express his wonderful intelligence.
Smith: That response seems to me very consistent with your pragmatic streak: that way of
thinking about the value of a work and the nature of a legacy. I wonder, if you were to speculate
on yourself, looking from the outside at the body of your work, how would you like it to appear,
and what would you like your legacy to be?
West: It's hard to say. I don't think of legacies so much, because it depends on the way the world
is going. If the twenty-first century turns out to be as barbaric as the twentieth, then my voice
could just be one voice in a wilderness, wedded to the discourses of democracy that just turned
out to be marginal and impotent. If things turn out a bit better than that, then I would want to be
part of the same intellectual chorus as Whitman, Du Bois, Dewey. Fundamental commitments to
democracy, of course, but mine is a Christian voice with a Chekhovian tragicomic twist,
representing the African Americans' attempt to come to terms with the dark side of modernity.
It's very hard to say what the legacy will be. History is unpredictable, so I am not worried about
legacies. I will say this, however. I hope that whatever legacy I leave, it will not be confined to
the realm of ideas and texts. If I am anything, I am a thinker who is concerned with life in its
most concrete forms. To be able to affect persons at a variety of levels of their lives, not simply
academic intellectuals who will read texts and teach them, but to be able to reach out to touch
people's lives and affect them, to feel that there is a certain energy, a certain concern, a certain
love, a certain care that will be thoroughly anonymous, thoroughly invisible in the history of
ideas but could live through the discussions in barbershops, in churches, in mosques, in
nightclubs when people just remember someone who tried to do something with love and style,
that to me would be just as important as to have a text taught at Harvard for the next hundred
years. I have a very different idea of what consitutes a legacy than some of my fellow
academics.
Smith: In the course of this interview, we have gone a very broad discussion of the public
intellectual to a very personal assessment of your own work. Is there anything that you would
like to add?
West: One is that in good Emersonian fashion, I've only just begun. After next year when these


--- PAGE 487 ---
two texts are published, that will mark the end of a particular era in my work. When I take off
with the Coltrane and Chekhov, I think that I will begin a whole new wave of work and texts
and, I hope, insights. In that sense I am very excited. The foundation has been set now that will
allow me a springboard, a launching pad. That's one of the things that I love about Harvard. It's
so rich intellectually that I can see the next ten, twenty, thirty years taking me to so many different
directions and, I hope, higher levels of work than what I've done in the past. So I feel that I'm
just starting, and that's very exciting.
Smith: That prospect certainly is exciting. Thank you.
SOURCE: Interview by David Lionel Smith, Boston, October 12, 1998.


--- PAGE 488 ---
Notes
CHAPTER 5
1. This claim is based on a particular periodization of the development of the Western world
persuasively argued in Ernst Cassirer's The Philosophy of the Enlightenment, trans. Fritz C. A.
Koelin and James P. Pettegrove (1932) ; Ernst Troeltsch's The Social Teaching of the Christian
Churches, Vol. 1, trans. Olive Wyon (1931), pp. 23-34, and his Protestantism and Progress: A
Historical Study of the Relation of Protestantism to the Modern World, trans. W. Montgomery
(1912); and Peter Gay's magisterial work, The Enlightenment: An Interpretation, Vol. 1 (Knopf,
1966). For the classic Marxist treatment of the Enlightenment, see Max Horkheimer and Theodor
Adorno, Dialectic ofEnlightenment, trans. John Cumming (Herder k Herder, 1972), especially
pp. 3-42.
2. For a classic treatment of this problematic of provinciality in the beginnings of the United
States, see Merle Curti, The Growth of American Thought, 2d ed. (Harper & Brothers, 1951),
pp. 3-126. Note also Max Lerner, America as a Civilization (Simon & Schuster, 1957), pp. 3-
73. My own theory of the development of American provinciality is based in part on the seminal
treatment of American culture by Geoffrey Thurley, The American Moment: American Poetry in
the Mid-Century (St. Martin's Press, 1978), especially pp. 3-32.
3. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, ed. Phillips Bradley (Knopf, 1944), Vols. 1
and 2; George Santayana, The Genteel Tradition, ed. Douglas L. Wilson (Harvard University
Press. 1967); Van Wyck Brooks, America's Coming-of-Age (1915). The best secondary
literature on de Tocqueville's unsurpassed analysis of American culture remains the superb
extended essays byJohn Stuart Mill that accompany the de locqueville volumes. For insightful
interpretations of Santayana's work, especially his classic 1911 essay "The Genteel Tradition in
American Philosophy," originally given at the Philosophical Union of the University of
California at Berkeley and first published in his Winds of Doctrine (1913), pp. 186-215, see
Danforth Ross, "The Genteel Tradition: Its Characteristics and Its Origins," Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Minnesota, 1954; Douglas L. Wilson, "Introductory," in The Genteel Tradition, pp.
1-25; and Morton White, Science and Sentiment in America: Philosophical Thought from
Jonathan Edwards to John Dewey (Oxford University Press, 1972), pp. 241-246. The best recent
books on the long and winding career of Van Wyck Brooks are James Hoopes, Van Wyck
Brooks: In Search of American Culture (University of Massachusetts Press, 1977), and Raymond
Nelson, Van Wyck Brooks: A Writers Life (Dutton, 1980).
4. William James's notions were put forward in his address to the Anti-Imperialist League in
1903. See the Report of the Fifth Annual Meeting of the New England Anti-Imperialist League,
November 28, 1903, with excerpts in Ralph Barton Perry, The Thought and Character of
William James, Briefer Version (Harvard University Press, 1948), pp. 246-247. For a theory of
American culture based directly on James's notions, see Thayer, Meaning and Action: A Critical
History of 'Pragmatism, pp. 437-445. For a fine dramatic simplification of this theory, see Philip
Rahv's well-known essay "Paleface and Redskin," in his Image and Idea (New Directions,
1957), pp. 1-6.


--- PAGE 489 ---
5. Herbert W. Schneider, A History ofAmerican Philosophy, 2d ed. (Columbia University Press,
1963), pp. 23-26; Joseph L. Blau, Men and Movements in American Philosophy (Prentice-Hall,
1952)1 pp. 27-35.
6. Garry Wills, Inventing America: Jeffersons Declaration of Independence (Doubleday, 1978),
esp. pp. 167-319.
7. Schneider, A History of American Philosophy, pp. 55-61; Blau, Men and Movements in
American Philosophy, p. 114. See also Andrew Delbanco, William Ellery Channing: An Essay
on the Liberal Spirit in America (Harvard University Press, 1981).
8. Winthrop Jordan, White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the .Negro, 1550-1812
(Norton, 1968), Pts. 1-3, esp. pp. 44-98, 179-265; Thomas F. Gossett, Race: The History of an
Idea in America (Southern Methodist University Press, 1965), pp. 17-31.
9. W E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (Fawcett Publications, 1961), pp. 16-17. The best
secondary treatment of this classic text can be found in Arnold Rampersad, The Art and
Imagination of W. E. B. Du Bois (Harvard University Press, 1976), pp. 68-90, and Robert B.
Stepto, From Behind the Veil: A Study of Afro-American Narrative (University of Illinois Press,
1979), pp. 52-91.
10. The most important work on the retention of African practices among black people in the
United States (and New World) remains Melville J. Herskovits's The Myth of the Negro Past
(Beacon Press, 1958). For a superb recent treatment of this phenomenon, see Raboteau, Slave
Religion (Oxford, 1978), pp. 4-92.
11. M. H. Abrams, The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and the Critical Tradition
(Oxford University Press, 1953), chap. 7, pp. 156-183, chap. 8, pp. 184-225. See also the
influential essays by Harold Bloom, "The Internalization of Quest-Romance," in Romanticism
and Consciousness: Essays in Criticism, ed. Harold Bloom (Norton, 1970), pp. 3-24, and "`To
Reason with a Later Reason': Romanticism and the Rational," in his The Ringers in the Tower:
Studies in Romantic Tradition (University of Chicago Press, 1971), pp. 323-337.
12. Jacques Barzun, Classic, Romantic and Modern (Little, Brown, 1961), pp. 1-17, 96-114.
13. Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism (Norton, 1971), pp. 11-140, 327-372, 411-462.
14. For the classic text on this subject, see F. O. Matthiessen, The American Renaissance
(Oxford University Press, 1941). Other notable works include V. L. Parrington, Main Currents in
American Thought, Vol. 2 (Harcourt, Brace, 1954), pp. 427-465; D. H. Lawrence, Studies in
Classic American Literature (1923); R. W. B. Lewis, The American Adam: Innocence, Tragedy,
and Tradition in the .Nineteenth Century (University of Chicago Press, 1955), especially the
Prologue, pp. 1-10; Richard Chase, The American Novel and Its Tradition (New York, 1957),
esp. pp. 1-22; and Ihab Hassan, Radical Innocence: Studies in the Contemporary American
Novel (Princeton University Press, 1961), pp. 34-60. This American search for newness is
captured by the words of the two major literary figures of the period: Ralph Waldo Emerson and


--- PAGE 490 ---
Herman Melville. In his renowned essay "Circles," Emerson states that "I am only an
experimenter.... I simply experiment, an endless seeker, with no past at my back" (Selected
Writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson, ed. William H. Gilman, [New American Library, 1965], p.
304). In his famous essay "Hawthorne and His Mosses," Melville writes, "Let us boldly contemn
all imitation, though it comes to us grateful and fragrant as the morning, and foster all originality,
though at first, it be crabbed and ugly as our own pine knots" (Herman Melville, Moby-Dick, ed.
Harrison Hayford and Hershel Parker [Norton, 1967], pp. 546, 550).
15. Raboteau, Slave Religion., pp. 128-132. Note also Lawrence W. Levine, Black Culture and
Black Consciousness: Afro-American Folk Thought from Slavery to Freedom (Oxford
University Press, 1977), pp. 60-61.
16. Herskovits, The Myth of the Negro Past, pp. 232-235. The material conditions under which
many Africans in the United States became Christians are worth noting: the structure of
domination was that of a preindustrial form of slavery; a lower ratio of Africans to whites than
that in Latin America facilitated more frequent and intense African-white interaction; and though
only 4.5 percent of all Africans imported to the Western Hemisphere came to the United States
and Canada, an incredibly high rate of natural increase soon quadrupled this percentage figure.
Therefore most converts (though not all, such as the poet Phyllis Wheatley) were American-born
Africans struggling to make sense of and give meaning to life without an immediate relation of
African customs and worldviews. For further elaboration on this matter, see Raboteau, Slave
Religion, pp. 87-92.
17. Raboteau, Slave Religion, pp. 59-75.
18. This point is accented by E. Franklin Frazier, The Negro Church in America (Schocken
Books, 1964), pp. 30-34. For a more dialectical treatment-which highlights the liberating and
debilitating aspects of the black Christian churches-see Eugene D. Genovese, Roll, Jordan, Roll:
The World the Slaves Made (Random House, 1974), pp. 159-284. See also the firstrate
dissertation ofJames M. Washington, which is a pioneering study of the separate black Baptists,
"The Origins and Emergence of Black Baptist Separatism, 1863-1897," Ph.D. dissertation, Yale
University, 1979.
19. Lionel Trilling, Beyond Culture: Essays in Literature and Learning (Viking Press, 1965), p.
3. In a famous essay entitled "The Idea of the Modern," in The Idea of the Modern in Literature
and the Arts, ed. Irving Howe (Horizon Press, 1967), Irving Howe writes, "Nihilism lies at the
center of all we mean by modernist literature, both as subject and symptom, a demon overcome
and a demon victorious" (p. 39). For a more affirmative view of modernism, see Peter Gay,
Freud, Jews and Other Germans: Masters and Victims in Modernist Culture (Oxford University
Press, 1978). The best general treatment of modernism is Malcolm Bradbury and James
McFarlane, eds., Modernism: 1890-1930 (Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1976), and the classic
Marxist perspective is put forward by Georg Lukacs in his influential essay "The Ideology of
Modernism," in Marxism and Human Liberation, ed. E. San Juan, Jr. (Dell Press, 1973), pp.
277-307.
20. Virginia Woolf, "Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Brown," in Collected Essays, Vol. 1 (London:


--- PAGE 491 ---
Hogarth Press, 1966), p. 321.
21. The major texts on the industrial provincial stage of American culture are Henry F. May, The
End of American Innocence: A Study of the First Years of Our Own Time, 1912-1917 (Knopf,
1957); Robert H. Wiebe, The Search fir Order, 1877-1920 (Hill & Wang, 1967); Samuel P.
Hays, The Response to Industrialism, 1885-1914 (University of Chicago Press, 1957) ; Chase,
The American Novel and Its Tradition, pp. 117-236; Hassan, Radical Innocence, pp. 61-95; and
the seminal essay by Herbert G. Gutman, "Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing
America, 1815-1919," in his Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing America: Essays in
American Working-Class and Social History (Vintage Books, 1977), pp. 3-78.
22. Alfred Kazin, On Native Grounds: An Interpretation of Modern American Prose Literature
(Doubleday, 1956), p. ix.
23. This formulation follows Richard Rorty's brilliant contemporary remake of Santayana's
essay, entitled "Professionalized Philosophy and Transcendentalist Culture," in The Georgia
Review, 30th anniversary (Winter 1976), pp. 757-769. For a broader characterization of the
pragmatist attack on idealism, see Morton White, Social Thought in America: The Revolt
Against Formalism (Beacon Press, 1957). Note also Bruce Kuklick, The Rise ofAmerican
Philosophy: Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1860-1930 (Yale University Press, 1977), pp. 129-227,
233-401. Related treatments on the phenomenon of professionalism in American culture are
Burton J. Bledstein, The Culture of Professionalism: The Middle Class and the Development of
Higher Education in America (Norton, 1976), especially pp. 80-128, 287-334; and David F.
Noble, America by Design: Science, Technology, and the Rise of Corporate Capitalism (Knopf,
1977).
24. August Meier, Negro Thought in America, 1880-1915: Racial Ideologies in the Age of
Booker T Washington (University of Michigan Press, 1963), pp. 161-278; S. P. Fullinwider,
The Mind and Mood of Black America: 20th Century Thought (Dorsey Press, 1969), pp. 47-71;
Abby Arthur Johnson and Ronald MaberryJohnson, Propaganda and Aesthetics: The Literary
Politics of Afrv-American Magazines in the Twentieth Century (University of Massachusetts
Press, 1979), pp. 1-63; and Julius Lester, "Du Bois and Washington," in his fine introduction to
The Seventh Son: The Thought and Writings of W. E. B. Du Bois, ed. Julius Lester (Random
House, 1971), Vol. 1, pp. 41-52.
25. This insight is but one of many in the superb essay by Harold Cruse, "Behind the Black
Power Slogan," in his Rebellion or Revolution? (William Morrow, 1969), pp. 193-260. 26. For
actual reprints of articles from The Messenger, see Voices oja Black Nation: Political
journalism in the Harlem Renaissance, ed. Theodore G. Vincent (Ramparts Press, 1973), pp. 43-
51, 113-122. Reliable treatments of Owen and Randolph can be found in Philip Foner, American
Socialism and Black Americans: From the Age of Jackson to World War II (Greenwood Press,
1977), pp. 265-287; Johnson and Johnson, Propaganda and Aesthetics, pp. 57-63; and Henry
Williams, Black Response to the American Left: 1917-1929 (Princeton University Press, 1973),
pp. 80-93. For a fuller examination of Randolph, see Jervis Anderson, A. Philip Randolph: A
Biographical Portrait (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972).


--- PAGE 492 ---
27. Similarly, reproductions of articles from The Crusader, the periodical of the African Blood
Brotherhood, are in Voices Y 'a Black Nation, pp. 123-136. Detailed treatments of this
fascinating group are difficult to find. The best ones I know are Harry Haywood, Black
Bolshevik: Autobiography of an Afro-American Communist (Liberator Press, 1978), pp. 122-
131; Foner, American Socialism and Black Americans, pp. 309-311; Mark Solomon, "Red and
Black: Negroes and Communism," Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, pp. 79-84; and Mark
Naison, "The Communist Party in Harlem. 1928-1936," Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University,
1975, chaps. 1-2.
28. N. R. Hanson, Patterns of'Discovery (Cambridge University Press, 1958); Michael Polanyi,
Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy (University of Chicago Press, 1958);
Thomas S. Kuhn, Tic- Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2d ed. (University of Chicago Press,
1970); and "Reflections on My Critics," in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, ed. Imre
Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (Cambridge University Press, 1970), pp. 231-278. Imre Lakatos,
"Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes," in Criti- asm and the
Growth of Knowledge, pp. 91-196; Paul Feyerabend, Against Method (Schocken Books, 1975)
and Science in a Free Society (Schocken Books, 1978). For serious critical responses to the
demythologizing of science, see Israel Scheffler, Science and Subjectivity (Bobbs- Merrill,
1967) and "Vision and Revolution: A Postscript on Kuhn," in Philosophy of Science, Vol. 39,
No. 3 (September 1972), pp. 366-374; Larry Landau, Progress and Its Problems: Towards a
Theory ofScienti lc Growth (University of California Press, 1977); and Clark Glymour, Theory
and Evidence (Princeton University Press, 1980).
29. Ihab Hassan, The Literature of Silence: Henry Miller and Samuel Beckett (Knopf, 1968);
The Dismemberment of Orpheus: Toward a Postmodern Literature (Oxford University Press,
1971); Paracriticisms: Seven Speculations of 'the Times (University of Illinois Press, 1975);
The Right Promethean Fire: Imagination, Science and Cultural Change (University of Illinois
Press, 1980); Raymond Olderman, Beyond the Waste Land: A Study of the American Novel in
the Nineteen-Sixties (Yale University Press, 1972); Christopher Lasch, The Culture of
Narcissism (Norton, 1978); Heinz Kohut, The Analysis of the Sty (International Universities
Press, 1971); The Restoration of the Self (International Universities Press, 1977); The
Search,for the Self: Selected Writings of Heinz Kohut, 1950-1978, 2 vols., ed. Paul H. Ornstein
(International Universities Press, 1978) ; Jerome Klinkowitz, Literary Disruptions: The Making
Y 'a Post-Contemporary American Fiction, 2d ed. (University of Illinois Press, 1981). Relevant
Marxist responses to and analyses of postmodernism include Fredric Jameson, Marxism and
Farm: Turntieth-Century Dialectical Theories of Literature (Princeton University Press, 1971);
Fables of Aggression: Wyndham Lewis, the Modernist as Fascist (University of California
Press, 1979); The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act (Cornell
University Press, 1981); his insightful essay "Reification and Utopia in Mass Culture," Social
Text (Winter 1979), pp. 130-148; Russell Jacoby, Social Amnesia: A Critique of Conformist
Psychology from Adler to Laing (Beacon Press, 1975) ; and Stuart Ewen, Captains of
Consciousness: Advertising and the Social Roots of the Consumer Culture (McGraw-Hill,
1976). For a critical, even polemic, treatment of postmodernism, see Gerald Graff, "The Myth of
the Postmodernist Breakthrough," Ti-Quarterly, No. 26 (Winter 1973), pp. 383-417, and his
controversial book Literature Against Itself: Literary Ideas in Modern Society (University of


--- PAGE 493 ---
Chicago Press, 1979). Of course, the basis of scholarship on postmodernism and mass culture
was laid by the pioneering work of Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno with their classic
essay The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass Deception," in Dialectic of Enlightenment,
pp. 120-167, and the writings of David Riesman in his (along with Nathan Glazer and Reuel
Denney) The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character, abr. ed. (Yale
University Press, 1961); Individualism Reconsidered (Doubleday, 1955), esp. pp. 12-27, 126-
163; and Abundance/or What? and Other Essays (Doubleday, 1964 . pp. 103-367.
30. This leadership fulfills the prophecy of Thomas Mann, the major German modernist writer,
who writes in the last paragraph of his famous 1938 lecture given on his coast-tocoast tour, "I
believe, in fact, that for the duration of the present European dark age, the centre of Western
culture will shift to America" (The Corning Victory ofDernocrwy, trans. Agnes E. Meyer
[Knopf, 1938], pp. 66-67). Note also William Barrett's words regarding the situation of
American intellectuals in 1945, "We were probably the last American generation to go through
this old rite of looking toward Europe for our culture ... that older exclusive filial relation to
Europe-the sense of Europe as a unique treasure on which Americans must depend-was on the
way out" (The Truants: Adventures Among the Intellectuals [Doubleday, 1982], p. 130).
31. Kuklick, The Rise of American Philosophy, pp. 565-572. See also Richard Rorty's
"Introduction," in The Linguistic Turn, ed. Richard Rorty (University of Chicago Press, 1967),
pp. 1-39. For a slightly different perspective, note my essay "Nietzsche's Prefiguration of
Postmodern American Philosophy," Boundary 2, Vol. 9, No. 10 (Spring-Fall 1981), pp. 241-
270.
32. This second theoretical moment of Afro-American philosophy constitutes its Foucaultian
elements: the exploration of the complex relationship between knowledge and power, discourse
and politics. For a similar yet more ambitious project, see Edward Said, Orientalism (Pantheon
Books, 1978). Note that my aim is not to endorse the discursive idealism of Michel Foucault, but
rather to incorporate some of his powerful insights into a more sophisticated Marxist analysis of
the emergence of modern racism. I have just embarked on a huge project that deepens my
concern in this chapter into a full-fledged volume.
33. Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, trans. Walter Kaufmann and R. J.
Hollingdale (Vintage Books. 1967); Michel Foucault, "Nietzsche. Genealogy, History,:" in
Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and In/e,views, trans. Donald F.
Bouchard and Sherry Simon (Cornell University Press, 1977), pp. 139-164.
34. Cf. Louis Althusser, "Marx's Relation to Hegel," in his Politics and History (Schocken
Books, 1972), pp. 181-183. For trenchant criticisms of Althusser, see Stanley Aronowitz, The
Crisis in Historical Materialism.' Class, Politics, and Culture in Marxist Theory (Praeger
Publications, 1981), pp. 68-69, 120-121, 325-327.
35. This insight bears the stamp of Foucault's long-drawn-out quarrel with vulgar Marxism. See
Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality, Vol. 1, trans. Robert Hurley (Random House, 1980),
pp. 92-98; Power/Keowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977, ed. Colin
Gordon (Pantheon Books, 1980), pp. 109-145.


--- PAGE 494 ---
36. For the "classicism plus science" view of the Enlightenment, see Peter Gay, The
Enlightenment: An Interpretation, Vol. 1, pp. 3-27, 313-321. For the importance of the Cartesian
transformation of philosophy, see Richard Rorty's insightful metaphilosophical claims in
Philosophy and the Mirror of'Nature, esp. pp. 8-12, 45-51, 54-69. 136-140.
37. This understanding of the Renaissance derives from Aby Warburg's notion of Ausgle-
ichsformel ("compromise formula"): and for Galileo's and Newton's protomodern worldviews,
see Gay, The Enlightenment, pp. 269-277.
38. Benjamin Farrington, Francis Bacon: Philosopher of Industrial Science (Collier Books,
1961), pp. 78-106; Bertrand Russell, A History off Western Philosophy (Simon & Schuster,
1945), p. 544.
39. Martin Heidegger, "The Age of the World View," trans. Marjorie Grene, Boundary 2, Vol. 4,
No. 2 (Winter 1976), pp. 348-349.
40. Gay, The Enlightenment, pp. 310-311.
41. Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature; Abrams, The Mirror and the Lamp.
42. This claim, as well as my general argument, derives in part from the seminal study by
George L. Mosse, Toward the Final Solution: A History of European Racism (Howard Fertig,
1978). This neglected work deserves much more attention than it has heretofore received.
43. Ibid., p. 10.
44. Jordan, White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Negro, 1550-1812, pp. 3-98;
Gossett, Race: The History of'an Idea in America, pp. 3-31.
45. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (Pantheon
Books, 1970), pp. 132, 158.
46. Jordan, White Over Black, pp. 217-218; Gossett, Race: The History of an Idea in America,
pp. 32-34; Ashley Montagu, "The Origin of the Concept of `Race,"' in his Man's Most Dangerous
Myth: The Fallacy oojRace, 5th ed. (Oxford University Press, 1974), pp. 46ff.
47. Jordan, White Over Black, p. 220.
48. Ibid., pp. 220-221.
49. Gossett, Race, p. 36.
50. For their defenses of Blumenbach, see Jordan, White Over Black, pp. 223, 507; Gossett,
Race, p. 39; and Montagu, Man's Most Dangerous Myth, pp. 41-45. Support for my viewpoint is
found in Mosse, Toward the Final Solution, pp. 11, 21.
51. Most notably in the United States, Dr. John Augustine Smith, president of the College of


--- PAGE 495 ---
William and Mary, and the famous naturalist Dr. Samuel George Morton of Philadelphia-both
fervent proponents of black inferiority. Jordan, White Over Black, pp. 505-506; Gossett, Race,
pp. 58-59.
52. Mosse, Toward the Final Solution, p. 22.
53. Ibid., p. 25.
54. Ibid.
55. Jordan, White Over Black, pp. 486ff., 514.
56. Ibid., p. 515.
57. Ibid.
58. Ibid., pp. 515-516.
59. Ibid., p. 520.
60. Ibid.
61. David Brion Davis, The Problem q I Slavery in Western Culture (Cornell University Press,
1966), p. 403.
62. Gossett, Race, p. 45.
63. Richard H. Popkin. "Hume's Racism." The Philosophical Forum, Vol. 9, Nos. 2-3, p. 213.
64. Jordan, White Over Black, pp. 436-437.
65. Popkin, "Hume's Racism," p. 218.
66. Ibid.
67. Gay, Vic Etligldenin nd, p. 34.
68. Frank M. Snowden. Jr.. Blacks in Antiquity: Ethiopians in the Greco-Roman Experience
(Belknap Press, 1970), pp. 178-179.
69. Ibid., p. 179.
70. E. E. Sikes, The Anthropology of 'the reeks (London, 1914); W. L. Westermann, The Slave
Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity, Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society, Vol.
50 (1955), pp. xi-180; Moses Hadas, Hellenistic Culture: Fusion and Di(usion (Columbia
University Press, 1959); Adrian N. Sherwin-White, Racial Prejudice in Imperial Rome
(Cambridge University Press, 1967).


--- PAGE 496 ---
CHAPTER 6
1. This phrase comes from the first line of Muriel Rukeyser's "Poem"-"I lived in the first century
of world wars"-in her book The Speed nf'Darkness (1968), in A Muriel Rukeyser Reader, ed.
Jan Heller Levi (New York: Norton, 1994), p. 211. In his magisterial treatment of this most
violent of centuries, The Age oof Extremes: A History pf the World, 1914-1991 (New York:
Pantheon, 1994), Eric Hobsbawm suggests the numbers of this century's "Megadeath" toll to be
187 million (p. 12). Here he follows the estimate of Z. Brzezinski in Out of Control: Global
Turmoil on the Eve of the Twenty-First Century (New York: Scribner, 1993). I think both
scholars underestimate the death toll in this "most terrible century in Western history" (Isaiah
Berlin's phrase).
2. In Dusk of Dawn. An Essay Toward an Autobiography q1 'a Race Concept (1940), W. E. B.
Du Bois writes, "Whatever of racial feeling gradually crept into my life, its effect upon me in
these earlier days was rather one of exaltation and high disdain.... My African racial feeling was
then purely a matter of my own later learning and reaction...... In W. E. B. Du Bois, Writings
(New York: Library of America, 1986), pp. 563, 638. See also Eric J. Sundquist, To Wake the
Nations: Race in the Making of'American Literature (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1993), pp. 459-467; David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race,
1868-1919 (New York: Henry Holt, 1993), pp. 56-70; and Manning Marable, W E. B. Du Bois:
Black Radical Democrat (Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1986), pp. 5-15.
3. W. E. B. Du Bois, "The Talented Tenth," in Writings, p. 852. As Peter Gay rightly notes, "The
question of the lower orders is the great unexamined political question of the Enlightenment....
[In the writings of the philosophes there is] snobbery ... [there is] a certain failure of imagination
... [and there is] a sense of despair at the general wretchedness, illiteracy, and brutishness of the
poor." The Enlightenment: An Interpretation (New York: Norton Library, 1969), Vol. 2, The
Science ofFreedom, p. 517.
4. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Souls oofBlack Folk (New York: Fawcett Publications, 1961), pp. 48,
50, 75, 76, 83, 87, 101, 107, 109, 125, 126, 132, 139, 150, 170, 171. 182, 189. The last quote is
from page 80.
5. Ibid., pp. 140-141.
6. In a brilliant essay, Shamoon Zamir makes a similar point about Du Bois. "As Du Bois details
his curiosity and excitement at the novelty of the situation, his posture is very much that of an
ethnographic participant-observer reporting from the field.... The feelings of the young Du Bois
reproduce the same exoticism that led the white middle-class reading public at the turn of the
century to seek out works that revealed how `the other half' lived." Zamir grounds Du Bois's
worldview in The Souls of'Black Folk in Victorian moralism, Herderian romanticism and the
historical realism of the Gospels (sorrow songs). Zamir suggests that Du Bois's sense of the
tragic goes a bit deeper than I admit-but only a little bit deeper. See Shamoon Zamir, "`The
Sorrow Songs'/`Song of Myself': Du Bois, The Crisis of Leadership, and Prophetic
Imagination," in The Black Columbial: Dcjining Moments in African American Literature and
Culture, ed. Werner Sollors and Maria Diedrich (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,


--- PAGE 497 ---
1994), pp. 145-166, esp. 147-148. For Zamir's fascinating, yet ultimately unconvincing Hegelian
treatment of Du Bois's early thought, see Dark Voices: W. E. B. Du Bois and American Thought,
1888-1903 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995). For Du Bois on jazz, see Kathy J.
Ogren, The Jazz Revolution: Twenties America and the Meaning ofJazz (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1989), pp. 118-120.
7. For a provocative recent treatment of this age-old dichotomy created by intellectuals-the
ultimate logic of which denies the full human status of the majority of people-see John Carey,
The Intellectuals and the Masses: Pride and Prejudice Among the Literary Intelligentsia, 1880-
1939 (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1992). For direct references to black peoplesome of which
resonate with Du Bois's-note pp. 52, 65, 121, 125, 148, 194f., 210. Needless to say, most of the
figures Carey examines-such as Jose Ortega y Gasset, Knut Hamsun, T. S. Eliot, H. G. Wells, W.
B. Yeats, Evelyn Waugh, Arthur Machen, George Bernard Shaw, Ezra Pound. Wyndham Lewis,
D. H. Lawrence and Aldous Huxley-were either arch elitists or outright xenophobes. Du Bois's
democratic sentiments tempered his elitism and xenophobia (e.g., his antiJewish stereotypes
were toned down in later editions of The Souls of Black Folk). For example, note David
Levering Lewis's analysis in W. E. B. Du Bois, p. 285.
8. Du Bois, Dusk f Dawn, in Writings, p. 596.
9. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Autobiography of W. E. B. Du Bois: A Soliloquy on TTewing My L fe
from the Last Decade ofIts First Century (New York: International Publishers. 1968), pp. 221-
222.
10. Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois, p. 227.
11. This brief tilt toward the tragic in Du Bois's corpus may be contrasted with that most rare of
despairing moments in Ralph Waldo Emerson's upbeat writings-namely, his often overlooked
poem "Threnody," one of the great elegies in the English language, written in response to the
death of his beloved five-year-old first son, Waldo. Note how Emerson wrestles with the
overwhelming irrevocability of his son's death in its opening lines, with no reaching for reason
or revelation:The South-wind brings "Life, sunshine and desire, / And on every mount and
meadow / Breathes aromatic fire; / But over the dead he has no power, / The lost, the lost, he
cannot restore; / And, looking over the hills, I mourn / The darling who shall not return."
12. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, pp. 154-55. See also Keith E. Byerman, Seizing the
Word: History, Art, and Self'in the Work of W. E. B. Du Bois (Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 1994), pp. 29-31.
13. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 153.
14. For a fascinating yet unpersuasive reading of this neglected moment in Du Bois that claims
that "this suffering has no redemptive moment," see Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity
and Double Consciousness (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993), pp. 138-139.
Gilroy rightly points out that Du Bois experiences "an awful gladness in my heart.... No bitter
meanness now shall sicken his baby heart till it die a living death, no taunt shall madden his


--- PAGE 498 ---
happy boyhood. Fool that I was to think or wish that this little soul should grow choked and
deformed within the Veil! ... Better far this nameless void that stops my life than a sea of
sorrows for you" (Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 156). Yet the first sentence of the
chapter-"Unto you a child is born"-invokes,Jesus of Nazareth (that most redemptive of figures).
Du Bois also hears "in his baby voice the voice of the Prophet that was to rise within the Veil"
while his son is alive. And he vows that his son's death "is not the end. Surely there shall yet
dawn some mighty morning to lift the Veil and set the prisoned tree. Not for me,-I shall die in my
bonds,-but for fresh young souls who have not known the night and waken to the morning ... some
morning...:' (p. 156). This certainly is Du Bois in a tragic mood, yet his Enlightenment
eschatology-with a small dose of Stoicism-gets the best of hiss. Like Candide in that marvelous
Enlightenment novelette Candide (1759) by the inimitable Voltaire, even in the midst of the
deepest tragedies and absurdities, cultivation can still generate a harvest, rational control and
moral action can still yield fruit down the road. In fact, Du Bois's salvific sentiments provide
more hope for the future than Voltaire's witty and resilient Stoicism. Only Du Bois's incredible
and torturous prayer in response to the Atlanta Riot-his classic "A Litany of Atlanta" (1906)-
explores the tragic and absurd depths of the human condition. His desperate call for moral
integrity and political action in the face of the "white terror" of human suffering and divine
silence, as well as his embrace of the "dark sleep," is one instance in his corpus where he
engages in the existential deep-sea diving of Tolstoy, Chekhov, Kafka, Coltrane and Morrison.
For this sterling performance, see James Melvin Washington's canonical text, Conversations
with God: Two Centuries of Prayers by African Americans (New York: HarperCollins, 1994),
pp. 102-104. Washington's profound "Afterword: A Scholar's Benediction" captures my own
Christian tragicomic sense of life-a sense grounded in the Christocentric humanism of Erasmus,
Kierkegaard and Martin Luther King, Jr.; the tormented love ethic of Tennessee Williams, Leo
Tolstoy and Toni Morrison: and the indefatigable compassion of Anton Chekhov, Muriel
Rukeyser and John Coltrane. My own perennial wrestling with existential tension in history is
deeply influenced by the profound corpus of Eric Voegelin.
15. For Du Bois's direct debt to the father of Victorian social criticism, Thomas Carlyle, see
Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois, pp. 74-75, 77, 78, 115-116, 120, 136, 148. The best general treatment
of Carlyle's life and work is Fred Kaplan's Thomas Carlyle: A Biography (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1983).
16. Du Bois, "The Talented Tenth," in Writings, pp. 842, 861.
17. Du Bois's critique of patriarchy-black and white-grows and deepens in the course of his long
career. For instance, see his 1920 classic essay "The Damnation of Women," from Darkwatei; in
W itings, pp. 952-68.
18. Matthew Arnold, Culture and Anarchy, ed. J. Dover Wilson (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1960), p. 70.
19. Du Bois, "The Talented Tenth," in Writings, pp. 846, 847.
20. For superb synoptic treatments of two exemplary figures, see Thomas C. Holt, "The Lonely
Warrior: Ida B. Wells-Barnett and the Struggle for Black Leadership," in Black Leaders of the


--- PAGE 499 ---
Twentieth Century, ed. John Hope Franklin and August Meier (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1982), pp. 39-61; and Joseph P. Reidy, "Aaron A. Bradley: The Voice of Black Labor in
the Georgia Lowcountry," in Southern Black Leaders of the Reconstruction Era, ed. Howard N.
Rabinowitz (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1982), pp. 281-308.
21. Du Bois acknowledges this fact in Dusk of Dawn (in Writings, p. 690): "It still remains
possible in the United States for a white American to be a gentleman and a scholar, a Christian
and a man of integrity, and yet flatly and openly refuse to treat as a fellow human being any
person who has Negro ancestry." As in Leo Tolstoy's magnificent short story "After the Ball"
(1903), in which a genteel old colonel masks his hatred and cruelty toward a lower-class
person, this paradox and hypocrisy undermines one of the crucial "truths" of the Enlightenment
worldview and Victorian social criticism.
22. W. E. B. Du Bois, "The Talented Tenth: Memorial Address" (1948), in A Reader, ed. David
Levering Lewis (New York: Henry Holt, 1995), p. 349.
23. Ibid., p. 350.
24. Two neglected gems in the rich Victorian tradition of social criticism especially pertinent in
our precatastrophic postmodern times arc L. T. Hobhouse, Democracy and Reaction (1904) and
C. F. G. Masterman, The Condition ofEngland (1909). In the former text, Hobhouse-a great anti-
imperialist democrat of Edwardian England-echoes Du Bois's famous claim that "the problem of
the twentieth century is the problem of the color-line." In the latter book, Masterman-the
sagacious critic of English self deception just prior to World War I-writes: "Humanity-at best-
appears but as a shipwrecked crew which has taken refuge on a narrow ledge of rock, beaten by
wind and wave; which cannot tell how many, if any at all, will survive when the long night gives
place to morning. The wise man will still go softly all his days; working always for greater
economic equality on the one hand, for understanding between estranged peoples on the other;
apprehending always how slight an effort of stupidity or violence could strike a death blow to
twentieth-century civilization, and elevate the forces of destruction triumphant over the ruins of a
world" (London: Methuen, 1909; p. 233).
25. George Steiner, "A Responsion," in Reading George Steiner, ed. Nathan A. Scott, Jr., and
Ronald A. Sharp (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994), p. 278. Steiner's critical
attitude toward the academy echoes that of the grand old (Canadian-born) Harvard humanist
Douglas Bush. His 1966 book on the greatest nineteenth-century English poet, John Keats, is one
of the best we have, and his 1939 Alexander Lectures lament the loss of the "general reader." In
the latter he states: "One may wonder, timidly, if a real revival of the humanities might not be
inaugurated by a moratorium on productive scholarship ... long enough to restore our perspective
and sense of value. What a golden interlude we might have, with the learned journals
temporarily withdrawn, with no scholarly lucubrations to read or write, no annual
bibliographies to torment us with hundreds of things we must know if we are to be qualified to
lead hopeful young men into the same labyrinth, with nothing to do, in short, but sit down in
peace with the great books we ought to be soaking in! ... In front of my desk are serried rows of
card-indexes, bibliographies, and periodicals. Out of sight behind me are Holbein's portraits of
Erasmus and More. `Saint Socrates, pray for us."' (quoted from Douglas Bush. The Renaissance


--- PAGE 500 ---
and English Humanism [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1939], pp. 132-33). For one of
the most powerful critiques of professionalized cultural studies in this century, see Geoffrey
Scott's classic The Architecture ofHumanism: A Study in the History of Tiste (1914; reprint,
New York: Norton, 1974).
26. For a brief examination of the slow demise of American exceptionalism in American
historiography. see David W. Noble, the End of American History (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 1985). Note also Michael Kammen, "The Problem of American Exceptionalism: A
Reconsideration," American Quarterly 45, No. 1 (1993), pp. 1-43.
27. Du Bois confronts this pessimism most strikingly in two of the most insightful and angry
essays in his corpus-"The White World," in Dusk of Dawn (1940), and "The Souls of White
Folk," in Darkwater (1920). These essays echo the themes in the work of the grand dean of Pan-
African Studies in America, John Henrik Clarke. But in neither essay does Du Bois openly
acknowledge that a long tradition of black cultural and revolutionary nationalists had already
arrived where he seemed to be headed. Harold Cruse makes this persuasive argument in his
classic work The Crisis oof the Negro Intellectual (New York: William Morrow, 1967), pp.
330-336. For Du Bois's essays, see Writings, pp. 652-680, 923-938.
28. Henry Highland Garnet, "An Address to the Slaves of the United States of America of 1843,"
in Black Natimualism in America, ed. John Bracey, August Meier and Elliot Rudwick
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970), p. 73.
29. It is no accident that these two groups serve as major preoccupations of the two towering
European men of letters in our time-Isaiah Berlin and George Steiner. The recent revival around
Berlin focuses on his pluralistic liberal political thought, but his greatness resides in his deep
and empathetic interpretations of Russian intellectuals such as Turgenev, Belinsky, Bakunin and
especially Herzen and Tolstoy. His powerful readings of Vico, Herder and de Maistre-though
canonical-pale in the face of his self-invested and magisterial treatments of Tolstoy. In fact, his
most famous essay, "The Hedgehog and the Fox" (originally entitled, in its shorter form, "Lev
Tolstoy's Historical Scepticism"), is the best example of philosophic plzronesis (practical
wisdom) in this blood-drenched century. Section 6 of this magnificent essay-the pinnacle of his
masterful corpus-represents the highest form of philosophic wisdom literature written in
twentieth-century Europe-and Tolstoy is his major springboard. This essay, to be read and
reread, is found in Russian Thinkers, ed. Henry Hardy and Aileen Kelly (New York: Viking
Press, 1978), pp. 22-81, esp. 68-74. George Steiner's gallant attempt to focus our attention on
early twentieth-century central European figures such as Hermann Broch, Paul Celan, Arnold
Schoenberg, Robert Musil, Sigmund Freud. Rainer Maria Rilke and Franz Kafka is monumental
and has yielded much fruit. For example, recent interest in Musil-due in part to the new edition
of his novel The Man Without Qualities (1930), including previously unpublished sections, and
of his timely essays, Precision and Soul, ed. Burton Pike and David S. Luft (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1990)-is growing. A Broch revival centered on his masterpiece, The Death of
Vail (1945), may be next. Yet Steiner's project began with the Russians-that is, with Tolstoy,
Dostoyevsky and Shestov. His first book was Tlstoy or Dostoevsky: An Essay in the Old
Criticism (New York: Knopf, 1959)-Tolstoy as Homeric bard vs. Dostoyevsky as tragic


--- PAGE 501 ---
dramatist in response to the "dilemma of Realism" created by Dickens, Hugo, Stendhal, Zola and
Flaubert. And the great work of Shestov (whose first book was on Shakespeare), Athens and
Jerusalem, deeply influenced him. Steiner notes, "The nearing shadow of Hitler made me.... The
dialectic of `Athens/Jerusalem' has been perennial throughout my teaching and published work."
And notwithstanding his marvelous readings of Kafka-a figure who shunned noise and music-
Steiner states, `"The question 'what in the world is music like?' has become for me the
metaphysical inquiry incarnate.... It is, in Levi- Strauss's arresting formulation, the invention of
melody which remains the mystere supreme des sciences de 19romme." See Steiner, "A
Responsion," in Reading George Steiner, pp. 276, 280, 283, 284. Note the brilliant essays
pertinent to my concerns in this superb volume by Robert Boyers, Guido Almansi, Ruth Padel,
Edith Wyschogrod, John Bayley and especially Caryl Emerson. For a seminal effort to connect
black arts to nineteenth-century Russian literature-in a call for `universalized particularity"-see
Alain Locke, "Self-Criticism: The Third Dimension in Culture," Phylon 11 (1950), pp. 391-394.
My attempt to link the situation in fin-de-siecle Russia, early twentieth-century central Europe
and late twentiethcentury black America rests in part on possible connections between Tolstoy,
Kafka and black artists like John Coltrane and Toni Morrison. For a brief contrast of Tolstoy
and Kafka. see Pietro Citati, Tolstoy (New York: Schocken Books, 1986), pp. 223-225. For
fascinating and suggestive connections between 1ostoy, Chekhov and jazz, note Nabokov's
pregnant remarks about the distinctive genius of Tolstoy-his "time-balance"; "his characters
seem to move with the same swing as the people passing under our window": "Tolstoy's prose
keeps pace with our pulses": or "the perfectly natural swing" in Chekhov's The Seagull. This
characterization resonates with the formal improvisational freedom, "metrical adventurousness,"
verbal playfulness and syncopated responsiveness associated with black cultural expression-
especially its most sophisticated artistic works, such as those of John Coltrane and Toni
Morrison. Note Vladimir Nabokov, Lectures on Russian Literature, ed. Fredson Bowers (New
York: Harcourt Brace, 1981), pp. 141-142, 282. An important historical treatment of the
evolution of black culture is Roger D. Abrahams's Singing the Master: The Emergence
ofAfrican-American Culture in the Plantation South (New York: Penguin Books, 1992). The best
recent synoptic treatment of the origins of black culture is Sterling Stuckey's Slave Culture:
Nationalist Theory and the Foundations of Black America (New York: Oxford University Press,
1987). A more interpretive examination of black music is LeRoi Jones's classic, Blues People
(New York: William Morrow, 1963). The complex relation of the world-historical efforts of
Tolstoy and Kafka to those of Armstrong, Ellington, Coltrane and Morrison to transfigure
sadness and sorrow into great art based on meticulous explorations of the quotidian realities of
degraded and devalued peoples requires serious inquiry in the future. How do we account for
these three incredible artistic peaks-Russian novelistic and theatrical preeminence, central
European literary and epistolary achievements and twentieth-century black musical and literary
supremacy-in late modernity?
30. Du Bois's debt to Goethe's Faust was profound. And the word "striving" was-along with
"enjoyment"-the most Faustian of terms, rooted in Goethe's own idiosyncratic theory of entelechy
in nature and man. "Striving" consists of a fundamental human urge to embrace the world and
takes the form of self-expression in thought and, above all, action. The famous last words of
Faust in Goethe's incomparable modern epic poem are worth quoting here-they get at the heart
and core of Du Bois's worldview: "Yes-this I hold to with devout insistence, / Wisdom's last


--- PAGE 502 ---
verdict goes to say: / He only earns both freedom and existence / Who must reconquer them each
day. / And so, ringed all about by perils, here / Youth, manhood, age will spend their strenuous
year. / Such teeming would I see upon this land, / On acres free among free people stand. / I
might entreat the fleeting minute: / Oh tarry yet, thou art so fair! / My path on earth, the trace I
leave within it / Eons untold cannot impair. / Foretasting such high happiness to come, / I savor
now my striving's crown and sum." For Du Bois's special love for Goethe's work and his advice
to Fisk University students and graduates to immerse themselves in Goethe in order to expedite
"the rise of the Negro people," see Lewis, W E. B. Du Bois, p. 139. For a comprehensive and
incisive reading of Du Bois's The Souls o (Black Folk as itself a "striving" in the form of a
textual performance and narrative experiment in dramatic form, see Sundquist, T Wake the
.Nations, pp. 457-539.
31. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 15. Du Bois's allusion to a European poet's powerful
metaphor of crying seems to echo the opening of Anna Julia Cooper's classic A Voice from the
South (1892)-the first major work of a black woman of letters in the United States, which
inspired the powerful writings of black women intellectuals like bell hooks, Patricia Williams,
Deborah McDowell, Kiinberle Crenshaw, Alice Walker, Katie Cannon, Hazel Carby, Michele
Wallace, Paula Giddings, Wahneema Lubiano, Evelyn Brooks Higgam- botham, Hortense
Spillers, Angela Davis, Tricia Rose, Valerie Smith and Farah Griffin in our day. In the preface,
Cooper begins, "In the clash and clatter of our American Conflict, it has been said that the South
remains Silent. Like the Sphinx she inspires vociferous disputation, but herself takes little part in
the noisy controversy. One muffled strain in the Silent South, a jarring chord and a vague and
uncomprehended cadenza, has been and still is the Negro. And of that muffled chord, the one
mute and voiceless note has been the sadly expectant Black woman, / An infant crying in the
night, / An infant crying for the light. / And with no language-but a cry." Cooper's explicit
allusion to the self-description of nineteenth-century Europe's great lyrical poet Alfred
Tennyson-with his themes of the terror of loneliness and the preoccupation with death-resonates
with the beginning of Du Bois's text. W. H. Auden's famous characterization of Tennyson seems
to apply to the existential starting points of both Cooper and Du Bois: "Two questions: Who am
I? Why do I exist? and the panic fear of their remaining unanswered-doubt is much too
intellectual and tame a term for such a vertigo of anxiety-seem to have obsessed him all his life
.... Tennyson became conscious in childhood of Hamlet's problem, the religious significance of
his own experience." In short, the black predicament first emerged as Hamlet's problem-the
radical contingency of life, the sheer indifference of nature and human destructive thought and
self-destructive action. Like the Russian intellectuals' obsession with Hamlet-from Turgenev's
torment in his influential essay on Hamlet (and Don Quixote) in 1860 to Tolstoy's scorn in his
infamous renunciation of Shakespeare in 1906 and Kafka's appreciation of Shakespeare (thanks
to his Anglophilic friend Emil Weiss), despite his disorientating experience of seeing Albert
Bassermann perform Hamlet in Berlin in 1910-the tragedies and absurdities bombarding black
people in the New World made Hamlet's prob lem even more intense and urgent. In Tennyson's
case, this intensity and urgency were due in part to an unhappy childhood at home and school
(Louth Grammar School) and the early death of his best friend, Arthur Henry Hallam. For the
quote in Anna Julia Cooper, see A Viice from the South, introduction by Mary Helen
Washington, Schomburg Library of Nineteenth-Century Black Women Writers, Henry Louis
Gates, Jr., gen. ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), p. i. For W. H. Auden's quotes,


--- PAGE 503 ---
see "Tennyson," in Forewords and Afterwords (New York: Vintage Books, 1989), pp. 228, 229.
For Kafka's brush with Shakespeare, see Ernst Pawel, The Nightmare ofReason: A Life ofFranz
Kafka (New York: Vintage Books, 1984), pp. 127, 217; and Frederick Karl, Franz Kafka.'
Representative Man (New York: Fromm International, 1991), pp. 252, 259. Hamlet's famous
lines "The time is out of joint-O cursed spite, / That ever I was born to set it right!" and "To be,
or not to be, that is the question" are fundamental themes in black strivings. This is why flight
and flow-migration and emigration, experimentation and improvisation-are so basic to black
history and life. And also why Hamlet's motifs of mourning and revenge are two dominant
elements in the black cultural and political unconscious.
32. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 15.
33. Ibid.
34. This vicious white-supremacist reduction makes it difficult for black people to discuss and
display their full humanity and variety among themselves-most clearly seen in the
underdeveloped discourse on black sexuality in our era of AIDS. The formidable example of
black gay intellectuals like the late Marlon Riggs and Kendall Thomas and black lesbian
intellectuals such as the late Andre Lorde and Barbara Smith is indispensable in resisting this
inhumane reduction.
35. Ralph Ellison, Invisible Man (New York: New American Library, 1952), p. 7.
36. Du Bois, The Soup ofBlack Folk, p. 148.
37. Ibid., p. 149.
38. Ibid., p. 150.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid., pp. 16-17.
41. Toni Morrison, Beloved (New York: New American Library, 1987), p. 140.
42. Ibid., p. 251.
43. Ibid.
44. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 156.
45. James Baldwin, Go Tell It on the Mountain (New York: Dell, 1953), pp. 137-138.
46. Like Nina's precious words at the end of Chekhov's The Seagull, "Know how to bear your
cross and have faith," or Irina's at the conclusion of Three Sisters, "I'll give my whole life to
those who may need it."


--- PAGE 504 ---
47. Morrison, Beloved, pp. 87, 88-89.
48. Du Bois, The Souls of 'Black Folk, p. 157.
49. Ibid., p. 158.
50. Richard Wright, Native Son (New York: Harper & Row, 1940), pp. 20-21.
51. Ibid., pp. 285-286.
52. Ibid., p. 275.
53. Ibid., p. 277. Note Wright's allusion to "the last best hope of earth"-"America"-in Lincoln's
famous message to Congress on December 1, 1862: "We shall nobly save, or meanly lose, the
last best hope of earth." See Mark E. Neely, Jr., The Last Best Hope ooff_arth: Abraham Lincoln
and the Promise of'America (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993), p. v.
54. Wright, Native Son, p. 268.
55. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 159.
56. Needless to say, this theme of bondage applies above all to those obsessed not simply with
oppression, but with the sheer concrete fact and potency of evil. Bigger's existential nihilism-his
inability to run from himself (including the white supremacy in him)-echoes that of Ahab in
Melville's classic Moby-Dick (1851), Attwater in Robert Louis Stevenson's late masterpiece
The Ebb-Tide (1894) and Kurtz in Joseph Conrad's famous Heart of Darkness (1902).
57. Wright, Native Son, pp. 22-23.
58. Ibid., p. 388.
59. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 146.
60. Wright, Native Son, pp. 237, 238.
61. Ellison, Invisible Man, p. 11. For a fuller and richer elaboration of this Ellisonian insight,
the classic works of Albert Murray, Stomping the Blues and The Hero and the Blues, are
peerless.
62. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 161.
63. Wright, Native Son, pp. 109-110.
64. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, p. 164.
65. Ibid.


--- PAGE 505 ---
66. Ibid., pp. 164-165.
67. Ibid., pp. 23, 41.
68. Richard J. Barnet and John Cavanagh. Global Dreams: Imperial Corporatiots and the New
World Order (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994). See also Benjamin R. Barber, Jihad vs.
McWorld (New York: Random House, 1995).
69. For a powerful treatment of the negative impact of globalization on the most disadvantaged
and vulnerable human beings on the globe, see Herb Addo (the major exponent of neoradical
creative pessimism), "The Convulsive Historical Moment: Considerations from a Neoradical
Third World Perspective." Macalaster International 1 (Spring 1995), pp. 115-148. Addo's
sophisticated neo-Marxism leads him to conclude: "1) History is not just any old absurdity, but a
patently silly absurdity; 2) global life is not only just a drama, but a dark drama; and 3) the Third
World role in both is not just any old invigorating happy laughing farce, but a huge bad-humored
farce" (p. 115). This apocalyptic-yet far from outlandish-prospect is also entertained in
Giovanni Arrighi's magisterial The Long Twentieth Century: Monty, Power, and the Origins of
Our Old Times (New York: Verso, 1994), in which he concludes that humanity "may well burn
up in the horrors (or glories) of the escalating violence that has accompanied the liquidation of
the Cold War world order. In this case, capitalist history would also come to an end but by
reverting permanently to the systemic chaos from which it began six hundred years ago and
which has been reproduced on an ever-increasing scale with each transition. Whether this would
mean the end just of capitalist history or of all human history, it is impossible to tell" (p. 356).
Eric Hobsbawm reaches similar conclusions-but with a small dose of English reticence: "Our
world risks both explosion and implosion. It must change.... If humanity is to have a recognizable
future, it cannot be by prolonging the past or the present. If we try to build the third millennium
on that basis, we shall fail. And the price of failure, that is to say, the alternative to a changed
society, is darkness" (Hobsbawm, The Age of Extremes, Is. 585). The most recent erudite world
historian to look into the future and risk the curse of Cassandra is Felipe Fernandez-Armesto,
who claims that "the day of democracy looks as if it has arrived, but it will prove to be a false
dawn or a short spell of wintry light.... Recrudescent fascism is the great political menace of the
near future.... Ethnic enmity is likely to continue to be a breaker of states.... It seems inevitable
that in the next century the world will experience more rounds of ethnic cleansing ... the
massacres will be bloodier and the conflicts more prolonged.... The world. I feel tempted to
conclude, will go on getting worse." Millennium: A History of the Last Thousand Years (New
York: Scribner. 1995), pp. 726. 727, 732, 736. Thomas M. Callaghy and John Ravenhill
desperately attempt to temper such pessimism in "Vision, Politics, and Structure: Afro-
Optimism, Afro-Pessimism or Realism?" and "How Hemmed In? Lessons and Prospects of
Africa's Responses to Decline," in Hemmed In: Responses to Afizca'r Economic Decline, ed.
Thomas M. Callaghy and John Ravenhill (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), pp. 1-
17, 520-563.
70. For the incredible empirical figures revealing the disparity between the wealthy and others,
see Edward N. Wolff, Top Heavy: A Study nf'the Increasing Inequality of Wealth in America
(New York: Twentieth Century Fund Press, 1995), pp. 7, 10, 11. For the two most important


--- PAGE 506 ---
books on the decay of American democracy concealed by the political rule of liberal and
especially right-wing elites, see the work of the progressive populist William Greider, Who
Will Tell the People? The Betrayal of American Deinocrcuy (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1992); and that of the conservative populist Kevin Phillips, Boiling Point: Republicans, Denmo-
crats, and the Decline f Middle-Class Prosperity (New York: Random House, 1993).
71. Quoted from Gerald Horne, Black and Red: W. E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-American
Response to the Cold War (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986). p. 345.
72. A. N. Wilson, Tolstoy (New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1988), p. 257.
73. Pawel, The Nightmare ofReason, pp. 368, 427-430. Kafka writes, "I realized that if I
somehow wanted to go on living, I had to do something quite radical, and so I decided to
emigrate to Palestine. I probably would not have been able to do so; I am also quite unprepared
in Hebrew and in other respects, but I simply had to have hope of some kind to latch on to."
Although Kafka was not a Zionist, he might well have emigrated to Palestine if tuberculosis of
the larynx had not ended his short life. Like John Coltrane, Franz Kafka died at forty.
CHAPTER 9
1. Benjamin Barber, The Conquest of Politics: Liberal Philosophy in Democratic limes
(forthcoming), chap. 8.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid. The best practical outline of the desirable economy I know is in Alec Nove's The
Economics fFeasible Socialism (London: Allen and Unwin, 1983), pp. 197-230.
4. Roberto Unger, Social Theory, Its Situation and Its Trask: A Critical Introduction to Politics-
A Work in Constructive Social Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), p. 41.
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid., p. 14.
7. Ibid., pp. 18-22.
8. Ibid., p. 43.
9. Ibid., p. 214.
10. Ibid., pp. 214-215.
11. Ibid., pp. 223-224.
12. Ibid., p. 200.


--- PAGE 507 ---
13. Ibid.. p. 216.
14. Ibid., p. 233.
15. Ibid., p. 219.
16. Ibid., pp. 165-169.
17. Ibid., p. 237.
18. Richard Rorty, "Solidarity or Objectivity?" in Post-Analytic Philosophy, ed. John Rajchman
and Cornel West (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985), pp. 3-19.
19. For a preliminary effort in this regard pertaining to race, see Cornel West, "Race and Social
Theory: Towards a Genealogical Materialist Analysis," in American Left Yearbook 2, ed.
Michael Davis et al. (London: Verso, 1987), pp. 74-90.
20. See Foucault's influential essay "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History." in Language,
CounterMemory, Practice, trans. Donald F. Bouchard and Sherry Simon (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1977). pp. 139-164.
21. The best example of Foucault's powerful genealogical investigations is his work Discipline
and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Vintage Books, 1979).
22. For a reading of Foucault that highlights this aspect of his work, see John Rajchman, Michel
Foucault: The Freedom of Philosophy (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985), pp. 103-
108.
23. Michel Foucault, "Truth and Power," in Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other
Writings, 1972-1977, trans. Colin Gordon et al. (New York: Pantheon Books, 1980), p. 117.
24. Michel Foucault, "The Subject and Power," CriticalInquny 8, No. 1 (Summer 1982), pp.
777, 778.
25. Rajchman, Michel Foucault, p. 103.
26. Edward W. Said, The World, the Text, and the Critic (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1983), pp. 221, 222.
27. In discussions with Professor Daniel Defert in Paris during the spring of 1987, he informed
me that Foucault's letters contain evidence of deep familiarity with American pragmatism
(Foucault's neighbor in Tunisia for two years was France's leading interpreter of American
philosophy, Gerard Deledalle). FurthermolL.Foucault's reading of materials produced by the
Black Panther Party was instrumental in his turn toward the centrality of the strategic and tactical
in genealogical work. My basic claim here is that certain Kantian residues still haunt Foucault's
later work.


--- PAGE 508 ---
28. Raymond Williams, Modern Tragedy (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1966), pp.
48-49.
29. Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method (New York: Seabury Press, 1975), pp. 245-341.
Edward Shils, 7 adition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981).
30. Williams, Modern Tragedy, pp. 83-84.
31. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, ed. and trans. Quintin Hoare and
Geoffrey Nowell Smith (New York: International Publishers, 1971). p. 348.
32. Ibid., pp. 348, 349.
33. Ibid., p. 417. For an elaboration of this Gramscian viewpoint, see Cornel West, "Religion
and the Left," chap. 32 in this volume.
34. Said, The World, the Text, and the Critic, pp. 1-30.
35. For a prophetic pragmatist treatment of this matter, see Cornel West, "The Historicist Turn in
Philosophy of Religion," chap. 25 in this volume. See also Cornel West, "On Leszek
Kolakowski," chap. 28 in this volume.
CHAPTER 10
1. Alfred Kazin, An American Procession (New York: Knopf, 1984), p. 114.
2. Sidney Hook, Pragmatism and the Tragic Sense of Life (New York: Basic Books, 1974), pp.
1-25.
3. C. I. Lewis, Collected Papers (Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1970), p. 108.
4. John Dewey, "The Need for a Recovery of Philosophy," On Experience, Nature, and
Freedom, ed. Richard Bernstein (New York: Bobbs-Merrill. 1960), pp. 25, 26.
5. Josiah Royce, Sources of'Religious Insight (New York: Octagon Books, 1977), pp. 144, 145-
146.
6. William James, Collected Essays and Reviews (New York: Russell and Russell, 1969) p. 11.
7. John Dewey, "Philosophy and Democracy," Characters and Events (New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, 1929), Vol. 2, p. 843.
8. Royce, Sources of Religious Insight, p. 159.
9. John Dewey, Philosophy and Civilization (New York: Peter Smith Edition, 1968), pp. 24-25.
10. Quoted from editor's introduction, Josiah Royce, Fugitive Essays, ed. Dr. J. Loewenberg


--- PAGE 509 ---
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1920), p. 34.
11. Dewey, "The Need for a Recovery of Philosophy," p. 27.
12. Josiah Royce, The Spirit of Modern Philosophy (Dover Press, 1983), pp. 228, 229, 247.
13. Ibid., p. 266.
14. Royce, Sources of 'Religious Insight, pp. 153-54.
15. Royce, The Spirit ofModern Philosophy, pp. 469, 467.
16. Ibid., p. 469.
17. Josiah Royce, The World and the Individual, Second Series (Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith
Edition, 1976), p. 387.
18. Ibid., p. 407.
19. Royce, Sources of Religious Insight, p. 157.
20. Royce, The Spirit ofModern Philosophy, pp. 461-462, 463, 465.
21. Ibid., p. 470, 471.
CHAPTER 1 2
1. The English translations I shall refer to throughout this essay are: Twilight of the Idols, trans.
R.J. Hollingdale (Middlessex, U.K.: Penguin, 1968), and The Will to Power, trans. W. Kaufman
and R.J. Hollingdale (New York: Vintage, 1968). References to these editions, designated TI
and WP, respectively, will be incorporated in the text. The first work, written in 1888, was one
of Nietzsche's last and best texts; the second is a selection from Nietzsche's notebooks, 1883-
1888. Nietzsche's philosophical (and metaphilosophical) views have not been examined in
relation to the latest developments in postmodern American philosophy primarily because of the
distance between his work and Anglo-American philosophy. This distance exists owing to two
basic reasons. First, Nietzsche and Anglo-American philosophers radically disagree on the
appropriate mode of philosophizing, on how philosophy should be done, pursued and codified.
For Nietzsche, philosophy is a consuming passion, a gay vocation-hence more adequately
pursued in a literary mode for a intelligent general audience; for most Anglo-American
philosophers, philosophy is a pedagogical activity, a serious profession-hence more adequately
pursued in a technical mode for a highly specialized audience. Second, AngloAmerican
philosophers are noted (and notorious) for "their lack of historical sense." Therefore, their
interest in and attention to philosophical figures preoccupied with history, for example, Hegel,
Kierkegaard, Marx, Nietzsche, is minimal. It is not surprising that of the five major books on
Nietzsche in English-Walter Kaufman's Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975), R. J. Holling- dale's Nietzsche (London:
Routledge & Kegan, 1973), Arthur Donto's Nietzsche as Philosopher (New York: Macmillan,


--- PAGE 510 ---
1965), Crane Brinton's Nietzsche (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1941), and J.
P. Stern's Friedrich Nietzsche (New York: Penguin, 1979)-only one is written by an Anglo-
American philosopher, namely, Arthur Danto. And Danto is an atypical Anglo-American (or
analytic) philosopher, with diverse inter ests and publications ranging from Croce, philosophy
of history and Sartre to Nietzsche and Schopenhauer.
2. It comes as no surprise that analytic philosophy, with its "lack of historical sense," has
produced little historical reflection and interpretation of itself. Besides Richard Rorty's early
introductory essay in The Linguistic Turn (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967) and his
recent book, Philosophy and the Mirror of .Nature (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1979), there is only John Passmore's A Hundred Tars of Philosophy (Middlesex, U.K.: Penguin,
1970), that is pedantic reportage and straightforward exposition-neither historical reflection nor
interpretation-of late nineteenth- and twentieth-century developments in European philosophy.
The pertinent works of Frege, Meinong, Russell and Moore that I have in mind are Frege's
classic "On Sense and Reference," in Peter Geach and Max Black, eds.. Translations from the
Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1952); Meinong's
"The Theory of Objects," in Roderick Chisholm, ed., Realism and the Background
ofPhenomenology (California: Glencoe, 1960) ; Russell's "Meinong's Theory of Complexes and
Assumptions," Mind 13 (1904), pp. 204-219, 336-354, 509-524; and Moore's "The Refutation
of Idealism," in Philosophical Studies (London, 1922).
3. For noteworthy examples of naive (or commonsensical) realism, see G. E. Moore's "A
Defense of Common Sense" and "Proof of an External World," in his Philosophical Papers
(London, 1959); for Platonic realism, see Bertrand Russell's Principles of Mathematics
(Cambridge, 1903) and to a lesser extent his Problems fPhilosophy (New York, 1912); for
critical realism, see Roy W. Sellars's Critical Realism (Chicago, 1916) and his "A Statement of
Critical Realism,' Revue internationale de philosophic 1 (1938-39): 472-498; and for internal
realism, see Hilary Putnam's recent work, Meaning and the Moral Sciences (London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1978), Part 4, "Realism and Reason."
4. Nelson Goodman, Problems and Projects (New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1972), pp. 29-30.
5. Ibid., pp. 279-280.
6. Ibid., p. 118.
7. Nelson Goodman, Ways of Worldmaking (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1978), p. 138.
8. Willard Van Orman Quine, From a Logical Point of View (New York, 1963), pp. 40-41.
9. Ibid., p. 42.
10. Ibid., p. 43.
11. Wilfred Sellars, son of the aforementioned Roy Sellars, deserves a similar place, alongside
Quine and Goodman. But his highly technical style of writing as well as his position at the


--- PAGE 511 ---
University of Pittsburgh (slightly removed from the center of fashionable intellectual activity and
notoriety) unfortunately has rendered his writings less accessible and influential.
12. Richard Rorty, "The World Well Lost," Journal ofPhilosophy 69, No. 19 (1972), p. 661.
13. Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1970), p. 206.
14. Thomas S. Kuhn, "Reflections on My Critics," Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, ed.
Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), p. 266.
15. Goodman, Ways of Worldmaking, p. x.
16. Goodman, Problems and Projects, pp. 30-31.
17. Ibid., pp. 117, 118.
18. Quine, From A Logical Point of Flew, p. 44.
19. Ibid., p. 19.
20. Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror fNature, p. 367.
21. This phrase was popularized by Wilfred Sellars's influential University of London lectures
originally entitled "The Myth of the Given: Three Lectures on Empiricism and the Philosophy of
Mind" and now known simply as "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind," Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy rf'Science 1, Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven, eds. (University of
Minnesota Press, 1956). For a brief, cogent and sympathetic elaboration on this myth, see
Michael William's Groundless Beliejr An Essay on the Possibility f Epistemology (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1977), chapter 2; and for the only treatment I know of how this myth
functions in traditional philosophical hermeneutics, see my essay, "Schleiermacher's
Hermeneutics and the Myth of the Given," Special Hermeneutics Issue, Union Seminary
Quarterly Review 34, No. 2 (Winter 1979), pp. 71-84.
22. For C. I. Lewis's pertinent work, see his Mind and the World Order (New York: Dover,
1956) and "The Given Element in Empirical Knowledge," The Philosophical Review 61, No. 2
(April 1952), pp. 168-173. For H. H. Price's relevant work, see his classic Perception (London:
Methuen, 1964). Lewis's book was first published in 1929, Price's in 1932. More recent
defenders of the Myth of the Given include A. J. Ayer, The Foundations oj'Empirical Knowledge
(London: Macmillan; New York: St. Martin's Press, 1958); R. M. Chisholm, Theory
of'Knowledge, 2d ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1977); Jonathan Bennett, Locke,
Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971); and John L. Pollack,
Knowledge and.7ustpcation (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975). For a survey of the
variety of versions of the Myth of the Given, see J. J. Ross, The Appeal to the Given (London:
Macmillan, 1970). Lastly, for a fascinating and original attempt to reject the myth and Quine's
holism (at the same time!), see Clark Glymour's Theory and Evidence (Princeton: Princeton


--- PAGE 512 ---
University Press, 1980).
23. Lewis, Mind and the World Order, p. 38.
24. Price, Perception, p. 4.
25. Lewis, Mind and the World Order, p. 39.
26. Price, Perception, p. 1.
27. Goodman, Problems and Projects, pp. (i1-62.
28. Ibid., p. 9.
29. Goodman. Ways of 'Worldmahing p. 7.
30. Sellars, "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind," p. 289.
31. Ibid., p. 293.
32. Price, Perception, p. 3.
33. Sellars, "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind," pp. 298-299.
34. Ibid., p. 300.
35. Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror r f Nature, p. 174.
36. Ibid., p. 181.
37. Ibid., p. 182.
38. Stanley Cavell, The Claim ofReason (Oxford, 1979). p. 226.
39. Quine, From A Logical Point of flew, p. 46.
40. Goodman, Ways of Worldmaking; p. 22.
41. Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, p. 379.
42. Willard Van Orman Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge, 1960), p. 221.
43. Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, p. 122.
44. Sellars, "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind," p. 319.
45. Ibid., p. 316.


--- PAGE 513 ---
46. Maurice Blanchot, "The Limits of Experience: Nihilism," The New Nietzsche:
Contemporary Soles oflnterpretatima, ed. and intro. David B. Allison (New York, 1977), pp.
122-123.
47. W. V. Quine, Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York, 1969), pp. 50ff.
48. Quine, Ontological Relativity, p. 87.
49. Goodman, Ways of Worldmaking, p. x.
50. Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of 'Nature, pp. 9, 10.
51. Kuhn, "Reflections on My Critics," p. 264.
52. Gilles Deleuze, "Nomad Thought," The New Nietzsche, p. 149.
CHAPTER 14
1. Fredric Jameson, Marxism and Form: Twentieth-Century Dialectical Theories of Literature
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971); further references to this work will be given
parenthetically as ME The Prison-House of Language: A Critical Account of 'Structuralism and
Russian Formalism (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972); further references to this text
will be given parenthetically as PHL. The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially
Symbolic Act (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981); further references to this book will be
given parenthetically as PU. I shall include in this "trilogy" Fables of'Aggression: Wyndham
Lewis, the Modernist as Fascist (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979) since it was
originally conceived to be a part of The Political Unconscious but was separated, enlarged and
published as an independent work.
2. In the preface to PU, Jameson refers to the "flawed yet monumental achievements ... of the
greatest Marxist philosopher of modern times, Georg Lukacs" (p. 13).
3. Fredric Jameson, Sartre: The Origins o fa Style (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1961).
4.Jameson's treatment of Adorno in chapter 1 of MFis based on an earlier essay that appeared in
Salmagundi, No. 5 (1967), pp. 3-43.
5. For Jameson's view of Adorno's negative dialectics as an aesthetic ideal, see PU, p. 52, n.29.
6. The major difference between Adorno and Derrida (or de Man), between a dialectical
deconstructionist and a poststructural deconstructionist, is that the theoretical impasse the
dialectician reaches is not viewed as an ontological, metaphysical or epistemological aporia,
but rather as a historical limitation owing to a determinate contradiction as yet unlodged because
of an impotent social praxis or an absence of an effective historical revolutionary agent. For
interesting comments on this matter, see Stanley Aronowitz, The Crisis in Historical
Materialism: Class, Politics and Culture in Marxist Theory (New York: Praeger, 1981), pp. 24-
34.


--- PAGE 514 ---
7. See also MF, p. 373, where Jameson states that "we take a point of view not so much
philosophical as hermeneutic."
8. Herbert Marcuse, Eros and Civilization (New York: Random House, 1955), p. 29, quoted in
MF, p. 113.
9. This traditional hermeneutic strategy is enunciated in the following passage in MF: "Thus the
process of criticism is not so much an interpretation of content as it is a revealing of it, a laying
bare, a restoration of the original message, the original experience, beneath the distortions of the
various kinds of censorship that have been at work upon it; and this revelation takes the form of
an explanation of why the content was so distorted and is thus inseparable from a description of
the mechanisms of this censorship itself" (p. 404).
10. Note also his remark in PU: "That life is meaningless is not a proposition that need be
inconsistent with Marxism, whose affirmation is the quite different one that History is
meaningful, however absurd organic life may happen to be" (p. 261).
11. For Jameson's interesting remarks on religion, see MF pp. 116-118 and PU, pp. 70, 292.
12. Jameson is one of the few Marxists who explicitly rejects a realist epistemological position.
Sec MF, pp. 365-366. Note that he invokes the early work of the then American-style Marxist
Sidney Hook at this point. For a persuasive treatment of the "textual idealism" of
poststructuralists, see Richard Rorty, "Nineteenth-Century Idealism and Twentieth-Century
Textualism," in Consequences ofPragrnatism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1982), pp. 139-159.
13. PU, pp. 139, 226.
14. PU, pp. 97, 141. Bloch puts forward this complex notion in "Nonsynchronism and
Dialectics," New German Critique, No. 11 (1977), pp. 22-38. ForJameson's powerful critique
of teleological and genetic forms of Marxism, see "Marxism and Historicism," New Literary
History 11 (1979), pp. 41-73.
15.MF,,p.402.
16. Fredric Jameson, "Criticism in History," in The Weapons of 'Criticism, ed. Norman Rudich
(Palo Alto, Calif.: Ramparts Press, 1976), pp. 31-50.
17. For the Lwi-Straussian language, see PU, p. 167 and for Frye's notion of literature, see PU,
p. 70.
18. Yet I remain unconvinced that the cosmic body in Blake's anagogy is even roughly analogous
to the individualistic bourgeois body. See Northrop Frye, Anatomy of'Criticism: Four Essays
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1957), pp. 1 19f.
19. Geoffrey H. Hartman, "Ghostlier Demarcations: The Sweet Science of Northrop Frye," in
Beyond Formalism: Literary Essays 1958-1970 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970), p.


--- PAGE 515 ---
40.
20. Hartman, "Ghostlier Demarcations," pp. 24-41; J. Hillis Miller, "Tradition and Difference."
Diacritics 2 (Winter 1972), pp. 6-13.
21. Note Jameson's remarks in MF: "This formal character of the concept of freedom is
precisely what lends itself to the work of political hermeneutics. It encourages analogy:
assimilating the material prisons to the psychic ones, it serves as a means of unifying all these
separate levels of existence, functioning, indeed, as a kind of transformational equation whereby
the data characteristic of one may be converted into the terms of other" (p. 85).
22. Jameson explicitly states in PU.• "I will argue that the critique [by poststructuralism] is
misplaced" (p. 21).
23. For the classic reply to Nietzsche on this matter, though not a thoroughly satisfactory one, see
Max Scheler, Ressentiment, trans. William Holdheim, ed. Lewis A. Coser (New York: Free
Press, 1961), pp. 43-46, 79-89, 95-97, 103-111, 114.
24. Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Vintage
Books, 1966), p. 48.
25. Nietzsche remarks repeatedly that modern bourgeois European culture is an amalgam of
various traditions, only one of which is the Judeo-Christian tradition. Yet what Nietzsche
stresses, andJameson ignores, is that Christian morality is a weapon of the oppressed against the
oppressor, not simply a symptom of impotence. On this point, Jameson follows not Nietzsche,
but Sartre. "The moral attitude appears when technical and social conditions render positive
forms of conduct impossible. Ethics is a collection of idealistic tricks intended to enable us to
live the life imposed on us by the poverty of our resources and the insufficiency of our
techniques." This passage is an unpublished note of Sartre's quoted by Simone de Beauvoir,
Force of ' Circumstance, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Putnam, 1965), p. 199.
26. This point is made most emphatically by Lucien Goldmann, Immanuel Kant (London: New
Left Books, 1971), pp. 170-179. Hegel puts forward this critique in Philosophy o/Right, trans. T.
M. Knox (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967), pp. 89-103, and Philosophy of Mind, Part
Three of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), pp.
253-291. Jameson clearly grasps this point when he states, "As an ideological field, conceptions
of ethics depend on a shared class or group homogeneity, and strike a suspicious compromise
between the private experience of the individual and those values or functional needs of the
collectivity which ethics rewrites or recodes in terms of interpersonal relationships." Yet, unlike
Hegel and Marx, Jameson clings to the notion that the historicizing of ethics results in a "going
beyond" good and evil. In the same paragraph quoted he continues, "In our time, ethics,
wherever it makes its reappearance, may be taken as the sign of an intent to mystify, and in
particular to replace the more complex and ambivalent judgments of a more properly political
and dialectical perspective with the more comfortable simplifications of a binary myth." The
basic point here is that Hegel, Marx and Jameson agree that bourgeois ethics cannot do justice to
the richness of moral experience without embarrassing equivocation. Yet Jameson believes that


--- PAGE 516 ---
this has something to do with the binary oppositions of good and evil, whereas Hegel and Marx
rightly hold that such poststructuralist itching does not require scratching, but rather getting rid of
the source of the itch. The passage quoted is from Jameson, Fables of Aggression, p. 56.
27. David Couzens Hoy, "Hegel's Morals," Dialogue 20, no. 1 (1981), p. 99.
28. For a detailed examination of Marx's critique of Kant and Hegel on ethical approaches, see
Cornel West, "Ethics, Historicism and the Marxist Tradition," Ph.D. diss., Princeton University,
1980, pp. 14-62.
29. As Richard Rorty notes, "The non-Kantian is a parasite-flowers could not sprout from the
dialectical vine unless there were an edifice into whose chinks it could insert its tendrils. No
constructors, no deconstructors. No norms, no perversions. Derrida (like Heidegger) would
have no writing to do unless there were a `metaphysics of presence' to overcome. Without the
fun of stamping out parasites, on the other hand, no Kantian would bother to continue building."
See "Philosophy as a Kind of Writing: An Essay on Derrida," Consequences of Pragmatism, p.
108. This is precisely the philosophical "game" Marx ignores, sidesteps and avoids. For Rorty's
brilliant historical situating of this modern "game," see Philosophy and the Mirror of.Nature
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979); for a leftist critique of this text, see Cornel West,
"The Politics of American Neopragmatism," in PostAnalytic Philosophy, ed. John Rajchman and
Cornel West (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985), pp. 259-275.
30. For his brief characterization of the French and American Left, see PU, pp. 54, 31.
31. Jameson does address the role of the Marxist intellectual in the academy in his essay
"Marxism and Teaching," Neu Political Science, No. 2/3 (Fall/Winter 1979/1980), pp. 31-36.
CHAPTER 21
1. This figure describes the average expenditure on a child from birth to eighteen years, in a
husband-wife household with an income in the $33,700-$56,700 range. See U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, Ecpnditures on Children by Families,
1995 Annual Report, Publication No. 1528 (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1995).
2. Viviana A. Zelizer, Pricing the Priceless Child: The Changing Social Value f Children (New
York: Basic, 1985), p. 3.
3. Jane Addams, Democracy and Social Ethics (Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press,
Belknap Press, 1964).
4. Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice: Pychological Theory and Women's Development
(Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982), pp. 149. 129.
5. Jean Bethke Elshtain, Democracy on Trial (New York: Basic, 1995), p. 129.
6. Gus A. Haggstrom, Linda J. Waite, David E. Kanouse and Thomas J. Blaschke, "Changes in


--- PAGE 517 ---
the Life Styles of New Parents" (Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand Corporation, Dec. 1984), p. 61.
7. Diana DiNitto, Social Welfare: Politics and Public Policy (New York: Allyn & Bacon,
1995), pp. 169-170.
8. Stephanie Ventura, demographer, National Center for Health Statistics, telephone interview,
December 10, 1997.
9. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Child Support and Alimony: 1989, Current Population Reports,
series P60, No. 173 (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1991).
10. Daniel R. Geyer and Steven Favasky, "Custodial Fathers: Myths, Realities, and Child
Support Policy," Journal ofMarriage and the Family 55 (February 1993), pp. 73-89.
11. For an in-depth discussion, see Jack Kammer, "What Do We Really Know About Child
Support?" Crisis (January 1994), p. 16.
12. Harry F. Harlow, "Love in Infant Monkeys," Scientific American June 1959), pp. 68-74.
13. Willard Gaylin, "In the Beginning: Helpless and Dependent," in Willard Gaylin, Ira Glasser,
Steven Marcus and David J. Rothman, eds., Doing Good: The Limits of Benevolence (New
York: Pantheon, 1978), p. 10.
14. Urie Bronfenbrenner, "Discovering What Families Do," in Rebuilding the Nest: A New
Commitment to the American Family (Milwaukee, Wis.: Family Service America, 1990), p. 31.
15. James AlanFox, Tends in Juvenile Violence: A Report to the United States Attorney General
on Current and Future Rates of Juvenile Offending (Washington, D.C.: Bureau ofJustice
Statistics, March 1996); Centers for Disease Control, "Rates of Homicide ... Among Children;'
pp. 101-105; Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families, U.S. Children and Their
Families, p. 31, and National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty, Blocks to Their Future:
A Report on the Barriers to Preschool Education for Homeless Children, September 1997;
Lloyd D. Johnson et al., National Survey Results on Drug Use from the Monitoring- the Future
Study, 1975-1996 (Washington, D.C.: National Institute on Drug Abuse, 1997), Table 20-1;
Karen W. Arenson, "Students Continue to Improve, College Board Says," New York Tnnes,
August 23, 1996, p. A16: Centers for Disease Control, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
April 21, 1995, and Suicide Deaths and Rates per 100,000, United States, 1989-1995,
unpublished data; National Center for Health Statistics, Health United States 1996-97, July
1997, Table 73, p. 193.
16. Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development, Great Tansitions: Preparing Adolescents for
a New Century (New York: Carnegie Corporation of New York, October 1995), p. 10.
17. Fox, Tends in Juvenile Violence.
18. Fox Butterfield, "Survey Finds That Crimes Cost $450 Billion a Year," New York Times,
April 22, 1996, p. A8.


--- PAGE 518 ---
19. Barbara M. Jones, "Guns, Drugs, and juvenile justice: Three Aspects of the Crisis in Youth
Violence," paper prepared for the Task Force on Parent Empowerment, April 17, 1996, p. 1.
20. NancyJo Sales, "Lost in the Park," New York,June 16, 1997, pp. 24-29; N. R. Kleinfield et
al., "Lives Tangle in Park's Hidden World," New York Times, June 1, 1997, p. 1.
21. Centers for Disease Control, "Suicide Among Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults-
United States, 1980-1992," vol. 44, no. 15, April 21, 1995, pp. 289-90; National Center for
Health Statistics, Mortality Data Tapes, "Suicide Deaths and Rates per 100.000, United States,
1989-1995."
22. Sylvia Ann Hewlett, Child Neglect in Rich Nations (New York: UNICEF, 1993), p. 1.
23. U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1997 March Current Population Survey, App. C, Table 20.
24. Joe Dalaker, statistician, Bureau of the Census, telephone interview, October 15, 1997.
25. National Survey Results on Drug Use; National Institute on Drug Abuse, "Facts About
Teenagers and Drug Abuse," NIDA Capsule Series (C-83-07), 1996; "Monitoring the Future
Study: Trends in Prevalence of Various Drugs for 8th Graders, 10th Graders and High School
Seniors," NIDA Capsule Series (C-94-01), 1996.
26. National Center for Education Statistics, NAEP 1994 Tends in Academic Progress
(Washington, D.C.: GPO, Nov. 1996), p. iv.
27. National Center for Education Statistics, Digest f Education Statistics, 1997, Table 99,
"High school graduates compared with population 17 years of age, by sex and control of school:
1869-70 to 1996-97," p. 108, December 31, 1997.
28. Carnegie Council, Great Transitions, p. 10.
CHAPTER 25
1. For intellectual explorations in the American grain for philosophy and theology, see John E.
Smith, The Spirit (f'American Philosophy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1963); and
Randolph Crump Miller, The American Spirit in Theology (Philadelphia: United Church Press,
1974). A more contemporary expression and examination can be found in John Rajchman and
Cornel West, eds., Post-Analytic Philosophy (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985).
2. The major essays on the refinement and rejection of these philosophical distinctions are Carl
G. Hempel, "Empiricist Criteria of Cognitive Significance: Problems and Changes" and "The
Theoretician's Dilemma: A Study in the Logic of Theory Construction," in his Aspects of Scienti
a Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy of Science (New York: Free Press, 1965), pp.
101-122; 173-226.


--- PAGE 519 ---
3. For the persuasive arguments for Quire's epistemological holism and methodological monism,
see his classic essay "The Dogmas of Empiricism," in his From a Logical Point of New (New
York: Harper & Row, 1963), pp. 20-46; and his less rigorous personal reflections in "The
Pragmatists' Place in Empiricism," in Pragmatism: Its Sources and Prospects, ed. Robert J.
Mulvaney and Philip M. 7.eltner, pp. 23-39.
4. Goodman's postempiricist antireductionism is best illustrated in his powerful essay "The Test
of Simplicity" and his classic piece "The Way the World Is," in his Problems and Projects (New
York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1972), pp. 279-294; 24-32. Goodman's full-fledged ontological pluralism
is put forward in his Ways of Worldmaking (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1978). For Quine's
critique of Goodman, see Theories and Things (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press,
1981), pp. 96-99.
5. Sellars's classic statement is "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind," in Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 1, ed. Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1956), pp. 253-329.
6. For a more detailed account of this takeover, see Cornel West, "Nietzsche's Prefiguration of
Postmodern American Philosophy," Boundary 2: A journal oj'lbstmodern Literature, Special
Nietzsche Issue, Vol. 9, No. 10 (Spring-Fall 1981), pp. 241-270.
7. C. S. Peirce, The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, 6 vols., ed. Charles
Hartshorne, Paul Weiss and Arthur Burks (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1933-
1958), Vol. 1, p. 135.
8. The texts of liberation theology I have in mind are Gustavo Gutierrez, A Theology ofLib-
eration, trans. Sister Caridad Inda and John Eagleson (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1973);
Mary Daly, Beyond God the Father (Boston: Beacon Press, 1973); and James H. Cone, God of
the Oppressed (New York: Seabury Press, 1975).
9. Jeffrey Stout, The Flight from Authority (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press,
1981). This important book has yet to receive the attention it deserves.
CHAPTER 30
1. The term democrat (small c refers to the political philosophy rather than the political party.
2. Michel Foucault credits Carl Westphal's 1870 article `ArchivfurNeurlogie"with presenting
the first medical categorization of homosexuals as a "species" in History of Sexuality: An
Introduction (New York: Vintage, 1978, 1990), p. 43.
3. Patrons of the gay and lesbian Stonewall bar in New York City revolted against ongoing
police harassment in June of 1969. This rebellion is commonly used to mark the birth of the
contemporary lesbian and gay liberation movement in the United States.
4. Robert Goss, Jesus Acted Up: A Gay and Lesbian Manifesto (San Francisco: HarperCollins,


--- PAGE 520 ---
1993).
5. The Rev. Peter Gomes is minister at Harvard Memorial Church and Plummer Professor of
Christian Morals at Harvard Divinity School.
CHAPTER 35
1. Harold Rosenberg, "Criticism and Its Premises," in Art on the Edge: Creators and Situations
(Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1983), p. 140.
2. Robert Storr, quoted in "The Global Issue: A Symposium," Art in America 77, No. 7 (July
1989, p. 88.
CHAPTER 36
1. John Dewey, Art as Experience (1934), Later Works, 10:278, ed. Jo Ann Boydston
(Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press).
2. Ralph Waldo Emerson, "The American Scholar," Selected Writings f Ra ph Waldo Emerson,
ed. William H. Gilman (New York: New American Library, 1965), p. 239.
3. Dewey, Art as Experie ce, 10:10-11.
4. Ralph Waldo Emerson, Emerson in His Journals, selected and edited by Joel Porte
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982), p. 136.
5. Richard J. Powell, Homecoming: The Art and Life of ' Wlliam H. Johnson (Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution, 1991), p. 138.
6. Alain Locke, "Horace Pippin, 1888-1946," Horace Pippin Memorial Exhibition, exhibition
catalogue (Philadelphia: The Art Alliance, 1947).
7.James Clifford, The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth Century Ethnography, Literature and
Art (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988), p. 196.
8. Samella Lewis, Art: African American (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978), pp.
105-106.
9. Michele Wallace, "Modernism, Postmodernism and the Problem of the Visual in
AfroAmerican Culture," Out There: Marginalization and Contemporary Cultures, ed. Russell
Ferguson, Martha Gever, Trinh T. Minlr-ha and Cornel West (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1990), pp. 47-48.
10. See "The New Cultural Politics of Difference," chap. 7 in this volume.
11. E. P. Richardson, Painting in America: The Story o1'450 Years (New York: Thomas Y.
Crowell, 1956), p. 389.


--- PAGE 521 ---
12. Martin Puryear, introduction to Powell, Homecoming, p. xix.
13. W. E. B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (1903; reprint New York: Penguin, 1989),
introduction by Donald B. Gibson, p. 5.
14. Arnold Rampersad, introduction to The New Negro, ed. Alain Locke (New York: Atheneum,
1991), p. ix.
15. Alain Locke, ed., The New Negro (New York: Atheneum, 1991), foreword.
16. Ibid., pp. 223-224.
17. Ibid., pp. 222-223.
18. For Alain Locke's influence on the intellectual framework that shaped the practices of the
William E. Harmon awards for distinguished achievement among Negroes and the 1928 to 1933
annual Harmon Foundation Exhibitions, see the fine essay by Beryl J. Wright, "The Harmon
Foundation in Context: Early Exhibitions and Alain Locke's Concept of a Racial Idiom of
Expression," Against the Odds: African-American Artists and the Harmon Foundation, ed. Gary
A. Reynolds and Beryl J. Wright (Newark, NJ.: The Newark Museum, 1989), pp. 13-25. Leslie
Bolling was the only "folk artist"-with no formal art training (though he did attend Hampton
Institute and Virginia Union University)-who exhibited with the Harmon Foundation.
19. For Locke's complex development as an art critic-especially his modernist views of African
and African American art-see his Negro Art: Past and Present (Associates in Negro Folk
Education, Albany, N.Y.: The J. B. Lyon Press, 1936). See especially his discussion of the
notion of the "primitive" in African and European art, pp. 93-116.
CHAPTER 37
1. John Summerson, Heavenly Mansions (New York: Norton, 1963), p. 111.
2. Charles Jencks, Modern Movements in Architecture (New York: Penguin, 1973), p. 51.
3. Aaron Betsky, "The End(s) of Architecture," unpublished essay; James Wines, De-
Architecture (New York: Rizzoli, 1987), p. 38.
4. Roger Kimball, "The Death and Resurrection of Postmodern Architecture," New Crite-
rion,June 1988, pp. 21-31, "Is Modernism the Enemy? The Case of Mies Van Der Rohe," New
Criterion (May 1989), pp. 67-77.
5. Alan Colquhoun, Essays in Architectural Criticism: Modern Architecture and Historical
Change (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981), p. 140.
6. Lewis Mumford, The Myth of'the Machine IT The Pentagon of Power (New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1970).


--- PAGE 522 ---
7. Colquhoun, Essays in Architectural Criticism, p. 13.
8. Quoted from Charles Jencks, Le Corbusier and the raga New of Architecture (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1973), p. 67.
9. For assorted essays on Mies, see Mies Reconsidered: His Career, Legacy, and Disaples
(New York: Rizzoli, 1986).
10. Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York: Doubleday,
1966); Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown and Steven Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1972); Charles Jencks, The Language of Fbst-modern
Architecture (New York: Rizzoli, 1977); Post-modern Classicism (New York, 1980); James
Wines, De-Architecture, p. 38.
11. Mark Wrigley, "Deconstructivist Architecture," Deconstructivist Architecture (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1988), p. 16.
12. Mark Jarzombek, "Post-Modernist Historicism: The Historian's Dilemma," Threshold:
Journal of the School of Architecture, The University of Illinois at Chicago (New York:
Rizzoli), Vol. 4, Spring 1988, p. 96.
13. Jencks, Le Corbusier and the 7 agic View of Architecture, p. 102.
14. Quoted in ibid., p. 102.
15. Quoted in ibid., p. 109.
16. Quoted in ibid., p. 110.
17. Quoted in Stephen Gardiner, Le Corbusier (New York: Viking, 1974), p. 115.
18. The pioneering work of Darell Fields, Kevin Fuller and Milton Curry in their journal
Appendix is of great significance to race and architecture.


--- PAGE 523 ---
Index


--- PAGE 524 ---



--- PAGE 525 ---



--- PAGE 526 ---



--- PAGE 527 ---



--- PAGE 528 ---



--- PAGE 529 ---



--- PAGE 530 ---



--- PAGE 531 ---



--- PAGE 532 ---



--- PAGE 533 ---



--- PAGE 534 ---



--- PAGE 535 ---



--- PAGE 536 ---



--- PAGE 537 ---



--- PAGE 538 ---



--- PAGE 539 ---



--- PAGE 540 ---



--- PAGE 541 ---



--- PAGE 542 ---



--- PAGE 543 ---



--- PAGE 544 ---



--- PAGE 545 ---



--- PAGE 546 ---



--- PAGE 547 ---



--- PAGE 548 ---
Table of Contents
Preface
Introduction: To Be Human, Modern and American
1 The Making of an American Radical Democrat of African Descent
2 On My Intellectual Vocation
3 Sing a Song
4 The Ignoble Paradox of Modernity
5 Race and Modernity
6 Black Strivings in a Twilight Civilization
7 The New Cultural Politics of Difference
8 Why Pragmatism?
9 On Prophetic Pragmatism
10 Pragmatism and the Sense of the Tragic
11 The Limits of Neopragmatism
12 Nietzsche's Prefiguration of Postmodern American Philosophy
13 The Indispensability Yet Insufficiency of Marxist Theory
14 Fredric Jameson's American Marxism
15 Race and Social Theory
16 The Role of Law in Progressive Politics
17 The Political Intellectual
18 A World of Ideas
19 The Dilemma of the Black Intellectual
20 American Progressivism Reoriented
21 Parents and National Survival
22 On the 1980s
23 Michael Harrington, Democratic Socialist
24 The Crisis in Contemporary American Religion
25 The Historicist Turn in Philosophy of Religion
26 Religion and the Left
27 On Elisabeth Schiissler Fiorenza's In Memory of Her
28 On Leszek Kolakowski
29 On Liberation Theology: Segundo and Hinkelammert
30 Christian Love and Heterosexism
31 A Philosophical View of Easter
32 On Gibson Winter's Ecological Ecumenism
33 Prophetic Christian as Organic Intellectual: Martin Luther King, Jr.
34 Subversive Joy and Revolutionary Patience in Black Christianity
35 Critical Reflections on Art
36 Horace Pippin's Challenge to Art Criticism
37 Race and Architecture
38 The Spirituals as Lyrical Poetry
39 In Memory of Marvin Gaye
40 On Afro-American Music: From Bebop to Rap


--- PAGE 549 ---
41 On Anna Deavere Smith's Fires in the Mirror
42 On Walt Whitman
43 On Affirmative Action
44 On Black-Brown Relations
45 On Black Sexuality
46 On Black Nationalism
47 Tensions with Jewish Friends and Foes
48 On Jackie Robinson

