=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy Bla - Kunjufu, Jawanza.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 283
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:01:24.383396
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Table of Contents
 
 
Title Page
Copyright Page
Foreword
Introduction
CHAPTER ONE - The Conspiracy to Destroy Black
Boys
CHAPTER TWO - Infancy - Nine Years
 
Spirituality
 
CHAPTER THREE - Fourth Grade Failure
Syndrome
 
Parental Involvement
Peer Pressure
Boys - No Longer “Cute”
Low Teacher Expectations
Lack of Male Teachers
 
CHAPTER FOUR - Developing Responsibility in
Black Boys
CHAPTER FIVE - Mothers and Sons
CHAPTER SIX. - Female Teachers and Black Male
Culture
CHAPTER SEVEN - A Relevant Curriculum and
Pedagogy for Black Boys
 
A sample lesson plan
Male Classroom Characteristics
 
CHAPTER EIGHT - Adolescence. Diploma and
Entropy
 
Entropy and the Black Man’s Predicament
 
CHAPTER NINE - Male Seasoning and Rites of
Passage
CHAPTER TEN - African American Males on
Campus
CHAPTER ELEVEN - Why Do Black Men Kill Black


--- PAGE 3 ---
Men?
CHAPTER TWELVE - Counter Conspiracy
Solutions
 
Case Study I
Case Study II
Case Study III
Case Study IV
Case Study V
 
References
PLEDGE ON BLACK MANHOOD
Notes
Notes
Notes


--- PAGE 4 ---



--- PAGE 5 ---



--- PAGE 6 ---
Copyright © 1995 by Jawanza Kunjufu
 
First Edition, Fourth Printing 
Front Cover Illustration by Tony Quaid
 
 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in retrieval systems or transmitted in any form, by any means,
including mechanical, electronic, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without prior permission of the publisher.
 
Printed in the United States of America
 
ISBN: 0-913543-96-9


--- PAGE 7 ---
Foreword
 
Among the animal and bird kingdoms there are
certain species classified as “endangered” by the
Department of the Interior. This label has been
assigned to these species because they are
becoming scarce under adverse environmental
conditions and the insatiable greed of man to hunt
them for so-called sporting pleasures. Indeed, these
species would soon become extinct if it were not for
certain laws and protective measures to ensure their
survival. However, “endangered species” are not
limited to the animal and bird kingdoms. In America,
and other nations for that matter, many humans fall
under this same category. But this should not come
as a revelation. Human life has always been
expendable in a world that is bent on violence and
war, and which ignores the social and physical
needs of many of its inhabitants. And there is no
better example of this human neglect than in the
case of Black children, or African and African
American children.
Jawanza Kunjufu elaborates on this travesty to
describe how Europeans, specifically European
Americans, have conspired to destroy African
Americans by damaging the lives of African
American boys. Brother Jawanza chooses to
concentrate on the destruction of African American
boys because he feels that the African American
male poses the greatest threat to White supremacy.
For it is during childhood when the system of
American racism and oppression begins to cripple
African Americans so that when they reach
adulthood, they are socially, physically and politically
impotent. Although the reader may question his
impotence on African American boys over African
American girls, one cannot easily dismiss the fact
that European Americans have done nearly
everything imaginable to malign and subjugate
African American males. In his commentary, Brother
Jawanza describes how African American boys are
systematically programmed for failure so that when


--- PAGE 8 ---
they become adults they pose little danger to the
status quo. By their control of key social institutions,
European Americans have denied the African
American boy the fruits of his heritage, culture and
“rights of passage.” As a result, the African
American boy becomes the bearer of social
maladies which he carries with him into adulthood.
This “early seasoning” is described by Sekou Toure,
president of Guinea, as the “science of
dehumanization” which signals the first stage of the
conspiracy.
Brother Jawanza cites the public school as being
the most flagrant institution which contributes to the
destruction of African American boys. This
destruction can be clearly observed during the fourth
grade when many African American boys begin to
exhibit signs of intellectual retrogression.
Unfortunately, most never recover, and as a result, a
disproportionate number of African American
students find themselves ill-prepared to survive in a
racist educational system. However, Brother
Jawanza feels that a strong school principal, an
aroused and concerned community, and positive
role models can do much to change this disparaging
situation. He suggests that more African American
male teachers be assigned to the primary grades
because it is during the formative years that children
shape their values and begin to identify with role
models. But the public school ignores this fact and
does little to encourage males to teach in the
primary grades.
The author is also highly critical of the “macho
syndrome” which permeates the society. Many
African American men seem to be mesmerized by
this chauvinistic quality. In their effort to compensate
for certain weaknesses, they become strong
advocates of the “macho syndrome,” displaying it
like a badge of honor. African American boys must
be taught that masculinity is not measured by the
size of one’s biceps or sexual powers, but is a
quality that is characterized by being affectionate,
sincere and responsible.
Brother Jawanza also stresses the importance of
a strong family unit as being the foundation for the


--- PAGE 9 ---
positive development of African American children.
Despite its weaknesses, the Black family unit should
not be perceived as being an anemic institution.
Contrary to what we are led to believe, there are
strengths in this unit that need to be considered in
programming for African American children.
Although the picture which Brother Jawanza
depicts is not a glamorous one, it is not etched in
stone. The author makes it unmistakably clear that
something can be done to correct the
dehumanization of African American children. He
understands, and quite correctly, that all too often the
African American community accepts its problems
as being insurmountable. The system of racism and
oppression is designed to foster this type of passive
resignation. However, Brother Jawanza does not
leave the reader with a sense of hopelessness. He
offers many examples of what can be done to ensure
that African American boys grow up to be strong,
committed and responsible African American men.
But he does warn us that unless we seriously
respond to the true needs of African boys, the future
of African Americans is indeed bleak and destined
to follow the path of other endangered species.
Brother Jawanza should be commended for this
insightful work. As a long-time advocate for African
American children, he has synthesized these two
disciplines and provided us with a commentary that
should be read by everyone who is concerned about
African American children - the seeds of our destiny
and ultimate liberation.
Useni Eugene Perkins


--- PAGE 10 ---
Introduction
 
I wrote the first volume of Countering the
Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys in 1982. The Lord
inspired me to write it after witnessing a
disproportionate number of African American males
in special education, suspension, and scores
declining after fourth grade. Every four years the
Lord has blessed me to write another volume. I
released volume II in 1986, Volume III in 1990, and
Volume IV in 1994. The combined volumes have
over a million copies in print.
This hardback, revised, updated, and expanded
version is designed for my new readers who hadn’t
read the earlier volumes. It is also being provided for
my loyal enduring readers who either prefer all four
volumes together in a hardback edition or who have
loaned one or more of the volumes and for some
strange reason they were never returned!
I have often been asked why I concentrate more
on boys than men. I have believed over the past two
decades that the problems African American men
are experiencing did not begin when they were
incarcerated at 21 years of age. I don’t believe the
problems men have keeping their word, showing up
for work on time and raising their children began in
adulthood.
I believe in prevention. Therefore, I feel it is easier
to develop a boy into a man which is a one-step
process than it is removing bad habits from men and
providing them with an Africentric, Maatian view of
the world, which is a two-step process. I also believe
the most effective way to destroy the African
American family is to destroy the African American
man, which places a greater burden on the African
American woman to raise her children, specifically
her male children in a racist, patriarchal and
capitalistic society.
I am thankful that as a boy growing up I had the
best father a son could have. I was also blessed to
have excellent male teachers and a track coach who
taught me kujichagulia (self-determination). I was


--- PAGE 11 ---
also exposed to some of the greatest speakers and
writers in my collegiate experience. For the above
reasons, I disagree with Shelby Steele and Clarence
Thomas who resent being asked to volunteer and
become mentors to African American males. I
believe to whom much is given, much is required.
Consequently, we need to volunteer our time, talents
and monies to “the least of these.”
Lastly, over the course of these four volumes, I
have seen my two sons grow into adulthood. I thank
God they are still alive and my prayer remains they
will love the Lord, strive for excellence and work for
their race.


--- PAGE 12 ---
CHAPTER ONE
 
The Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys
 
Genocide (jen’ 
 sid’)n. The deliberate and
systematic destruction of a racial, political or cultural
group.
To use the word 
conspiracy
 to describe certain
aspects of our society is a strong indictment against
the social fabric of this country. I have been
challenged hundreds of times in debates and by the
media with the use of this word 
conspiracy
. Many of
the challengers want me to document who were the
plotters of this conspiracy, where was the meeting
and when did it take place? I smile and listen to their
barrage and remain confident in knowing as Neely
Fuller stated, “until you understand White supremacy,
everything else will confuse you.” I then begin to ask
them several questions:
1. Can you explain how less than 10 percent of
the world’s population which is White own
over 70 percent of the world’s wealth?
2. Can you explain how every United States
president has been a White male?
3. Is there a relationship between Africans
being labeled three-fifths of a person and
their median income being that same fraction
in comparison to Whites?
4. Why did some Whites feel the need to
physically castrate African American males?
5. Was it an accident that all the men that
constituted the “Tuskegee Experiment” were
African American and they possessed
syphilis and went untreated by the U.S.
Center for Disease Control for 40 years?
6. Is it ironic that only two White persons have
ever received the death penalty for killing an
African American?
7. Are the video tapes of racial discrimination
as shown on national television in housing,


--- PAGE 13 ---
banking, employment and shopping a figment
of our imagination?
8. Is it an accident that African American males
comprise six percent of the U.S. population,
but represent 35 percent of the special
education children and 50 percent of the
inmates?
Could the above be happenstance, irony, luck
or a conspiracy?
9. Is it an accident that on average a White male
with a high-school diploma earns more than
anyone else in America on average with a
college degree?
10. Is it luck that one percent of the U.S.
population owns 48 percent of the wealth and
greater than 99 percent of them are White?
11. Was it ironic that the F.B.I. used their
program “Cointelpro” to infiltrate African
American organizations with their stated
objectives: to create internal conflict and
prevent a messianic leader?
 
There is a broad array of people ranging from
historians, politicians, academicians and writers
who have provided the “theoretical” justification for
White supremacy.
Cecil Rhodes, in his article “Confession of Faith,”
provides the historical blueprint:
I contend that we are the finest race in the world
and that the more of the world we inhabit the
better it is for the human race. Just fancy those
parts that are at present inhabited by the most
despicable specimens of human beings. What
an alteration there would be if they brought
under Anglo-Saxon influence. Look again at the
extra employment a new country added to our
dominion gives. Why should we not form a
secret society with but one object, the
furtherance of the British Empire and the
bringing of the whole uncivilized world under
British rule? Poverty is better under our flag than
wealth under a foreign one. Africa is still lying
ready for us, it is our duty to seize every
opportunity to acquire more territory and we


--- PAGE 14 ---
should keep this one idea steadily before our
eyes that more territory simply means more of
the Anglo-Saxon race, more of the best of the
most human, most honorable race this world
possesses.
 
Arnold Toynbe (historian) states,
When we classify mankind by color, the only one
of the primary races ... which has not made a
creative contribution to civilization is the Black
race.
 
Thomas Jefferson wrote,
I advanced it, that the Blacks are inferior to the
Whites in the endowments of both body and
mind.
 
Abraham Lincoln wrote,
There is a physical difference between the
White and the Black race. There must be the
position of superior and inferior, and I as much
as any man am in favor of having the superior
position assigned to the White race.
1
 
Holly Sklar, in the book 
Trilateralism,
 notes:
Very few women have been admitted into elite
planning circles; there are virtually no women in
the inner circles. Women were not admitted to
the Council on Foreign Relations until 1970. No
women serve as chief executive officers and
only a handful have reached high positions in
the corporations related to the Trilateral
Commission.
2
 
Sidney Wilhelm comments in 
Who Needs the
Negro
,
The ultimate destiny of the Afro-American is
likely to be extermination, not assimilation. His
situation is less like that of the European
immigrant than like that of the American Indian.
Black militants have not fully understood the


--- PAGE 15 ---
economic basis of what they perceive, but in
prophesying genocide they have accurately
grasped the end to which logic of automation
leads.
3
 
Ralph Epperson in 
The New World Order
 writes,
We can no longer afford freedom, and so it
must be replaced with control over man, his
conduct and his culture. Two centuries ago our
forefathers brought forth a new nation; now we
must join with others to bring forth a new world
order.
4
 
The legacy of White supremacy arguments
continues with Charles Murray and Richard
Herrnstein in the Bell Curve, who believe that IQ is
substantially heritable somewhere between 40 and
80 percent, meaning that much of the observed
variation in IQ is genetic.
I wonder how the authors scientifically determined
the range 40-80 percent? Second, that is a broad
range for a scientific argument. Lastly, how did they
do what no other scholar has been able to and that is
separate the impact of genetics from environment to
develop their conclusions?
I believe five of the best African American
scholars to explain the origins and motivations of
White supremacy are:
 
Welsing states,
Racism is viewed as a global behavior power
system with a constant and specific set of
power relationships. Racism evolved with the
singular goal of white supremacy or white power
domination by the global white minority over the


--- PAGE 16 ---
vast non-white global majority. This “colored
global collective” has been forced into the
position of relative powerlessness compared to
the “global white collective” establishing the
power equation of white over non-white (W/N-
W). Racism, whether consciously or
unconsciously evolved as a survival necessity
for the tiny global white minority, due to their
genetic recessive status as albino variants
(mutants) in a world of skin-color genetically
dominant black, brown, red and yellow peoples.
Indeed had the global white minority not evolved
this specific system of power relationships
(whites over non-whites) wherein whites control
all of the behavior activity of non-whites in all
areas of people activity (economics, education,
entertainment, labor, law, politics, religion, sex
and war) as a survival mechanism, in the
presence of the genetically dominant colored
world majority, the mutant albino genetic-
recessive minority would find itself genetically
annihilated. That is, there would be no “white”
people except for the new mutations to albinism
produced by skin-melaninated or colored
peoples. Thus, to prevent the genetic
annihilation of skin whiteness, a behavior power
system was evolved — the power system of
racism or white supremacy domination.
5
 
Men initiate the act of reproduction. Therefore, if a
population is fearful of its genetic annihilation, it has
to focus only on the men of the potentially annihilating
population. When you consider an African man,
African woman, European man, and European
woman, there are four possible heterosexual
combinations, but only one will produce a child with
genetic makeup similar to Europeans:


--- PAGE 17 ---
We must now expand our description of racism to
include imperialism and White male supremacy.
 
I smile when asked to prove that White male
supremacy exists because Bobby Wright in the
Psychopathic Personality
 reminds us that a racist
has no conscious or memory and is in a classic
state of denial. Therefore, I spend no time trying to
trigger a racist’s consciousness. Second, in any
conspiracy there would be two major players - active
and passive. The active conspirators have been
described above, some are overt racists and others
are covert and participate through institutions. These
are the “liberals” who I meet on talk shows who say,
“I didn’t take your people from Africa. I’m struggling
in America just like you. Can’t we all just get along?”
 
Now, let’s look at a more subtle form of the
conspiracy, institutional racism.
Two college graduates, with identical grade-point
averages and majors, apply for the same position
with an employer. The African American graduate is
interviewed first and is told by the European
employer either that the position has been filled or
that he is not appropriate for the position. Upon
leaving the employer’s office, he mentions to his
European friend to leave, based on the information
he received. The other graduate decides, just for the
experience, he would like to be interviewed, and
secures the position. The European graduate did not
make the final decision, nor did he deny the benefit
his racial position affords him. Taking advantage of
a situation, whether in employment, housing or other
opportunities, is playing a passive role in the
conspiracy and perpetuates institutional racism.
The passive conspirators are African Americans
who participate via their miseducation, self-hatred
and apathy. This group consists of African American
males who do not raise their children. It also includes
African American women who have double
standards for their children. They have lower
expectations for their sons than their daughters. This
group includes African American educators who
also have lowered their expectations for African


--- PAGE 18 ---
American children, specifically the male child. It also
includes those that sell drugs and commit murders.
I am not confident that we can convert a racist who
is xenophobic to a secure loving person who is
xenophillic. I expect nothing less from African
Americans than for them to disavow from
consciously or unconsciously participating in their
own genocide and to actively become involved in the
liberation of their own people.
6


--- PAGE 19 ---
CHAPTER TWO
 
Infancy - Nine Years
 
Over the years I have grown tired of hearing about
the adult African American shortage. Oftentimes the
books, conferences, radio and television specials
border on sensationalism. The topic has become
good business. We seem to look at this issue only
from a macro perspective, forgetting that each of the
17 to 20 million African American males should be
viewed individually. In this way we can determine
what is needed to develop boys into responsible
African American men. We have a small shortage at
birth, but all newborn African American girls born
today statistically should have an ample number of
men to choose from in the future.
It is remarkable how the Lord works in the
production of life. The chances of a sperm fertilizing
an egg and developing through the entire birth cycle
are one in a million. Unfortunately, in the African
American community, the chances of a successful
birth are even more remote due to the lack of pre —
and post-natal care. The normal birth weight is 5.5
lbs, and 13 percent of African American children are
underweight, in contrast to six percent for Whites.
The infant mortality rate for African American
children is 18 deaths per 1,000 live births in
comparison to 9 per 1,000 Whites. Black boys
survive less than girls: 1,965 deaths per 100,000 live
births versus girls’ 1,603 per 100,000.
1
The African American community resembles an
underdeveloped country in relation to the quality of
care provided for expectant mothers and infants. In
most large urban areas, one-tenth of African
American babies are addicted to drugs. Have you
ever seen an adult withdrawn from heroin or
cocaine? The experience does not even compare to
the trauma experienced by the infant whose first nine
months were dependent on its substance. Seventy
percent of all African American children are born out


--- PAGE 20 ---
of wedlock. Female African American teenagers
lead the industrialized world in teen pregnancy,
followed by Arab and European Americans. I often
ask the Lord if He would consider reversing the
responsibility and allowing the males to become
pregnant. I was pleased to see Cosby allocate a
show to this phenomenon. I honestly believe that the
teen pregnancy epidemic would subside in our
community if the brothers got pregnant, as depicted
below.
Would you be more careful if it was you
that got pregnant?


--- PAGE 21 ---
We would have birth control all over the town, like
Europe, if this were to happen. We need more
programs like Project Alpha and Teen Fathers that
stress both male and female responsibility.
Frances Welsing suggests that to correct this
problem in our race and to restore our people to
their original greatness, we should delay marriage
until the age of 28. By then maturation should have
taken place, along with the development of self-


--- PAGE 22 ---
esteem. A couple should then wait until age 30
before having children; this would allow the couple to
become better acquainted and discuss their views
on child rearing. There are few things worse than to
marry someone with different views on child rearing.
The couple should only have two children, bearing
them four years apart; each child would then receive
an adequate amount of individual nurturance, or “lap
time,” before the next child is born. Ironically, those
with the 
least
 to give - time, money, nurturance, and
direction - have the 
most
 children, and those with the
most
 to give have the 
fewest.
 The future of our race
depends on only bringing into the world children that
are loved, nurtured and given a sense of direction.
Nation building is not built on 
quantity
 but 
quality
.
In contrast to Frances Welsing’s theory of 28, 30,
2 and 4, in many of our communities, the rule of
thumb has become 0, 13, 5 or more children every
nine months. (Many couples are not married,
mothers give birth at age 13, and have five children
every nine months.) We are not going to develop our
race with that kind of lifestyle. From this point on, we
will hone in on the specific problems and
peculiarities that are affecting African American
males. Many people are aware of the large disparity
between African American males and females as it
relates to incarceration, homicide, suicide,
alcoholism and other ills. Most people are not aware
that Black boys also lead Black girls in infant
mortality, as previously mentioned. Consequently,
the male shortage begins early (though many people
think that the male shortage begins at age 18, 25, or
30). In actuality the male shortage begins at birth
when there is a disproportionate number of Black
boys that aren’t able to survive birth. At the tender
ages of two weeks, one month and three months,
African American females are already experiencing
the Black male shortage.


--- PAGE 23 ---
The future of African Americans is dependent on us
developing our boys to be men.
 
The next period that we want to concentrate on is
the preschool years, the period between six months
and four to five years of age. This is a very important
period. Many doctors and psychologists have
pointed out that the brain’s growth and development
is greatest between infancy and three years of age,
with the next-greatest period being between three
and six years of age. It becomes crucial that the
African American community develop our children,
especially our boys, during this critical period of
brain development and cognitive growth. This area
of child development is paramount in reinforcing fine
motor and language development.
Instead, we have a frightening situation in which
many of our children, having been born addicted to
drugs, are experiencing the effects of detoxification.
In addition, many children live in homes where fine
and gross motor and language development is not
encouraged. These are the reasons why many
people advocate Home Start, Head Start and other
programs to develop these skills even before the


--- PAGE 24 ---
child enters kindergarten. This reinforces the notion
of professionals who say that the most important
periods are between infancy and three, followed by
three to five, in child development. These are the
times when parents should be cradling their children
close to them; toys should be bought for their ability
to stimulate cognitive and motor development as
well as for fun. For example, cradle gyms can be
attached to the cradle to maximize development. It is
remarkable how energetic and intelligent African
American children are, especially if they are placed
in environments with the proper nurturance, nutrition
and guidance that all children should receive.
There are numerous studies that have been done
around the world contrasting and comparing what
children are able to do at certain stages. One such
study done by several doctors compared African
and European American children and their ability to
recognize and respond to stimuli.
1. With body drawn up into a sitting position,
able to prevent the head from falling
backwards - African, nine hours; European,
six weeks.
2. With head held firmly, able to look at face of
the examiner-African, two days; European,
eight weeks.
3. Able to support body in a sitting position and
watch reflection in the mirror - African, seven
weeks; European, 20 weeks.
4. Able to hold body upright - African, five
months; European, nine months.
5. Able to take the round block out of its hold in
the form-board - African, five months;
European, 11 months.
6. Can stand against the mirror - African, five
months; European, nine months.
7. Can walk to the Gesell box to look inside -
African, seven months; European, 15 months.
8. Can climb steps alone - African, 11 months;
European, 
1
5 months.
2
 
These studies are very significant because if we
really want to measure natural and raw intelligence,
this would be the best time to do it, between infancy


--- PAGE 25 ---
this would be the best time to do it, between infancy
and three years of age. From that point on, we’re
really measuring what children have been exposed
to, not intelligence. It becomes discouraging that our
children, at a very young age, have demonstrated a
tremendous amount of intelligence, only to place last
on high school culture tests. The above indicators of
innate intelligence show that in the first three years,
African American children are exceptional.
Psychologists and educators have always
recommended that parents talk, read and play
games with their children. This will help in their
growth and development.
In dissecting the first stage of growth and
development in Black males from infancy to nine
years of age, there are two major components that I
want to analyze. One is the dichotomy between fine
motor and gross motor development, and the
second is the issue of hyperactivity.
Comparing males and females in fine motor and
gross motor development, the female body on the
average is 23 percent muscle; the male body is 40
percent muscle.
3
 Right or wrong, schools value fine
motor development more so than gross motor
development.
How well children can hold a pencil, a crayon, or a
pair of scissors (fine motor) is valued more than their
ability to hold a ball, play with a truck, grab an object
and wrestle with one another (gross motor). “Boys
will be boys,” families like to say.
Given two young children at home, the daughter
will be coloring and the son will be playing with his
truck, car or basketball. This is a very complicated
point: Are we saying that we want to take gross
motor objects away from Black boys and force them
at the tender ages of two and three to sit still with
crayons, pencils, and scissors? Or are we saying
that we should take the pencils and pens and
scissors away from girls and give them trucks, balls
and large motor objects to manipulate? Or are we
suggesting that schools find other ways to measure
learning besides a left brain, analytical, fine motor
approach? Schools must realize that intelligence can
be measured in other ways 
besides a left brain
abstract exam
. All these factors need to be


--- PAGE 26 ---
considered, but ultimately what we are trying to do is
develop Black boys into men.
The first step in achieving this is not to compare
boys to girls and assume that boys are deficient.
Diane McGuinness has written an excellent book on
the subject called 
When Children Don’t Learn
. Many
people have often wondered, Are boys and girls
different? While we have some general feelings and
differences, how do we allow for those differences in
preschool programs, kindergarten, primary,
intermediate and upper grades? It becomes a
matter of concern when 75 percent of children in
remedial reading are male.
4
 This applies to both
Black and White males.
Somehow we have the general sentiment that
boys and girls are different; yet we have not allowed
for those differences in the home and in the
classroom so that boys and girls can develop
according to their own unique abilities. If we define
growth and development from a female perspective
(i.e., how long you can sit still, or how well you can
hold a pencil, crayon, or pair of scissors), then we
may be defining success in a way that will be
detrimental to male growth and development. Diane
McGiunness points out in her book that there is a
relationship between reading and hearing. Studies
have confirmed that in order to read, you have to be
able to hear the syllables. Females’ hearing abilities
are greater than males.
The response of the human ear at auditory
threshold has maximum sensitivity of about
1,000 cycles per second (cps). This is
approximately “high C” on the musical scale.
Hearing becomes less and less efficient both
above and below this frequency, until all sounds
become completely inaudible below 20 cps and
above 20,000 cps, which is the limit of human
hearing. When we get older or expose our ears
to very loud sounds, such as factory noise or
rock music, the upper range of hearing
deteriorates.


--- PAGE 27 ---
We must develop boys’ fine motor skills in
preschool.
 
 
When the sexes are compared, females
show a greater sensitivity at threshold for
sounds above 3,000 cps, and their sensitivity
relative to males improves at higher
frequencies. The sex differences become more
pronounced with age, and women suffer much
less hearing loss than men. Females were
found to have greater sensitivity above 3,000
cps. I have found very similar results on a
population of fifty college students. These
results help us to understand part of the
females’ advantage in the development of
language, because high-frequency sensitivity is
particularly important in the accurate perception
of certain speech sounds, especially the
consonants c, s, t, x and z.
In tests of comfortable loudness the sex
differences are perhaps the greatest. I asked
fifty British college students to increase the
volume of sound until it became “just too loud.”
The women set considerably lower levels of
volume than the men across a broad range of
frequencies. The difference between the sexes


--- PAGE 28 ---
was a constant 7 to 8 decibels across the entire
frequency range (see figure 2.1).
5
 
Diane McGuinness,
 
When Children Don’t
Learn
 
p. 78
5
 
Later in the chapter, as we move into the primary
grade period between kindergarten and third grade,
we will discuss this research in more detail and its
implications for reading abilities. For now we are
looking at the period between six months and three
to four years of age. We are looking at the fine and
the gross motor skills and language development of
our children as they relate to the home.
It becomes imperative that schools acknowledge
that males and females mature at different rates.
Research indicates that girls mature about two years
ahead of boys. Unless schools are willing to make
some adjustments in evaluating and labeling
children, then the only alternative is for parents to
accept female expectations for their male children.
Parents can try to accelerate their sons’ growth and
development by greater utilization of fine motor
objects and strengthening their hearing abilities by
reading to them and reducing loud music, especially
loud rap music, which impairs hearing of young
Black boys.
Two schools of thought emerged to try and explain
the developmental differences between boys and
girls. Alfred Binet, a psychologist, developed a test
that, unfortunately, ended up being used to classify
children; even he acknowledged that the test should


--- PAGE 29 ---
have been used as an indicator. However, many
educators advocate classifying children. Some
people feel comfortable when they can put children
into categories. This comes out of a left-brain school
of thought, where there is a need to place people
and objects into divisions. This tendency is prevalent
in the music industry. When people try to make
Nancy Wilson and Wynton Marsalis choose what
category of music they sing and play, they
consistently say, “I’m a singer, or I’m a musician. I’ll
perform while you classify.” The same approach
takes place in our schools.
Maria Montessori, a medical doctor, based her
approach on the fact that children develop at
different rates (males vs. females, Blacks vs.
Whites), and that there’s nothing wrong with children
developing or learning at different rates or with
different styles. We should design homes and
classrooms to allow for those differences and to
encourage children to expose themselves in ways
that are comfortable. Unfortunately, the Montessori
approach is least used in our schools; classification
dominates. As a result, a high number of male
children are labeled hyperactive and dyslexic; then
they are placed in remedial reading classes, and
ultimately, special education.
The second area that I want to look at is
hyperactivity. The energy level of African American
children is referred to by some psychologists as
“verve.” The word “hyperactive” is a value judgment.
The word is based on an assumption that we have
an understanding and knowledge of what normal
activity represents. It may be that African American
children, and specifically African American male
children, are not hyperactive. It may be that the
stimuli around them are simply not challenging
enough. They choose to become involved with other
activities that they find to be of greater interest.
There was a study done by Yale University that
looked at two very popular television shows, Mr.
Rogers and Sesame Street. Mr. Rogers is a very
slow moving show. Sesame Street is more action
oriented; the images change more frequently. Yale
University found that African American children


--- PAGE 30 ---
responded better to Sesame Street and European
children responded better to Mr. 
Rogers.
6
Unfortunately, the average classroom moves at a
pace similar to the 
Mr. Rogers
 show. Therefore, it
may not be that African American children, and
specifically African American male children, are
hyperactive. It may be that the methodology is simply
too slow. Interesting enough, boys of all races do not
seem to be hyperactive when they play video games
or when they are involved in other activities that
capture their interest.
Shown in 
Figures
 2.2 and 2.3 are the results of a
study measuring children’s level of interest in various
activities, which reinforces the conclusion that
hyperactivity may not be the issue. What children are
involved with will determine their interest level. We
may need to look at the stimuli we provide for
children rather than label them hyperactive when they
do not respond as we deem appropriate.
Figure 2.2
 illustrates the scores for the average
duration in minutes for each of these categories.
Perseverance, for example, was calculated as the
longest time a child spent on any one activity during
the period of observation. The average time for the
girls was twelve minutes, for the boys, eight minutes.
Girls spent twice as much time in play organized by
the teacher (usually, but not always, a female),
whereas males spent twice as much time in
unsupervised play constructing things or watching
other children.
Figure 2.3 illustrates the frequency of occurrence
of certain behaviors. Boys are found to carry out four
and one-half different activities in twenty minutes,
girls only two and one-half. Particularly interesting is
the number of interruptions of ongoing play. Boys
interrupted what they were doing three times more
frequently than girls. Behaviors in categories 7 to 9,
which were intended to tap destructive and
aggressive behaviors, occurred extremely
infrequently. None of our observers ever saw any
serious misbehavior, and no child at this excellent
preschool was considered deviant, hyperactive or
difficult to control. Therefore, a sex difference of the
magnitude we discovered is all the more remarkable


--- PAGE 31 ---
and illustrates that when children are left to their own
devices, “boys time their actions differently than
girls.”
 
Figure 2.2
HYPERACTIVITY: A Diagnosis in Search of a
Patient
 
Diane McGuinness,
 
When Children Don’t Learn
p. 191
7


--- PAGE 32 ---
Figure 2.3
HYPERACTIVITY: Unraveling the Evidence
 
Diane McGuinnes,
 
When Children Don’t Learn
p.?
8
In a classroom setting, the routine and structure
favors the timing patterns of girls far more than that
of boys. Imposing these unnatural temporal
constraints on young boys can disrupt their normal
rhythms, producing frustration and tension.
The African American home is filled with a great
number of stimuli. Many psychologists and social
workers who have not lived or been trained in the
African American experience label the African
American home as chaotic. A home that has five or
more children, two or three radios playing at the
same time on different stations, extended-family
members entering and exiting the home, is for many
educators, psychologists and social workers, quite


--- PAGE 33 ---
overwhelming. Children that come out of these kinds
of homes have developed an ability to do more than
one task at the same time. They are more people -
than object - oriented and prefer interacting with
children rather than objects. A child being raised in a
home with only one sibling or none, performing only
one task at a time and doing homework only when
it’s quiet is geared more toward the American
classroom. Again, we are faced with a dilemma.
Schools need to understand that children with
higher energy levels are not hyperactive; they simply
have a higher verve. The level of intelligence
demonstrated by African children during infancy
confirms that innate talent exists, and schools should
be charged with creating an environment that
maximizes cognition with classifications. Many of us
are doing all that we can to provide in-service
training to teachers to help them better understand
the relationship between culture and learning styles,
but people and institutions move very slowly. So we
have to place pressure on African American homes
to reduce the stimuli in order to match the American
classroom. I stated earlier that we may need to
reduce the trucks, basketballs and gross motor
objects that are given to our boys and increase the
number of fine motor tools boys need to be involved
with in preparation for kindergarten and the primary
grades.
We also recommend that African American
homes reduce the music. Many teachers have
indicated that there is simply no quiet time at home,
and their classroom is not going to teach reading
with 
Public Enemy
 and 
Boogie Down Productions
playing in the background. From three o‘clock to
nine o’clock there is a greater degree of noise in
many of our homes. It becomes imperative, if we are
going to reduce the number of African American
children, and specifically - African American male
children, from being hyperactive, then parents and
teachers must compromise. Parents need to
institute quiet time where children are expected to sit
still for a few minutes. As they become older,
teachers have greater expectations on the number of
minutes children can sit still. Playing games such as


--- PAGE 34 ---
“Concentration” and “Simon Says” enhances
listening skills and following directions which,
teachers say, are most problematic in African
American boys. Parents can cultivate their male
child’s development by reading and discussing
ideas together. This interaction will give you an
opportunity to evaluate your child’s development
personally.
We must also develop our children’s social skills.
They must be taught manners and respect for
authority. When children enter preschool,
kindergarten and primary grades, teachers are very
concerned about children’s social skills. They
observe how well children interact with one another,
and whether they are respectful and cooperative with
each other.
Many teachers feel that African American boys
are very aggressive. There is an African proverb that
says, “It takes a whole village to raise 
a
 child,” not a
single parent or two parents - a village. Unfortunately,
many African American parents are telling their
children, “You don’t have to respect anybody but
me.” As a result, children at a young age are telling
their teachers, neighbors, and other adults, “You’re
not my mama, you can’t tell me what to do.” One of
the major strengths of Asian children, besides being
obedient, exhibiting discipline and valuing
education, is their respect for authority, which means
respect for their elders. African American boys may
have the greatest problem in respecting authority
figures. The aggression being expressed in the
classroom, to their own detriment, contributes
heavily to being placed in special education classes.
We as parents have to ask ourselves, “Have we
given our boys the resources necessary to have a
successful academic and social experience?” We
have to ask ourselves as educators, “Are we going
to provide a fair opportunity for boys in the
classroom without comparing them to girls,
European American and Asian American children?
Have we provided the experience and the
environment that will allow boys to grow to their
fullest potential?”
Now we face the next hurdle, kindergarten.


--- PAGE 35 ---
Children, specifically African American male
children, are failing. It has now reached an epidemic
level, where you can now fail kindergarteners. This
was unheard of ten, fifteen or twenty years ago. The
self-esteem of a child failing kindergarten is greatly
affected. From this point on in their educational
career, they will be one year behind everyone else.
They will have to explain to the other children every
year why their age and grade do not correspond.
The National Association of Educating Young
Children (NAEYC) has gone on record in trying to
persuade educators to refrain from comparing
children. Some children receive their first formal
educational experience as early as six months old,
others in kindergarten. Kindergarten teachers cannot
determine what children are bringing to them.
Teachers should take children as they are and
develop them with the curriculum that was designed
at the kindergarten level.
Is it fair to a child who was not taught his/her
numbers, alphabets and colors before the first day of
kindergarten to be placed in the slowest group and
labeled “at risk?” Kindergarten used to be the grade
where children were introduced to colors, alphabets,
numbers, the spelling of their names, social skills
and fine motor skills. Due to the wide disparity in
income levels and other socioeconomic factors,
many parents have prepared their children before
kindergarten with some of these skills. Rather than
accepting this, educators negatively evaluate
children that have not been exposed to these
learning skills, therefore tracking unfortunately
begins at the kindergarten level.
Many parents and community people in large
urban areas ponder the reasons for the high dropout
rate of 50 percent and upward. Children can be in
the ninth grade and read on a third through fifth
grade level. (A wide disparity among students exists
in the same classroom.) The difference begins
before children enter into the formal kindergarten
experience. I’m appealing to African American
parents to expose their children to the kinds of
experiences that they are going to be expected to
master in kindergarten. It is also an opportunity for


--- PAGE 36 ---
teachers and educators to again assess whether
they’re providing an opportunity that is fair to all
children. Whatever academic achievement levels
existed between one child and another before
kindergarten 
widens
 with their educational
experience because of tracking. Tracking begins as
early as the eighth day of kindergarten, according to
in an article in the 
“Harvard Educational Review
, ”
9
by Ray Rist.
First, how much academic information do
teachers have on a child on the eighth day of
kindergarten? They have very little. They rely on the
social worker’s interview and the parental
registration forms. They also look at how children are
dressed, the way they smell, whether they are verbal
with adults, whether they speak Black English,
whether a father is in the home, whether they’re low-
income and what their energy level is in the
classroom. Children that do not meet the teacher’s
feminine, middle-class standard are placed in the
lowest reading group. The study goes on to point out
that the children in the lowest reading group receive
the lowest level of expectations. The study which was
a longitudinal study, also demonstrates that other
children also evaluated as early as the eighth day of
kindergarten, were placed in the highest reading
group. Both groups remained in the respective
group throughout the first and second grade. This
initial classification has now become a self-fulfilling
prophecy. If this format continues throughout the
primary, intermediate and upper grades, we’re
going to see a large differential which was created
by “at risk schools,” not “at risk children.”
African American children comprise 17 percent of
public school children in this nation; 41 percent of
African American children are placed in special
education. Why the disproportionate number? We
believe that any percentage greater than 17 is
excessive. To further compound the problem, 85
percent of those African American children are male.
We believe that any percentage beyond 50 is also
too high and that before we look at the boys, we
have to look at educators and the school
environment and ask ourselves, “What is it about the


--- PAGE 37 ---
environment and our assessment tools that
promotes the placing of Black boys in special
education more than Black girls, and the placing of
African American children in special education more
than European American children?”
If the ideal student is a female, and is quiet,
cooperative and attempts to please the teacher, and
in contrast, if boys are aggressive, possess a high
energy level and do not always cooperate with
teachers, does that dictate that boys of all races
deserve to be 90 percent of the children labeled
hyperactive, 75 percent of the children placed in
remedial reading and 85 percent of the children
placed in special education?
The problem is further compounded when many
people do not value statistics and acknowledge only
personal experiences. If we have a class of thirty
students, consisting of fifteen males and fifteen
females, and five of the male students are labeled
“special ed,” we can look at this situation in one of
two ways: We can either say the problem is with the
five boys and their behavior, because the other ten
boys do not have this same problem, or we can say
that when you have one-third of your males
negatively classified, there needs to be a
reassessment of our measurement tools.
We have two boys in our class. The first boy’s
name is Darryl. He is very quiet, nonathletic,
cooperative and fearful of strangers. The other
kindergarten student is Richard. He’s athletic, very
talkative and popular. Darryl, by most teachers’
standards, will be a good student. Richard will be
viewed with suspicion. If academic intelligence was
not valued to the exclusion of social, kinetic, athletic,
spatial, and musical intelligence, then Richard would
also be intelligent.
Another example: We have four levels of students:
low-income, middle-class, White, and Black
students. The teacher reads the children a story. The
middle-and low-income White students and middle-
income African American students regurgitate the
story back to the teacher exactly as it was read to
them. Rote learning and memorization are taking
place. The lower-income Black students jazz it up.


--- PAGE 38 ---
They bring in some additional characters, put in a
little body movement, make it more interesting,
original, convincing and dramatic. If we only value
rote learning, three groups receive an A, and the last
group fails. If we also value original, dramatic and
convincing, then the last group would also receive an
A.
Unfortunately, in most American schools the last
group would not have received an A because we
measure intelligence and academic achievement in
very narrow parameters. If African American children
cannot perform within those dimensions then they
are labeled in ways that determine their future.
I mentioned earlier in the chapter that there are
physical differences between males and females.
Whether we look at the development of muscles,
hearing abilities or the overall maturation rate of
boys and girls, there are differences. The question
is, Do we allow for those differences in the
classroom? It is obvious from the statistics that we
have done a very poor job of acknowledging the
differences in males and females and in Africans
and Europeans.
The factors that contribute to the disproportionate
number of African American males in special
education exceed racism. Sexism is a part of it.
When 83 percent of your teaching staff is female, 92
percent of your teaching staff is White, and only 1.2
percent of your teaching staff is African American
male, there is a very good chance that the group
that’s least represented (African American males) is
going to receive the brunt of the improper or
inappropriate labeling that’s taking place in our
school system. A whole book could be written on the
relationship between female teachers and African
American male students. In my earlier book, 
Critical
Issues in Educating African American Youth,
 I
indicated that the most important factor for the
growth and development of children is not the 
race
or the 
gender
 of the teacher but his/her
expectations
. I maintain that position. This does not
negate my concern about the relationship between
White female teachers and Black male students.
This relationship leads to great misunderstandings


--- PAGE 39 ---
and a lack of bonding; yet it is a very frequent
occurrence, and it’s going to increase as the number
of African American teachers declines.
Males and females learn in different ways; they
mature at different rates. White boys also suffer from
this educational system, but because of a world
based on White male supremacy, a White boy with a
high school diploma will receive more money than a
White or Black female or Black male with a college
degree. Black boys are not as fortunate to have
fathers who may own a corporation. They are not
likely to benefit from White male privilege.
To remedy the problem of disproportionate
numbers of Black boys in remedial reading, special
education and being labeled hyperactive, schools
must realize that children learn differently, and
parents must establish quiet time, introduce fine
motor activities, teach respect for authority figures
and improve social graces. In addition to the
solutions, we will also introduce or develop the
notion of an all-Black-male classroom, a classroom
consisting of only Black boys being taught by a
Black male teacher. This solution would remove the
opportunity to compare boys and girls. Boys would
not be faced with the pressure of having to act like
girls, presently considered the ideal students.
Another possibility is to delay boys’ entry into
kindergarten by one or two years because of the
maturation difference. In this way we will not have a
five-year-old boy competing with a five-year-old girl.
Obviously, these two are not ideal solutions.
However, it is a fact; girls mature about two years
ahead of boys, but this could be offset in schools,
when classifying children, would consider gender
differences. For example, boys may not be behind in
reading if we only compared males to males, rather
than comparing male scores to the scores of all
students. Males may be two years behind girls in
reading but they may not be two years behind each
other. In this context, if a girl was two years behind
other female students, then that girl would go into
remedial reading along will all the boys that were two
years behind other male students. This way, we will
be comparing apples to apples.


--- PAGE 40 ---
It may not be that boys are poor readers; it may be
that boys simply mature and develop reading skills
more slowly than girls. Studies also indicate that
boys are more spatially and visually developed
(which may explain their interest in playing videos),
and that boys are more advanced in mathematics,
especially higher-order mathematics, including,
geometry and trigonometry, because they rely more
on spatial and visual development.
The primary teacher, kindergarten through third
grade, provides a more holistic learning approach
than any other group. My interest is for teachers
fourth through twelfth grade to also realize that
children learn in different ways. It is in the primary
division that teachers use fewer ditto sheets in
preference of the oral traditions, including pictures,
fine arts and artifacts. From the fourth grade on, we
use a left-brain, written, analytical approach to
teaching children. I wish we had more primary grade
teachers teaching in the upper grades who would
use a right-brain pedagogy to present a lesson,
especially to the African American male child who
often prefers learning in other ways. It is in the
primary grade that you see children involved in
drawing, music, drama and other modes of learning.
The male shortage that we hear so much about is
smaller at infancy. At this level we are experiencing
two problems: infant mortality is disproportionately
higher for males than for females, and schools not
understanding that males and females mature at
different rates, have already begun the negative
classification of males, specifically African American
male children. The shortage will now magnify.
There is a relationship between the excessive
number of Black boys in special education and the
800,000 African American males that are involved in
the penal system. Our concern is that we can
intervene as early as infancy if parents and teachers
heed the suggestions offered.
Throughout the book I will be offering barometers
for parents, teachers and community people to use
in monitoring development. We need to have some
mechanism to evaluate how well our boys are doing.
I propose seven barometers: (1) spiritual


--- PAGE 41 ---
development; (2) African identification, specifically
their commitment, understanding and appreciation
of their race; (3) scholarship and academic
achievement, especially in the areas of reading and
test taking; (4) self esteem; (5) respect for parents
and other adults; (6) the amount of time spent with
their friends and its influence on their values; and (7)
respon-sibility for behavior and actions. We don’t
have to wait until boys are 18-years-old to find out if
they’re in trouble. We can find out during this stage
by using these seven areas.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Spirituality
 
Studies indicate that little boys that were reared in
church have less chance of going to prison. I like that
kind of research. We hear so much about what the
church is not doing. I think it’s important to recognize
that even children that are reared in the church and
leave when they become older often return to the
church, if for no other reason than that’s where they
were raised.
In this first barometer, we are in trouble if a large
number of children, specifically male children, are
not developing spirituality. In a later chapter we will
look at how parents have different expectations for
whether their son or daughter will go to church. The
relationship with God will reduce the homicide and
self-hatred that exist in the African American
community.


--- PAGE 43 ---
Racial Awareness
 
How well are children developing their African
consciousness and awareness? I believe that we
can rear Black boys to be men if we can teach
African American boys to bond with, identify and
understand the lives of Malcolm X and Martin Luther
King, Jr. They must have a vision of their history that
begins before 1619, and visualize Imhotep
designing the first pyramid. I believe our boys are “at
risk” when they have a negative image of their
history.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Scholarship
 
We can measure the growth and development of
boys by their reading levels. It is essential that boys
be taught how to read. It is imperative that we
improve the hearing level of our boys and that we
use the phonetic approach to reading, which
teaches children to attack a word and break it into
syllables. We need to provide them with reading
materials that are culturally relevant and will enhance
their interest. It is also important that adults be
mindful that America is a test-taking country, and
African American boys must master test-taking
skills.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Self-Esteem
 
In later chapters we are going to provide a
comparison between self-esteem and school-
esteem. Many educators will have us to believe that
our boys have low self-esteem. It may not be that
boys have low self-esteem; it may be that because
they are placed in classrooms where they are
slowerthan the girls (remedial reading), lower-track
classes or special education, the schools destroy
the boys’ self-esteem. In all the other endeavors and
activities, engaging in sports, listening to rap music
and other social activities, our boys have a high level
of self-esteem.
This is a very important area that we need to
monitor. Children’s self-esteem, but more
specifically the school-esteem, is a major factor in
their growth and development. We cannot allow boys
to simply withdraw from academics out of frustration
while they apply themselves and gain confidence in
how well they fight, play basketball and make rap
records. It is obvious that it may not be our children’s
low self-esteem but the environment and the
insensitivity of educators to the African American
male students.
Schools often request that I speak to the male
students with the major premise being that the boys
lack self-esteem. However, I take the opposite, e.g.,
that our boys came into the classroom at
kindergarten with a high level of self-esteem and that
quite possibly the teacher’s low expectations and the
lack of understanding of the male child and his
learning styles may have led to his destruction. We
need to monitor our children’s self-esteem
throughout their academic career.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Peer Pressure
 
Studies indicate that the greatest influence on
children is the peer group, followed by television,
home, school and church. Studies also show that
home is number one, followed by school, church,
peer pressure and television.
9
 How well African
American families can reduce the amount of time
children spend with their friends will also determine
how well we develop boys.


--- PAGE 47 ---
Respect for Parents and Elders
 
I mentioned earlier that “it takes a whole village to
raise a child.” We have a lot of youths, especially
male youths, that are not respecting their parents. In
chapter nine we will look at the period between 13
and 18 years of age (adolescence); we have a lot of
boys who do not respect their teachers and adults
but do not respect their mothers as well. You have
mothers who say, “I don’t know what to do with him.”
This loss of control did not begin at thirteen; it began
very early. It may have begun in this first period,
infancy through nine. There are parents who have
lost control of their boys before the age of nine. Many
parents, especially mothers, nag their boys,
negotiate with their boys, have discussions about
when they should wash dishes and when they should
empty the garbage, and then wonder how they lost
control of their boys. Most believe they lost him when
he became a teenager, when they may have lost him
before age nine. We are very concerned about this
area of our children’s growth and development, and
we have to instill respect for elders in our boys.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Responsibility
 
It has often been said that we have a lot of
irresponsible men. You cannot be an irresponsible
man unless you were allowed to be irresponsible as
a boy. Teenage pregnancy is running rampant, and
90 percent of the programs are geared for females,
letting the males off the hook. So the question
becomes, Who is going to teach Black boys to be
responsible? You don’t start at sixteen when he’s
already made a baby. You start very early.
We need parents to teach boys to be responsible
for their hygiene, clothes, room and chores.
Throughout the book, we will look at other areas of
responsibilities, but we believe that early on, at the
tender age of two, three and four, we need parents
who will teach boys to be responsible in some basic
areas.
In the next chapter we will now look at the period
between nine and thirteen. I feel that this is the most
significant period in Black boys’ growth and
development. We call this the “Fourth Grade
Syndrome.”


--- PAGE 49 ---
CHAPTER THREE
 
Fourth Grade Failure Syndrome
 
Since 1974, I have been a national consultant to
public and private schools, ranging from preschool
through college. My responsibilities are to conduct
workshops for teachers and parents and to provide
cultural assembly programs for children. It was
during my travels that I recognized the conspiracy,
often so subtle, mentioned previously. Let me first
begin with the innocence of Black boys who bring
enthusiasm to the classroom, trust their teachers and
are willing to please.
Darryl, who just turned five, has just completed two
years of Head Start. His mother informed me that
Darryl’s only major regret about Head Start is that it
lasts only three hours per day. But now Darryl could
not wait to see his new teacher, Miss Ford. She
smiled at him often and helped him with his shoe-
laces. I guess the only regret he had about Miss
Ford was that she insisted he eat his broccoli, which
was not Darryl’s favorite food. Darryl loved his
classmates and enjoyed singing songs, playing in
the sand and listening to stories. Once his classmate
Richard was sad about an incident at home, and
Darryl was quick to provide instant cheer. Darryl was
an eager student. Miss Ford commented, “He asks
so many questions.” He loved the alphabet and
numbers as much as he loved playing with dump
trucks in the sand.
Darryl enters the primary division of the
neighborhood public school. Many important and
tender moments occur in these formative years of
kindergarten through third grade. Darryl still sings,
but not as loudly and with less enthusiasm. He likes
all of his teachers, but each year a little less than
before, and none compares with Miss Ford. The
alphabet and numbers still interest him, but now the
dump truck, his bicycle and his football are his most
important possessions.


--- PAGE 50 ---
When I present cultural assembly programs to
children, because of the limited seating capacity, I
often conduct two or three programs for different
grade levels so that all the children will be able to
attend. The primary divisions sing and recite louder
and seem much happier than the intermediate and
upper divisions. My experience has necessitated
altering the program for the older division in
consideration of their loss of innocence, enthusiasm
and trust. Third-grade teachers often ask me what
has happened to the Darryls and Richards when they
observe their behavior in the upper divisions. I
hesitate to answer that question, because I do not
consider myself a psychologist but merely a man
concerned about the future of his race. I sincerely
think that much can be learned by listening to and
observing children. I was amazed that teachers with
twenty years of experience could not determine what
had happened to Darryl and Richard’s enthusiasm to
learn and trust, and their willingness to please.
I wanted so much to learn from educators. The
same holds true for the parents who, in contrast to
the teachers, have the child for more than a year.
Darryl’s mother had witnessed her son’s behavior in
Head Start, kindergarten, third grade, eighth grade
and all grades in between. Unfortunately, the parents
seem unable to pinpoint when and what innocence
and enthusiasm for learning were lost. If they knew
the answer they would be in a better position to alter
the trend. I sought the answers from educators and
parents because initially I did not know.
The answers were not forthcoming, and my
frustration grew with each city where I witnessed the
declining achievement of Black boys. I began to
respect the subtlety of the conspiracy, and realized
that teachers and parents could live with it every day
and not be cognizant of it. Again, this is why I
focused on African American 
boys
; the conspiracy is
in its early stages for them and can be treated.
Harry Morgan notes in “How Schools Fail Black
Children”:
When blacks enter first grade the stories they
create express positive feelings about


--- PAGE 51 ---
themselves in the schooling situation, but by the
second grade students’ stories express
“negative imagery of the teacher and school
environment,” and by the fifth grade the overall
feeling expressed by students is that of
cynicism. In other words, upon entering school
in primary grades, black children possess
enthusiasm and eager interest; however, by fifth
grade the liveliness and interest are gone,
replaced by passivity and apathy. Primary
grades presented a more nurturing environment
than intermediate or upper grades. In early
childhood education much of the activity is child-
teacher centered and child-child interactive. In
primary grades, blacks progress and thrive at
the same rate as their white counterparts until
the third grade syndrome. I found after the third
grade, the achievement rate of blacks began a
downward spiral which tended to continue in the
child’s academic career. The classroom
environment was transformed from a socially
interactive style to a competitive, individualistic,
and minimally socially interactive style of
learning.
1
 
I call this the “
Fourth Grade Failure Syndrome.
 ” It
is the poor transition boys make between the
primary and intermediate division. Graphically
illustrating this phenomenon is this list of twenty male
students’ Iowa Reading Test scores, indicating their
performance at the beginning of the third grade and
five academic years later at the end of the seventh
grade. My objective was to identify an African
American public school with demographics
matching the income and educational level of the
African American community, along with family size.
In addition, we also had to identify 20 random
students who had remained in the same school all
five years. I sincerely thank the principal and his staff
for providing the sample measurement. 
2
 (see chart
on p. 37)
The following is an outline of 20 African American
high school males, who took the Iowa Reading Test.
This chart shows their performance and that of 20


--- PAGE 52 ---
students chosen at random. Overall, the graph
shows how well the students performed over the past
five years beginning at the third grade.


--- PAGE 53 ---



--- PAGE 54 ---
The innocence and lively interest typical of the early
years change to...


--- PAGE 55 ---
The apathy and limited interest apparent as early as
the fourth grade.
Reviewing the scores: fourteen decreased, four
improved, and two remained constant. The median
beginning percentile was 52, the ending one was 29.
The median change in reading was 3.1 years. Only
one child was able to improve his reading by five
years or more during the same period. There were
two children who started at 98 and 92 and dropped
to 35 and 24, respectively. We had two geniuses,
only to lose them five years later. The boy who
started at 63 and dropped to 4 could have stayed at
home and watched 
Sesame Street!
Dr. Nancy Arnez, in her book 
Implementation of
Desegregation as a Discriminatory Process
,
reports:
In 505 school districts in Alabama, Georgia,
South Carolina, Mississippi, and Arkansas,
which had classes for those labeled as
“educable mentally retarded,” over 80 percent of
the students so labeled were black, although
less than 40 percent of the total school district
was black.
 
She further found that, although the biased I.Q test
was a major factor producing racial disproportion,
the vulnerability of Black children to the labeling
process persisted into subsequent classification
stages. The study indicated that disproportionately
more of the “eligible” Black children were actually
recommended for placement into special
classrooms, while disproportionately fewer eligible
White children were recommended for such
placement. A large percentage of the Black children
in this study were found to be males.
3
Additionally, several studies have found that,
although African Americans have significantly lower
scores, the scores of African American males are
demonstrably lower than those of African American
females. Bruce Hare, in his sample of ten-and
eleven-year olds, further found African American
females to have outperformed their male


--- PAGE 56 ---
counterparts on measures of achievement
orientation. His investigations revealed a
hierarchical academic performance structure in
which Euro American females were in the middle
and African American males at the bottom.
4
 The
negative consequence for African American males
is further highlighted in dropout and pushout
statistics. African Americans constitute 17 percent of
the total public school enrollment, yet were 21
percent of the dropouts, with African American
males constituting the largest category. Thus, the
pool of potential college-bound students is effectively
reduced.
5
 In 1994 there were only 500,000 African
American men in college compared to 800,000
African American females.
The church has not been able to capture the minds
of our youth, specifically boys. I hope concerned
ministers and church members will look inward and
ask themselves why youth, and male youth
specifically, have not been attracted. I would also
urge them to study the success of the Nation of
Islam, specifically the period under the leadership of
the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.
6
7
8
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) data reveal that 83 percent of all elementary
school teachers were females, while only 10.1
percent of this number were African American
females. African American males constituted only
1.2 percent of the total 17 percent of elementary
teachers who were males. Further, 45.7 percent of
all full-time secondary school teachers were female,
with African American males accounting for 3.2
percent of the 54.3 percent male participation rate.
When teacher aides were considered, the
male/female imbalances increased. The EEOC data
indicate that 95.5 percent of all teacher aides were
female, with 20 percent of this number being African
American. African American males accounted for
1.3 percent of the remaining 4.5 percent male
teacher aides.
9
 Based on these figures, it could be
concluded that a majority of African American males
can spend an entire career in the public schools
(private schools are not very different) and have very
little interaction with an African American male


--- PAGE 57 ---
teacher, counselor or administrator.
During the past eight years, speaking four times a
week, my travels have not taken me to one male
kindergarten teacher! Men normally enter the picture
in the upper grades, when the conspiracy is well
under way. Men can usually be found as janitors,
physical education teachers or administrators. It is a
positive experience to find male academic
instructors, especially in the primary division.
Furthermore, with so few male teachers we can ill
afford to lose any to homosexuality.
The complexity of the conspiracy goes beyond the
lack of male teachers and a racist/irrelevant
curriculum designed to maintain the status quo
(training) versus problem solving (education). It also
includes the quality and continuity of the teaching
staff. Many people are quick to declare public
schools incapable of teaching African American
children. I have been to many public schools where I
witnessed some of the finest educational
experiences, public or private. I make it a habit to
visit the classrooms after conducting a workshop. In
the same public schools that many of us are quick to
denounce, I often experience different teaching
styles and levels of competence. How can we say
public schools cannot educate our children? In one
public school I visited, a fifth-grade teacher had 85
percent of her children reading above grade level,
but more importantly, had them excited about
learning! The problem cannot be easily solved with
the condemnation of public schools, racism or the
lack of male teachers. To pinpoint the problem we
must look at the continuity. The above teacher
indicated to me that her students in the fourth grade
last year were “turned off” because their prior
teacher did not care. She also indicated to me that
she feared the choice between the two available
sixth-grade teachers boiled down to the lesser of two
evils. Parents often tell me how wonderful their
children’s previous teacher was, but say that during
the current year this is not the case. Principals also
are quick to mention who their stalwarts are. This
scenario is completed by the comments from the
children about which teachers care. What I learned


--- PAGE 58 ---
from these encounters is that all four groups -
children, parents, teachers and administrators -
recognize quality. Therefore, you are a member of
the conspiracy if you allow a child to sit in a
classroom one extra day with an unconcerned
teacher!
Principals have informed me that they place their
“best” teachers, including men, in the upper grades,
to maintain order to the most undisciplined children.
This Band-Aid approach is part of the conspiracy. It
should be obvious that if you stopped the problem in
the primary division, you would not have this problem
migrating to the upper-grades. When I have shared
this observation, the response has been, “But what
would we do in the meantime with the upper-grade
children?” The solution then would be to make the
staff changes and accept and live with the problem
for three years until all those upper grades
graduated. The problem is magnified with
desegregation, when inner-city schools, in
desperation to achieve racial balance allow a
disproportionate number of non-Black teachers to
teach in the primary division. While this is occurring,
some of the better upper-grade teachers of all races
become increasing frustrated, suffer from teacher
burnout and contemplate retirement. I cajole more
teachers to remain with each passing year.
The problem can be minimized when public
school parents realize that the prime difference
between them and private school parents is that one
pays directly and the other through taxes. Schools
still belong to parents, and if parents recognize
qualitative differences in their teachers and are not
satisfied, they can organize with other parents to
either have the teacher removed or keep their
children home. As a result, the school will lose
money and be forced to remove the teacher. I have
also seen concerned, creative teachers develop
arrangements with their principals, in which they
insure continuity by placing their most competent
teachers in the primary division.
The fastest and greatest influence on most male
youth is the streets. There is a direct correlation
between age and street time. The transition from the


--- PAGE 59 ---
primary division to the intermediate and upper
division parallels the increased street time. Street
time increases as male youth become older,
because most parents spend less time with and give
more freedom to their children. Eugene Perkins, in
his book 
Home is a Dirty Street
, paints the picture:
Summer mornings never appear to change.
They quickly become a part of ghetcolony
tradition, a pervasive episode of hopelessness
and poverty. What was true yesterday is more
than likely to be true today. There are the same
decrepit structures basking under the sun with
their frayed window shades half drawn, and the
odor of hominy grits, fried pork and burnt toast
seeping out into the almost death-like air. On
hot days one can see fatigued ebony faces
protruding out of windows to gain relief from the
morning humidity. And the stenchy alleys
covered with broken wine bottles, empty beer
cans, urine, and the feces of strayed dogs and
unwanted people. And the weary people waiting
on street corners to catch the crowded buses
which take them to work. And the school aged
children who leave home before they have
eaten breakfast. And the whimpers of babies
who are still hungry for yesterday’s shortage of
milk. And the dispossessed men who mill in
front of taverns waiting to quench their hunger
with anything that can help them escape their
pain and frustration. And the hustlers, pimps,
street men and other social outcasts who serve
as models for the young. And the blue squadron
flashing down the street or the blaring of a fire
truck answering a call of distress. And there are
the dirty streets. Always the dirty streets where
“ghetcolony” children make their home. A home
that has an asphalt floor, tenements for its walls
and a door which locks them in from the rest of
the world. The streets constitute an institution in
the same way that the church, school and family
are conceived as institutions. They all have a
set of values and norms to govern and reinforce
their existence. Of course, the social structure of


--- PAGE 60 ---
the street lacks the sophistication these other
institutions have. Nevertheless, it is an institution
because it helps to shape and control behavior.
And it is on the streets where the Black child
receives his basic orientation to life. The streets
become his primary reference because other
institutions have failed to provide him with the
essential skills he needs to survive in the
“ghetcolony.” And for a child to survive the
“ghetcolony” he must undergo a rigorous
apprenticeship that will enable him to
compensate for the lack of guidance from other
institutions and adults. He becomes a student of
the “asphalt jungle” because that is where he
can learn the skills he needs.
10
 
When Black children are not compelled to attend
school, and often when they are, they usually can be
found in the streets. The streets become their text,
instructor and subject matter. The curriculum for this
asphalt institution incorporates many of the same
courses that are found in the formal school setting:
sociology, political science, history, biology and
even the physical sciences. However, unlike the
school, the courses in the Street Institution are
structured around community norms and are more
binding on its members.
Its sociology consists of studying the so-called
pathology of the ghetto. Political science is learned
from the unscrupulous exploits of currupt politicians,
history from years of discrimination and economic
deprivation, biology from youths smoking marijuana
and having sex in dirty alleys and the physical
sciences are taught by learning how to endure
elements unfit for human consumption. The
theoretical references for the Street Institution reflect
how the people actually live and not how others
would like them to function. There are no semester
breaks or summer vacations, for study in the
“ghetcolony” is a continuous cycle which never stops,
not even in the face of death.
The values of the Street Institution are shaped
from the physical and psychological manifestations
of the “ghetcolony.” From these manifestations


--- PAGE 61 ---
certain lifestyles are created that are exemplified by
the instructors of the Street Institution. The instructors
consist of hustlers, pimps, street men, militants,
gang leaders and working men. And though these
men do not have Master’s or Ph.D degrees, their
credentials have been earned from actual
experience and not from the sterile laboratories of
formal academic institutions.
A research study commissioned in New Orleans
by the public school system and lead by Antoine
Garibaldi reviewed the problems facing Black boys.
1
This study shows the levels of declining academic
success, and it shows how the problem starts very
early. This does not negate my concern about the
fourth grade. I am simply saying that Black boys, in
spite of harsh problems they experience, do
reasonably well. The objective in this chapter is to
analyze the factors that are taking place in the lives
of Black boys between the ages of nine and thirteen
and what we can do to circumvent them.
The significance of this research lies in the area of
public policy and intervention. There is a limited
amount of human and financial resources. It
becomes paramount that all programs are designed
to be cost effective. Presently the U.S. government
allocates between $18,000 and $38,000 to send
someone to prison, $2,300 to Head Start, and
$10,000 to send someone to a public college. What
is unfortunate is that 85 percent of inmates released
from prison return; yet all kinds of studies reinforce
the conclusion that Head Start, Chapter 1 and
college are effective. If we are serious about solving
the problems facing Black boys, then I think we need
to understand when the best time is to intervene.
As a national consultant to school districts, one of
the workshops I enjoy giving the most is entitled
“Factors That Contribute to the Fourth Grade
Syndrome.” I strongly believe that only when we
understand what is taking place in the lives of
African American boys at the age of nine will we be
able to rectify it. The factors that contribute to the
decline in African American boys’ achievement are:
• a decline in parental involvement


--- PAGE 62 ---
• an increase in peer pressure
• a decline in nurturance
• a decline in teacher expectations
• a lack of understanding of learning styles, and
• a lack of male teachers.
 
Let’s review these factors.


--- PAGE 63 ---
Parental Involvement
 
As age increases, parental involvement
decreases. I don’t know who told parents that when
children become older they need less of our time
rather than more. When I speak to Head Start
parents across the country, 80 percent of them are
present. At the elementary school level, 30 percent
show and in most high schools, parent’s meetings
aren’t even considered.
My wife and I have two sons; we believe that the
oldest son needs us more than the youngest. We
need parents that will remain involved in their sons’
growth and development from infancy through age
18 and beyond. It bothers me that we have so many
parents who will attend their children’s graduation
and such a small number who attend PTA meetings.
I call these people graduation parents. Can you
imagine instituting a rule that says parents can
attend graduation only if they went to, say, an
average of six PTA meetings per year?


--- PAGE 64 ---
Peer Pressure
 
For most children, peer pressure has become the
number one influence in their lives, exceeding the
influence of parents, teachers and ministers. There
are several reasons for this. An obvious one is that
our children spend more time with their peers than
with parents, teachers and ministers. They want to
look and act like their friends, and that’s why role
models, especially adult Black male role models, are
so important. Mothers have often told me that when I
say something that they’ve been telling their sons for
years, they finally hear me, and that’s because it
means more coming from a Black man. My children
have also told me that when their friends making
comments similar to mine, it means more coming
from their friends. Most children emulate people that
look like them.
Many people think that all peer pressure is
negative. Peer pressure in and of itself is not
negative; only when the peer group is not reinforcing
positive values does it become detrimental. When
peer pressure fuses with age and street time, youth
become socially aware of the contradictions
between what schools teach and the realities of their
communities. Disillusioned, they begin to act out
negatively.
Although peer pressure has become the greatest
influence on many of our children and we will
probably never be able to reduce its power, we can
infiltrate and incorporate our values into the peer
group to reinforce academic achievement. In my
earlier book, 
To Be Popular or Smart: The Black
Peer Group
, I indicated that peer pressure has
reached such negative proportions that when our
children are doing a good job in school, many of
them are teased, especially when a boy is doing
well. Now it becomes even harder when they are on
the honor roll because they are accused of “acting
White.” When they speak proper English, they
receive the same accusation.
One of the ways we can circumvent this trend is to
use the peer group to reinforce academic


--- PAGE 65 ---
achievement. The method that can achieve this is
called cooperative learning. In a typical classroom of
30 children, teachers normally grade on a curve.
Grades are based on the highest score achieved,
and distribution ranges are determined accordingly.
With cooperative learning, children are divided into
groups, and they receive a team grade and an
individual grade. It is ironic that African American
children, especially boys, do everything together but
study. They play ball, listen to records, develop rap
songs, get high and hang out together. It is only in the
classroom that they are viewed as individuals.
Studies also show that Asian students score higher
for several reasons, one being that they study
together. Cooperative learning is one way to use the
peer group to reinforce academic achievement.
The use of cooperative learning will reduce the
teacher’s need to tell students to be quiet, be still
and return to the lesson, because the group
reinforces positive behavior. It is very enjoyable to
see students on the same team discipline and
motivate each other toward academic excellence.
Schools must also realize that they are often guilty
of giving mixed and negative messages to children
on what activities are to be valued. Schools give
more glory to their ballplayers than to their scholars.
We give big medals, trophies and pep rallies to the
basketball and football teams, and give little
certificates, buttons and medals for the winners of
the debate, spelling bee and science fair.
Schools must show that they value academic
achievement more than athletics and they must also
reinforce it with the kind of pomp and glorification
that is given to sports.
I remember speaking at a school in Seattle, in the
heart of the African American community. There
were White male pictures on the wall representing
the U.S. Presidents. This really bothered me, the
lack of Black male pictures, but it seemed to be OK
for the staff teaching these children. Yet, when the
children leave the school and go out into the real
world, it’s the “Silky Floyds” and the “Smooth
Reggie’s” who are selling drugs or simply hanging
out on the corner, waiting for life to give them a


--- PAGE 66 ---
sense of direction. It is at this period that African
American boys gegin to wonder, “What is the
relevance of learning that Columbus discovered
America, that Lincoln freed the slaves, and that
Hippocrates was the first doctor? What does this
have to do with my survival in my community?” I
believe that children have the right to ask why they
are learning a particular lesson. I don’t think this
request is one of defiance or belligerence; I simply
feel that if children have to remain in school eight
years for an elementary school diploma, four years
for a high school diploma, and four years for a
bachelor’s degree and additional years for a
Master’s degree and a Ph.D., then they deserve to
have some input into what they are learning or at
least be able to question why the concepts are
important. I also feel that if we can’t find some
congruency between the lessons and the real world,
then it’s worth considering a change in the
curriculum.


--- PAGE 67 ---
Boys - No Longer “Cute”
 
To some, as boys become older, they become
more aggressive and hostile, disciplinary programs.
It is amazing to me how little Christopher at three,
five and seven years of age was viewed as a nice,
sweet, innocent little boy, but now that Christopher
has become nine, 11 and 13, he’s viewed as being
rough, rugged and aggressive and is being
recommended for suspension.
Many teachers and parents, during the first period
between infancy through nine, use their size to
discipline. They simply are larger than the boys.
From the fourth grade on, children, specifically most
boys, become taller than the teachers. They can look
adults directly in the eye and as they become older
they will probably look down at them. Teachers and
parents are no longer able to discipline male
students with their height. For the insecure or
intimidated parent or teacher, having to look a child
in the eye and not back down becomes a serious
problem. This situation requires a parent or teacher
who is very confident and assertive. This adult gives
very clear messages about who is in control in the
classroom as well as in the home. I am reminded of
the stories of the good old days when a four-foot-one
mother who was 70-years-old could tell her seven-
foot 30-year-old son, “I brought you in this world and
I’ll take you out.”
I am very much aware of the limitations that
schools have had placed upon them about not being
able to spank children, but adults who give very
clear, assertive messages are still effective in the
classroom. Parents need to tell children that any
adult that they come in contact with is to be
respected.


--- PAGE 68 ---
Low Teacher Expectations
 
Numerous studies by Wilbur Brookover, Ron
Edmonds and Antoine Garibaldi indicate that some
teachers lower their expectations based on the race,
income, gender and appearance of the child. For
Black boys, the combination of being African
American, male, low-income and poorly dressed
puts them “at risk.”
This is a very popular term, “at risk.” Most people
who use the term tend to blame the victim. When we
use the term, we need to look at the institutions and
the factors that caused this child to be at risk. The
study that was done in New Orleans indicated that
60 percent of the teachers did not believe that
African American boys were going to college. I
reiterate that teacher expectations are the most
important factor in academic achievement. You do
not measure a school by its facilities, or the race of
the student population, but on teacher’s
expectations. I believe that what teachers 
see
 in the
child is what they produce 
out
 of the child. If teachers
see in Black boys future engineers, computer
programmers and doctors, if they see Benjamin
Carson and Walter Massey, then they will produce
those kinds of practitioners and scholars.
Children learn best when they are given feedback
and reinforcement. Studies indicate that low-
achieving Black boys are given very few clues and
little feedback when answering questions incorrectly.
Research indicates that they receive approximately
three minutes to correct the wrong answer.
2
 I believe
that low-achieving African American boys can also
answer questions correctly with this kind of prodding,
nurturance and attention.
In the fourth grade, more abstract thinking is
expected. The classroom becomes less child-
centered in that more homework is allocated and
less movement is allowed. There is more left-brain
methodology and less right-brain lesson planning,
i.e., stories, pictures, fine arts and artifacts.
If in the first period between infancy and nine boys
are disproportionately placed in remedial reading


--- PAGE 69 ---
are disproportionately placed in remedial reading
and special education, then the fourth grade and this
whole intermediate period makes the final decision
on who’s going to college, lucrative careers and
businesses.


--- PAGE 70 ---
Lack of Male Teachers
 
Up until the fourth grade, African American boys
probably have not had the opportunity to experience
an African American male teacher. I was very
fortunate, when I was growing up at a very critical
age and in the fourth grade, to have had a Black
male teacher by the name of Mr. Payne. I believe
that in order to be a Black man you need to see
Black men. I indicated earlier that the present
proportion of Black male teachers is only 1.2
percent. The overall shortage of Black teachers will
become more acute for Black males by the year
2000. Again, I ask the question of the large
community: How are we going to develop Black
boys to be men if they have not seen one? Why do
we not want to educate our children?
When America had an extreme shortage of math
and science teachers, schools altered their criteria
and qualifications and allowed professionals in other
fields such as engineers and accountants to teach.
Provisions were made to provide the training course
work and pedagogy. Many private schools have
successfully used this approach. I believe that the
same urgency, if not a greater one, exists in the lack
of African American teachers.
It’s obvious that the present power structure does
not value African American male teachers as much
as I do, so it is up to the African American
community to put pressure on school districts to
come up with programs and provisions that will
increase the number of African American teachers,
specifically male teachers.
There is a movement afloat in many states to
entice younger students into considering teaching. In
Iowa, they are working with sixth-through eighth-
grade students, promising scholarships if they agree
to teach. I commend these efforts, and we need
more incentives like this one.
The long-term solution is to have role models
inspire our students, especially Black males, at a
very young age to consider teaching. Secondly, we
need to have institutions that will provide


--- PAGE 71 ---
scholarships to students who promise to teach.
Several private schools have responded to these
suggestions. These institutions went to the streets,
community colleges and other places and recruited
Black males who had potential. Now they are
reaping the benefits of having some very positive
Black males in their classrooms.
I am very much aware of the problems that may
occur from unions that often want to maintain the
status quo but we need creative administrators who
will respond, as Malcolm X used to say, “by any
means necessary.” If we cannot increase the number
of African American males in schools on a full-time
basis, then every effort should be made by schools
to implement the program, “A Hundred Black Men.” I
am pleased to see the growth of this program in
cities across the country. I just do not believe that
100 Black men in Chicago, New York, Los Angeles,
Washington or Atlanta will solve the problems that
we are currently experiencing. We need them for
each 
school,
 not just each 
city.
Two programs that are doing an excellent job of
intervening at the right time with the proper strategy
are in Waterloo, Iowa and Houston, Texas. The
program in Waterloo matches 50 to 75 at risk Black
boys in fourth grade to Black male role models who
will spend four to six hours a week interacting with
the children. In-service training is provided for the
teacher, mentor and parents. I had the fortunate
opportunity to speak at a ceremony where 75 men
placed kente cloth on the shoulders of 75 boys. The
men made a commitment to remain in contact with
the boys through their eighteenth birthday.
The program was funding for only one to three
years, and like most governmental programs, just
when the bugs and idiosyncrasies were being
removed from the operation, the money stopped.
We need to begin to build programs the way we built
the pyramids. Our ancestors built the pyramid of
Gizeh in 2700 B.C. This later became one of the
seven wonders of the world. We built pyramids that
lasted more than 5,000 years, but our programs die
in three.
I was also impressed that the program was in


--- PAGE 72 ---
Waterloo, not in New York, Chicago or Los Angeles.
My only desire is to institute more programs of this
caliber. Another program that I greatly respect is the
Fifth Ward Enrichment Program in Houston. The
combination of role models going into the schools
and providing counseling and tutoring during the
school day and providing recreational and
informational sessions in the evenings and on
weekends has been very successful. Most schools
do not have counselors at the elementary school
level and have an inadequate number at the high
school level. The ratio of students to counselor is
something like 300-500. It has become obvious that
very little counseling is taking place and children who
are at risk, specifically Black boys, need counseling
before high school. We need more adults,
specifically African American males, to consider
counseling and tutoring our youth.
If we cannot do a better job of developing African
American boys to their fullest potential, then I
recommend an extreme solution — the design of a
Black male classroom.
I made this recommendation in 1985 to a private
school in Newark, New Jersey, and in 1989 at the
National Association of Black School Education’s
(NABSE) national conference in Portland, Oregon. I
had been interviewed by numerous newspapers and
magazines, including 
Education Week
 and 
Time
,
about the needs and components that would make
up the Black male classroom. My publishing
company, African American Images, has a
curriculum division called SETCLAE (Self-Esteem
Through Culture Leads to Academic Excellence).
Consultants are trained to help school districts
design and develop these classes.
The major components of the Black classroom
would include:
• Black Male Teachers
• Twenty to Twenty-Four Students
• Cooperative Learning
• SETCLAE Curriculum
• Physical Education
• Nutritious Daily Meals


--- PAGE 73 ---
• Science Lab
• Martial Arts Training
• Phonics
• Musical Instruments
• Whole-Brain Lesson Plans and Tests
• Math Word Problems
• Junior Business League
• Corporate Sponsors for Summer Employment
• Academic Contests and Assemblies
• Monthly Parent Meetings
 
SETCLAE represents the kind of classes and
schools we would like all of our children to
experience, but especially African American male
children. Our staff would train the teachers on
expectations, learning styles, SETCLAE,
cooperative learning and all the components that
would best socialize our boys. This kind of setting
would no longer place Black boys in the tenuous
position of being compared to female students who
have matured faster and of being taught exclusively
by female teachers.
This type of classroom would correct the problem
of Black boys not being taught by an African
American male teacher. The high energy that boys
naturally have would be channelled into daily physical
education and martial arts. Boys’ competence in
handling objects and artifacts would be used in the
science lab. Music would be used to teach
mathematics. This classroom will teach critical
thinking skills. It will use word problems and
establish a junior business league, which will try to
show the relevance of the classroom to the streets. It
should be amazing, to everyone that the same boy
who failed math in a classroom is able to measure
kilos and grams for drugs and to convert it to dollars
and cents on the street.
The major objection to the all-Black male
classroom is that it’s discriminatory and it harkens
back to segregated classrooms. What my detractors
don’t understand, though, is that with 75 percent or
more African American boys in special education
and remedial classes, classrooms are already
segregated, Nobody seems to object to that. Since


--- PAGE 74 ---
the boys are already in a separate class, why don’t
we take advantage of the opportunity -- for them as
well as for high-achieving male students. I’m glad
that there are some creative and committed
superintendents and administrators who are now
pursuing this classroom and investigating how legal
problems can be avoided.
I am pleased that the government has become
more acceptable to single gender classrooms and
schools. These programs have been able to
withstand the legal litmus test of Title IX legislation
because we are also providing single gender
classrooms and schools for females. Thurgood
Marshall School in Seattle reported a 78 percent
decline in suspensions and a six stanine increase in
test scores with the male classroom. Other schools
have experienced similar results with the male
classroom or school.
I also recommended at the NABSE convention a
moratorium on special education placements for the
African American male child, except in extreme
cases. The numbers indicate that there is something
wrong with the way we are classifying children. When
17 percent of public school children are African
American, but 41 percent of the children are placed
in special education and 85 percent of those Black
children are male, something is wrong with the
system
, not the 
children.
It is also imperative that we understand that five
percent of the teachers make 30 percent of the
referrals. A better solution would be to mandate in-
service training or institute a policy that would allow
for the removal of such teachers. Unfortunately,
teachers have a union and African American boys
do not. I have chosen to represent the Black boys’
union. We need more adults to stop this onslaught.
In Detroit, a pilot program brings the special
education resources to the children rather than
removing the child from the mainstream classroom.
Many schools have become trigger-happy, e.g., they
pull children out to receive increased funding to their
school district. This is not totally the schools’ fault.
Schools receive additional money based on how
many students are classified at the upper and lower


--- PAGE 75 ---
extremes. Consequently, schools receive additional
funds for having gifted students or special education
students, not average students.
One of the most important meetings of a child’s
life is the one that determines whether the child will
be placed into special education. The principal,
teacher, social worker and psychologist will be in
attendance. In most schools, once the
recommendation has been made by the teacher, the
school worker, psychologist and principal will concur.
A low-income single parent may become very
intimidated when meeting with four educated people
who are all recommending that the child be placed in
special education. My concern is that the aggregate
figures in special education are the result of each of
these individual meetings. This one meeting may
contribute to the large number of Black boys who do
not receive a high school diploma, do not go on to
college, end up in prison and do not become
responsible husbands and fathers. We cannot afford
to lose any more boys to special education.
A study published in 
Harvard Educational Review
indicated that special education may not be all that
special, except for the fact that African American
children are placed there 
more
 than anyone, stay
longer
 than anyone else, and don’t return to the main
classroom at their appropriate 
grade level
. What
makes special education special? How do we
evaluate special education?
Again, parents, I cannot stress enough that you
have to meet teachers where they are. If a lack of
understanding exists between the classroom
teachers and Black male students, then we must
develop programs and literature that will help
educators understand how children learn. We must
consider placing a moratorium on special education
placement. We must increase the number of Black
male teachers or design a Black male classroom.
And parents must increase the amount of study and
quiet time at home; they must reduce the amount of
time that their children spend watching television,
talking on the telephone, listening to the radio or
record player and playing Nintendo. During this
period of preadolescence (9 through 13), we need


--- PAGE 76 ---
parents who will listen to their sons read. Parents
should not accept illiteracy in their preadolescent
children. Unfortunately, many parents are not aware
that their 13-year-old son is reading at a primary
level.
It is during preadolescence when many adults
have growing concerns about the self-esteem of
their children. Many people feel that Black boys
suffer from low self-esteem. We have indicated that
self-esteem is very complex and that a person may
be very confident and have a healthy dose of self-
esteem in one endeavor and may be very
intimidated and hesitant in another. I take the
position that Black boys do not suffer from low self-
esteem outside of the classroom, and are very
confident with their friends, girlfriends and in many
social activities. When Black boys are placed in
lower-track classes such as remedial reading and
special education, are labeled hyperactive and are
not given high expectations, their self-esteem
plunges in the classroom. It is also very significant
that African American boys who may have been
destroyed in the classroom somehow find ways to
feel good about themselves within Black culture.
Gangs and rap records are expressions of this
phenomenon.
Finally, let’s discuss the significance that 
sports
has on the African American male, especially at the
impressionable ages of nine through thirteen.
In speaking to students across the country, I often
ask the boys to share their career goals with me.
More than half the group will tell me that they plan to
go to the NBA, NFL, or Major League Baseball.
Because I am a strong advocate of developing self-
esteem, the last thing I want to do is to destroy
someone’s dream of becoming a professional
ballplayer. However, I do attempt to make the
students aware that the odds are one million to 35
that they will achieve this objective, and that the odds
are better that they will become engineers, computer
programmers, or doctors.
Every effort should be made to try to reduce the
allure of money making sports. I have observed
schools where 200 athletes have tried out for ten


--- PAGE 77 ---
athletic teams — basketball, football, baseball,
wrestling, swimming, track, gymnastics and others.
One hundred students tried out for the basketball
team, 25 for football, 25 for baseball and the other
50 students tried out for the remaining seven sports.
I try to convince youth they have a much better
chance making the swimming or track team than
making the basketball team. This may be an
excellent opportunity to secure a scholarship and
develop a career. Youth, especially between the
ages of nine and thirteen, don’t care about odds.
They believe that they will be the one out of a
hundred on their high school team and one out of a
million going to the NBA.
In conclusion, we must assess how well our boys
are doing against our seven barometers that we are
using to monitor their growth and development:
spirituality, racial awareness, scholarship, school,
self-esteem, peer pressure, respect for authority and
responsibility. We don’t lose our boys
instantaneously; we lose them when they stop
growing spiritually, when they become cynical and
disdain reading about their history, as their reading
levels and math scores begin to lag behind the
national average. We lose our boys when they begin
to lack confidence in their ability to successfully
manage school; they no longer volunteer to read
aloud, go up to the board or answer questions. They
no longer volunteer to be in public programs.
We must monitor the influence of the peer group.
This is a volatile period when boys may become
involved with gangs. It is our responsibility to monitor
the time and influence that the peer group has on our
children.
In 
To Be Popular or Smart: The Black Peer
Group
, I indicated that good parents 
know
 their
children’s friends, 
invite
 them over, 
program
 their
activities, and make sure they 
check
 back every so
often. Children who leave home at one o‘clock in the
afternoon on Saturday should be seen before ten
and eleven o’clock that night. We must monitor
whether or not our boys are respecting authority, in
the home, school, church and community.
Finally, in the preadolescent period between nine


--- PAGE 78 ---
and 13, our boys should become more responsible
managing money and studying.
The next chapter will explore how successful
parents are in teaching their sons to be responsible.
 
The fourth grade is the most pivotal time in African
American male development.


--- PAGE 79 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
 
Developing Responsibility in Black Boys
 
The most frequent response I received upon
releasing 
Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy
Black Boys
 was that more should have been written
about teaching Black boys to be responsible. The
revised edition declared, “Some mothers raise their
daughters and love their sons.” Over the years I have
observed that when it comes to their sons, 
some
mothers have low expectations for academic
excellence and seldom assign household chores. On
the contrary, girls are expected to perform well in
school as well as share a good load of the e.g.
housework. This double standard reinforces the
stereotype that household chores and academics
are for girls only. Further, it serves to create
conflicting expectations in adult male-female
relationships: she has learned to be responsible and
expects him to be too. Not only has he not learned,
he expects her to do all the cooking, cleaning,
washing, ironing, homework with the children, etc.
The present day mother-son relationship reflects
the history of the African American experience.
Mothers can be heard referring to their “littleman of
the house” or negatively to that “no-good boy” who’s
“just like your no-good father.” My concern in my
book, 
Motivating and Preparing Black Youth for
Success
, was parents who work to give their
children everything but become annoyed when their
children lack drive and enthusiasm. Mothers who
give everything and allow their sons to live at home
indefinitely do not help their children grow up. There
are mothers who buy their sons expensive gym
shoes, stereos and leather bags while providing free
room, board and meals indefinitely.
I ask mothers in my workshops for their reasons
why some “raise their daughters and love their sons.”
Here are some of their responses and my
comments:


--- PAGE 80 ---
1. 
Mothers are not supported by fathers in
encouraging domestic responsibility.
This response applies to less than four
percent of the households where the men still
reside with their children. I understand a
mother’s concern. Parenting is much more
effective when there is mutual agreement.
When the father does not subscribe to this
school of thought, a mother’s appeal will be
less effective.
2. 
Mothers lack knowledge of masculinity.
Many boys still believe domestic activities are
feminine and may lead to homosexuality. A
single parent once told me her son did not
want to wash dishes the previous night after
dinner because washing dishes was
feminine. The next evening, the parent was
going to serve her son on the same dirty plate
used previously. The son washed his plate,
not because it was masculine or bordering on
femininity, but because he wanted his food on
a clean plate.
3. 
Mothers use their sons to replace an
absent husband.
How many mothers have told their son, You
are the man of the house? Can a nine-year-
old boy be a man? Have mothers come to
rely on their strong son to do the physical
work around the house? While I am in favor of
boys doing whatever is necessary, I am
concerned that mothers, consciously or
unconsciously, use this work, to keep their
sons with them permanently.
4. 
Mothers hold their daughters to a higher
standard.
The double standard that exists is not healthy
for boys’ development and is disastrous for
future adult male-female relationships. When
daughters are taught to cook, sew, clean, visit
libraries and attend church and are expected
to be on the honor roll, while boys are allowed
to play basketball all evening after school,
never visit libraries or church, cannot boil a


--- PAGE 81 ---
hot dog and have never been on the honor
roll, the Black family has a very serious
problem.
5. 
Mothers protect their sons from racism.
Historically, Black mothers shielded their
sons to keep them from being lynched. This is
very complex historically and contemporarily. I
don’t know if the present-day mother
consciously thinks about lynching when she
lowers her expectations for her son and does
not push him to society’s limit, when she
overcompensates her efforts to help her
daughter to reach her full potential. If mothers
don’t believe their sons will be able to
become self-sufficient in this racist society,
she will rear him to become more dependent
on her.
 
 
The persons most likely to teach Black boys to be
responsible are Black mothers.


--- PAGE 82 ---
The question then becomes, Who is going to
teach Black boys to be responsible in White
America? Black men? Female teachers? Ministers?
Peers? Television? Radio? Bosses? The extended
family? Athletic Coaches? Fathers? Mothers? I
believe the motive for the conspiracy is White male
supremacy. If you think the only reason for our
problem is because of somebody else, you have
given them a compliment they do not fully deserve.
You can blame White men for a portion of the
problem, but White men do not determine if our boys
wash dishes and clean up their rooms. I can be
critical of Black mothers only to a degree; the major
indictment is on those Black men, specifically Black
fathers, who began their jaunt toward irresponsibility
by making a baby they refused to care for.
I have observed different responses from
unemployed fathers. Some fathers cry in their misery
and make the matter worse with abuse, neglect and
crime. Other fathers in the same circumstances will
sell papers or peanuts or provide landscaping or
garbage removal services. Should Black men and
women accept these narrow gender roles or should
they understand that even while unemployed, men
can help their children with homework, teach them
the beauty of being Black and a Christian, and also
assist their wives with housework? Until we redefine
manhood and limit the psychological effect of
welfare, we will continue to observe the phenomenon
of boys making babies.
What is “being responsible?” Webster defines it
as accepting obligation, being answerable and
accountable. Why are some Black men so
irresponsible? I am reminded of a food co-op I was
a member of. We would purchase the food from a
large distribution facility at 3 a.m. I was a weekly
regular, and we had rotating assistants. One brother
in particular was always late or absent. As I
pondered his circumstances, I observed a chaotic
family and an unpredictable lifestyle; he simply did
not have the internal fabric to be responsible and
consistent. It was often hard for me to accept this,
because my father worked evenings but called the
house at exactly 8 p.m. every night of my childhood. I


--- PAGE 83 ---
thought all men were like my father. I now understand
that responsibility must be taught early. I am tired of
Black women complaining about Black men being
irresponsible when they have the best opportunity to
correct the problem with their sons. I repeat,
responsible men are born in boyhood. Remember,
our little boys will be someone’s future husband and
father.
 
Here is a general list of tasks, chores, character
developers, etc., that should be reinforced on a daily
basis.
personal hygiene 
clothes 
room 
household chores 
siblings 
allowance 
studies
toys and equipment 
schedule 
sexual activity 
law 
residence 
health 
race 
God
 
Who is going to teach Black boys good hygiene
and proper grooming? Who is going to insure that
Black boys do not play in their good clothes and
hang them up after school? When will Black boys be
expected to make their beds daily and clean their
rooms periodically? Who is going to make Black
boys wash dishes, mop, vacuum, dust, sew and
cook? When will Black boys be expected to take
care of their siblings in preparation for fatherhood?
Who will teach their sons how to manage their
allowance, so that they won’t be like so many men
who carry a wad of money in their pocket and cannot
explain what happened to it at the end of the week or
month? In our house, both boys are required to save
a portion of their allowance each week; at the end of
the year they have an option of spending it or saving


--- PAGE 84 ---
a portion, which we will match and invest. Two
lessons are taught; first, what they save each week
is very small and could buy very little, but money
accumulated throughout the year amounts to a
significant sum and promotes the value of saving.
Secondly, a matching grant incentive and investment
teaches how money can work for them.
Who is going to teach Black boys to do their
homework as soon as they come home from school,
music and television off? Who is going to teach them
to be responsible for their grades and actions in
school? When are Black boys going to learn to take
one toy outside at a time and always bring it back in
before taking out another? When are they going to
be taught to put their toys in one location in their
room, and how to avoid breaking them? Who is
going to teach their sons to be punctual about time
commitments and class schedules?
When are Black boys going to be responsible for
their sexual promiscuity? A documentary titled 
The
Vanishing Black Family
 that portrayed a brother
who was irresponsible, many people thought he was
an actor. He said, “Making babies is like a piece of
art; you lay back and look at your work.” There are
parents who know their son has impregnated a
sister on the block but do not hold him accountable.
In the same documentary the sister said, “I want the
baby because I want someone to love me, but I don’t
want to marry the father because he can’t even take
care of himself.” Our society, specifically families,
have a double standard on this issue. Statements
such as “boys will be boys — all boys have some
dog in them” and “boys have to soak a few wild oats”
all reinforce boys’ feeling that they can do whatever
they want sexually.


--- PAGE 85 ---
Who is going to teach Black boys to do their
homework as soon as they come home from
school?
 
Ninety percent of all teenage pregnancy programs
service females. When you hear the phrase teenage
pregnancy, most people think girls. My studies still
confirm that it takes consenting parties of both
genders to produce a bay. I applaud programs like
Project Alpha, the Urban League and Teen Fathers
in Cleveland for providing concrete programs and
counseling for the “other party.” While we need to
commend these and other programs holding Black
boys accountable, the first level of responsibility still
resides in the home. When are parents going to hold
their sons accountable for their sexual behavior? I
believe there is a direct correlation between a boy
being allowed to be irresponsible about his hygiene,
clothes, room, household chores, siblings, money,
studies, toys, activities and schedule to his sex life. If
a boy has been irresponsible about everything else,
why should we expect anything different in his sexual
behaviors? Another book is needed to explain why
girls are also sexually irresponsible.
Most adults, especially mothers, are not
comfortable talking to their sons about sex.
Unfortunately, most boys learn inaccurate sexual
information on the streets. Parents may timidly drop
a book on their 16 year-old son’s bed, saying, “Let
me know if you have any question.” Or you get the
“open minded” parents who accept that “boys will be
boys,” or are “highly sexed,” as the brother in the


--- PAGE 86 ---
documentary stated, and give their sons an unlimited
supply of condoms.
Research shows that youth, specifically those
labelled “high risk,” become sexually active at 12 or
13 years of age. This is important, because most
homes, school and churches provide counseling for
youth 16 years and older. The fundamental question
is, what is the objective of our counseling? Moral
guidance? Dispensing contraceptives? Many
parents and institutions have dropped the first line of
defense, which is moral responsibility. The second
step is accepting the act but protecting yourself
against pregnancy. I often tease my workshop
audience on teenage pregnancy by declaring, “I can
stop teenage pregnancy if you can stop teenage
sex!” Our sad state of affairs results from a lack of
moral responsibility, inadequately preparing our
children on the use of contraceptives and not holding
them accountable for their “piece of art.” My father
always told me, “If you make it, you will take care of
it.” I believed him. I actually thought that if a girl’s
parents came to my house and convinced my
parents that I was the father of her child, my school
plans and savings would have been altered. This
kind of background makes a boy think twice about
his actions. My father also said, “Welfare didn’t
make it, and welfare will not take care of it.”
The next area of responsibility is the law. Schools
and the larger society operate on rules; if the rules
are broken there are direct consequences. When
there are no rules at home and no repercussions, it
is difficult for all youth to understand, especially
Black boys who spend a disproportionate amount of
time on the streets. Discipline is the number one
problem in elementary schools, and many teachers
say, “How can I discipline them when their parents
don’t?” Who is going to teach Black boys to respect
rules, the law and authority? Again, I refer to my
father who told me early on, “If you get caught
breaking the law and get locked up, don’t even think
about calling.” (I knew my mother would get me out,
whatever the reason.) Please note, I am very much
aware of police brutality and the large number of
brothers who are in jail for no other reason than


--- PAGE 87 ---
racism and lack of money. I am referring to those
unquestionable violations, such as rape, burglary
and murder, where parents will still plead in defense
of their sons.
Who is going to hold Black boys accountable for
becoming employed? People have told me their
parents said, “You will either go to school or get a
job, but you are not going to lay up in this house.”
Granted, institutional racism in America confirms
Sidney Wilhelm’s prediction in 
Who Needs the
Negro?
 Alvin Toffler, in 
The Third Wave
, describes
the White power brokers’ disdain and disregard for
Black labor. White suburbia has help wanted signs
in numerous fast-food franchises, but many of the
jobs are simply inaccessible to Black teenagers,
and their minimum wage are inadequate for heads
of households. I mentioned earlier that despite these
conditions, some brothers will sell newspapers or
peanuts before selling drugs or “pimping” off their
mother or “lady.” I remember when I could not find
work in high school, I volunteered to work with an
electrical firm to learn how to be an electrician. They
first questioned my desire to volunteer, then felt sorry
for me and gave me bus money, and eventually gave
me a little spending money. But more importantly, I
learned the basics of being an electrician.
Who is going to teach Black boys to be
responsible for their education, employment and
overall skill development? If Black boys are allowed
to stay with their parents indefinitely without
contributing to the household financially, and do not
attend school or develop skills, how will they ever
learn responsibility? The relationship some boys
have with their mothers parallels the parasitic
relationships some sisters have with welfare. In each
case, the authority figures expects nothing from the
dependent, and consequently, the person becomes
more irresponsible and dependent.
When are Black boys going to learn the
relationship between diet and health? Who is going
to prevent our boys from smoking cigarettes at age
11, creating a lifetime addiction and potentially
premature death? Life expectancy tables show the
following life expectancies:


--- PAGE 88 ---
1
 
2
3
Black men often die before receiving their first
Social Security check. Who is going to take Black
boys for their annual medical and dental checkup?
Lastly, who is going to teach Black boys to be
committed to the liberation of Black people and to
place God first in their lives? In my experience
providing cultural and religious programs for youth, I
observe different standards for sons and daughters.
Why should we be surprised when we see more
women involved in cultural and religious activities
when as children, the pattern was already being
molded? Many parents require their daughters to
attend Black and religious events, but leave it
optional for their “little man of the house.”
In conclusion, developing responsibility in Black
boys is essential if we want responsibility from Black
men. Responsibility starts early. The relationship
between some mothers and sons needs an honest
assessment. It also has implications not only for
adult male-female relations but also for the
associations boys have with their female teachers.
Often boys think the way they negotiate, plead, rap
and manipulate their mothers can also be used with
their female teachers, girlfriends, and later, their
wives. The next chapter will explore further the
relationship between mothers and sons and what
are her major concerns developing him into
manhood.


--- PAGE 89 ---
“Solving the problems of Black boys may eliminate
the problems of future men.”


--- PAGE 90 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
 
Mothers and Sons
 
I
t had been a beautiful Saturday afternoon and a
great game. Before leaving the park, a few of us
decided to stop at the restroom. While I waited
outside for my nine-year-old son, I couldn’t help but
overhear a conversation an African American
woman was having with her son. He looked to be
about four or five years of age. Basically, she was
explaining to him how to use the restroom. She
seemed to be well educated and very accomplished.
Sometimes I like to look at people and see how
much I can learn about them in three to five minutes.
My first impressions were confirmed while we waited
for our boys. We chitchatted about how pleased we
were that our home team had won. It was ironic, she
said, that while today she cheered for the home
team, soon she would be traveling to the opposing
team’s city to represent her client as their attorney.
My son came out, but before I could say my good-
byes, she asked if I would mind going in to see what
was holding up her son. “All he had to do was
urinate,” she said. No problem, I said, and told my
son to stay next to her. I went into the restroom and
looked for the boy by the long row of urinals. He was
nowhere to be found. I was just about to leave when I
saw him coming out of one of the enclosed stalls. I
asked him why was he using the toilet when he could
have used the urinal. He said, “We don’t have one of
those at home, and I don’t know how to use it.” I was
amazed. Using the urinal was something I took for
granted. At that point I began to wonder if he was the
only male child in America who had this problem, or
if there were other children, especially African
American male children, without a significant male
influence in their lives? I walked the child out of the
washroom and explained to his mother what had
happened. I then asked her if I could take him back
inside and give him a five-minute class in Urinology


--- PAGE 91 ---
101.
For the last two decades, I have devoted my life to
the empowerment of African American people, with
a strong concentration on the development of the
African American male. I raise many questions,
analyze issues and look for trends that both
positively and negatively affect the development of
African American male children. The incident at the
park sent out a red alert to me. What other rites of
passage and learning experiences were African
American boys missing under the guidance of
African American women who were doing their level
best?
The Lord had more for me that Saturday as he
prepared me to write this next book. That evening I
was scheduled to speak at an awards banquet. The
awardees were freshmen entering college. They
were spending the entire summer in a science camp
sponsored by the local college. The purpose of the
camp was to increase the number of African
Americans in the sciences. As I spoke, I mentioned
how much I respected their work. Then I gave them
the cold facts: only two percent of the doctors and
one percent of the engineers in America are African
American. I teased my audience and asked them
how many Asians play in the NBA.
There were 49 awardees at the program, 35
African Americans and 14 Latinos. There were six
males, four African Americans and two Latinos. Two
of the four African American males would fit the
description of “nerd.” One was overweight, seemed
to possess homosexual tendencies and acted very
childish. The young man who introduced me looked
like an eighth-grader rather than a freshman entering
college. He seemed to possess some physical
impairments, including a visual problem that made it
difficult for him to read his introduction.
I thought about the sisters in the audience and the
numerical disparity between them and the brothers,
and I wondered what they were going to do when it
came time to select a mate. In my book 
The Power,
Passion and Pain of Black Love
, I mentioned that if
a sister has a BA degree, she has a 10 percent less
chance of getting married. After completing one year


--- PAGE 92 ---
of graduate school it becomes 15 percent and if she
earns a Masters
degree, a Ph.D. or makes over $40,000 a year, then
it becomes 19 percent. At the banquet there were 31
females to a mere four African American males. The
other two young men were tall, suave and athletic. I
was very glad to see them. I later learned that one of
them came from a highly dysfunctional family. His
mother was a crack-head and his father was the
latest boyfriend in her life.
I began to reflect and juxtapose what I saw today.
There was the middle-income African American
female attorney whose son did not know how to use
a urinal. And there was the African American male
college freshman, the product of a crack-head
mama and an absent father, who had successfully
completed a six-week intensive science camp. It
became obvious that a child’s final destination in life
transcends race, class and gender.
In this chapter on the relationship between
mothers and their sons - an issue which transcends
class - we will examine some of the many challenges
facing mothers as they attempt to rear their male
children.
I am reminded of a conversation I had with a
middle-income African American woman. Her son
was having problems in school and she was having
difficulty resolving them. Ironically, she was a teacher
in the very same school district. Her third-grade son
claimed that his teacher was making derogatory
comments about him. She wrote a letter to the
teacher in order to get her side of the story, as well
as to share her son’s comments, and she requested
a return letter. Three weeks later, having received no
response, she called the school and attempted to
either talk with the teacher or arrange for a mutually
convenient time to meet. No response. This is one of
the same schools, no doubt, that encourages
parents’ involvement and support.
The third time she called she did not ask for the
teacher; she asked for the principal. She told the
principal that if she did not have the teacher call
within 24 hours, she would “be in school first thing
tomorrow morning.” My friend has always believed


--- PAGE 93 ---
that the lack of parental involvement is the reason
why our children suffer academically. Teachers who
have children, especially male children, in regular
public schools (vs. gifted or “magnet” programs)
have a unique understanding of how challenging it is
to fight school districts. She told me that the teacher
finally called her late that night and they scheduled a
meeting for the following morning.
As she waited in the school office for the teacher
to arrive, she overheard a conversation between
someone who she thought was a low-income parent
and the school clerk who apparently thought the
parent was not important enough to warrant a
meeting with either the teacher or the principal. My
friend said that for the first time in her life she
realized all that she and her low-income sister had in
common. Although one was educated while the other
was a dropout, one made over $40,000 while the
other was probably on AFDC (Aid to Families with
Dependent Children). One was wearing an
expensive fur coat while the other was wearing an
old handy-down coat, and one was wearing a
designer dress while the other wore blue jean
cutoffs, in the final analysis, they both were trying to
negotiate with a school system on behalf of their
sons. Having an extensive vocabulary or lacking one
made no difference. They both sat there at the mercy
of a school system that held the future of their most
prized possession, the man-child.
This chapter is a response to the large number of
letters I receive on a regular basis from mothers
nationwide who have either read one of the earlier
volumes of 
Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy
Black Boys
, heard me speak on the subject or have
been referred by someone who thinks that I may be
able to provide some direction. I would like to share
with you some of the more heart-wrenching letters I
have received. The names have either been altered
or deleted for anonymity. I think it is imperative that
we understand the concern, pain and anguish that
mothers are experiencing as they attempt to raise
their sons alone. This first letter is from Ms. Johnson.
 
Dear Dr. Kunjufu:


--- PAGE 94 ---
You don’t know me, but I have read most of your
books on Black boys and I was hoping that you could
give me some advice concerning my son. Last
week, I attended a staff meeting that was very
intimidating. I was the only African American in the
conference room. Seated around the table was a
principal, psychologist, social worker and teacher,
who all used a lot of acronyms - BD, ADD, EMR and
EMH. It made me feel uncomortable in the meeting,
besides the fact that I was the only African American.
They were there before I arrived and it seemed as if
their minds were already made up when they
recommended that my child be placed in a BD
classroom, because he has been evaluated as
being hyperactive and suffers from an attention
deficit disorder. The first question posed to me was,
Did I drink or use drugs, specifically during
pregnancy? What really baffled me about that
question was this child was almost on the honor roll
last year and my personal background had not been
an issue. I told them that I drink a little beer and that
was the extent of my drinking. They went on to say
that they felt that my child had difficulties following
instructions, completing his assignments, was often
restless in class, and was easily distracted. They
thought the drug Ritalin would help reduce some of
this nervous energy. Dr. Kunjufu, I don’t know what to
do.
Should I agree to have my child placed in special
education? I asked them if I could at least have a
week to make the decision. I really felt that the
decision had already been made before I had
arrived. I simply don’t know what to do. Please call
me tonight.
First of all, it was essential to let her know that I
cared, that I appreciated the respect that she had for
my work and that I felt limited in what I could do
because of the distance that separated us. I did,
however, suggest that she utilize the resources of
her local chapters of the National Association of
Black Social Workers (NABSW), Black
Psychologists, the National Association of Black
School Educators (NABSE), the National Black


--- PAGE 95 ---
Child Development Institute, a local teacher’s
advocacy group or a sympathetic legal aid
organization.
Whenever I talk to mothers in this kind of
predicament, I refer them to 
Countering the
Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys,
 which I stress
the fact that parents have rights. For example, a child
cannot be placed in special education without the
signature of a guardian unless the school is willing to
pursue a hearing or arbitration. Many times parents
are not aware of their rights. I suggested to this
mother that at the next meeting she have a
representative with her to balance the racial
disparity. It’s also good for emotional support. As the
child had almost made the honor roll in the previous
grade, I also suggest that she seek the support of
her son’s former teachers. Unfortunately, some
schools operate like police departments, in that the
bond among staff supersedes what is best for the
child.
Principals should critically evaluate their teachers
before placing the entire onus on the child. Most
principals are aware that 20 percent of their staff
make 80 percent of the referrals for special
education. The problem may be with the teacher
rather than the student. I then asked the parent, if she
knew how long they thought the special education
class would be needed and what criteria they were
using to measure success. I try to point out to
parents that presently there is no evaluation
instrument to measure the effectiveness of special
education.
Before she meets again with the faculty and
administration, I suggest that the mother honestly
assess her son’s behavior by answering the
following questions:
 How well do you really know your child?
(Games like Checkers, Dominoes, Scrabble
and Concentration can help you assess the
ability of your child to be focused and follow
instructions.)
 Does your child have a short or long
attention span?


--- PAGE 96 ---
How much TV does your child watch?
 What kind of TV programs does your child
watch?
 
The better you know your child, the better you can
negotiate the system on his behalf.
I encourage parents to videotape their child if they
can. I’ll never forget the mother who did follow this
suggestion. Her child had been assessed with an
attention deficit disorder, but the tape showed, with a
shadow of a doubt, a child who was focused during
his playtime.
I give mothers a list of questions that they need to
ask their son’s teacher. Many schools know how to
avoid the major issues when they dialogue with
parents. One of the favorite lines that teachers give
to parents is, “Your son has the potential, but he is
not working to his capacity.” If the teacher had told
the parent that her son was stupid, we would have
World War III, but the teacher has softened the blow,
and the parent is feeling pretty good. When the
teacher says the child is not working to his fullest
capacity, the burden of responsibility is now
exclusively on him. This is misplaced responsibility.
The failure of the child also lies with the teacher and
the parent. The following are questions I would like
all parents to ask their child’s teacher at some point
during the school year:
 Where was my child at the beginning of the
school year in each subject area?
 What skills/concepts has he/she acquired
during this reporting period?
 Where is he/she in relation to your
expectations at this point?
 What criteria did you use to establish your
expectations for my child?
 How did you make your assessment of my
child?
 What areas of strength have you identified in
my child?
 What weaknesses have you identified in
him/her?


--- PAGE 97 ---
What are your plans for addressing these
weaknesses?
 How can I assist in addressing the
weaknesses?
 Is my child receiving any resource services
outside the classroom? If so, please specify.
 
These are the kinds of questions that place the
burden on the person who is being paid to educate
your child. It is the job of the parents to assist and of
the child to try, but it is the teacher’s responsibility to
provide a pedagogy, curriculum and environment
that is conducive to learning.
Ideally speaking, the objective for those children
who are not in special education because of a
physical impairment should be mainstreamed back
into the regular classroom and expected to perform
at a satisfactory level. Special education programs
should not be designed to indefinitely warehouse
children. I suggest to parents that they query the
possibility of the child remaining in the mainstream
classroom and of special education resources being
brought into the classroom.
Regarding Ritalin, I believe the school system is
becoming a larger drug dealer than the Mafia. There
are presently four million children receiving Ritalin.
Ritalin is a stimulant, an amphetamine. I’ve always
thought it was a contradiction to prescribe an
amphetamine for hyperactivity. Ritalin’s side effects
are loss of appetite, sleeping difficulties, and
lethargy. It is my opinion that before Ritalin is given,
a change in instructional pedagogy and curriculum
should be implemented. I also encourage parents to
visit the classroom, observe their child and make
their own honest and informed assessment. If the
school is unwilling to make any concessions, parents
may have to identify an alternative public or private
school which may present financial and/or residential
hardships.
Of all the concerns in the letters that I receive, the
issue of special education far exceeds all others.
 
Dear Dr. Kunjufu:


--- PAGE 98 ---
I have heard you say once that if a child fails a
grade between kindergarten and third grade, there
is a 70 percent chance that he will not graduate from
high school.
I never forgot that statement, and it has me
worried now. The school has indicated that they want
to retain my child in kindergarted because they don’t
feel that he has mastered what a five-year-old child
should have during this past school year. I believe
my child is smart, but of course I am just a mother.
The people with the degrees have a different
answer, and they feel that my child would benefit
from remaining in kindergarten an extra year. They
also think that it will make him more mature.
I know that you don’t know me and you don’t know
my child, but I am wondering, what should I do? I
don’t want children to call my child slow or dummy. I
don’t want him to wonder why he is not able to keep
up with his friends in class. I don’t know what that will
do to his self-esteem. Please call me collect as soon
as you can.
I wonder about parents who express concern on
the last day of school when they find out their child
has not been, e.g. promoted to the next grade. There
must have been obvious warning signs during the
first, second and third quarters of the school year. At
my workshops, I have parents provide their child’s
grades based on homework, and test scores they
have reviewed. When a child and his parents are
expecting an A and the teacher gives the child a D
or a C, there is missing information in the scenario
that needs to be discovered. Parents who have
monitored their child’s progress throughout the year
should not be surprised in any given quarter, and
definitely not at year’s end. I also have parents
determine whether there was a disparity between
the report card and national achievement test
scores. If the child has done well in either one, then
the parent has an important argument to use for
promoting the child into the next grade.
After I collect this data, I quiz the parents: What
kind of academic stimulation is being provided for
children at home?Are there regular visits to the
library? Is there any reading of stories to children or


--- PAGE 99 ---
by children?
Next, I want parents to give me some idea of how
many children were in the class and whether there
were any other children that failed. Were there a
disproportionate number of African American males
retained?
I agree that retainment is necessary if mastery has
not been achieved. Society has a right to expect that
anyone in possession of a high school diploma can
read, write,and compute at a certain agreed upon
level. If schools don’t enforce their standards,
employers will lack confidence in graduates
receiving promotions, diplomas and degrees. I am
against social promotion, e.g., children can only fail
once because the school does not want older
children to remain in lower grades or because it is
more expensive to educate children for several
years in the same grade. This practice does not take
into account what they do or don’t do during the
school year. Can you imagine how difficult it is for a
classroom teacher to hold children accountable
when they know that regardless of what they do, they
have to be promoted?
I advise parents to consider their options. As soon
as they see a problem, provide additional tutors at
home. Increase study time. Deny privileges at home.
What my teachers told me must hold true for us with
our children today. They said they refused to allow
me to fail. What they meant was that I was not
allowed to fail my class and whatever it took to make
sure I passed - extra time, energy, resources, home
visits, field trips, speeches given by role models -
they would provide it.
Lastly, I tell parents facing retainment of their child
that they can appeal to the principal and the school
board to have their child “condition” to the next
grade. This puts the child on a 10-week trial period,
during which time the child must demonstrate
mastery of a subject(s) based upon clearly defined
and mutually agreed upon criteria. This allows
parents one more opportunity to circumvent the
problem.
 
Dear Dr. Kunjufu:


--- PAGE 100 ---
I enjoyed hearing you speak a few months ago in
my city. I don’t know if you remember, but I
mentioned to you after the presentation that I was
having problems with my son. He seemed to fit your
Fourth Grade Failure Syndrome to a “T.” He seemed
to be motivated and interested in school in K-3, but
with each grade since then his interest has waned.
He is now in seventh grade, and he’s just completely
lackadaisical as it relates to academics. Of course
he loves his friends, rap, and sports. I do the very
best I can as a single mother (who works nights) to
monitor his whereabouts, but I’m afraid that at the
pace that he is going he may get caught up in the
wrong crowd and join a gang and drop out of school.
I was wondering if you could write to him or give him
a call, or possibly on your next visit to my city, stop by
and visit. Just give me a call at your earliest
convenience. My heart is heavy and I know you
understand.
My first question in this type of situation is, Does
the child have a positive male role model? He
doesn’t have to be the father. There are numerous
homes, including mine, where the father is very
literate and accomplished, but the children are not
inspired to read and take academics as seriously as
they should. Many parents tell me that I have said the
same thing to their child as a role model that they’ve
saidas parents, but that it meant so much more
coming from another person. I think it is very
important that for children, especially African
American boys, to be exposed to positive male role
models.
Additionally, I encourage parents to have their
child read 
To Be Popular or Smart: the Black Peer
Group.
 Since peers are the number one influence on
our children, every effort should be made to monitor
peer pressure. Parents should know their children’s
friends and their parents. Parents should get phone
numbers, invite their children’s friends over, program
the children’s peer group with activities that reinforce
your value system and have your children check
back regularly when they are outside playing.
I also encourage parents to read 
Maggie’s


--- PAGE 101 ---
American Dream
 by James Comer and 
Gifted
Hands
 by Ben Carson, and to watch 
Up Against the
Wall,
 starring Marla Gibbs, and the 
Mary Thomas
story
 about Mrs. Thomas raising former NBA Star
Isaiah Thomas. These four strong Black women
were able to raise their sons in poverty, squalor and
mire because of their relationship with the Lord and
their will power. I also recommend that they read
Family Life and School Achievement
 by Reginald
Clark, who discounts the role of money and the
number of parents participation in quality interaction
between parent and child as the key factors in
raising healthy children.
Parents need to review not only the literature but
also that in the school’s curriculum for its accuracy
and relevance to their children’s lives. Many times I
have sent literature to schools to rebut the fallacy that
Columbus discovered America, Lincoln freed slaves
and Egypt is in the Middle East.
Lastly, children are bored only when they are
boring people. Parents should help their sons find
engaging hobbies. They should try to find out what
their sons’ interests are and secure reading
materials in that area. If a son likes rap, subscribe to
a rap magazine or get biographies of famous
rappers. Children can improve their reading skills
while reading material they enjoy.
This last letter comes from the parents of an older
youth.
 
Dear Dr. Kunjufu,
 
I hope this letter finds you and your family doing
well. I’ve enjoyed reading your work and hearing you
speak. I know this is an unfair question, but I’ll ask it
anyway. What do you do with a 19-year-old son who
has graduated from high school, can’t find a job and
simply wants to lie around my house all day long and
eat the food that I buy and is too lazy to even help me
carry the food up the steps? I threw up my hands
seven or eight years ago when he was 12, and said,
I don’t know what to do with him. I said that in a
moment of frustration, but now that he is 19, I really
don’t know what to do with this boy. I have two


--- PAGE 102 ---
younger children that I need to raise, and hopefully
they won’t end up like him. I’m tired. I have my own
life to live. So what would you suggest? Just kick him
out? The military? What can I do? Please write or
call soon.
In responding to this type of letter, I tell parents
about the opposite sex dynamics. Apparently,
humans in Western countries are not as skilled at
pushing their children out of the nest as in Eastern
countries and in the animal kingdom. It is a greater
challenge when the opposite gender is involved.
Mothers seem to do a much better job of preparing
their daughters to leave than their sons. Fathers
seem to do a much better job with their sons than
their daughters. We have a rule at our house: we will
give you everything you 
need
 for the first 18 years of
your life, and on your 18th birthday you must leave,
preferably for college. Parents have a dilemma when
their sons are not college material and have no
immediate plans for the future. Who wants to spend
$10,000 to $15,000 a year for a student who’s not
serious? It is mind boggling when you consider that
children who receive money from parents may not do
well, but when the money is cut off, and the students
are forced to pay their own way through school, they
seem to do much better.
Many of our youth believe that they have the
option, though not preferable, of remaining in the
parent’s home. This allows them to play grownup
while acting like children. Many youth, because of
materialism, want to live in their parents’ house but
spend their money on Western trinkets instead of
rent, utilities and food. This, in my opinion, can
deceive children about reality. I wish there was an
institution similar to a dormitory where parents could
send unmotivated youth who want to be grownup but
can’t pay for it.
When the mother mentioned that her son was
unemployed, I wondered how aggressively he has
been looking for employment. Mothers need to put
the fire under their sons and let them know that their
stay cannot be indefinite. Obviously, if a person did
not have a support system, he’d have to look for
work day-by-day, if not hour-by-hour, and accept


--- PAGE 103 ---
whatever was available. When children are allowed
to be irresponsible, they often don’t feel compelled
to accept minimum wage jobs like washing dishes
or commission sales.
The military option is more complex. There are
many mothers who have used the military to teach
their sons responsibility and have been successful. I
am concerned, though, about how parents can say I
don’t know what to do with him after 18 years and
expect the military to teach them discipline in two to
three months. I could give you horror stories on the
abuse and the disproportionate number of African
American males who have received a dishonorable
discharge, which can affect their employment
opportunities for the rest of their lives. I could also
mention studies illustrating that the military has been
fairer to African American males than corporate
America. Retired General Colin Powell showed us
that there is no glass ceiling in the military in contrast
to the Fortune 500. That does not mean that racism
does not exist in the military. African American
males are only six percent of the population, but they
are one-third of the military. There remains a
disproportionate percentage of African American
males on the front-line and involved in combat duty. I
am concerned with our sons being on the front-line
especially in places like Haiti, Rwanda, Liberia and
Nigeria. In a world based on White supremacy,
African males from various countries don’t need to
kill each other to maintain the oppression of its
people. I encourage mothers to attend the
registration meetings with the military and monitor
the application. If your son has expressed an interest
in electronics, aviation or another technical field that
is noncombative, every effort should be made to
attain that reality.
I usually close my letters or conversations by
imploring the mother to stay strong and give her son
tough love. I remember my father telling me that if I
ever got locked up he was not going to get me out.
My mother said she would, but my father told her,
“Don’t even think about it.” I knew he meant it, and
even though I didn’t like what he said, I am raising
my sons by similar rules. For many parents, the


--- PAGE 104 ---
problem is the lack of rules. For others, it’s the ability
to enforce them. If the consequence of breaking the
rules is kicking the child out of the house, then you
must be prepared to follow through. With the streets
as dangerous as they are, mothers are reluctant to
have their sons leave and become the victim of an
act of violence that she will always think was her fault
and could have been prevented. It’s the choice
between a rock and a hard place. If the rock is
allowing my son to stay home and be irresponsible,
and the hard place is taking the chance that my son
will be a victim of an act of violence, I’m going to
take the hard place because it is the only hope for
teaching responsibility. If mothers allow their sons to
stay with them irresponsibly, they may be physically
alive but they are mentally, emotionally, financially
and spiritually bankrupt and dead. When one mother
said that her son eats up all the food in her house,
yet was too lazy to help her carry the food, in my
opinion death has already begun.
I wish mothers of sons could have a conference to
benefit and derive strength from each other. Mothers
are worrying about and suffering from similar
problems, but they are responding individually
without support. They are waiting in school offices by
themselves. They are arguing with school clerks,
teachers and principals by themselves. They are
meeting with four professionals about their son’s
future by themselves. They are tackling lack of
motivation, peer pressure, gangs and other vices by
themselves.
In many cities mothers who have buried their sons
due to wanton violence have organized themselves
into various groups: Mothers Against Gangs,
Mothers Against Violence, Mothers Against Crime.
Most had not considered getting together until a
tragedy happened to their sons. I commend them for
coming together to try to prevent another child from
being a victim. I wish we could organize mothers
before their sons’ lives are snuffed out at an early
age. Not only do we need these groups, but we need
Mothers Against Ritalin, Mothers Against a
Disproportionate Number of Black Boys Failing
Kindergarten, Mothers Against Special Education,


--- PAGE 105 ---
Mothers against Teachers That Give Our Boys Low
Expectations and Mothers Against Gangster Rap.
The following chapter will explore the relationship
between female teachers and Black boys.
 
When a Black boy looks at a female teacher with a
look of defiance, I call this “the showdown.”


--- PAGE 106 ---
CHAPTER SIX
.
 
Female Teachers and Black Male Culture
 
Female teachers, especially White ones, are
integral in the development of Black boys in
America. Since the Brown vs. Topeka case of 1954,
desegregation has more than ever brought Black
boys into contact with White females. In light of this, it
can be noted that 83 percent of all elementary
teacher are females. 
1
 Black children constitute 17
percent of all students but comprise 41 percent of all
special education placements, primarily as
Educable Mentally Retarded (EMR) and Behavioral
Disorder (BD). Of the Black children placed in
special education, 85 percent are boys. African
American males lead the nation in suspensions.
2
These statistics raise numerous questions. Why
are Black children disproportionately labeled EMR
and BD? Why are Black boys labeled EMR and BD
more than girls? Is there any relationship between
female teachers and Black boys being placed in
EMR and BD classes and/or suspended? What are
the differences between Black and White female
teachers in their impact on Black boys? Are there
differences between male and female teachers as
they relate to Black male children?
Who’s responsible for the plight of Black boys in
school?
In American society, the victims are often blamed
because they have the fewest resources to defend
themselves. Black people are blamed for their plight
yet are the only racial group that did not come to
America voluntarily looking for a better life. Scholars,
like Ryan in 
Blame the Victim
 and others, realize the
blame may lie with the perpetrator. It is not my desire
to blame either Black boys or female teachers. This
would be just as useless as teachers blaming
parents and parents blaming teachers while children
suffer. My concern is based on the realistic profile
that Black boys, in their nine years (K-8) of


--- PAGE 107 ---
elementary school, may encounter a maximum of
two male teachers - possibly none. And if male
teachers are available, they will be in the upper
grades, beyond the all-important fourth grade.
The educational future of our boys must be based
on mutual understanding and respect. Instead, I feel
that schools have placed the burden of blame on
boys for their lack of achievement. Even the NCAA
rule 48 places the major responsibility on the
“athlete-student” to achieve a 2.0 grade point
average and 16 or 800 on the ACT or SAT
respectively. Often this is not achieved since
elementary schools still operate with “social
promotion,” children are passed because of age
rather than competency.
To evaluate the relationship of female teachers
and Black male students, let’s first look at female
teachers. I believe that how women feel about
themselves affects their pedagogy. How women feel
about their father, boyfriend, husband - or the lack
thereof - is also significant. Women who have been
abused or raped, either in childhood or marriage,
have serious issues to deal with. In the broad range
between the traditional wife and the lesbian lies our
female teaching corps. On the issues of sexism,
contemporary literature like 
For Colored Girls Only
and 
The Color Purple
 have an impact on teacher
attitudes. Do you really believe that the way female
teachers feel about themselves, men and sexism
can be left at home and not enter the classroom?
What structure exists for female teachers to unload
these complicated feelings, or to objectively
determine if they are affecting their male students?
What college education department equips female
students to isolate these variables for
consideration?
For White women it becomes more complex,
because their Black students may be the first Black
males with whom they have ever had direct contact.
This amazes me. How can you teach a child who you
do not know or understand?
Unfortunately, in an insecure world, most people
equate differences with deficiencies. Black people
are different from Whites, and insecure Whites will


--- PAGE 108 ---
use this as evidence of White superiority. My
position is that Black boys are different from White
boys and Black and White girls, but not better or
worse. All teachers must develop strategies to
maximize African American boys’ potential.
Now let’s look at African American culture, male
culture and their synthesis, Black male culture. It is
sad commentary, but many Blacks do not feel they
have a culture. I have not only been told that by Black
adults but I have also witnessed it in the actions of
children. A friend of mine shared with me that a
teacher of an international class of children
requested that they bring an ethnic dish and wear
their cultural dress. The Chinese, Mexican and
German students knew what to bring and wear, but
the two Black students brought hamburgers and
french fries and wore blue jeans and t-shirts. I could
not fault the students because they only expressed
the lack of cultural awareness of their parents. W. E
.B. Du Bois, in the 
Souls of Black Folks,
 eloquently
describes the “double consciousness and warring
souls” - one African, the other American - and the
difficulty of trying to be African (Black) in White
America or being American (White) in the Black
community. Many Blacks give up trying to please
either soul and they become very individualistic.
Their motto is, “I’m just trying to be me.”
I feel compelled to describe my culture. Had it not
been for chattel and mental slavery, I would be
dressing my son in a dashiki and my daughter in a
buba with her hair wrapped in a gele or profiling
cornrows, not French braids or the Bo Derek look.
For “International Festival Day,” they would have
brought mangoes, avocados, plantains,
watermelons, millet, okra, black-eyed peas and
curried chicken. Their notebooks would have
pyramid designs and hieroglyphics on them, and
they would know that Egypt is in Africa, not the
Middle East, and that Egyptians, not Greeks and
Romans, built the first civilization. The red, black and
green flag would be saluted daily in their classroom.
When other children greeted them in their native
language, my children would say, “habari gani,”
which means, “What’s the news?” in Swahili. Lastly, I


--- PAGE 109 ---
would require that the next “International Festival” not
be held on January 15, in February, on May 19, June
19, August 17, or December 26 through January 1
(the holy days honoring Dr. King, Black History
Month, Malcolm X, Juneteenth, Marcus Garvey and
Kwanzaa, respectively) because my children would
not be there.
Not all Blacks may agree with me on my idea of
an empowering African American culture, so let’s
look at what kind of culture we do have.
 
I often hear terms like “culturally disadvantaged,”
“culturally deprived,” “dominant culture” and
“subculture.” These are arrogant terms. Everyone
has a culture, including a people with two warring
souls. Culture is lifestyle; it represents the what and
how of everything you do.
We cannot afford to have teachers placing
negative value judgments on Black culture. When a
five-year-old Black child enters kindergarten
speaking the language of his or her environment,
which may happen to be Black English, this child’s
self-esteem should not have to withstand teacher
condemnation. I am not in favor of our children
speaking Black English, but the self-esteem of the
child should not be harmed when the transfer is
made from Black to Standard English. White female
teachers interacting with Black students for the first
time need to understand and appreciate this new
culture - Black English, rappin, slang, soul, blues,
jazz, rhythm, Black dress, food, Black standards of
beauty, and holistic learning styles. How can you
teach a child you do not understand or respect?
Black, Hispanic and White children are culturally
different, but not culturally disadvantaged, unless the


--- PAGE 110 ---
different, but not culturally disadvantaged, unless the
definer is culturally arrogant.
Let’s now look at some of the traits of African
American male culture:
 
Teachers who have a healthy respect for Black
male culture developed their appreciation in
childhood. For those teachers who were not similarly
blessed, college education departments should offer
courses on understanding male culture. I am not
suggesting that a course is not also needed for
female culture, but I am advocating that in this
country where a disproportionate number of females
are teaching a large number of boys who are not
reaching set academic standards, this course is
essential. The issue of male culture transcends race:
White and Hispanic boys are also known for their
ego, aggression, athletic orientation,
noncommunication and risk taking.
The rate of progress of the members of these
three groups is directly influenced by institutional
racism and teachers’ ability to understand these
cultures. Hispanic males have the highest dropout
rate, which is attributed to the language barrier and
the strict gender role expectation of being the
family’s provider regardless of age. Black males
disproportionately lead in special education
placements, suspensions, and athletic scholarships.
(The latter will be curtailed with NCAA rules 48, 42,
16, and 14.) White males also suffer from a female-
run classroom, but when placed in special education
rather than EMR, they are usually classified learning
disabled (LD), where the curriculum and teacher’s
expectations remains challenging. White males


--- PAGE 111 ---
need only to finish, high school to exceed the income
levels of all other groups with college degrees. My
concern remains for Black and Hispanic males who
are not as fortunate. That’s why Lerone Bennett,
executive editor of 
Ebony Magazine
 and author
says, “The question of education for Black people in
America is a question of life and death. It is a
political question, a question of power. Struggle is a
form of education, perhaps the highest form.”
3
Let’s now combine the Black culture of language,
music, food, dress, religion and learning style with
the male culture, which consists of ego, aggression,
athletics, noncommunication and risk taking. The
synthesis should provide a reasonable view of Black
male culture. Black male culture encompasses all
e.g., the characteristics of male culture and Black
culture with one important exception - religion. Large
numbers of Black boys think the church is for women
and sissies.
Expressions of this synthesis are rap music or the
lines men give women, “dozens” (signifyin’), “the
walk” (the leaning of the head with a cap and a
tremendous regard for the peer group. (Other
classroom characteristics will be provided in chapter
eight on curriculum.) Female teachers must
understand that Black boys value their peers, their
walk, rap and signifyin’ more than anything else.
Teachers are not going to sway these boys to their
way of thinking with a condemnation of things the
boys value. Many female teachers are not aware of
the value system Black boys hold dear. College
education departments don’t teach the importance
of these things. Not only that, there are many of us
who grew up in the culture but express disdain and
condescension for it. Please do not think that
condemnation will sap a boy’s desire to value his
culture expressions. Condemnation may instead
cause him to defend these expressions.
I am not condoning the dozens, or any other
negative facet of Black male culture, but if we want to
save Black boys, we must transfer their cultural
strengths into the classroom experience. This
chapter is designed to familiarize teachers with
Black male culture. Chapter eight will attempt to


--- PAGE 112 ---
show how these cultural patterns can be integrated
into the curriculum to maximize student achievement.
A group acceptance will take this into consideration
when making public admonishments. For example,
there is one characteristic that is the most
misunderstood and causes Black boys to be
suspended or placed in EMR and BD classes. It’s
the “dozens.”
The dozens is an activity primarily performed by
males, in which usually two opponents dual verbally.
They make derogatory comments about each other
and each other’s family members, usually the
mother. The performance of each player is
appreciated and judged by the group who urges
them on. This is called a manhood rite because it
serves an important function. The boy must master
several important competencies in order to be a
good player. First of all, he must control his
emotions. Here in the presence of his friends, terribly
derogatory statements are made about his mother,
who is dear to him. He must suppress his emotional
reaction to what has been said so that he can think
quickly and counter with an even more clever slur
upon his opponent’s mother. Unfortunately, when
Black male children volley verbally in an aggressive,
threatening manner, some teacher’s misunderstand
and interpret their behavior as fighting, when actually
they were signifyin’ to relieve tension and 
avoid
 a
fight. Large numbers of Black males are labeled as
having disciplinary problems or being EMR, and are
often suspended because of the dozens or signifyin.’
People who do not understand Black culture take
words of this rite literally. When Black parents tell
their children, “I’m going to knock you into the middle
of next week,” the phrase needs to be tempered with
a Black cultural perspective.


--- PAGE 113 ---
When Black male children volley verbally in an
aggressive manner, some teachers don’t
understand.
 
An important component of both Black culture and
Black male culture is the oral tradition. Principals
express disappointment in men when only a few
parents attend the PTA meeting, although hundreds
of notices were sent out. My experience has been
that institutions like Head Start, with a parent
coordinator staff and a principal who personally
solicits PTA attendees, receive a far greater
response. For Black boys, the ability to rap, e.g.,
rhyme, to influence a girlfriend, mother, and, if
possible, the teacher, is valued because they come
from a strong oral tradition. In chapter eight, I will
discuss how the walk, the tilted head and the hat
affect the learning process.
Ten-year-old Renee has light skin, “good” hair,
“keen” features, and “pretty” eyes. She wears nice
lace dresses with a ribbon in her hair daily. She is
slightly shy, but has a radiant smile that she flashes


--- PAGE 114 ---
slightly shy, but has a radiant smile that she flashes
when complimented.
Willie is also ten, but is big for his age. He has
dark skin, short “nappy” hair, and “broad” features.
Willie wears the same jeans to school everyday for
one week, but only wears the shirt twice. He talks
loudly and shows off in front of his friends. His arms
are often crossed defiantly. Are your expectations
the same for both students? What do you feel when
a 10-year-old Black boy folds his arms and looks
you directly in the eye?
When a Black boy looks at the female teacher with
a look of defiance, I call this the “showdown”
between female teachers and Black boys. If the
dozens did not exclude him from the mainstream, in
most instances the showdown would. Black boys
could avoid this confrontation if they looked and
acted like Renee. Black males unfortunately are not
always interested in being cooperative, quiet and
dainty. Female teachers could avoid this exhibition if
they would come out of themselves and appreciate
Willie for what he represents. As we have asked
before, Why are we unable to maintain boys’
enthusiasm and achievement levels with each
passing year? There are numerous reasons for this
decline: less nurturance and physical activity; less
student questions and parental involvement; greater
influence by the peer group; more classroom
competition; more left-brain, analytical and task-
oriented learning; and fewer male teachers.
As boys grow tall, teachers are less able to use
their prior advantage of size to discipline them.
The showdown will not always match strength
against strength. Some female teachers are 
afraid
of Black boys. I do not believe you can teach a child
while afraid. This may be the reason why only 45
percent of all secondary teachers are women. Male
teachers can be found in high schools, and possibly
in upper elementary grades. The problem is that we
are losing large numbers of Black boys before they
reach grades eight through twelve. (I have also
observed a very strong, effective teaching cadre in
alternative schools, GED and adult education.)
Principals continue to tell me that they must place
their stronger teachers in the upper grades. This is a


--- PAGE 115 ---
Band-Aid approach. How effective is this strategy
when we are losing students before they encounter
these “relief teachers”?
When a Black boy looks at the female teacher with
a look of defiance, many factors are at stake. How
do female teachers feel about themselves? How do
they feel about men? Where are they on the
continuum between “traditional” wife and “lesbian?”
What has their exposure been to Black culture? Do
they understand that our society is patriarchal?
When they see Willie, do they see a future Jesse
Jackson or a drug addict?
What is going on inside the Black boy at the
showdown? Is he trying to show off in front of his
friends? Is this one of the risks required for the rites
of passage? Has he learned that discipline is
associated with physical force, e.g., the belt, and
does he feel confident now that he is bigger and his
strength and size are in his favor? Does he really
want to be taught, loved, understood and given some
direction? Is he challenging the adult to e.g.,
determine if there is anyone capable of fulfilling his
needs?
When the showdown begins, these are some of
the potential outcomes:
1. The female teacher, out of emotional control,
hollers at the child. The class laughs. Willie
sits down slowly causing further disruption.
The class, Willie and probably the teacher
know Willie won this battle.
2. The female teacher responds inconsistently
to Willie’s behavior. He wins because she
has never reproved his negative behavior in
the past. If her response is unassertive, he
also wins.
3. The female teacher sends Willie downstairs
to the principal’s office. Probable actions
include suspension, EMR placement and
eventual expulsion. Willie wins against the
female teacher because she was incapable
of handling the situation herself. He may still
lose to the principal or special education
teacher.


--- PAGE 116 ---
4. The female teacher sends Willie to the comer
or outside the classroom door. This
showdown is a draw; the battle has been
delayed indefinitely.
5. The female teacher assertively and
consistently tells Willie to go to his seat and
he complies. The female teacher wins all
encounters.
 
The showdown is a battle of physical, emotional
and intellectual strength, and adults cannot win
without leverage. Many homes use the belt as the
leverage. A major problem for schools occurs when
children only respect physical punishment, not
assertive communication, behavior modification and
denial of priviledges. Coaches are effective
because they use uniforms, letters, game
participation, trophies, scholarships and potential
stardom as leverage. Teachers can possibly use
grades, but this is ineffective if not reinforced in the
home and if the students do not see the effect of
good grades on their future place in society. The only
other leverage a teacher (Black, White, male or
female) has is when you exclude the belt, NBA,
grades and jobs is the best combination of love,
cultural understanding and mutual respect.
The following chapter will explore this in providing
a congruent pedagogy and curriculum for African
American males.


--- PAGE 117 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
 
A Relevant Curriculum and Pedagogy for
Black Boys
 
I keep asking myself, “What kind of curriculum and
pedagogy can we develop to maximize Black boys’
potential?” Most formal workshops have not
uncovered the answer to this research question
because of institutional resistance to altering
curriculae or teaching styles for the purpose of
meeting the needs of Black children, specifically
boys. I optimistically believe that most teachers
would like to reach Black boys rather than place
them in special education or on suspension, so I
developed a workshop where participants can share
ideas and successful lesson plans.
Unfortunately, there are teachers who teach with
the attitude, “I got mine and you’ve got yours to get.”
Many teachers teach the way they were taught as
children. They ask, “Why should I have to change the
way I teach for Black boys?” In the Effective Schools
Project, Ron Edmonds noted that in schools with low
achievement, the most negative room in the school
is the teachers’ cafeteria. The room is filled with
condescending negative comments about the futility
of teaching “these children.” Effective schools have a
positive learning climate that does not allow this
attitude to permeate its facility.
1
Piaget says, “Instructors teach their subjects, but
teachers understand how children learn.” This idea
helps us further understand the fourth-grade
syndrome. As children move into the upper grades
and high school, less concern is allocated to the
student, and more attention is given to the subject
matter. High school teachers will quickly inform you,
“I am a geometry teacher” — not a teacher of
children. Who cares that the student may be lacking
in self-esteem, motivation or reading comprehension
skills?
I open all my teacher workshops declaring “You


--- PAGE 118 ---
cannot teach a child you do not love. You cannot
teach a child you do not respect. You cannot teach a
child you do not understand. You cannot teacher a
child you fear. You cannot teach a child before
discarding your political baggage, e.g., sexism and
racism.” (How many teachers do you know that have
the ability to keep their past experiences about
racism and sexism outside the classroom door?)
You cannot teach a child without bonding with him
first. To bond, you must have love, respect and
understanding.
When you teach Black boys, what do you see? A
future engineer, doctor, accountant? Or do you see a
drug dealer? Whatever you see will be what you
produce. Do you have the same expectations for
Black boys as cooperative girls? Research has
shown that expectations are a major factor in student
achievement. The problem is that often within the
same classroom, teachers have different levels of
expectation. The Teacher Expectations Student
Achievement (TESA) model is an excellent tool to
evaluate consistency. The model is divided into
three separate categories for observation:
 
Can you honestly say that in each category and to
the fourth degree you provide each child with the
same level of expectations? Studies show that
teachers give girls 3.2 seconds to respond to a
question versus 2.7 for boys. The gap widens for
Black girls and boys and becomes progressively
wider over the school year.
2
The critical question remains: What kind of
curriculum and pedagogy can we develop to
maximize Black boys’ potential? I believe this


--- PAGE 119 ---
question has been answered in numerous articles by
A. W. Boykin, Henry Morgan and Na’im Akbar.
Janice Hale, Paulo Friere, James Banks and
William Glasser have also contributed important
information to this research. My favorite piece on this
subject was written by Asa Hilliard of the Council of
Independent Black Institutions (CIBI) and the Cultural
Linguistic Approach (CLA). Listed below are a few
salient salient ideas Hilliard offers:
 
The School
 
Many psychologists connect this model to the


--- PAGE 120 ---
split-brain theory. The brain is divided into two
apparently symmetrical parts. The left side of the
brain is analytical, divides things into sections, and
specializes in the functions of math and science. The
right hemisphere is holistic and relational and
appreciates music, art, dance and sports. Returning
to Piaget’s comment about instructors and teachers,
do we ignore the strength of Black children who
process information on the right side of the brain?
One factor of the fourth-grade failure syndrome is
that with each grade level a more left-brain
curriculum is implemented. A most graphic
illustration of this is the large number of college
graduates who draw on a primary level. The
curriculum of most schools ignores most forms of
learning other than the written word.
I offer five forms of instruction: written, oral,
pictures, artifacts and fine arts.
The last four emphasize the right side of the brain.
I am not suggesting that we should exclude the left
hemisphere or analytical learning; that would be just
as harmful as the present situation which excludes
right-brain, relational learning. I’m advocating all five
forms of instruction to help more children to grasp
concepts. The following examples are offered:
1. Two students are learning to dance, one with
a left-brain analytical approach, the other with
a right-brain relational approach. The first
child goes to a dance studio and follows the
floor chart until he succeeds. The second
student goes to a disco, observes for a
period of time, then gets on the dance floor
and does his/her “own thing.” Which
approach is correct?
2. The teacher announces she will give 100
points in extra credit for additional reading,
75 points for an oral presentation, and 10
points for an illustration. Is this evaluation fair
to all learners?
3. Teachers can assign students to:
a. Read and write the definitions.
b. Read the definition and trace the
picture.


--- PAGE 121 ---
c. Read the definition and create your
own image.
 
Which exercise encompasses both analytical
and relational learning?
4. Children know that 6 x 3 = 18, but in a word
problem they don’t know when to use
multiplication.
 
Example number four has several pedagogical
and cognitive points that require illumination. The
analytical learner who breaks an operation into parts
is more comfortable separating a skill from its use.
The relational learner needs to be given the
objective before the skill is taught. An increasing
number of students, including analytical thinkers, are
lacking motivation because they don’t see the
relevance of the lesson. It concerns me that Black
boys are labeled slow learners in the classroom and
yet on the streets and in the military, they understand
math and science applications very well.
How can a brother fail Math in school and yet,
without pencil, paper or calculator, tell each one of
his friends what he will pay for a bottle of Wild Irish
Rose? Is it because the street curriculum is real and
one mistake could be costly or deadly? Did the
motivation to learn come before or after the skill?
Military training is another excellent example of
blending theory with practice, analytical with
relational.
The military provides an overview of its objectives,
followed by theoretical readings, and finally
demonstrations on the actual equipment. Again,
many Black boys that were placed in EMR and on
suspension do very well in the military. (I am not
overlooking institutional racism evident from the
disproportionately high number of Black men on the
front line as compared to behind the line where
technicians and officers fulfill their imperialistic
objectives.) A sound educational plan shows the
need first and encourages questions.
Another component of the fourth-grade failure
syndrome is the inverse relationship between age
and questions. What is it about our pedagogy that
produces unmotivated students who sit for long


--- PAGE 122 ---
periods of time without asking questions? A
comprehensive multicultural pedagogy uses a
variety of lesson plans and evaluation instruments.
The military not only teaches its students through
reading, films and objects but also evaluates
learning in written and oral tests and in field
demonstrations.
The Cultural Linguistic Approach (a university
curriculum research firm) based its educational
curriculum in social studies, mathematics, science
and language arts called USISPU:
U
 - Unstructured Elicitation 
S
 - Structured Elicitation 
I
 - Interim 
S
 - Structured Elicitation 
P
 - Practice 
U
 - Unstructured Elicitation


--- PAGE 123 ---
A sample lesson plan
 
Concept:
 All people are alike and different in many
ways.
Performance:
 The child will be able to identify
people who are similar to him in the dimensions of
race, sex and age.
Materials:
 Pictures — Black ABC’s
Filmstrips — 
Getting to Know Me
 
Books — 
Colors Around Me
Procedure:
 Motivation — Teacher shows the class
various pictures of Black children.
U-
 Tell me everything you can about this picture.
(The objective is to use Black children’s oral
strength and cultural heritage to stimulate further
cognition.)
S-
 Tell me what color skin this child has.
Tell me what color the child’s eyes are. 
Tell me something about the child’s hair.
I-
 Class, these are pictures of Black children.
Why do we call them Black children? How many
of us think these children look like you?
There are lots of skin colors that little
Black children have.
Have them draw a picture of themselves.
 
S-
 Tell me what color skin this child has.
Tell me what color his eyes are. 
Tell me something about this child’s hair.
P-
 My name is ___________________
I am _____ years old. 
My eyes are ________. 
My hair is ________. 
I belong to the _______________ race. 
I am a _______ (boy/girl).
U-
 Tell me everything you can about this picture.
 
This sample lesson plan would benefit Black
children and all other children who have a relational
orientation. In my workshops I often ask female
teachers, “What are some of the differences


--- PAGE 124 ---
between boys and girls in the classroom?” If we
accept Piaget’s contention about instructors and
teachers, we must determine commonly observed
male classroom characteristics in contrast to female
characteristics, and then create a curriculum that will
compliment it. The following list reflects
brainstorming sessions I have had with teachers
from across the country.


--- PAGE 125 ---
Male Classroom Characteristics
 
Aggressive 
Athletic 
Shorter attention span 
Slower maturation rate 
Less cooperative 
Larger in size 
Influenced more by peer group 
Greater interest in math than reading 
Gross motor skills greater than fine motor skills 
Interested in fine arts 
Not as neat 
Louder 
Prefer hats 
Distinct walk 
Larger and more sensitive ego 
Signifying/dozens/rapping
 
I again want to return to the research question:
What kind of curriculum and pedagogy can we
develop to maximize Black boys’ potential? Please
review the male classroom characteristics. What
curriculum changes or teaching styles should be
altered within the context of these factors? I would
like to isolate (1) shorter attention span, (2) greater
influence of peer-group, (3) greater interest in math
than in reading, (4) more advanced in gross versus
fine motor skills, (5) keen interest in fine arts, (6)
larger and more sensitive ego and (7) playing the
dozens.


--- PAGE 126 ---
(1) Short attention span
 
Larger numbers of Black boys are put in special
education because they are “hyperactive.” This word
is filled with value judgments and complexities.
Hyper
 has to be based on a norm, which in America
is White. Psychologists such as Garber, Boykin, and
Wilson document the higher vibrancy, capital and
verve that Black children bring into this world, which
are reinforced in a highly stimulating home and
street environment.
Black children with greater verve are often bored
with 
Mr. Rogers
 and love 
Sesame Street.
Unfortunately, the classroom is paced like 
Mr.
Rogers
. Black children, especially Black boys, may
not be hyperactive but alternatively perhaps the
curriculum is too slow. I suggest that the pace of
classes be set fairly for everyone, not just whites or
females who may be comfortable with 
Mr
. 
Rogers’
pace. I suggest that lectures, readings and individual
tasks be shortened, and that more group projects
and movement to hands-on learning centers be
incorporated. If geometry, history, physics and
English teachers can’t provide hands-on
experiences like the military, then the lack of
motivation, best expressed by poor grades,
boredom and cheating, will continue. I would also
suggest that Black parents reduce their children’s
sugar in-take and television viewing and lead
meditation exercises.


--- PAGE 127 ---
(2) The peer group
 
A teacher who is sensitive and respectful of the
culture will not embarrass a child in front of the highly
valued peer group. In one of my classes I asked the
students, “How do you stay cool with your friends?”
Almost all of them said by breaking the rules and by
getting poor grades. I also asked them about things
they wanted to improve — career goals, etc. — and
they all invariably had high ambitions and wanted to
do well. How can they individually want to do right,
but collectively want to do wrong? How can a child
act one way by himself and be totally different in front
of his friends? (That reminds me of the cowardly
KKK member who hides behind sheets and the
street gang member who hides behind his
identifiers. They are both afraid of one-on-one
confrontations, but thrive on participating in gang
beatings.)
I see the peer group as one of my competitors, but
I also respect its influence. Unless children have
strong self-esteem as well as peer esteem we will
not be able to strip the peer group of its power. The
best way to approach the peer group is through
reprogramming, not elimination. The session titled
Unity/Criticism/Unity (U/C/U), which I describe in
detail in my book 
Developing Positive Self-Images
and Discipline in Black Children
 attempts, with
adult direction, to let the peer group mediate conflict.
We have to find ways to reprogram the male peer
group to believe that being smart is being cool.


--- PAGE 128 ---
(3) Interest in math than in reading
 
In a left-brain oriented curriculum, subjects are
taught in isolation from each other. Reading and
writing, reading and science, reading and math, art
and math, etc., are taught separately. A more
interdisciplinary approach is called for. There needs
to be an avalanche of word problems infused into the
math curriculum. Please remember, because of
Black children’s oral orientation, they should be
encouraged to explain their operations at the board.
Problems in reading are a result of the movement
in recent years away from phonics, the increase in
television viewing and the lack of relevant books for
Black children in the classroom. Reading comes
before skill applications, and a relevant curriculum
would provide Black children books that describe
their cultural experiences.


--- PAGE 129 ---
(4) Advanced in gross motor skills
 
Large numbers of Black boys enter the primary
division behind girls in fine motor functions. Homes
that supply boys exclusively with trucks and balls do
not help their sons on school projects that
accentuate pencils, crayons and scissors. Teachers
should not only be aware of the double standards at
home but should give boys more time on fine motor
functions without valuing one over the other. Black
boys simply have had less exposure to toys or other
instruments that might encourage fine motor skills.
The statement that boys maturation rate is slow is
too simplistic and does not account for the
nature/nurture relationship. Please understand that
these same clumsy boys could become excellent
brain surgeons. Learning centers need to build both
skills, with teachers evaluating boys and girls
equally. Fill your classroom with science projects,
animals and plants.


--- PAGE 130 ---
(5) Keen interest in fine arts
 
I suggest that every concept presented in the
classroom should include readings, oral
presentations, pictures, artifacts and 
arts.
 Black
boys often express their cognition and sensitivity
through art. Black boys often learn a speech or story
better through music than a book. A person who
chooses to teach Black children without music or art
is an instructor, not a teacher. Fine arts and the oral
tradition are two cornerstones of Black culture. Thus,
an excellent lesson plan might culminate every unit
with a play. Does it really matter if students express
their understanding on paper, orally, with a portrait,
an object or dramatically?


--- PAGE 131 ---
(6) Large and sensitive egos
 
In a patriarchal society controlled by White men
and with very few Black male role models available,
Black boys don’t know how to express their male
ego. Creative teachers not only must teach boys to
differentiate between battles and wars but they also
must find ways for boys’ leadership abilities to be
expressed. This will not happen with female teachers
who bring their political baggage into the classroom.
Suggestions include:
a. Encourage boys to be the Master of
Ceremonies in assemblies.
b. Encourage boys to be captains of learning
centers and academic teams.
c. Designate the most aggressive boys as
classroom monitors.
d. Encourage boys to read aloud and go to the
board.


--- PAGE 132 ---
(7) Playing the dozens, signifying and rapping
 
In chapter 7 the dozens were explained. In this
section we will look at how this skill can be
transferred into the classroom. When I see a Black
boy demonstrate the ability to play the dozens or
signify, I see a person who:
a. has quick thinking skills.
b. understands rhyme.
c. is expanding his vocabulary.
d. has public speaking potential.
 
This can be used in debate, language arts, poetry,
spelling bees, drama, etc. I would stop every game
of the dozens and turn it into:
a. a spelling bee.
b. a debate, and I choose the topic.
c. a word game where I say a word and we see
how many other rhyming words can be given.
The winner is the one who lasts the longest.
d. a dramatic presentation.
e. a game called “Nightline” where I let them
discuss issues in an investigative style.
 
I repeat, you cannot teach a child that you do not
understand or with whom you have not bonded. I
would not accept the dozens in my classroom, but I
understand it
. And I let the boys know how good they
are and that 
these skills
 can be transferred into
other areas. As a teacher who understands the
culture of the students that I teach, I use its strengths,
not mine, to answer the question, “What kind of
curriculum and pedagogy can we develop to
maximize Black boys’ potential?”
The next chapter will illustrate adolescence and
the African American male’s quest for a high school
diploma. 
3
4
5


--- PAGE 133 ---
Adolescene will reflect how well we’ve done our job.


--- PAGE 134 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
 
Adolescence. Diploma and Entropy
 
“I don’t even recognize my son. Does he love me?
I think he shows me. I’m not going to ever have
children again. Something happens to them when
they become thirteen. They must all take some pill or
drug or go to another planet called teenageville.
When he was in second grade he used to run home
from school and tell me about his spelling grades. I
used to love it when he called me mama. He could
always get whatever he wanted from me when he
said, ‘Mama, I love you.’ But last night, I asked him
where he was going and when he would be coming
back. He looked at me, then he looked through me,
and for a moment, I was afraid of him. It was as if my
17-year-old son had never come out of me.”
These are just some of the comments from
parents, especially mothers, who are trying to figure
out how they are going to get through this next
development hurdle. Adolescence is a very trying
period, especially for sons and their mothers. It’s
also a challenging time for larger communities. We
adults have relinquished control of our communities
to teenage males, ages 13 to 18. Young, angry male
predators have made us all, women, elders, even
men, afraid to walk our own streets at night. This age
group has forced schools to consider whether or not
they should have guards or metal detectors at every
door. Teachers are now more concerned about
safety than education, and students are often afraid
to walk to school.
This sad state of affairs brings us to the mother-
son relationship. Many parents want a buddy-to-
buddy relationship with their children, to be on a first-
name basis, to hang out. Boys often treat their
mothers like girlfriends or some other girl to try a line
out on. Many boys learn how to manipulate their
mothers out of doing chores, homework and other
responsibilities. For example, they tell me they have


--- PAGE 135 ---
eight times to empty the garbage: seven times to
listen to their mothers’ nagging, and one time to do it
when she becomes very assertive and clear.
In chapter five I wrote about some mothers who
raise
 their daughters and 
love
 their sons. They teach
their daughters to study, cook and sew. They make
them attend church and they expose them to other
educational and cultural programs. These activities
are optional for their sons. One of the major
difficulties that youth workers struggle with is the lack
of support they receive from parents with older boys.
During earlier developmental stages, parents are
more supportive in mandating their children’s
attendance in constructive programs. For some
reason, parents who become buddies with their
older sons allow them to decide whether they should
go to church, attend an extra tutorial session or
participate in extracurricular activities.
In 
To Be Popular or Smart: The Black Peer
Group,
 I suggested the need for parents to organize
a parental support group so that the mothers can
openly discuss their teenage children, primarily their
boys. Many parents are responding to difficult
situations individually and feel isolated from the
larger community. Just knowing that you’re not alone
is consoling. I’m optimistic that not only can we
provide a bond for each other but solutions as well.
This period of adolescence is when the larger
society begins to acknowledge the male shortage. It
has been brought to my attention by the staff
members of one high school that the junior and
senior proms are not always attended by both males
and females and that larger numbers of females now
go unescorted to the prom. I was stunned when I
heard this. I just couldn’t comprehend that girls would
go to the prom without a date. Apparently the girls
chose to attend because the alternative would be to
miss a very memorable experience in their lives. I
was aware that girls often don’t go to the prom with
someone from their own class, but the fact that they
are unable to find a male in the immediate vicinity
illustrates the magnitude of this problem.
In large urban areas, the dropout rate hovers near
50 percent, and in a few cities the percentage is


--- PAGE 136 ---
greater. The reasons for the high dropout rate are
boredom, lack of finances, lack of rewarding
experiences in school, lack of positive adult
reinforcement and lack of safety. Our boys are
extremely bored with the irrelevant curriculum
presented in conjunction with low teacher
expectations.
Schools are giving children a 1910 curriculum in
the 1990s. I spoke to a group of teachers in New
York who insisted that Black boys were not good in
math. One of them had to admit, however, that they
were great at working with metrics. She wondered
why. When Black boys hear terms like kilos and
grams, their interest peaks because they finally see
the relevance of the classroom to the streets.
I enjoy speaking to all groups — students, parents
and teachers — but the group that gives me the
greatest satisfaction is adolescent boys. Schools
often tell me they are undisciplined, disrespectful
and have short attention spans. So educators are
amazed to see their boys respond so well to my
talks. I tell them that my success at bonding with
these students is due to my relationship with God; I
tell them the truth, and they know it comes from their
brother who loves them. What I like about our youth
is that they’re honest. They will tell you exactly how
they feel. When they hear the truth from someone
who cares about them, they are disciplined and
respectful.
We have to improve our curriculum by making it
multicultural, Africentric and relevant. It is surprising
how a simple change in the curriculum can reduce
the dropout rate and improve attendance. You
cannot separate the curriculum from the
disseminator; they are part of the same package.
There are three kinds of adults in our classrooms:
instructors, teachers and coaches. Instructors
specialize in dispensing information. Many of them
will tell you they teach geometry, physics or english.
Instructors don’t teach 
children
, they teach their
subjects.
 Instructors are people that desire to be
college professors. Teachers on the other hand,
understand their subjects and can accommodate a
variety of learning styles. Coaches have the ability to


--- PAGE 137 ---
combine subject matter and learning styles with
identity and self-esteem.
Unfortunately, from the fourth grade on we have
too many instructors teaching our youth. Most African
American boys require coaches that understand
content, learning styles and self-esteem. We need
coaches, not instructors, to teach our students.
It has been rewarding visiting high schools where
many of my friends are coaches. They almost single-
handedly decreased the dropout rate because of the
bond that they share with the students. The students
do not want to disappoint the coach. One committed
coach in the lives of our children can make the
difference.
My concern is that coaches burn out faster than
instructors. Coaches give more and are in the
minority. Instructors, who are the majority, give less
and are often found in the teacher’s lounge
condemning our youth; they seldom burn out. We
need strong administrators who will find creative
ways to keep our coaches inspired and hold
instructors accountable.
The high dropout rate is also a result of the
disproportionate number of Black males that are
suspended. African American males are eight
percent of public school students nationwide but
constitute 37 percent of the suspensions. Numerous
studies indicate that African Americans are
suspended for infractions, while other students
receive warnings for the same violations. African
American males that have been suspended for many
days risk not matriculating due to unfulfilled
attendance requirements.
My travels have taken me to school districts where
a major difference exists in the suspension rates
between high schools that have similar
demographics. Why is it that one high school with an
effective administrator, a committed staff and clearly
stated guidelines, can have a much lower
suspension rate than another school? We can’t
afford to lose African American boys to ineffective
schools or have them fail due to suspension. For
these reasons, I’m also in favor of in-house
suspension. In this way, the violation will be served,


--- PAGE 138 ---
but attendance will be maintained. My staff at African
American Images has designed the Malcolm X room
to provide an educational and cultural experience for
infractions. Trained staff provide resource materials
and a program similar to Scared Straight. The
Autobiography of Malcolm X is required reading for
staff and students. My only hesitancy is that students
may choose to be suspended to take advantage of
this cultural experience.
It was going to be a big day in the Taylor house,
for today, their son Marlon was graduating from high
school. It was nearing 7 p.m. and the limousine was
waiting outside for the Taylor clan. It had been a very
special year for Marlon. He had attended the senior
prom in the same limousine. It was a beautiful white
Lincoln stretch with large whitewall tires, a TV, VCR,
CD player and telephone. The Taylor family was very
proud of their son. He had achieved what his parents
had been unable to achieve because of
circumstances beyond their control. Family
members from around the state had traveled to
participate in this very special occasion. Some of
the family went straight to school, but others came to
the house for pre-graduation pictures with alterior
hopes of riding in the limousine. Marlon was upstairs
putting on his white suit jacket (that coincidentally
matched the limousine) and combing his hair for the
twenty-seventh time. Everything seemed to be in
place. The whole family looked forward to the
glorious occasion just one hour away.
When Marlon walked down the stairs, you would
have thought that someone was announcing
Mandela from South Africa or Clinton from the
United States. That is exactly how Marlon felt, and
that is how the Taylor family received him. Thank
God they rented a stretch limousine because there
were eleven people that rode in it from the Taylor
house to Frederick Douglass High School. The
family had much to be proud of. Four years ago,
there had been 300 entering freshman students, 150
male and 150 female. Four years later, there were
only 200 students graduating, 125 females and 75
males, and Marlon Taylor was one of them.
When they arrived at the high school, they took


--- PAGE 139 ---
more pictures. The Taylor family was not by itself in
laying out the red carpet for their children; this was a
big occasion for most Black families in this city. After
an additional fifteen minutes of picture taking, the
Taylor family entered the auditorium and tried to get
seats close to the front. Marlon went into the room
with his graduating class. The principal, Mrs.
Roberts, the assistant principal, Mr. Johnson and the
teachers were assisting students with their caps and
gowns. Marlon was teasing some of the sisters and
playing with the brothers and everybody was in a
warm and jovial spirit. The organist walked in and
began giving the students the signal for the
procession. They lined up, first by divisions and
second by height.
“I now introduce to you the Douglass Class of
1994.”
There was a deafening roar from the crowd and a
standing ovation as two hundred proud African
American students walked down the aisle. The
graduation exercise included the Pledge of
Allegiance, “Life Every Voice and Sing” and an
opening prayer. There were several songs, a
welcoming address and a speech by the
valedictorian and the salutatorian. After the special
guest speaker, Mrs. Roberts came to the
microphone and said, “And now the moment we
have been waiting for. We now present the
graduates. We ask that parents hold their applause
until all graduates have received their diplomas.”
The students giggled knowing that this request
always went overlooked by the parents. The students
expected that when they received their diplomas,
their parents would take pictures and applaud for
each of them. Every year it became a popularity
contest of which graduate would receive the most
applause; the winner would probably be the one who
secured more than the four tickets allocated for each
child. The Taylor family had 26 people present.
Marlon had been used to waiting for his name to be
called. He often wished his name was Marlon Allen
or something starting with an A or a B so that his
name could be called first. Oh well, he had waited
four years, so 20 additional minutes wouldn’t be


--- PAGE 140 ---
catastrophic.
Finally, they concluded the S names and they
move to the T,s. Marlon was the first T to be called.
There was a thunderous roar from the crowd. Four
family members were down in front taking pictures.
A gift-wrapped box was also given to him as he
receives his diploma. Mrs. Sanders, one of the
teachers, had to wisk Marlon down the stage
because he was blocking traffic for the next graduate
as he posed for more pictures. Marlon went back to
his seat with a grin all over his face that said, I HAVE
DONE IT! He was now a high school graduate. He
had the diploma in his hands. He had a gift in his
hand to remind him. He had 26 people in the
audience who loved him. He had a Lincoln stretch
limousine waiting outside for him. He had the world
at the tip of his fingers. He had his future in front of
him. Marlon didn’t remember what happened from
that point on. He didn’t know when the program
ended.
He can’t even remember when the graduates
walked out. As they took their robes off, many of the
students began to realize this might be the last time
that they were going to see each other. Some were
going to college, others to the military and some
were going to look for employment. Marlon was so
happy to have graduated from high school that
neither he nor his family had thought about what he
would do after graduation. He had plenty of time
during the summer, he guessed, to figure that out.
Many of the students said that they would stay in
touch; maybe we’ll get together for an annual picnic.
Marlon ran out of the auditorium to spend the rest of
the night with his family.
They had dinner reservations at one of the finest
restaurants in town, and Marlon was going to enjoy
riding in a limousine. This restaurant was primarily
frequented by Whites and Blacks that were middle
class, but tonight they were middle class and they
had a reservation for twenty-six. Marlon couldn’t
remember a night as enjoyable as this. He enjoyed
the ambience of the restaurant. He said, “This is the
kind of life-style that I want for the rest of my life.”
Dinner concluded and the drive home was very


--- PAGE 141 ---
festive. At 11:30 p.m. they arrived back at the Taylor
house.
Everybody seemed pretty exhausted.
Mrs. Taylor walked into Marlon’s room where he
was lying on his back on the bed. She kissed him on
the cheek and said, “I am very proud of you, my son.”
Marlon said, “Thank you, Mom. Thanks for being
there all the times that I needed you.”
When he woke up the following morning, he
looked at his diploma and began wondering what he
was going to do with the rest of his life. He asked
himself, “What can I do with this diploma? Am I now
an honorary citizen in the city? Will this diploma allow
me to secure employment and take care of my
family? Will this diploma get me a business?” He
continued to look at the wall and wondered why
today felt so different from yesterday. He wished that
yesterday had never ended. He thought about all of
his friends that entered high school with him as
freshmen — some were dead, others were in jail,
some were hanging out on corners selling drugs,
others were working as stock clerks and a few were
working at fast-food chains. He wondered, “Will my
future be any different from theirs?” They wanted him
to drop out of school, but he always knew that he
was going to finish. He and his mother exchanged
promises that if he graduated, she would provide
him with a special night that he would never forget.
Now he doesn’t want to forget it. He wants it to
return, but it is no longer Sunday evening. It is now
Monday morning. It is now Monday morning for an
18-year-old African American male with a high
school diploma and nowhere to go.
There are thousands of Marlons around the
country. There are thousand of African American
males who are not incarcerated, who graduated
from high school but have no future. For a myriad of
reasons, college was not their first choice after
graduation. For many, they needed to be convinced
that there was an economic payoff to education.
Many African American males have an attitude of,
“Why don’t I get this high school diploma and see
what I can earn with it before I make an additional
investment in college?” Many African American


--- PAGE 142 ---
males know that a White boy with a high school
diploma will earn more income than anyone else in
America with a college degree. Most African
American males are tired of a curriculum that is
based on inaccurate information and irrelevant
materials that are not applicable to their
neighborhoods. Many are still wondering whether
Columbus really did discover America. Did
Abraham Lincoln really free the slaves? Regardless
of whether it is true or not, what difference does it
make if you live in the inner city of America?
For other African American males, they knew
college was not financially feasible because their
parents could not afford it and the government
prefered paying for inmates rather than graduates.
The joke on the streets was, commit a crime, go to
jail, and while in jail, secure a college degree at the
government’s expense. A Black man has a much
greater chance of getting an education in prison than
from most American universities. Many African
American males knew that their GPA and test
scores were not high enough for acceptance.
Later in the week, Marlon began to write down the
names of as many brothers that he could remember
that entered with him four years ago as freshman,
Next to the names of 75 brothers that graduated with
him he wrote exactly what they were doing.
Of the seventy-five dropouts:
 
fifteen died,
fifteen were in prison,
fifteen were selling drugs,
fifteen were working in fast-food chains,
fifteen were underemployed: working
sometimes, laid-off, and in between jobs.
 
Of the seventy-five graduates:
 
twenty-five were in the military, 
twenty-five went to college, 
twenty-five are
underemployed/unemployed/daydreaming.


--- PAGE 143 ---
Marlon giggled as he realized he was
daydreaming.
What does White America want African American
males to do after graduation? In Germany and
Japan, there are excellent apprentice programs.
Corporations sponsor these programs for the
portion of their populations that will not attend
college, because they are very important to their
economies. The incentive to graduate from high
school is economic stability for these Germans and
Japanese. The American system seems to require a
college degree. It is true that the American college
system is considered the best in the world. This is
borne out by the large numbers of immigrants that
secure visas to complete their college studies in
America. But for those who chose, for a multiplicity
of reasons, not to attend college, 66 percent of the
females and 74 percent of the males, being African
American, what does White America want African
Americans to do after high school graduation?
Does White American want African American
males to go to a community college? If they attended
or graduated from a community college, would they
be gainfully employed upon securing their
associate’s degree? Is the objective to enroll in a
community college and then go to a four-year
school? Does America provide more financial aid
for students after they secure their A.A. degree than
after their high school diploma? Does America want
African American male high school graduates to
become legal entrepreneurs? Are there programs in
African American communities to identify capital and
provide technical assistance for the development of
business plans? Does the American public school
system prepare African Americans to become
entrepreneurs? Is the American public school
curriculum designed for employees or for
employers? Does White America need African
Americans to apply at U.S. Steel, General Motors
and Goodyear Rubber, etc.? Does White America
want African American males to fly to Mexico and
South Korea and other parts of the world where
those plants now are and pay between 75 cents and
$2.38 per hour? Does White America want African


--- PAGE 144 ---
American males to work at fast-food chains, to clean
hotels and other large corporate offices?
A friend of mine was telling me he had relocated
from Los Angeles to Atlanta. His daughters were
amazed and pleased to see large numbers of
African Americans working in so many different
occupations. What they were referring to was basic
employment at restaurants, stores and hotels. Their
experience in Los Angeles had been that Latino
illegal aliens held most entry level positions and
were paid below minimum wage. Does White
America want African American male high school
graduates to wash dishes, clean cars and pump
gas? Those jobs have been replaced by microchips
and robotic technology. Every time my car is washed
at one of those automatic car washes, I still see
Richard Pryor and seven other brothers who were
working at the car wash. Each of those eight men
was able to visit a young lady after work, take her
out, and combining his meager wages with her
salary, consider marriage and a family. When I go
through the car wash now, I wonder, where those
eight brothers are?
As much as I appreciate advances in technology,
I’m still not convinced from an Africentric and
humanitarian perspective that it is the most
productive way to empower 250 million Americans. I
am not convinced we have made progress if a
factory which once employed a thousand people
now, with robots and other computer operated
machines, only employs 100 people. I am not
convinced that America has produced economic
options for the 900 “downsized” employees (Ujamaa
vs. capitalism). I am very much aware that my value
system is in conflict with theirs, because when they
laid off 900 people, they were not concerned about
what those people were going to do. Their only
interest was the bottom line. If it meant reducing the
labor force by means of automation or reducing the
cost of e.g., labor by exporting jobs overseas, it was
done.
If the value of humanity exceeds that of profit, then
before we replace them with a robot, we need to
provide options for the 900 laid-off employees. One


--- PAGE 145 ---
of the contradictions with capitalism is that when 900
people are replaced with a robot, while costs have
been reduced, robots don’t buy products — people
do. Who is going to buy their product? This forces
American corporations to find new markets for their
products.
Does White America want African Americans to
stand on corners? There are laws now in some cities
where if two or three people are gathered on a
corner they are considered loiterers and are subject
to fine or arrest. Does White America want African
Americans to make babies and stay home with their
children and receive welfare? Historically, welfare
laws were designed to discourage males from
staying at home. Does White America want African
American males to join gangs, sell drugs and have
access to guns to kill each other?
Marlon wants to know what does White America
wants him to do with the rest of his life. What is
America going to do with African American males
who have high school diplomas? Does America
have a need for them? Does America have a need
for African American males with college or graduate
degrees?
I remember watching Minister Louis Farrakhan, on
the Donahue show several years ago, and the issue
came up about the 700,000 African American males
in penal institutions and the $18,000 to $38,000 that
America spends annually, depending on the state, to
incarcerate each of these brothers. This money
comes primarily from middle-class taxpayers.
Farrakhan looked out at the audience and said, “You
know our track record. You know what Elijah
Muhammad did with Malcolm. You know what we
can do with these brothers. We can turn an addict
into a minister, a criminal into a security officer in a
housing development center. We can turn a brother
that has never worked into a brother that will sell
1000 newspapers, 500 bean pies and 200 pounds
of fish a week.” He looked out to the audience and
said, “White America, why don’t you give them to
us? You don’t want them. You don’t know what to do
with them. You are spending billions of dollars to
incarcerate them.” And then he smiled at them and


--- PAGE 146 ---
said, “And all we want is a couple of states.”
America doesn’t mind sending African Americans to
boot camp programs, but why won’t America give
these brothers to Minister Farrakhan and the Nation
of Islam? If the objective is to balance the budget,
wouldn’t it be cheaper to give him Georgia or
Alabama? What benefit does America gain in
paying $18,000 to $38,000 per person for 700,000
African Americans and the wasted productivity of the
Marlon Taylor’s, who are lying in bed or standing on
corners wondering what to do with the rest of their
lives?


--- PAGE 147 ---
Entropy and the Black Man’s
Predicament
 
There is a technological term, entropy, that relates
to human behavior. Entropy is when a system, void
of its essential maintenance resource, e.g., energy,
is deprived of the capacity to carry out its ascribed
function. At this juncture the unit begins to
disintegrate and ultimately dies. During this process,
the disintegrating unit causes havoc as it becomes
the hostile force, arbitrarily, capriciously and
spontaneously bombarding other units, quite often
causing damage and death to them before ultimately
succumbing itself. When I first learned of this term
and saw the parallel between what happens in
technology and sociology, I began to see what
happens in machines, where every machine part has
a purpose, and if the part cannot achieve its
purpose, then it will cause havoc for all other parts
surrounding it. Unfortunately, it is the same thing with
humans. Every human has a purpose, and if humans
are unable to achieve their purpose, they too will
cause havoc for all the other people around them.
The major purpose for men is to economically
provide for and protect their family. If men are not
allowed to provide for their family economically, they
will begin to cause havoc for all the other men
around them while simultaneously causing damage
to themselves. What does White America expect of
the 75 members of Marlon’s freshman class that did
not graduate? What does White America expect for
them to do? What does White America expect
Marlon to do if Marlon chooses not to go to college
or the military since there are no internship and
apprentice programs available? Can a man be a
man in America without income? Can an
unemployed man be a man in a patriarchal,
capitalistic, materialistic economy? The major
purpose for women is to give birth and nurture
children. This remains viable and feasible for
women.
The assumption that crime is based on need
would imply that the poorest people in America


--- PAGE 148 ---
would imply that the poorest people in America
should be more actively involved in crime. If that was
the case, then Black women should be committing
crime in greater numbers than anyone else. The
reality is there are in excess of 1.5 million African
American males that are in prison, while there are
less than 70,000 African American women, or 10
percent of that total. The myth that crime is based on
need could easily be dispelled with the reality that 80
percent of the crime in America is white collar crime
— computer embezzlement and savings and loan
scandals. A White male stockbroker embezzled $6
million and received a $5,500 fine. A Black male
who was unemployed stole a TV set and received
six years in jail. Crime is not based on need; crime
is based on greed or power. African American men
want the same power White men have. It is an
unfortunate relationship in America that for every 1
percent increase in male unemployment there is a
4.3 percent increase in wife abuse. Why should
these two factors, male unemployment and wife
abuse, be correlated? The reverse is not true. Every
one percent increase in female unemployment does
not precipitate an increase in male abuse. It is
obvious that the genders operate on two different
value systems.
My wife and I were following the horror stories in
Rwanda which the media did not want to place in a
historical context. That’s European imperialism.
They divided the country into two warring factions
before they physically left leaving hand-picked
puppets in power who ensured the vitality of their
oppressive value system.
My wife and I observed a commentator
interviewing an African woman who had seven
children. They had walked over 100 miles from
Rwanda to the border of Zaire. In this very hilly terrain
where very little grows, she was trying to stabilize her
family for the evening and to get water. The
commentator wanted to know why her husband and
the father of the seven children was simply sitting
next to the tree. My wife also wanted to know
because you see the same behavior pattern among
many African American men. She wanted to know
what is it about manhood, specifically African


--- PAGE 149 ---
manhood, that creates this tendency, whether in
Rwanda or the United States. I asked a brother from
Liberia, who I was doing some consulting work with,
for his analysis. He said it’s about pride. When
African men have been able to provide for their
families economically, and then they don’t feel
capable of doing that, it effects their psyche. For
many of them it incapacitates them from doing
whatever it takes to feed and clothe their children. In
the United States you see the same pattern where
both the man and the woman are working menial
jobs. They are both subject to verbal abuse from
White supervisors, but the woman remains there
because she has mouths to feed at home. But many
brothers get frustrated in that circumstance and walk
away from their jobs. While I understand the issue of
power and pride and ego, while I understand that in
Los Angeles African Americans resent now being on
the same totem pole as immigrants who just crossed
the border and speak no English, while I understand
that many of these businesses are taking advantage
of the immigrants and paying them less than the
minimum wage, I still believe that some income is
better than no income. Legal work is better than
illegal work. There is pride to be found in a good
day’s work. This may be the most pivotal issue men
have to resolve.
In our crime watch group, we had a long
discussion about that part of our race that is so
frustrated about their economic options that they will
either not work at all or choose illegal means to take
care of themselves financially. Many older African
American men don’t understand the issues facing
younger African American males. Many of these
older men still remember the good old days when
they arrived in the industrial belt in the 40s and 50s
and jobs were plentiful. They remember when you
could drop out of school at sixteen, or if you were like
Marlon and graduated at eighteen, you could earn
between $8 and $18 per hour. These men with very
little education were able to provide a middle-class
lifestyle for their families. When these men retired,
their job and $18 per hour were not transferred to
their sons. Corporations either closed the plant and


--- PAGE 150 ---
opened one overseas, or hired part-time workers to
avoid paying medical benefits. Unfortunately, the
ideology and viewpoint of many older African
American men does not reconcile itself to the
present economy. Therefore, older population has a
tremendous communication problem with younger
African American males. I often remind these older
brothers of stories where in Chicago e.g., there was
a rumor that the Sheraton Hotel was looking to hire
5,000 people. The following morning 10,000 to
15,000 African Americans, mostly men, came
looking for work in sub zero temperature. I don’t
know if those older brothers did that in the 1940s.
Within the context of the term, entropy, it has been
said that your most productive economic years will
be 20 years after your formal education. As Marlon
lies in bed looking up at the ceiling wondering about
his options, the theory says that his most productive,
economic years will be between eighteen and thirty-
eight. For his classmates who dropped out of school
at sixteen, their most productive years will be
between sixteen and thirty-six. When you look at
African American males between the ages of 16 and
36, or between 18 and 38, unfortunately this is not
the time when they are the most economically
productive. This is the time, based on entropy, when
they are most dangerous, not only to themselves
(suicide), but to other people (homicide).
Many times principals give me the opportunity to
speak just to their male students. It is a very
humbling and tremendous experience to speak in
front of 500 to 1,000 African American males
between 14 and 19 years of age in high school.
When I look at them, I see their potential, and I
imagine what would happen if these 1,000 brothers
could be converted to the liberation struggle and join
organizations that give our community direction.
I look out at the audience and I see where these
16-year-old brothers will be 20 years from now.
Statistics show that many will be dead via homicide,
suicide or some type of accident. Others will be
either using or dealing drugs. One-fourth will be in
prison. Others will be marginally employed. I ask the
Lord to allow them to see Him when they see me


--- PAGE 151 ---
and allow me to give the best speech of my life.
My best experience was one where after I spoke
the principal had organized 100 men that were going
to break up into small groups with these boys to
discuss my speech further over lunch. That gave the
program more impact because there was
immediate follow-up, but that’s just one day. These
boys need follow-up each and every day. I often
dream that after I speak, I would have buses outside
that would take these thousands of African American
males from this urban area to the country. In a safe
environment, we would teach them Africentric
manhood. They would return to the city between thirty
and thirty-five years of age when they had mellowed
out, when they were no longer dangerous, when they
knew “whose” they were, “who” they were, who the
enemy was and empowerment strategies.
1
The late author Amos Wilson in his book, 
Black
on Black Violence
, pointed out something that is
very unfortunate in our community. Black men kill
themselves with their futures ahead of them and
White men when their futures are behind them. “One
dies a blossoming in the Spring; the other after the
first frost of Autumn. The Black man has packed all
the guilt, failure, shame, fatalism, pain,
hopelessness, and cynicism of a lifetime within a
span of three decades. Somehow the cavalier
optimism of youth and willful self-confidence of young
manhood are dissipated at or before the point of
actualization and assumptions of their powers to
transform the world. Somehow Black youth and
young adults are born into and come early to exists
in a different ominous reality: one that was created
for them; one under the control of others.”
2
That created “reality” negates, diminishes, and
saps their will to live. It makes their lives pointless,
an absurdity filled with bitter irony, happenstance
and quicksand. Every effort at self-rescue seems to
pull them more rapidly under, and every branch
thrown to the sinking men breaks as they struggle to
reach safe ground. The word 
entropy,
 remember,
means that the nonfunctional, the useless part, will
cause havoc not only for the parts around it but also
for itself. That is why it becomes more and more


--- PAGE 152 ---
difficult to distinguish Black homicide from Black
suicide, which we will discuss in the following
chapter in more detail.
Marlon is still waiting in his room trying to
reconcile his Sunday night experience with his
Monday morning reality. He has played the game the
way the game was supposed to be played. He
stayed in school for eight years of elementary school
and four years of high school and he is now looking
for the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. Some
African Americans males played the game an
additional four years in college and are still waiting
for the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow.
Conformity is sold to White Americans. White
Americans are convinced that if you follow the
American rules, you can live the American dream.
Unfortunately, nonconformity is now being sold to
African Americans, specifically African American
males. It used to be that youth believed that if you
secured a good education and worked hard there
would be an economic windfall at the end. Today our
youth believe that nonconformity may be a more
lucrative option. They have seen too many Marlons
with high school diplomas hanging out on corners.
They’ve seen too many brothers with college
degrees who are still looking for employment. Many
African Americans, especially African American
males, now believe the better options are not in a
better education and working hard but in a sports or
rap contract, or a drug deal.
Ironically, the White version of Marlon across town
also experienced graduation Sunday. Interestingly
enough, both African American males and White
American males will sell drugs. But the White
Marlon’s in this world will sell legal drugs. They will
be from pharmaceutical companies; and he will be
paid a base salary and commissions. I see these
young men on airplanes frequently. These White
males that did not finish college, and in some cases
did not even start college, will make more than most
African Americans with college degrees. Those
White males who graduated from high school on
Sunday night will now tell my mother and father what
to do on Monday morning as they become vice-


--- PAGE 153 ---
president of their daddy’s firm.
It is obvious that African American males have the
tenacity and an expertise in selling. Many of these
drug dealers work ten, twelve, fourteen, twenty,
twenty-four hours a day. They understand
advertising, math and accounting. They will promote
their product by giving it to you free to see if you like
it. They can convert kilos to grams to dollar bills
without the use of a calculator. They are masters at
the ability to collect outstanding debts. Any
corporation could utilize those types of skills, if only
these brothers had a legal product to sell. I
commend Minister Farrahan, Father Michael Fleger
and others who have given young brothers legal
products to sell.
Do African American adults sell their future short
when they say that they can’t save the older youth, 14
to 19-year-olds, so they need to work on saving the
children? I understand the statement. I am a strong
advocate of correcting the problem before it
develops and is exacerbated. I am an advocate of
confronting the Fourth Grade Syndrome. I am a
proponent of correcting the problem before the
Fourth Grade Syndrome. I believe that the best time
to intervene for African American males is fourth
grade. It is more cost-effective at fourth grade than at
12th grade. But are we making that statement
because it is the most feasible option or because
we feel incapacitated and impotent as it relates to
correcting the problem for our older youth? Are we
making that statement because we have limited
human and financial resources? Are we questioning
God’s ability to save these brothers between 14 and
19 years of age? Do we as adults feel so weak and
helpless against the problems that are so acute and
grave that we don’t create the resources to save
these brothers? If African American adults don’t
save these young men who will? If we save the youth
between 9 and 13 years of age, what are we going
to do with them when they become fourteen? Do we
stay with this young group until they become adults?
Do we take them to the countryside and bring them
back to the city when they’re thirty? Do we feel our
resources are strong enough to work with youth


--- PAGE 154 ---
between the ages of 9 and 13, or infancy to nine?
Do we then release them to negative peer pressure,
gangster rap, gang bangers, drug dealers and a
hostile media? Do we think that what we do with
these youth will undergird them against the
upcoming onslaught of violence? Can African
American adults sell the future to their children if they
cannot save their youth between fourteen and twenty-
one years of age?
W.E.B. Du Bois, in the early 1990s, stated that the
major question of the 21st century was going to be
the color question. Throughout this century he has
been correct. I believe it will continue into the twenty-
first century, but I also believe that there is an
additional question that may have an equal
importance. And that is the question of economics;
the major question of the twenty-first century will be
the economic question. To be most succinct, the
major question of the twenty-first century will be, How
many people do you employ? The same question
will be posed to the Black middle class and Du
Bois’s talented. Maybe the reason why African
American adults sell their future is because they
don’t employ their future.
The reason for the success of the Nation of Islam
is that when they go into prisons they go in with more
than ideas; they provide employment opportunities
through basic goods and services. They sell suits,
newspapers, bean pies, and security contracts. Amil
Cabral taught that intellectuals discuss ideas but the
masses respond to basic goods and services. Are
we as a race and a community going to succumb to
entropy? Are we going to self-destruct? Does White
America really believe that African American males
that suffer entropy are simply going to stay silent in
the ghetto and slowly die? The thoughts are
addressed in Claude Brown’s 
Man Child in the
Promised Land,
 Richard Wright’s 
Native Son
 and
Nathan McCall’s 
Make Me Wanna Holler.
This chapter has looked at Marlon’s economic
options with a diploma. The next chapter will
describe the characteristics associated with
manhood and the role of rites of passage programs
in socializing our male youth.


--- PAGE 155 ---
Rites-Of-Passage comes from our rich African
tradition.


--- PAGE 156 ---
CHAPTER NINE
 
Male Seasoning and Rites of Passage
 
Sekou Toure, president of Guinea, described a
certain form of seasoning called the science of
dehumanization. It is the process of indoctrinating
you against yourself by denying internal development
for external reward.
1
 This chapter takes a look at
men in general and African American men
specifically whose poor communication skills,
decline in academic interests and weak emotional
development may be linked to the male seasoning
process. First let us ask the question, What is a
man? Goldberg, in his book 
Hazards of Being Male
,
writes that a man is
an independent strong achiever who can be
counted on to be always in control. His success
in the working world is predicated on the
repression of self and the display of controlled,
deliberate, calculated, manipulative
responsiveness. The man who “feels becomes
inefficient because he gets emotionally involved
and this inevitably slows him down and distracts
him. His more dehumanized competition will
then surely pass him by.”
2
 
The questions Michael Brown asks in 
Image of a
Man
 provides a picture of manhood held by most
African American male youth:
How much pain or violence can you inflict on
another person;
How many girls can you impregnate and not get
married;
How much reefer you can smoke, pills you can
drop, and wine you can drink;
How many times you can go to jail and come
out “un-rehabilitated”,
What kind of clothes you wear;


--- PAGE 157 ---
How much money you have;
What kind of car you drive.
3
 
To the above, I will add the “classics.” Men do not
cry, ignore symptoms of ill health, must bring home
the bacon and do not display affection to anyone,
especially their sons.
There has been much debate over the last decade
concerning the significance of biological and
sociological factors in male development.
Genetically, males have X and Y chromosomes,
while females have X chromosomes. Males have the
hormone testosterone while the female hormone is
estrogen.
4
 The chemical makeup of the male body is
40 percent muscle, 15 percent fat; a woman’s body
is 23 percent muscle and 25 percent fat.
5
 Some
researchers use these differences to explain why
men are more aggressive and excel in math and why
women are more passive and excel in
communication.
The debate becomes heated when other
researchers point to society’s role in encouraging
aggression and math in boys, and passivity and
communication in girls. The images of John Wayne
and Rocky, along with the fact that men dominate the
fields of math and science, provide role models
which perpetuate the myth. Roger Brown, in his
article 
“Social Psychology,”
 paints the picture:
In the United States a real boy climbs trees,
disdains girls, dirties his knees, plays with
soldiers, and takes blue for his favorite color. A
real girl dresses dolls, jumps rope, plays
hopscotch, and takes pink for her favorite color.
When they go to school, real girls like English
and music and “auditorium,” real boys prefer
manual training, gym and arithmetic. In college
the boys smoke pipes, drink beer, and major in
engineering or physics; the girls chew Juicy
Fruit gum, drink cherry Cokes, and major in fine
arts. The real boy matures into a man who plays
poker, goes hunting, drinks brandy, and dies in
the war; the real girl becomes a feminine
woman who loves children, embroiders


--- PAGE 158 ---
handkerchiefs, drinks weak tea, and
“succumbs” to consumption.
6
 
Experience has taught me that very little, if any,
research is objective. The researcher brings to the
subject his or her values and frames of reference.
“His-story” is just that — someone’s story about what
happened. I originally sought to prove biologically
why males are aggressive, which would explain why
boys receive disproportionately harsh treatment in
schools. I found literature documenting study after
study to confirm biologically why males behave in a
certain manner; I also found just as much literature
either refuting the biological significance or raising
strong doubts about the denial of sociological
factors. It is my opinion that because the two factors,
nature
 and 
nurture,
 cannot be separated for
laboratory investigation, the debate is futile. I also
feel that, while many researchers believe
testosterone increases aggression in males (and I
do not deny the possibility), honest researchers must
admit that our sexist environment has clearly
prescribed roles for men and women which
perpetuate the gender stereotypes. I cannot state,
then, that the reason boys, and specifically African
Americans, perform at a lower level than their female
counterparts is because they have testosterone,
which produces aggression. I can say unequivocally
that our society encourages males to release their
aggression in contact sports such as football and
boxing. Boys learn very early that disagreements can
be settled with fists, while male-dominated
governments clarify their disagreements with other
nations by means of war.
This debate is similar to the left brain/right brain
controversy, whereby the left hemisphere is very
analytical and excels in math and science, while the
right hemisphere is holistic and excels in
communication, fine arts and sports.
7
 In private
academic circles, the notion exists that Europeans,
and specifically men, are more left-brain oriented,
and people of color, specifically women, are more
right-brain oriented. The myth becomes a self-
fulfilling prophecy if parents, teachers, counselors


--- PAGE 159 ---
and the mass media provide the reinforcement. How
can you separate biological theory from the social
environment where it is manifested? The myths that
African Americans are lazy, lack initiative, are super
sexy, love to dance, sing and play basketball
become self-fulfilling if role models and
encouragement are not provided in other areas by
parents, educators and community advocates.
8
Parents often perpetuate male seasoning by
patterning their household to fit the sexist mold.
Female parents, who are well aware of the lack of
male support, can often be found rearing their male
child with few household responsibilities required.
Many boys continue to reach manhood with little skill
and less interests in cooking and cleaning. Parents,
educators and community advocates do little to
reinforce the male child who has interests in the fine
arts, religion and reading.
Some mothers demand less academic
achievement, maturity and household chores from
their sons than their daughters. Boys are also
allowed later street hours, more sexual
permissiveness and more athletic pursuits than their
female counterparts. It is very difficult to be
economically, emotionally, and domestically self-
sufficient if academic mediocrity, nonattendance at
spiritual activities, minimal intimate communication
and exemption from household tasks are condoned.
The difference in child-rearing practices for sons
and daughters has important implications for adult
male-female relationships. Men may enter these
relationships with fewer academic, economic,
emotional and domestic skills. They may expect
women to love them unconditionally and to be as
loyal to them as their mothers are. Women who saw
their mothers do everything without a man will be
aggressive and more academically accomplished,
as well as emotionally and domestically self-
sufficient. A woman would like for her man to
demonstrate these same qualities, but because of
the way she has been raised, as opposed to the
male track record, she often feels that it is in her best
interest to keep a little money on the side, just in
case.


--- PAGE 160 ---
It is hard to imagine the tremendous pressure on
approximately 10 percent of the world’s population
(European men), who have the desire to rule world.
There are 6 billion people in the world, of whom 5.4
billion have color; only 600 million
9
 (I am being
generous with the U.N. estimates) lack color, or 10
percent. For the sake of simple math, I divided the
10 percent in half, although in actuality there are
more European women than men. Perhaps we
cannot imagine, having been oppressed for so long,
the tremendous burden assumed in running the
world. To be a “world runner” you must be macho,
you must die with your boots on, you must never
display emotion, never drop a tear. How can you run
the word crying? On 
Monday Night Football
 the
football superstar Emmitt Smith goes off the field
with an injured knee, only to return later in the game
to the announcer’s cry, “Oh, what a man!!”
The popular movie Making Love illustrates why the
swelling number of homosexual men has reached an
estimated 20 million in the United States.
10
 The two
men in the movie shared their childhood
experiences and their desire to be nurtured by a
man, preferably their father. Unfortunately, men are
not supposed to show affection and compassion to
their sons, who need to be trained as future world
runners. One man described his Little League
baseball experience, in which his father worked with
him all season on his hitting, and in the “big game,”
brought his friends to watch “his boy.” The son did an
excellent job at the plate, but late in the game
dropped a flyball in right field. (The father forgot to
teach him how to catch.) The father did not talk to
him for a week and said he was too embarrassed to
go to the office. Imagine the effect on the boy’s
psyche — irreparable damage, making him a prime
candidate for homosexuality, as he still yearns for
male companionship.
I also propose that this skeleton macho image of a
man is a leading contributor to lesbianism. Can you
imagine what happens to a little girl’s psyche after
being sexually abused by a sick man? Have we
reached a point where men and women can no
longer talk to each other with warmth and


--- PAGE 161 ---
admiration? A recent article in a feminist magazine
said that men listen less to women than each other,
and women have a better chance for a conversation
if they discuss what men initiate or if they talk to
other women.
From both ends of the continuum, men seem to be
blocked when they try to relate to each other. That is,
they are not comfortable sharing their downsides,
their failures, anxieties and disappointments.
Perhaps they fear being seen as weak complaining
losers or crybabies, a perception that threatens their
masculine images. Nor do they seem to feel
comfortable sharing their ecstasy or successes for
fear of inciting competitive jealousies or appearing
boastful. Consequently, verbal social interactions
between men focus on neutral, largely impersonal
subject matters such as automobiles, sports and
politics.
Goldberg explains why being a male can be
“hazardous to your health”:
When a man’s self is hidden from everybody
else...it seems also to become much hidden
even from himself and it permits disease and
death to gnaw into his substance without his
clear knowledge. Autism, the severest form of
childhood schizophrenia, runs three to four
times as high for boys. In state and county
mental hospital units for children, boys
outnumber girls by approximately 150 percent.
Under the age of fifteen, males are diagnosed
as schizophrenics 42 percent more frequently
than girls. Though there are approximately 105
male babies conceived for every 100 females,
in the population at large there are today
approximately 95 males for every 100 females.
From birth on, the rate of attrition is significantly
higher for the male. There are approximately
115 male fetal deaths for every 100 female fetal
deaths. At nearly every age level, from birth to
death, the male mortality rate is significantly
higher. Specifically, from birth to age one the
male death rate is 33 percent higher. From age
fifteen through nineteen the male death rate is


--- PAGE 162 ---
more than 150 percent higher. From age twenty
to twenty-four, the male death rate is 200
percent higher and at almost all age levels after
that, the male death rate is about 100 percent
higher or twice as high as that of females.
Today, the difference in life expectancy is eight
years and increasing (69.9 white men vs. 77.8
white women).
11
 
European men need to recognize, for their own
sakes, that running the world alone is not beneficial
for their health, self-esteem or relationships with
family and friends. It is unnatural for 20 percent of the
population — actually, the 10 percent that are men
— to want to control the world. Robert Mugabe does
not want to control the world; he wants to administer
Zimbabwe. Julius Nyerere does not want to control
the world; he wants to administer Tanzania. I believe
this is correct, and justice will prevail. Unfortunately,
Gil Scott-Heron, in his album 
Reflections
, may be
right when he says, “America was looking for its
hero” and since John Wayne was no longer
available, they settled for Ronald “Ray-gun.”
It is equally unfortunate that African American men
take their example of manhood from White men.
Some African American men wish to dominate their
women as Europeans dominate theirs, but because
they do not hire and fire, and do not control the
means of production, they become “aspiring
chauvinists.” Their dominance is expressed in the
82,000 rapes reported in the United States each
year.
Again, African American men, like European men,
are taught to be aggressive, to not cry, show little
emotion and affection toward male children, ignore
symptoms of ill health, and continue to bring home
the bacon. African American men, though, have a
difficult time bringing home the bacon, in contrast to
their European counterparts. African American adult
male unemployment hovers at 25 percent, and
teenage unemployment is soaring to 75 percent,
with a strong possibility that some will never work.
Imagine what it is like in a male-controlled world to
not be able to bring home the bacon. Is there any


--- PAGE 163 ---
worse conspiracy than miseducation of African
American boys so they will never compete in the
economy? Liebow, in 
Talley’s Corner,
 says:
The way in which the man makes a living and
the kind of living he makes have important
consequences for how the man sees himself
and is seen by others; and these, in turn,
importantly shape his relationships with family
members, lovers, friends and neighbors.
Making a living takes on an overriding
importance at marriage. Although he wants to
get married, he hedges his commitment from
the very beginning because he is afraid not of
marriage itself, but of his own ability to carry out
his responsibilities as a husband and father. His
own father failed and had to “cut out” and the
men he knows who have been or are married
have also failed or are in the process of doing
so. He has no evidence that he will not. The
black menial worker remains a menial worker
so that, after one, two or three years of marriage
and many children, the man could not support
his family from the very beginning and is even
less able to support it as time goes on. The
longer he works, the longer he is unable to live
on what he makes. He has little vested interest
in such a job and learns to treat it with the same
contempt held for it by the employer and society
at large. From his point of view, the job is
expendable; from the employer’s point of view,
he is. Sometimes he sits down and cries at the
humiliation of it all. Sometimes he strikes out at
her or the children with his fists, perhaps to lay
hollow claim to being man of the house in the
one way left open to him, or perhaps simply to
inflict pain on this woman who bears witness to
his failure as a husband and father and
therefore as a man. Increasingly, he turns to the
street corner where a shadow system of values
constructed out of public fictions serves to
accommodate just such men as he, permitting
them to be men once again provided they do
not look too closely at one another’s


--- PAGE 164 ---
credentials.
12
 
The John Hopkins Research Center reported in
1981 that for every one percent increase in
unemployment, there is a 4.3 percent increase in
mental patients, a 4.1 percent increase in suicide, a
5.7 percent increase in murders and a 4.0 percent
increase in prisoners. The leading killers of African
American men are heart disease, cancer, homicide,
accidents and suicide.
13
 African American boys
outnumber African American girls 1.03 to 1.0 at
birth, but upon reaching their eighteenth birthday,
women outnumber the men 1.8 to 1.0. The life
expectancy of African American men is 65,
European men, 73, African American women, 75
and European women, 79.
14
 These figures have
much significance. African American men die before
anybody else. (Legislation should be considered to
excuse African American men from contributing to
Social Security because they usually will not live to
receive it!) European women live 12 years longer!
African American women spend the last 10 years of
their lives without their men, 
if
 their men are at home.
The question of who will define manhood,
seasoning, or rites of passage will be determined
based on who spends the most time with our boys
and who can attract and influence them most
effectively.
Male seasoning thus becomes a dehumanization
process of indoctrinating you against yourself; it is a
conspiracy designed to make you a skeleton with no
feelings and no compassion for your children,
women or brothers. Psychologists have proven that
expressing emotions can alleviate suicidal
tendencies. Men returning home from work, or never
going, sitting in rocking chairs with a beer all
evening, never fully sharing with their spouse or
children how they feel they’re at risk of illness,
depression and death. Men have become slaves to
bringing home the bacon and letting mama bring
home the emotion. It has often been said that being
a man in America is very difficult, but I strongly
advocate that we redefine manhood. Goldberg and
Brown’s description is not in our best interest. How


--- PAGE 165 ---
can we build strong families and nations with a
group of people who have not developed themselves
internally? I believe manhood may be best
expressed by telling your wife, “I appreciate you,” by
bringing your son to your chest, and by telling your
brothers when you are hurting and need their help.
15
16
17
18
19
Let’s review the messages that each group gives
to our children:
 
It should be obvious that we are not going to win
against gangs, dealers and the media with fathers
and mothers spending 7 and 34 minutes,
respectively, and instructors spending 40 to 45
minutes disseminating irrelevant information to their
youth. Many youth tell me that adults in the
neighborhood don’t even say hello. Many adults say
they’re afraid. Isn’t it interesting that as our youth
become older, they spend more time together, while
their involvement of with most adults declines.
If you gave most adults an opportunity to make
hundreds of thousands of dollars a day rather than
giving years of service, many adults would probably
choose the former. In Motivating and Preparing


--- PAGE 166 ---
Black Youth for Success, I mentioned that for many
of us life has been reduced to money. Our youth, via
gangs, dealers and the media, have found five other
ways to make money beside a good education and
working hard. Our competition now has become
drugs, sports, music, crime and the lottery. Needless
to say, competing against these activities is difficult.
However, we must make a good case for a good
education and retirement security as opposed to the
million-to-one odds of going to the NBA or the
dangerous business of selling drugs. Ultimately, we
must show youth that life is about more than making
money. It’s about finding something that you enjoy so
much that you are willing to do it for free, but
because you do it so well, you get paid for it. Adults
must help young people identify and develop their
talents and expose them to related careers. As a
chess or basketball game, we need to design and
carve out a strategy that will reclaim our youth.
The media further complicates our efforts with its
onslaught on our youth. Advertisers selling to youths
is a major market, and youth often influence their
parents’ purchasing habits. The African American
community is only 12 percent of the nation’s
population, but we consume 38 percent of the liquor
and 39 percent of the cigarettes. Former U.S.
Secretary of Health and Human Services Louis
Sullivan, Rev. Calvin Butts, Father George Clements,
Father Michael Pfleger and many others need to be
commended for the strong stand they have taken in
trying to reduce the consumption of nicotine, alcohol
and hard drugs.
Sullivan publicly reprimanded the tobacco industry
for directly marketing cigarettes to Black males. Rev.
Butts of Abyssinia Church in New York along with the
larger community, pressured billboard advertising
companies to remove the billboards under threat of
defacement. Father Clements, Father Pfleger, Dick
Gregory and others organized themselves to make
sure stores did not sell drug paraphernalia.
As an activity, I recommend that educators,
concerned community citizens and parents cut out
advertisements in magazines, cover up the company
name and discuss with youths the messages that


--- PAGE 167 ---
are really being advertised. Advertisements that
appear to be selling liquor, cigarettes, and
cosmetics are, in actuality, subliminally advertising a
good time, sexual activity and materialism. The
illusion is that smoking and drinking will improve your
looks, provide a fancy car and make people of the
opposite sex attracted to you.
Many of our youths’ first encounters with smoking,
drinking and sexual activity is during adolescence. A
decision to start smoking at age 14 may very well
lead to premature death at 34. A decision to
become sexually active at age 14 produce a life long
dependency on welfare. Some youths lack
knowledge about their bodies, birth control and
pregnancy. I have heard horror stories about youth
who did not think that they could get pregnant during
the first six months of sexual activity. Some youth
who became pregnant thought that just as with other
problems, time would remove it, and chose not to tell
their parents. This miseducation will continue as long
as the peer group spends more time with our
children than we do. It really does take a whole
village to raise a child.
There is also a need for adults to show African
American adolescent males a way to resolve their
problems through nonviolence. My staff at African
American Images has designed a program called
The Dr. King Nonviolence laboratory. This project
was established primarily for junior and senior high
schools. The program teaches designated staff
and/or students how to resolve conflict through
nonviolence. Dr. King’s theory does not need to be
buried between 1929 and 1968. We need to show
African American males how they can preserve their
manhood without having to kill someone because
their shoes were stepped on, they were brushed up
against, their designer shoes or starter jackets were
envied or they were just plain irritated.
The term “Black-on-Black crime” is often used by
the media. We never hear the term “White-on-White
crime.” Any criminologist will tell you that crime
usually takes place between people that are related,
know each other or live nearby. Homicide is the
leading killer of Black male adolescents; it is


--- PAGE 168 ---
essential that we teach African American males how
to resolve conflict through nonviolence means. In
Chicago, there is a program in which 100 Black men
volunteer on a regular basis to teach Black high
school boys a strategy of nonviolence and conflict
management.
An activity of our Dr. King laboratory includes role-
playing. For example, two African American males
brush up against one another and express
themselves the way they normally would on the
streets. Of course, we don’t allow them to hit each
other, but body language, hostility and all other
expressions are released. We then bring them
together as if it was the beginning of a boxing match.
We have them look at each other, and in front of the
group say that the reason why they hate their 
brother
is that they hate 
themselves.
 We then expose them
to Dr. King and his theories of nonviolence. If they
must, groups can also consider allowing boys to
resolve conflict through public competition: Indian
wrestling, pushups or bench pressing.
Some Black boys think that talking back to their
mothers, female teachers and the police is a form of
manhood. We need programs and men that will
teach Black boys the distinction between a battle
and a war; it may be better to keep their mouths shut
and lose the battle in order to be available for the
war for the liberation of our people. The police often
know how to bait Black boys into making a mistake.
Too many African American males make a
wisecrack or a wrong move and are shot by the
police. Churches, schools and community groups
need to establish a better relationship with the police
so that we can reclaim our youth. Our males are
being seized by the gangs, the dealers, the media,
the police, and the penal institutions.
A professional organization called NOBLE
(National Organization of Black Law Enforcement)
attempts to organize African American
superintendents, captains and other high-ranking
officials around prevention rather than intervention.
The relationship between the police department and
the African American community will only deteriorate
as more Black men are shot in the back. The


--- PAGE 169 ---
relationship needs to be nurtured by an ongoing
watchdog committee and NOBLE representatives.
Efforts should be made, in spite of the affirmative
action backlash, to increase the percentage of
African American police officers to the percentage
of African American people in the city. There are
numerous cities where the African American
population is 50 percent or more yet African
American police officers constitute less than 20
percent of the staff and a smaller percentage of the
officers. 
This racial inequity
 is further exacerbated
in prisons across the state in rural areas miles from
the African American community.
The Honorable Judge Eugene Pincham reported
that 95 percent of the people who passed through
his court did not possess a high school diploma, nor
did they attend church while growing up. He and
others have designed programs like Probate
Challenge, which allows youth on probation to be
given academic assistance, role models and cultural
awareness. It provides a positive transition from
probation to the real world. As 25 percent of our
male population is involved with penal institutions
and 47 percent of all inmates are African American,
we need more programs like this. There is much that
we can do for our boys. Many are angry.
For example, Darryl is 16 years of age; it’s five
o‘clock in the afternoon; he’s been outside on the
streets since eleven o’clock that morning. There
were a couple of times when he could have gotten
high; he passed them up. There were opportunities
to rob a store and steal a car. He robbed the store
but chose not to steal the car. There was a chance to
meet three females over someone’s house when
their parents were not home. He said he might check
it out later that evening, and that he was going home
to get something to eat.
He walked into the house and his mother (who
was not home when he left at eleven o’clock) sort of
looked at him and shook her head, while she
continued to talk with her friend on the telephone.
Darryl went into the kitchen, where there was nothing
to eat. The mother then yelled, “Why did you come
back in here anyway? Get your head out of that


--- PAGE 170 ---
refrigerator. Sometimes I wish you were never born.”
Darryl stomped outside.
This is one example of the kind of male child on
our streets, one who is angry, suffering from lack of
nurturance and acceptance, and hungry for love. He
gravitates toward his peers, gangs, young ladies that
give him a two-minute thrill and drugs that may give
him a short-term high.
There are also wayward boys in the White
community. These boys don’t always do their
homework, don’t always come home on time and
are often involved with crime. In the typical White
community, 16-year-old Joey has been acting up in
the neighborhood, has thrown a couple of balls in
neighbors’ windows and has caused a minor
disturbance in front of a dry cleaners and grocery
store. One evening four or five White male adults,
three of them business owners, and two concerned
citizens decide to talk with Joey while he’s idling
away on the street. They tell him in no uncertain
terms that they are not going to allow it. “We are
going to give you a job at the dry cleaner’s, and if
you do well, we will find you another job at the plant
or come up with some money to send you to
college.”
I call this the “safety net.” When the home and
school fails, children need a community safety net. In
most communities, safety nets are spearheaded by
the business sector. The business sector not only
has the financial resources to respond but their
commitment to its youth and desire to make sure
their communities are safe for business growth and
expansion is enormous. In the African American
community, when the home and school break down,
the lack of a safety net, whether by the church or the
business sector, has increased the number of
African American male youth that have become a
threat to the people they encounter. I often tell people
that while my father was my best role model, it was
my track coach who created a safety net that
prevented me from spending idle time on the streets.
We need businesses, churches, community
organizations and concerned African American men
to identify adolescent males and provide them with a


--- PAGE 171 ---
safety net which includes direction, high
expectations, employment opportunities and
educational advancement. This may be one of the
biggest weaknesses in our communities; our safety
net is not strong due to the lack of business
development and since these youth are not
biologically ours but belong to the African village. It
should be obvious that a single parent or, for that
matter, parents, will not be as successful as a village
in raising children.
The struggle has come down to adults against
gangs for the minds of our children, and Rites of
Passage organizations against gangs for the minds
of our children. Jeff Fort, a major gang leader of the
Chicago Blackstone Rangers, once told me, “We will
always have the youth because we make them feel
important.” I’ll never forget that. Fort is a gangbanger
who understood psychology very well. One of the
ways to attract people to an organization is to spend
time with them and make them feel important. In that
respect, the gangs do a very good job. It is now the
responsibility of the adult community to also give our
youth more of our time to make them feel important.
Fathers are not going to win the battle for our
youth spending only seven minutes a day with their
sons. Men are not going to capture the imagination
of male youth when the Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts
in many areas are now being administered by
women. I don’t believe that African American women
want these positions, but they do want their sons in
constructive activities. If men are not going to
respond, then by default women will fill the void.
In Ray Raphael’s book 
The Men from the Boys
,
he describes what it’s like when urban male youth do
not receive a clear definition of manhood:
Traditional cultures throughout the world have
often devised ways of dramatizing and
ritualizing the passage into manhood and of
transforming that passage into a community
event. Through the use of structured initiation
rites, these societies have been able to help
and guide the youths through their period of
developmental crisis. By formalizing the


--- PAGE 172 ---
transition process, complex problems of identity
formation are translated into concrete and
straightforward tasks. Often, the trials a youth
must endure are extreme:
Throughout their journey, the elders
belabored them with firebrands, sticks tipped
with obsidian and nettles. They arrived covered
with blood and were received by a pair of
guardians. A period of seclusion followed,
during which the boys had to undergo a series
of trials. They were beaten, starved, deprived of
sleep, partially suffocated, and almost roasted.
Water was forbidden, and if thirsty they had to
chew sugar-cane. Only the coarsest foods were
allowed, and even these were left raw. All the
time the guardians gave them instructions about
kinship, responsibilities, and duties to their
seniors. At length, after some months, the priest
summoned the supernatural monsters from the
underground while the other men sounded the
bull-roarers. The guardians now taught their
charges how to incise the penis in order to
eliminate the contamination resulting from
association with the other sex. Subsequently,
this operation had to be performed regularly. A
series of great feasts then took place, and
initiates emerged richly decorated.
This is how a Busama youth in the highlands
of New Guinea proves his manhood. As odd as
the rituals might sound to us, their impact is
forceful and direct: If a youth can make it through
this bizarre sequence of mutilation and
deprivation, then certainly he can handle the
everyday hardships he will confront throughout
his adult life. Dramatically and emphatically, he
has repudiated the vulnerability of boyhood
while asserting the toughness and resilience
required of in manhood. In his own eyes and in
the eyes of society, he has shown himself to be
worthy of adult respect.
Perhaps we have something to learn from this
primitive Rites-of-Passage. The underlying
structure of the ritual is enviable, even if the
details might seem sordid. Listen, for example,


--- PAGE 173 ---
to a typical reaction of a modern day man to the
crude but gutsy Busama initiation rituals:
I wish I had it that easy. Run through the fire,
step on the coals — then it’s over and done
with. You’re a man, everyone knows you’re man,
and that’s the end of it. For me it keeps on
going on and on. The uncertainty of it — at any
moment you can be out on the streets. It’s all
tied up with money. I’ve got to keep on fighting
for money and respect. The fire never stops; I
keep running through it every day.
1
 
I have been actively involved over the years in
assisting Rites-of-Passage organizations. We need
them in every city, neighborhood, and every block. I
discuss how to organize the adult male population,
the need for study and bonding among this group,
how to identifying a facility, which recruitment
strategies to use, the desired age range and the
number of youth to be served.
The basic topics studied in most Rites of
Passage programs include African and African
American history, economics, politics, family
responsibility, career development, spirituality,
community involvement and organization, physical
fitness and the Nguzo Saba value system, all taught
from an Africentric perspective.
The objective is to have the youth master a
predetermined criteria in these areas. Lesson plans
are then designed to assist youth in this endeavor.
The learning experience should be taught from a
whole-brain approach rather than a left-brain
approach. There is a strong tendency for African
American men to do the same thing that teachers do
in the classroom, which is to lecture the children or to
pass out a ditto sheet. The use of right-brain
activities, taking advantage of children’s interest in
music, fine arts, and the use of their hands, should
be considered. I strongly suggest using our
SETCLAE curriculum. The SETCLAE curriculum
encompasses all of the above areas, so why
reinvent the wheel? The following are sample topics
and lesson plans:
African and African American History


--- PAGE 174 ---
African and African American History
• Develop a family tree.
• Design a time line from four million years
B.C. through 2000 A.D.; indicate special
events from the African American
experience on the timeline.
• Read 
Lessons From History: A
Celebration in Blackness, The
Autobiography of Malcolm X, Manchild
in the Promised Land, Native Son,
Kaffir Boy, Abdul and the Designer
Tennis Shoes and Makes Me Wanna
Holler.
• Use raps, plays and debates,
incorporating African and African
American leaders into the material.
 
Economics
• Develop a family budget.
• Learn to read the stock pages.
• Create an example where a stock/mutual
fund was purchased and monitor it over
a period of time.
• Observe, analyze and write about the
types of businesses and business
activities in African American
communities.
• Make a product or provide a service and
sell it to the larger community, e.g., T-
shirts, sweatshirts and memorabilia.
Develop a business plan.
 
Politics
• Design a chart listing local
representatives through the presidency
with names and duties provided for
each.
• Create a mock election, campaign
speeches and debates.
• Arrange field trips to city, state, national
and international offices, e.g., United
Nations.
• Be involved in voter registration drives.


--- PAGE 175 ---
Family Responsibilities
• Require that parents design a list of
chores and sign the sheet, confirming
that the boy has completed these
responsibilities.
• Provide classes in sex education; teach
the difference between making a baby
and taking care of a baby.
• Provide opportunities for boys to be
involved in cooking, ironing, sewing and
washing dishes. This can be done in an
in-house session or at a camp site.
• Create an opportunity for boys to babysit
infants and toddlers.
• Teach the boys carpentry and plumbing.
 
Career Development
• Have the youth provide five occupations
for each letter of the alphabet.
• Invite guest speakers to talk about their
careers.
• Provide tutorial services and awards
ceremonies glorifying academic
achievement.
• Review course schedules to ensure that
career goals can be met.
 
Spirituality
• Teach the boys the three components of
prayer:
1. Thanksgiving
2. Forgiveness of sin
3. Request/Petitions
 
• Provide the opportunity for boys to pray.
• Review scriptures and have them
memorized.
 
Community Involvement
• Have boys participate in community


--- PAGE 176 ---
activities, cleanup drives, walk-a-thons,
etc.
• Require a minimal number of hours to be
volunteered in community organizations.
• Spend time with the homeless and in food
distribution centers.
 
Physical Development
• Include the basic tenets of physical
development, sit-ups, push-ups and
running.
• Create sports contests and junior
Olympics, martial arts training, drill
performances (similar to the Nation of
Islam and fraternities); teach health and
nutrition.
 
Nguzo Saba
• UMOJA — unity: Teach the principle of
operational unity. We may be discussing
10 items. We disagree on nine. In the
spirit of operational unity we will work
with the one area we agree on.
• KUJICHAGULIA — self-determination:
Disallow the use of the word 
can’t.
• UJIMA — collective work and
responsibility: Prevent anyone from
leaving any of the programs until all are
finished with the activity.
• UJAMAA — cooperative economics:
Pool all resources together in the
purchasing of items.
• NIA — purpose: Assign every member of
the Rites of Passage to declare a career
goal and plan of action for achieving it.
• KUUMBA — creativity: Design T-shirts,
jackets and caps in a very creative
fashion.
• IMANI — faith: Teach and practice belief
in God, prayer and scripture study.
 
 
In 
The Orita for Black Youth,
 by Frank Fair,
2
 there


--- PAGE 177 ---
are six basic requirements:
1. Understanding of the Black experience in
America
2. Ability to manage the Family budget
3. Time volunteered with a community
organization
4. Exploration of career and educational
opportunities
5. Understanding the full responsibilities of
citizenship
6. Study and application of biblical scriptures
 
In Nathan and Julia Hare’s 
“The Passage,
 ”
3
 there
are seven basic requirements:
1. Development of a log during the transition
year
2. Awareness and understanding of self
3. Awareness and understanding of the
immediate and extended family
4. Service to the neighborhood and community
5. Adoption of a senior citizen
6. Exploration of educational opportunities,
including higher education
7. Development of discipline and responsibility
 
Both programs mandate that the youth be involved
in the preparation of the ceremony. There is a great
deal of similarity between the two programs, and
while there are differences concerning economics,
religion and elders, they do not preclude the Rites of
Passage program from adapting those features they
deem essential for manhood training. These models
are just that, models, and are to be used to further
inspire the cadres.
The word “Rites” is plural, meaning there are
several stages of mastery. We advocate that the
men design a structure which allows boys to
matriculate through different stages, a process very
similar to the Scouts, which had its origins in Africa.
In the African tradition, the Rites of Passage
process starts with the naming ceremony and ends
with a burial and becoming an ancestor. The general
stages include the naming ceremony, the transition


--- PAGE 178 ---
from boyhood to manhood, becoming an adult, and
becoming an elder. All too often, mainstream
programs serve children through the primary stages
of development, only to drop them at the all important
adolescent stage. By structuring the program to go
from boyhood on up to elder status, 14-year-olds will
be less likely to quit.
Because we are at work against the gangs for the
minds of our youth, we must understand the
significance of symbols. Our children value T-shirts,
sweatshirts, jackets and caps. Rites of Passage
organizations can provide these items with
Africentric symbols to reinforce our culture and to
create group solidarity.
There have been numerous success stories from
Rites of Passage organizations nationwide. Some
of the major pitfalls are men not remaining consistent
in their interaction with the boys, parents who use the
programs without giving support back to the
organization and the fact that most Rites of Passage
organizations are in the larger community while
gangs are operating on every block. In the African
community, all youth go through the same Rites of
Passage. Consequently, all youth respect the
process. In America, some youth have the fortunate
opportunity to experience an Africentric Rites of
Passage. However, when returning to their block, the
boys may encounter gang members that do not
acknowledge the experience, may resent it and may
eventually retaliate against the youth. This does not
negate the need for the Rites of Passage program; it
simply reinforces the need for male consistency,
parental involvement and more Rites of Passage
programs to saturate the community.
To make sure you’re on track, evaluate your Rites
of Passage program with the following questions:
Have our boys placed God first in their lives and
allowed their decisions to be influenced by this
relationship?
How do our boys feel about their race?
Do they have a tendency to hurt each other?
How are our boys doing in reading and math
achievement tests?


--- PAGE 179 ---
Do our boys feel good about the school
experience?
How much time are our boys allowed to stay
out?
Who is the major influence on their decisions?
Do our boys respect their parents, teachers and
elders?
Are our boys responsible for their allowance,
their studies and their time?
 
The most frequent question that I receive from
men is, How can they obtain more information about
Rites of Passage? Many people want a manual or
document that will show them how to develop Black
boys into men.
 
In turn, I ask them four questions:
1. Have you read the Rites of Passage section
in 
Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy
Black Boys and Coming of
 Age by Paul Hill?
2. Have you read respected Africentric authors
who have written extensively about the Black
male?
3. Have you changed your negative perceptions
of Black men?
4. Have you worked out the program logistics,
e.g., facility location, frequency of meetings
and the target age of the group to be saved?
 
Black men tend to underestimate how difficult it is
to organize a Rites of Passage program.
My experience has taught me that those programs
organized prematurely around a manual, in contrast
to those developing a cohesive cadre do not last
long. There are Rites of Passage programs around
the country operating with only one brother who is on
the verge of burning out because he did not start
methodically. Men must get to know one another and
resolve ego and political issues before organizing
the youth.
I am concerned that in our desire to save Black
youth, we actually spend more time talking and
reading 
about
 them, rather than in 
directly working
with them. How many minutes do we actually spend


--- PAGE 180 ---
working with youth rather than in study and
discussion? It is not my desire to belittle theory, but
theory without practice or an imbalance between the
two is not productive.
The ultimate goal of Rites of Passage is to
prepare the boys for manhood. Our boys do not
know when they’re men, and it is the responsibility of
men to teach them. If men do not fulfill this
responsibility, boys will continue to define it from a
physical perspective, e.g., making a baby, fights and
the consumption of drugs, alcohol, clothes and cars.
Nathan and Julia Hare note,
Boys reach physical puberty readily enough, but
it is far more difficult, in an oppressive situation,
to gain social puberty. We must recognize and
actualize the difference between physical and
social puberty in the Black boys’ development,
just as there is a difference between physical
potency and social potency. Indeed, blocked
from the avenues to social power and position,
social potency, the Black boys may too often
feel impelled to overcompensate in the
physical.
1
 
The work becomes organizing a group of men
who will study together, grow into a cohesive unit,
identify a facility, determine the frequency of the
meetings, identify and organize the target group of
youth to be serviced, and consistently provide them
with a program designed purposely to achieve these
criteria. There are numerous reasons why some
Rites of Passage programs have not been able to
fulfill their goals. One of the reasons is adult
inconsistency. One goal of Rites of Passage is to
match youth with a role model. The smaller the ratio
between youth and adult, the greater the progress
toward achieving the goal. When adults attend
irregularly, it upsets continuity; and when they drop
out completely, it puts a greater burden on the
coordinator. Another factor is youth inconsistency.
This results from age, parental involvement and other
competitive alternatives. Nathan and Julia Hare
proposed twelve as the target age.
4
 Their argument


--- PAGE 181 ---
is based on psychological and social principles,
tradition and the reality that any age after this may be
too late for intervention because of the peer group
and a more physical approach to manhood. Many
Rites of Passage programs service youth aged
seven through nineteen. I don’t disagree with the
Hares’ rationale, but I do understand the hesitancy
some men have expressed: honoring a 12-year-old
with the title of 
man.
Once again we return to the problem of
decreasing involvement. Many parents let the upper-
grade youth determine their participation. People
complain that there’s a shortage of youth programs,
but I disagree. Parents are simply not insisting their
boys’ attendance. Rites of Passage and similar
programs need the support of parents. Without
parental support, children will be lured by the
alternatives: sports, music, dating, peer groups and
the mass media.
These inconsistencies, both adult and youth,
provide less continuity and time on task to fulfill the
rites of passage requirements. I would recommend
that, besides addressing these issues, at least one
man should be designated for each criteria. Often
when the requirements are lumped together and no
one is assigned a particular area, nothing is
achieved. I propose that we draw from the high
school graduation requirements model and
designate that each youth satisfy each man’s
requirement in the particular area. This concrete
approach will also lend stability because, while
some adults and youth will be absent, the remaining
people can continue fulfilling their objectives. This
procedure encompasses the view that, while we
would have liked to have carried a larger number of
boys into manhood, we will concentrate on those in
regular attendance.
Many Rites of Passage programs have learned
from the scouts, gangs and fraternities, and have
incorporated symbols, patches of achievement, T-
shirts, sweaters, jackets and caps to heighten
solidarity. While I have concerns about the
overemphasis fraternities give to social activities
and Greek culture, you have to be impressed with


--- PAGE 182 ---
how the Omegas in particular, over a short period of
time, can create a desire so strong that pledgers will
be branded and swear to be a Q until the day they
die.
I am reminded of the work of Marcus Garvey and
Elijah Muhammad. These men turned “Reds” into
“Malcolms” without governmental grants and
doctorates in clinical psychology. They did it with
hard work, a knowledge of their history and a belief
in God. Nathan Hare shares that tradition:
I Am a Black Man
The evidence of anthropology now suggests
that I, the Black man, am the original man, the
first man to walk this vast imponderable earth. I,
the Black man, am an African, the exotic single
quintessence of a universal blackness. I have
lost, by force, my land, my language, in
essence, my life. I will seize it back so help me.
Toward that end, if necessary, I will crush the
corners of the earth, and this world will surely
tremble. Until I, the Black man, the first and
original man can arm in arm with my woman,
erect among the peoples of the universe a new
society, humane to its cultural core, out of which
at long last will emerge, as night moves into
day, the first truly human being that the world
has ever known.
 
I believe a conspiracy has been designed to
destroy Black boys. Black men must develop
programs like Rites of Passage, which offers adult
role models skill development, Black culture and a
male socialization process that will lead into real
manhood.
RITES OF PASSAGE PROGRAM
 
1. Organize a group of Black men willing to
participate in the program.
2. Develop study sessions with this group
discussing Black history and male
development.
3. Identify a facility and decide the


--- PAGE 183 ---
frequency and the length of the meetings
with the young brothers. (Age is
discretionary.)
4. The program should provide skill
development, Black history, male
socialization, recreation and “A Big
Brother.”
5. Recommended frequency of meetings is
weekly, with one week allocated to a
field trip, the study of Black history, the
development of skills and rites of
passage (male socialization).
6. Field trips should include prison, a drug
abuse center, a teenage pregnancy
center, a public hospital emergency
room on Saturday evenings, a best high
school honors class, the stock market,
camping and computer oriented
businesses.
7. The nine minimal national standards that
all programs should include are
spirituality, african history, economics,
politics, career development, community
involvement, physical development,
family responsibility and values which
could include the nguzo saba and maat.
 
 
The next chapter will explore the challenges
African American men endure securing a college
degree.


--- PAGE 184 ---
For the first time, we are facing a generation that will
not surpass the educational attainment of the
generation that spawned it.


--- PAGE 185 ---



--- PAGE 186 ---
CHAPTER TEN
 
African American Males on Campus
 
African Americans hold the unfortunate distinction
of being the only group in America to have more
males in prison than in college. There are
approximately 1.5 million African American males in
prison and over 650,000 African American males in
college. Let me provide an overview of important
statistics and trends interpreted from an Africentric
perspective. Of the 1,335,000 African American
students in college, 30 percent, or 267,000, attend
Black colleges. While Black colleges enroll only 20
percent of the total Black student body, they
graduate over 37 percent. Thirty-two percent of all
African American female high school graduates will
attend college, in comparison to 26 percent of
African American males. The overall retention rate
for African American students is 43 percent, 41
percent for African American female college
students, 53 percent for African American female
college athletes. It is 33 percent for African
American male students and 43 percent for African
American male college athletes.
Listed below are the 50 colleges and universities
that produced the largest number of African
American graduates.


--- PAGE 187 ---



--- PAGE 188 ---
With this quantitative data we can derive a
qualitative and ethnographic analysis, with the
emphasis and concentration being from the African
American male perspective. I mentioned earlier that
26 percent of Black male high school graduates are
attending college. In most large urban areas the
dropout rate nears 50 percent. While I have seen
figures saying that 80 percent of African American
high school students graduate from high school, I
don’t trust school districts to follow the paper trail of
students that have been expelled, pushed-out,
transferred, etc. The first glaring problem I want to
dissect is high school graduation rates. In a typically
urban African American school, there are 200
entering freshmen. For purposes of simplicity 100
will be male and 100 will be female. To substantiate
the 80 percent graduation rate, is to document that
80 males, and a total of 160 students, graduated
from high school four to five years later. What makes
it difficult for schools is that those 200 students that
entered as freshmen might have graduated
elsewhere. There is still some vagueness in terms of
what the actual graduation rate is in large urban
areas. The rates vary between 50 and 80 percent for
African American males. For the sake of this
analysis, with a thirty-point differential, it will be
divided in half, and we will use the figure of 65
percent. It is at this point that we will become more
personal and place an African American male in this
scenario and walk him through the high school and
college experience.
Our high school freshman is Jerome Brown.
Jerome is attend-ing an inner-city African American
high school. There are 200 entering freshmen


--- PAGE 189 ---
students; 100 male and 100 female. Four years
later, the year of graduation, the class no longer has
200 students. With a 35 percent drop-out rate, or a
65 percent graduation rate, we lost 70 students, and
there’s a very good chance that we could have lost
Jerome. Of the 70 students that we lost, using a ratio
of two-thirds for the males and one-third for the
females, we lost approximately 23 female students
and 47 male students. So, instead of 100 males and
100 females, on graduation day we will have 53
males and 77 females. In simple math, there is a 50
percent chance that we will not see Jerome on
graduation day from high school.
Because this chapter is looking at African
American males in college, Jerome will represent
one of the fortunate males that graduated from high
school. Of the total population of 53 males,
remember only 26 percent of that number will have
the opportunity to attend college. Twenty-six percent
of 53 equals a grand total of 14 male students of the
100 entering freshmen high school students that will
be attending college. Remember, there are more
African American males in prison than in college,
and they are the only group that has more females
attending than males. There will only be 14 males
attending college, in comparison to 26 females, 33
percent of the 77 graduating. Of the 14 African
American males that go to college, with a college
graduation rate of 33 percent, approximately five of
these students will graduate from college.
The odds are five percent that Jerome will enter
high school as a freshman and become a college
graduate. That is the grim probability facing African
American males pursuing a college education. With
those figures you begin to understand to some
degree why African American males believe they
have a better chance of selling drugs or securing a
rap contract than they do of getting a college degree.
In the following chapter economics and its impact on
the African American male are discussed. I will
assess Jerome’s chances with a college degree of
being gainfully employed and at what income level.
I thought it was very interesting that for both males
and females, athletes had a higher graduation rate


--- PAGE 190 ---
than regular students. For the female athlete, she
had a 12 percent greater chance of graduating from
college. The male had a 10 percent greater
possibility. The image is that athletes cannot handle
the rigors of college work. The reality is that they
actually perform better. There are a myriad of factors
intertwined in these statistics.
Contrary to popular belief, one of the major
reasons why African American students don’t
graduate is not because of lack of academic
preparation but the lack of financial resources. For
some strange reason, many students that receive
financial aid receive less with each passing year.
The financial package is based on the premise that
with each passing year of college the student will
earn more income. I think the White establishment
that designed this package were not aware that
there are African American college graduates who
are unemployed, so why should we assume that a
college sophomore will earn more than a freshman
and that a college junior will earn more than a
sophomore and that a college senior will earn more
than a college junior?
It is this faulty assumption that contributes to a low
retention rate unless African American parents can
help their children secure employment for internships
where the salary is commensurate with their
academic history. African Americans on athletic
scholarships have a more secure financial base,
which becomes one more reason why they graduate.
In addition, there is a larger number of athletes on
scholarships majoring in Physical Education. I am
not belittling its academic rigor, but in my opinion, it
is not as challenging as a degree in premed,
accounting, chemistry or computer science.
Another reason for the low graduation rate among
African American students is a feeling of loneliness
and a lack of belonging on many campuses,
especially White schools. College athletes benefit
from having a coach, who is often African American
even at a White school, who becomes a role model.
Another major reason for the low retention rate is
the lack of discipline and time management. Many
students who have additional responsibilities, e.g.,


--- PAGE 191 ---
athletics, employment and other extracurricular
activities, ironically improve their GPA because they
have less discretionary time available.
The issue of athletes at the collegiate level
becomes more complex when you introduce
Propositions 42, 48, 16 and 14. Each proposition
demands a higher GPA and higher scores on the
achievement tests. Many African American coaches
feel it is unfair to have higher standards for athletes
than for regular students. Secondly, the test has not
been the best barometer of college success. The
coaches are not compromising academics; they
want more weight placed on GPA rather than a
biased test. African American coaches think athletic
scholarships is an opportunity for African American
males to attend college, an option which would
otherwise be financially prohibitive. College
scholarships should be denied to them by the NCAA
before they have the opportunity to demonstrate their
academic acumen.
On the other hand David Robinson the late Arthur
Ashe, and other athletes take the opposing view that
it is not very demanding to earn a 2.0-2.2 GPA, a
16-18 on the ACT or 700-900 on the SAT. My major
concern has been that the burden, as usual, is
placed on the victim rather than on high school
teachers, elementary school teachers and coaches.
We expect the student athletes in the last two or
three years of high school, to eradicate ten years of
miseducation. Those coaches that value academics
and structure that into their program have been more
effective. I don’t think that it is an accident that
schools like the University of North Carolina,
Georgetown, Penn State, Duke, Providence
College, LaSalle University, Boston College and
Notre Dame graduate above 80 percent, and some
in the high 90s. And there are other schools, such as
University of Las Vegas, Texas at El Paso, Memphis
State, the University of Louisville, Tennessee State,
Texas Southern, Alabama State and Prairie View,
that are 20 percent and below. It is obvious that
some schools will admit you and other schools will
help you graduate.
I admire and respect John Thompson at


--- PAGE 192 ---
Georgetown University. He thought that if Patrick
Ewing in his four years at Georgetown could bring
$12,000,000 to the university in terms of TV
contracts, $11,940,000 was a pretty good return on
the $60,000 investment on his four-year scholarship.
John Thompson thought that the least that
Georgetown could do was to provide a five-year
scholarship, if necessary, tutorial service on the
airplane and in the hotel and a counselor to monitor
his progress. It did not surprise me to see Thompson
following and giving advice to his star of 10 years
during the NBA playoffs last year. Thompson
remains his role model and as a result the bond
remains. This is a major contribution to the higher
graduation rate of the male athlete over the student
that is not an athlete.
When I talk with students like Jerome and his
girlfriend, Renee, on a typical college campus and I
ask them what the ratio is between females and
males on college campuses, they tell me it’s 2 to 1.
Many say it’s 3 to 1, 4 to 1 or 5 to 1. When we
actually look at the figures, we have 818,000 African
American females, which is 61 percent, and
517,000 African American males, which is 39
percent. This is a 1.5 to 1.0 ratio. If we look at the
graduation ratio, African American females did
move from 60 percent, as a total, to 63 percent of
the graduates, and African American males went
from 40 percent down to 37 percent. The graduation
rate is 41 percent for African American females and
it’s 33 percent for African American males; an eight-
point differential. Yet when I ask people about the
graduation figures, you get the impression that the
figures multiply exponentially. Why is there a
difference between the perception and the statistical
reality in some schools where there are 100 college
students, 60 female and 40 male, and 20 or more of
the students just happen to be athletes? Many times
sisters forget about the athletes when there are
cultural activities. Unfortunately, many times athletes
don’t attend, either because of their schedule or lack
of political consciousness. Maybe sisters and
brothers forget about the 20 male athletes when they
tell me it’s 3:1 female to male. When I speak on their


--- PAGE 193 ---
campus, I may have 40 of the 61 sisters and only 10
of the 40 brothers, with 20 of the 40 being athletes. If
brothers are involved with White women or women of
other ethnic groups, oftentimes sisters will dismiss
them from the population. Of course all of this is
possible for females as well, but they’re not as
affected by athletics, political apathy and interracial
dating as African American males are. African
American males that are studious unfortunately can
be accused of acting White because they choose to
be in the library instead of someone’s dormitory
room; they might also be eliminated from the ratio. If
you refer to the table of the 50 colleges and
universities that produced the most African
American graduates, there is not one school that has
more male graduates than female. This excludes, of
course, Morehouse College, which does not admit
females. This was the first year in which North
Carolina A&T had a greater number of female
graduates. But this year there were 373 African
American female graduates to 293 African
American males. A major reason why North Carolina
A&T historically had a larger number of male
graduates than female is that the emphasis was in
engineering. African American males have fared
better in engineering, as can be seen in the
percentages of Tuskegee and Prairie View, which
also concentrate in engineering.
My major desire in this chapter is to understand
why Jerome and other African American males have
a lower retention rate than their girlfriends. The
retention rate is 41 percent for African American
females and 33 percent for African American males.
If it were not for a 10 percent higher retention rate for
the African American male athlete and the
disproportionate number of African American male
students who receive athletic scholarships, the
retention rate could be 20 percent.
Listed below are some questions to ponder
regarding disparity.
• Do African American males experience
greater institutional racism in college than
African American females?


--- PAGE 194 ---
• Do they experience more racism at Black
colleges?
• Do African American females possess
greater discipline than African American
males? If so, why?
• Do African American females manage their
time better than African American males? If
so, why?
• Do African American females have more
African American role models on campus
than African American males?
• Do African American females complete their
assignments more often than African
American males? If so, why?
• Are African American females more computer
literate? If so, why?
• Do African American females utilize the
concept of cooperative learning more
affectively than African American males? If
so, why?
• Are African American males more affected
academically by their social life? If so, why?
• Are African American males affected more by
their dating habits, which may involve more
than one female at a time?
• Are African American females more focused,
driven and goal-oriented? If so, why?
• Do African American males feel it is a more
viable option to return home to their mothers
than African American females? If so, why?
• Do African American women attend class
more than African American males? If so,
why?
• Do African American females study more than
African American males? If so, why?
• Do African American males cram more than
African American females? If so, why?
• Are African American males more affected by
peer pressure? If so, why?
• Do African American males spend more time
listening to music than African American
females? If so, why?
• Are African American males more emotionally
involved in pledging? If so, why?


--- PAGE 195 ---
• Are African American males more involved in
the liberation struggle and Black Student
Union than African American females? If so,
why?
• Could the difference in retention be the result
of a dynamic in which some mothers raise
their daughters and love their sons?
• Do African American males spend more time
getting high than African American females?
• Do African American males, excluding those
on varsity teams, engage in more sports or
get involved in more athletic activities than
African American females?
• Are African American males more affected by
car ownership than African American
females?
• Do African American males spend more time
visiting colleges than African American
females?
• Are African American males more influenced
by the option of earning money in illegal forms
than African American women, e.g., selling
drugs?
 
When you review these questions, which ones
suggest external factors and which internal factors?
Can racism be responsible for African American
males not attending class? Or spending more time
with their frat than with their books? Can the White
man be responsible for a brother trying to figure out
how he can date three sisters at the same time when
he should be completing his ten-page paper in
biology? How did the White man make African
American men drink and snort more than African
American women?
Please remember, I am the author of 
Countering
the Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys.
 I definitely
know a conspiracy when I see one, and I am very
much aware that it is not a accident that every
president in this country has been a White male and
that Black median income is only 61 percent of
White median income. If you live in a world controlled
by White men, then the greatest threat to Black men
would come not from women but from other men.


--- PAGE 196 ---
The best way to destroy the Black family is to
destroy the Black man.
I definitely believe that there is something unfair
and unjust and whatever word you want to use:
conspiracy, happenstance, a strange occurrence, for
the disproportionate number of African American
males that are placed in special education, remedial
reading and suspension. I am a strong believer in a
conspiracy, but the reason why I wanted to write this
chapter is because it is not the only factor affecting
African American males’ lower retention rate.
Jacqualine Fleming, in her book 
Blacks in College,
points out that African American males do far better
at Black colleges than they do at White colleges.
She too had a very difficult time trying to explain what
the differences are, because both Black males and
females suffer being in hostile environments, but it
seems to affect the male more. Studies also point
out that African American females at White school or
the Black school suffer at the White school because
of the hostility, overt and institutional forms of racism.
But at Black colleges, African American males seem
to do far better, because they feel more confident
about being able to secure leadership positions.
Fleming points out:
Since black, as well as white, males are
similarly deprived, they are predisposed to
interact competitively. The racial difference
serves to intensify the basically hostile nature of
male-male interactions. Black males have been
excluded from participation in a wide range of
activities and restricted to small groups of all
black social and political organizations.
Apparently, the restricted role that black males
play, both within the classroom and without, acts
to constrict intellectual gains that issue from
being an actor in campus going on. Upon
entering what is in some sense alien territory,
black males fall into the category of
subdominant males by virtue of their visibility
and small numbers. Interestingly, observers of
primate animal hierarchies find that sub-
dominate males lapse into a non-


--- PAGE 197 ---
confrontational, lethargic state of behavior that
can only be described as depression. In many
ways the developmental profiles of black males
in white colleges can also be described as
depressed. They become unhappy with college
life, they feel that they have been treated
unfairly, they display academic de-motivation
and think less of their abilities. They profess
losses of energy and cease to be able to enjoy
competitive activities. To be sure, there are
ways in which these males do act depressed in
as much as they become assertive and they
participate energetically in certain campus
activities. Nonetheless, these developments are
defensive and do little to remedy their plight.
Black men often try to work the problem out
through their interpersonal lives. They may try to
attach dominance over women or live through
children. In black colleges, which offer so many
opportunities for social ascendants, these
interpersonal strains can be ignored. 
1
2
If Black women suppress their assertive
selves to please men, then we can understand
why it is easier for them to develop their
assertive abilities on white campuses. The data
indicates that most predominately white college
campuses there are few black men, especially
among seniors. Furthermore, we know that on
predominately white campuses black males are
often undergoing depressive reactions that
cause them to withdraw academically and
psychologically. In other words, they are not men
enjoying dominance, social ascendence or their
own assertive abilities. In this context black
women may very well be able to develop their
assertive capabilities that help them hold their
own intellectually.
3
 
I remember when I was in college, and there were
1,000 African American students that were
freshmen, and four years later, only 254 of us
graduated. I knew that we did not graduate because
we were smarter; it was a result of discipline, time
management, study time, attending class, avoiding


--- PAGE 198 ---
cramming, studying together and utilizing tutors. If
you look at the 517,000 African American males in
college and the retention rate of 33 percent, that
means there are 341,000 African American males
that are not going to graduate. I wonder, will they
ever go back to college? Will they ever achieve their
goal? What is the state of their phyche? At what level
is their self-esteem?
It was difficult getting Jerome from high school into
college. I worry whether Jerome will be in the
category of the 341,000 that did not graduate or of
the 170,000 that did. I don’t like what I see when I
witness Black male failure. I have spoken in small
southern towns where the coordinator points out to
me, as we drive by, African American males
standing on the corners, who were star athletes.
These athletes knew they were going pro and
receiving million dollar contracts but unfortunately did
not make it and are now busboys in restaurants and
still talking trash on the corner about how they were
one step away from becoming a multimillionaire. I
am concerned about African American males that
drop our of college for financial reasons and end up
working at menial jobs.
My parents both worked for the post office and
they observed numerous college students working
there. Because the money was good, some left
college voluntarily or because they were forced to,
and they continued working at the post office. For
that reason, my parents did not allow me to work
there. Langston Hughes raises the question in his
poem, “What happens to a dream deferred?” I often
ask African American students what their majors
are. Invariably the five most popular majors are
business, computer science, communications,
criminal justice and accounting. The African
American community has so many problems that all
majors are welcome and necessary. Unfortunately,
there are very few African Americans, specifically
males, majoring in education. African American
children are 17 percent of the children in public
schools nationwide, but only 1.2 percent are African
American males. There are several states and over
20 colleges that have special scholarships for


--- PAGE 199 ---
African American males who will agree to teach for
several years.
The next chapter will try to explain why Marlon and
Jerome’s friends are killing each other.


--- PAGE 200 ---
Why do Black Men Kill Black Men?


--- PAGE 201 ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
 
Why Do Black Men Kill Black Men?
 
“The Lord will let the people be governed by
immature boys. Everyone will take advantage of
everyone else. Young people will not respect their
elders. And worthless people will not respect their
superiors.” Isaiah 3: 4-5 Good News Edition.
When you read that Scripture you wonder if you
are reading today’s newspaper rather than
something written two thousand years ago.
Communities are now controlled by boys, and young
people do not respect their elders. This is the first
generation of African Americans that does not
respect their elders. It is the first generation of elders
who are afraid of their children. There are parents
who are afraid of their children. Parents say they do
not know what to do with them. There are housing
developments where there are few, if any, men.
There used to be parks where if boys got into an
argument and a fight ensued, there were men in the
park who would break it up. Today there are parks
where there are 300 children and there may not be
one male present. Immature boys now distribute
justice and determine right from wrong and decide
who may have to pay with their lives. In Baltimore,
like so many cities where we have ethnic enclaves,
there is a neighborhood called Little Italy. On the
other side of the street is the African American
community, sometimes called a ghetto. Little Italy is
a working-class neighborhood, with manicured
lawns, populated by Italians. There is very little crime
in Little Italy. If there is an act of violence in Little Italy,
it becomes a newsworthy event. The media often
find out about crime in Little Italy after the men of
Little Italy have already resolved it. Please note, I
said the men of Little Italy, not the police of
Baltimore. Little Italy has very little crime, not
because of extra police that walk the streets, not
because they have an incestuous relationship with


--- PAGE 202 ---
City Hall, but because Italian men have taught Italian
boys the importance of the community and of what is
allowed and not allowed to take place there. In Little
Italy it is not surprising to see women by themselves,
including elderly women, walking the streets late at
night and not being bothered; in fact they might be
asked if they want an escort home. Across the street
in the African American neighborhood, anything and
everything is allowed to take place and only the
bizarre is reported by the media.
Consequently, if someone is shot in the Black
community across from Little Italy, that might not be
newsworthy because it happens daily. Maybe if three
to five people are shot, or maybe if a White person
was violated in the Black community the media will
cover the story. But as long as it’s the indigenous
residents, then it may not be reported.
If a Black woman was walking down the street
alone late at night and someone was walking toward
her, she would probably prefer that the person
walking toward her be a Black woman first, a White
woman second, a White male third. If it’s late at night
in this neighborhood, she would prefer the Black
male last. If you asked an Italian woman in Little Italy,
if she was walking down the street late at night and
someone was walking toward her, her first choice
would be the Italian man, then the Italian woman, the
Black woman third, and the Black male last. In the
Italian community, her man was desired first, while in
the Black community he was sought last. I could write
a book dissecting the differences between Little Italy
and the Black community because those differences
illuminate problems, causes and solutions.
Why do you think Little Italy is different from the
Black community? Little Italy could also be Little
Chinatown, Little Korea or Little Arabia. It is unfair to
compare a community of immigrants who voluntarily
came to America with their culture intact with a group
of people that were forced to come here and had
their culture stolen. Culture is very important; it is
your racial DNA. It gives you a sense of history, a
blueprint for living and direction for the future. Culture
is far more than food, dress and music. Culture is
synonymous with lifestyle, values, history, purpose


--- PAGE 203 ---
and direction. A people without their culture are a
people without a past, present and future. A people
without their culture do not know how to live. A
people without their culture are no longer a people
and they will act like animals. A people without their
culture will be afraid of each other and won’t trust
each other. They will not pool their resources to start
their own businesses or to support those that exist. A
people without their culture will be afraid to walk
down the street at three o’clock in the morning and
meet someone that looks like them because the
person that looks like them may not share their value
system — their culture. People without a culture,
people without values, are dangerous.
Little Italy, Little Chinatown, Little Korea and Little
Arabia are different, not because they receive
additional police support but because they have an
intact culture. Their culture drives them to become
economically self-sufficient and gives their boys and
girls rites of passage.
Two excellent books that describe life in African
American communities, where culture is often
nonexistent, are 
Do or Die
, by Leon Bing, and
Monster: The Autobiography of a L.A. Gang
Member,
 by “Monster” Cody Scott, whose African
name is now Sanyika Shakur. He says in the book,
“If I had been born in ’53 instead of ’63, I would have
been a Black Panther. If I had been born in Germany
in the early ’30s, I would have probably joined the
Nationalist Socialist Party. If I had been born Jewish,
I would have joined the Jewish Defense League
because I have the energy, the vitality to be part of
something with power, either constructive or
destructive. And because there was a destructive
element around me when I was growing up, I went
into the Crypts.”
1
Cody Scott described how important it was being
in a gang. He compared shooting someone with an
orgasm; it gave a sense of power. My gun became
the great equalizer.
2
I have noticed in my travels around the world,
whether I am in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles,
Toronto, Haiti, Jamaica, London, Botswana, Egypt
or Ghana, African men love standing on corners. I


--- PAGE 204 ---
have often wondered why brothers love hanging out
on corners. Are they waiting for their picture to be
taken? Do they want people to see them? What is it
they want people to see? Are they afraid that they
are going to miss something if they are inside and
not on the corner? What do they expect to see? Who
drives by those corners? And as Monster Cody says
in his book, it’s something about the nighttime that
makes corners more exciting; and we control the
night.
In my research, I have found that 95 percent of the
boys in jail were on the corners between 10 p.m. and
3 a.m. That is why I encourage parents, if you can’t
control any other time, to control this time span. I was
taught that once you know the time and the place you
have increased your chances of victory. We know
the place is the corner and we know the time is
between 10 p.m. and 3 a.m. We need to also
understand the root reason why African American
men hang out on the corner. Why is it that you see
more African American men on corners than African
American women? Why do corners provide a
greater excitement, intrigue, and mystique for men
than women? Monsters’ favorite phrase was “putting
work in for the gang.” His choice of words was very
similar to that of my father, who said he was putting
in work at the post office. I knew that meant eight-ten
hours per day, and Cody meant the same thing with
the Crypts. Gangbanging became a full-time job, and
his shift started at 8 p.m., and ended at 4 a.m.
The corner becomes more important if it becomes
an issue of turf. If we have two rival forces, then, just
like countries that are involved in military combat,
each group has to protect their turf. If we add drugs
to the equation, we have to protect turf because it’s a
distribution center. This strategy is similar for Coca
Cola or Pepsi or any other corporation protecting
their distribution system. In past generations, young
males grew up, left the gang, and secured a job.
Brothers are hanging out on corners longer because
the jobs are unavailable. While mothers would prefer
their sons to play outside, for many African American
males life has to be lived inside. When life has to be
lived in seclusion, if they can’t walk down the street


--- PAGE 205 ---
as they do in Little Italy, then many men feel they
have already died.
I am also grappling with the question, why do
Black men kill Black men? Why don’t they kill White
men? Why do Black men kill Black men more than
Black women? Why don’t Black men protect Black
women? Why don’t they protect Black children? Why
don’t they protect Black elders? Why don’t Black
males protect their turf from foreign businesses?
Could the reason that African American men don’t
protect Black women be because no one taught
them to do that? Could the reason that Black men
don’t protect their elders be because no one taught
them to do that? Could the reason that Black men
don’t protect Black children be because they have
not been taught to do that? Could the reason why
Black men don’t keep foreign businesses out of their
neighborhood be because they have not been taught
to do that? Could the reason that Black men do not
kill White people because they have not been taught
to do that? Could the reason why Black men kill
Black men be because that is what they have been
taught to do? Nathan McCall writes in 
Makes Me
Wanna Holler
 that he received 30 days in jail for
almost killing a Black man and received 12 years in
jail for robbing a White store with no injuries. Was he
taught something? Had he been taught to devalue
Black male life that day? There is a powerful scene
in the movie 
Juice
 between Tupac and his adversary
at their locker. Tupac is on the run and tells his
adversary that he isn’t — and that if he isn’t — then
you ain’t — . And if I hate myself, you know what I
think of you.
Amos Wilson describes this in Understanding
Black Adolescent Male Violence:
A sense of powerlessness and inter-personal
violence are inextricably intertwined. Absolute
powerlessness as well as absolute power
corrupts. For violence has its breeding ground
in impotence and apathy. True, aggression has
been so often and so regularly escalated into
violence that anyone discouragement and fear
that could be understood. What is not seen is


--- PAGE 206 ---
that the state of powerlessness which leads to
apathy which can be produced by the above
plans or the uprooting of aggression, is the
source of violence. As we make people
powerless, we promote their violence rather
than its control. Deeds of violence in our society
are performed largely by those trying to
establish their self-esteem, to defend their self-
image and to demonstrate that they too are
significant. Regardless of how derailed or
wrongly used these motivations express it, they
are still the manifestation of positive
interpersonal needs. We cannot ignore the fact
that no matter how difficult their redirection
might be, these needs, themselves, are
potentially constructive. Violence arises not out
of superfluity of power, but out of
powerlessness. Violence is the expression of
impotence. Having accepted the notion
promulgated by his white oppressors — that he
will never measure up to their “projected as
universal” standards, never be “as good” as
they — he vindictively asserts that they will never
be as “bad” as he. Thus, he finds near erotic
delight in demonstrating himself as the
“baddest” whoever. In this game he has a better
than sporting chance to win; in this game he
makes the rules. The essence of the black on
black criminal is self-hatred or self-alienation.
These can only be learned. Self-hatred can only
occur as a result of the self having been made
to appear to be hateful, ugly, degrading,
rejected, associated with pain, non-existent or
devoid of meaning, and adherently inferior.
Such appearances and associations are the
fruits of white American narcissistic racist
projection against the African American
community. 
3
 
Why do Black men kill Black men? Because their
anger and frustration is displaced.
Again Wilson provides the clue:
Frustration can and does produce a number
of consequences of which hostile aggression is


--- PAGE 207 ---
of consequences of which hostile aggression is
only one. Generally, the hostile aggressive
reactions to frustrations may be of two types —
direct and displaced. Direct hostile aggression
refers to the situation wherein reactionary
aggression is focused directly against the
perceived cause and source of frustration.
Should the cause or source remain hidden,
ambiguous, intangible, or more commonly, so
powerful that a hostile, aggressive attack
against it would expose the attacker to severely
painful retaliatory injuries, deprivation, injurious
loss of the various types and possible
annihilation, that attack may be redirected
towards some object, person, or group other
than the original cause or source of frustration.
This type of redirected hostile aggression is
referred to as displaced hostile aggression. In
this instance, the aggressive individual or party,
pressed by anger and compelling need to
express that anger yet constrained from
expressing it directly finds partial release by
attacking a less dangerous target.
4
 
Why do Black men kill Black men? Because they
are afraid and are not allowed to kill White people.
Why do Black men kill Black men? Because that’s
what they are allowed to do. That’s what they are
taught to do and there are few consequences. They
are encouraged and given more guns and lighter
sentences.
Why don’t Black men protect Black women,
elders, and children? Because they have not been
taught to do that. They have been taught to hate
themselves. Their anger cannot be converted to love
unless they are taught their culture. It is very difficult,
if not impossible, to love and protect someone until
you first love yourself.
Earlier in the chapter in reference to “Monster,” we
said that a male living in a particular neighborhood
could become either a Black Panther, a Nazi, a
member of the JDL (Jewish Defense League), or
Crypt — that he was a chameleon who could
become whatever the community wanted him to
become. That reminds me of when King marched on


--- PAGE 208 ---
Washington in 1963 and there was a reduction of
crime that day. It reminds me of Huey Newton and
the Black Panther party in Oakland, and in that
neighborhood where the Panthers were stronger,
there also was a reduction in crime. When Nelson
Mandela first visited New York there was also a
reduction of crime in Brooklyn and Harlem.
It inspires me and lets me know that there is hope
for saving our youth. Our youth are chameleons and
they will be whatever we want them to be. Cody
Scott, who was once known as “Monster,” has now
become Sanyika Shakur, and the only variable that
changed was culture; rather than being a Crypt with
displaced aggression, he is now a member of the
Republic of Africa and now understands the enemy.
The White establishment is cognizant of his
consciousness and they have placed him in solitary
confinement. As long as he was “Monster,” there
was complete access to all inmates, so that he could
teach them killing techniques.
In my earlier book, 
Hip-Hop versus Maat,
 I
mention the killing exercise where we asked boys in
South Central why they would kill someone. People
that are sane agree on those items they would kill
and die for. People who are insane have far more
reasons why they would kill someone than die for
them. We mentioned that they gave us thirty-seven
reasons why they would kill somebody. Things as
insignificant as — because he looked at me, he
stepped on my shoe, ate one of my french fries, said
hello to my lady, I just didn’t like him — and they went
on and on. Then we asked which ones would you die
for, and they wanted to retract them, but we said, No.
“What you would kill for is what you would die for.”
We have said that African American men kill
themselves with their futures ahead of them, while
White men kill themselves with their futures behind
them. Many times the police assume that any
brothers that are together must be a gang, any act of
violence has to be gang violence, any crime has to
be drug related and their next incorrect assumption
is that any death has to be homicide. For many
African American males, you can’t tell the difference
between homicide and suicide. Amos Wilson


--- PAGE 209 ---
provides the analysis:
Through committing homicide, the black on
black criminal steeped in his existential,
internalized white supremacist instigated guilt,
often seeks his own death; he desperately
searches for his execution. He provokes others
to do what he, himself, did not do that to kill him
as a way to kill himself as a way of committing
suicide. He is determined that his subliminal
guilt must not go unpunished. So he placed
himself in harm’s way. He compels himself to
live dangerously. He falls for the ultimate sting.
Carrying another man’s guilt, he pretends to live
without it. He thinks of himself as a black
pantherized predator, when in reality he has
been chumped into playing the part of the
sacrificial lamb.
5
 
“When African American males drive away from
the police in a hundred mile per hour chase and end
up driving into a pole, was than an automobile
accident or was that suicide?” When you have three
or four macho brothers who think that they are going
to be able to defeat forty gang members in shoot-
out, should the police record that as a homicide or a
suicide? When an opposing gang member walks in
rival gang turf, knowing that there is a war going on,
should that be recorded as a homicide or a suicide?
When African American males are racing each other
down congested expressways at one hundred miles
per hour and there is a car crash, should that be
recorded as an accident or suicide? Of all the
African American males who O.D. on heroin and
cocaine, should all those be registered as drug-
related deaths or do you think that some of those
could have been suicide?
One of the most challenging questions I have had
to answer was, How do you convince a young
person to value long-term gratification when he
believes in short-term gratification, when he is aware
that the life expectancy of a gang member or drug
dealer is 19 years? One of the reasons why many
middle-class adults have failed in counseling our
youth is that they are using long-term gratification as


--- PAGE 210 ---
youth is that they are using long-term gratification as
an incentive. If you’re not confident of living past
retirement, you may not want to stay in school
learning about Columbus, Lincoln and Washington. If
your life expectancy is only nineteen years, you may
not want to work at McDonald’s for $4.35 per hour
until you die. If your life expectancy is nineteen years,
you may not want to save your money and buy a
Toyota, Chevrolet, Ford or Honda when you can
steal a Lexus and drive it this weekend.
What do you say to a Monster who is already
eighteen and has one more year to live? What do
you say to someone who has already tested positive
for HIV? I observed an entire class that was tested
for HIV and almost one-third of the class tested
positive. People who hate themselves don’t have
much compassion for people with whom they are
sexually involved. I have heard angry White male
homosexuals who were angry at the realization that
they were going to die and wanted to take as many
people as possible to hell with them. The last
chapter will provide solutions to counter this
conspiracy against our males.


--- PAGE 211 ---
We can save African American boys with conscious,
consistent, African American men.


--- PAGE 212 ---



--- PAGE 213 ---
CHAPTER TWELVE
 
Counter Conspiracy Solutions
 
Here are some case studies that have been
based on actual experiences.


--- PAGE 214 ---
Case Study I
 
Ron Gilliam is entering his fourth year of college
and has hopes of being drafted as a running back by
the pros. Ron has won numerous awards as an
athlete, dating back to his middle school playing
days. I asked Ron how he was able to stay in school
when so many of his friends had either dropped out
or were pushed out. “I liked playing ball, and there
was more competition playing school ball than
sandlot and park district. I didn’t like school very
much, but looked forward to 3:15 p.m. when practice
started,” said Ron. “They held me back a year in
elementary school, but I knew they couldn’t hold me
back a second year because I would be 15-years-
old. Some of my friends said I was a better
ballplayer than anybody else in middle school
because I was older and bigger. I was determined to
show them in high school, where the upperclassmen
were larger and older, that I was good.”
Ron was happy to know some high school
coaches occasionally watched his team play.
“Sometimes the high school coach would watch the
middle school team play. I heard he asked about me
and when they expected me to graduate. I knew then
I was going to graduate, but maybe not on time,” he
said. “A lot of my friends played ball after school, but
it was in the park or around the house. For some
reason sports didn’t have the same effect on them.
Most of them dropped out around their sophomore
year because they didn’t like the teacher or vice
versa.” Ron continued. “I knew how they felt because
they were in remedial classes with the dumb people,
and it was embarrassing. I knew I wasn’t bright, but I
persevered for practice, and then I became a star. I
knew if I could endure 9 a.m. to 3 p.m., I could go to
the pros. Playing ball was always easier than
diagramming sentences.”
He added, “My high school coach only had to talk
twice to my teacher about changing my grades. He
always felt the best way was to develop my
schedule, giving me a light, easy load and going to
summer school each year. My college coach used


--- PAGE 215 ---
the same procedure. I don’t know what I’ll do if I don’t
get drafted. I don’t have enough hours to graduate,
and hadn’t thought about any other career except
running back. I feel pretty good. I didn’t drop out, I
graduated from elementary school and high school.
I’m in college, and one telephone call away from the
NFL, concluded Ron.”


--- PAGE 216 ---
Case Study II
 
Lawrence Drew has just graduated from
elementary school as the top student in the class. He
has big plans for repeating this feat in high school,
earning a college scholarship, and becoming a
doctor. Lawrence has a strong mother, Cynthia, who
runs a tight ship. She is a single parent; she was
divorced when he was five years old. Lawrence may
see his father once a year. The mother is an
accountant, and has been taking courses over the
past three years in hopes of becoming a Certified
Public Accountant. I had the opportunity to visit them
one evening, and asked about Lawrence’s success.
Cynthia responded, “Nothing but the Lord. I pray
constantly, because the streets are so dangerous.
Lawrence calls me at work when he gets home from
school. He knows to do his homework first; if he
does not have any, or not enough for an hour, I
bought him workbooks to supplement it. He can
watch television, but for only two hours each day. We
also have one hour for reading a library book of his
choice. He writes a paper about the book that is due
before he goes rollerskating on Saturday. We read
the Bible daily, and attend church regularly.”
I asked Lawrence, who is very quiet, if he could
explain his success. Lawrence added, “My friends
sometimes call me a sissy because I don’t play as
long as they do, and because I get good grades. I try
to get my mom to let me play more basketball and
learn martial arts. I think she is becoming more
understanding. She is tough, but what can I say? She
runs it, and it’s not that bad being valedictorian.


--- PAGE 217 ---
Case Study III
 
Jamaal Brock is in eighth grade in a private
school. He was labeled a behavioral disordered
(BD) student in fourth grade at the neighborhood
public school. His parents objected at the staff
meeting where the decision was made. Mrs. Brock,
a schoolteacher, said that if he must be placed, she
preferred learning disabled. When children are
placed in special education, there is a
disproportionate number of Whites placed in LD
versus Blacks in BD and EMR. The psychologist,
principal, and teacher were adamant that Jamaal
should be placed in BD. The Brocks grudgingly
conceded, but decided if there was no improvement
they would place him in a small private school the
following year. The decision in June was not to
mainstream Jamaal back into his regular class but to
another year of BD. The Brocks, who were unable to
place Jamaal in a private school during the middle of
the school year at the time of the staff meeting,
enrolled their son in a highly acclaimed private
school in the fall.
Jamaal is an only child and likes a lot of attention.
He has a strong need to be liked by his peers and is
easily influenced. He is a good student when he
concentrates and pays attention. Howalton is a small
private school with a student-teacher ratio of 20 to 1.
The school prides itself on being academically
challenging, with a good measure of discipline.
Students who act up get a chance to visit Mr.
Watson and his paddle before they call their parents
to explain what happened. I talked to Jamaal about
his new school. Jamaal offered these remarks: “At
my old school, I had more fun. We would throw
spitballs at the girls until we were sent downstairs.
That wasn’t so bad, because we missed all our
assignments. This school doesn’t play. I don’t know if
the school is so strict or the students are chicken, but
I do know what went on at PS 192 doesn’t go on
here. My report card is OK. I got three C’s, three B’s,
and one A. I miss my old friends, but my parents feel
this is a better school. I would like to go to a public


--- PAGE 218 ---
high school, but I think my parents will send me to
another private school. I don’t blame them; I haven’t
been in Mr. Watson’s office since fifth grade, and my
report card is better.”


--- PAGE 219 ---
Case Study IV
 
Carl Hampton is graduating from high school
tonight. Watching proudly from the audience are his
mother, his two younger sisters, and his uncle.
Tonight may appear easy, but the journey was filled
with obstacles. Carl’s mother was emotionally and
physically abused by her husband, Carl’s father. He
neglected Carl and his sisters and officially left home
when Carl was nine, entering the critical fourth-grade
failure syndrome. Coincidentally, his uncle Brian, his
mother’s younger brother, was just returning home
from college after graduation. Uncle Brian stepped
in and had a major impact on Carl’s life. A few days
after graduation, Brian, Carl and I had this
conversation. I asked Carl and Brian to describe the
graduation journey. Carl said, “I was just out there.
My parents were breaking up, my mother said I
would be the ‘man of the house,’ and my friends
were into ditching school and stealing. My mother
had more than she could handle just paying the bills,
and ‘raising’ my sisters.”
Brian commented, and while he spoke, Carl’s look
of admiration told the story. Uncle Brian had a
degree in computer programming and design. Carl
did not have his first male teacher until eighth grade.
Consequently, if it had not been for his uncle, he
would not have seen a Black male academic role
model until then. Brian said, “I love my sister, always
have, and anything I could do to help, I always tried. I
would take Carl to games, programs and sometimes
let him just hang out with me on Saturday, but only if
he had a good week in school. I would represent him
at those programs where fathers’ attendance is
encouraged. I knew my sister was a good person,
but she was weak in choosing men and would
possibly be the same in ‘raising’ one.”


--- PAGE 220 ---
Case Study V
 
Robert Wagner, a seventh-grader, is a small-to-
medium-sized kid with curly hair who speaks
Standard English. His favorite subjects are math and
science, and he has excellent critical thinking skills.
He has a knack for taking tests, but doesn’t do as
well on his report card. He is slightly hyperactive, but
teachers have found this occurs when he’s not being
stimulated. I had an opportunity to talk to Robert’s
teacher. I asked Mrs. Pierce how Robert was able to
avoid the decline in achievement demonstrated by
large numbers of Black boys. She stated, “Robert
simply has innate ability. A couple of teachers over
the years have suggested special placement for
Robert, but how can you rationalize that when he
often has the highest scores on achievement tests?
Robert is not working at his potential, but that does
not warrant special education. Most teachers simply
like Robert. He’s a loving kid, speaks well and
avoids getting caught like most boys when doing
something mischievous.”
In presenting the Conspiracy workshop across the
country, frequently someone will offer themselves or
someone they know to refute that a conspiracy
exists. Often, they expand their premise and suggest
that just as they or someone else made it, so can all
Black boys. In that same spirit, good-intentioned
teachers say, “If I can just save one ...” Carl Boyd, a
good friend of mine, counters with, “If I can just lose
one.” Are we willing to accept the figures that at birth
there are 1.03 Black boys to 1.0 Black girls, but at
eighteen there are 1.0 Black men to 1.8 Black
women? Are we willing to accept the loss of one of
every two? What number are you willing to lose?
Should we be satisfied that Ron, Lawrence, Jamaal,
Carl, and Robert survived the conspiracy? Is there
anything we can learn from these case studies that
we can use for others less fortunate?
Let’s review the factors we have seen in the case
studies.


--- PAGE 221 ---
Constructive programs can help Black boys enter
manhood.
 
Conversely, those brothers who do not possess
these variables are at risk. These brothers can be
described as follows:
Not on a school athletic team 
Nonacademic household 
Lower economic class (cannot afford private
school)


--- PAGE 222 ---
Nonreligious 
Macho 
Influenced by peer group 
Low teacher expectations 
No significant role model 
Right-brain thinking 
African features 
Black English 
No societal survival skills
 
How many boys do you know who are not on a
team, come from a nonacademic household, are
impoverished, do not attend church, are aggressive,
hang out with a negative peer group, receive low
teacher expectations or are placed in special
education, are in a large classroom, have no
advocate, think better relationally than abstractly,
have dark skin with short nappy hair and broad
features, speak Black English, and lack Western
sophistication? These boys are high risk and are
prime candidates for not entering manhood. Every
effort, program, person and dollar should be
allocated to avoid these tragedies.
In retrospect, please note that these are only
partial solutions to our problem. If we know that
placing a boy on a school athletic team may
encourage him to graduate, it should be pursued. If
we can show parents that they do make a difference
and that monitoring homework and television and
supplementing classwork is significant, it may
motivate more parents. If we can show parents that
dollars invested in education will bring a greater
return than their new car note or clothing accounts,
and weekend recreation, it may alter expenditures. If
we can show families that “the Lord is able,” and to
“ask anything that you will in [His] name,” it may
increase the number of worshipers. If we steer boys
to the center of the continuum between macho and
sissy, we may be able to redefine manhood.
The chances of boys falling to the right of center
(more intellectual than physical) is greatly reduced if
parents allow unlimited time on the streets and do
not know their son’s friends. Not all peer groups are
negative; Ron Gilliam’s peer group is his


--- PAGE 223 ---
teammates, and Lawrence Drew’s peer group is his
church choir and Simba. Parents need to understand
the peer group’s desire to evaluate how well a
brother can handle himself either athletically or
defensively. Parents make a critical mistake going
from one extreme to another by moving their sons
from the basketball court to piano, rather than half
the day in the library or with the piano, and the other
half in martial arts or basketball.
If we know the impact that teachers’ expectations,
student-teacher ratios, and placement in special
education have on children’s futures, we should visit
the classroom at least once, exchange telephone
numbers with the teacher, and bring Black
professional educators to those special education
placement staffings. If we understand that the reason
we are “successful” is not because we have some
great talent but because someone took the time to
help us develop it, we would reach back and help
other family, block and church members. Uncle Brian
saved a Black boy from futility. If teachers
understand that Black children, and particularly Black
boys, have a culture that encourages a right-brain
approach and alter their curriculum to utilize this
strength, and if parents understand that from the
fourth grade on, their culture needs to include a left-
brain curriculum which encourages analytical
applications, we can possibly arrive at an
equilibrium.
If teachers could overcome their value judgments
of beauty and feel the same way about dark skin,
and little Black boys with nappy hair and broad
features as they do about Renee, who has light skin,
long hair, “pretty” eyes, lace dresses and ribbons in
her hair, then Black boys might have an equal
chance. If teachers would not place a value judgment
on Black English and would learn how to teach
Standard English without condemning the child, and
if Black parents realized how significant language is
to student achievement. We need parents and
teachers to talk more to each other and share similar
values.
The last reason for that was identified was
societal survival skills. Black boys need to be taught,


--- PAGE 224 ---
in an African frame of reference, the distinction
between a battle and a war. I am reminded of the
movie 
Ragtime,
 starring, Howard Rollins, chose to
war rather than battle the White racists who
vandelized his new car. He decided that vindicating
this act was worth losing his wife, child, job, and
ultimately his life. Do you know how many Black boys
lose their lives or their freedom because of how they
respond to the police? When I was growing up, four
of my friends and I were playing ball in an alley. A
police car drove down the alley, and two officers
asked us if we had seen two teenagers accused of a
recent robbery. Four of us answered their questions,
but the other decided he “wasn’t telling the ‘pigs’
nothing.” The police decided one inconvenience
deserved another and took him to the station until his
parents signed for his release.
Many Black boys arrive at this position of militancy
without having any dialogue with their parents or
other respected adults. I began by saying that these
societal survival skills need to be taught from an
African frame of reference. I am not suggesting that
we not stand up for what is right, but I am stating that
we need to determine, in a logical manner, how
much are we willing to sacrifice. Secondly, standing
up for an issue does not negate the importance of
how
 you express your views. Thirdly, it concerns me
how militant we can be over a car or questions in an
alley, but when it’s time to vote, boycott, buy Black
products and volunteer time to the Black community,
we find very few men standing up. There is a
difference between a battle and a war. The same
people that criticize Dr. King for being passive don’t
realize that the man believed in nonviolent resistance
and did not back down on his disdain for the
Vietnam War. Dr. King died over Vietnam, not over
a brother stepping on his shoes or talking to his lady.
This same failure to differentiate battles and wars
follows Black boys into the classroom. Black boys
choose to make a war out of situations with their
classmates, teachers and principal. In chapter six I
made reference to a defiant boys with his arms
folded. The boy decided to take a stand. The
teacher said, “Get back to work,” and he folded his


--- PAGE 225 ---
arms and looked either down or away. He chose not
to unfold his arms or make eye contact. Before
teachers reading this book start nodding their
heads, the fundamental lesson here is that Black
boys have not been taught other ways to express
their manhood. We need men, sensitive female
teachers and parents to find healthier expressions.
I believe we have to give our children, especially
Black boys, something to lose. Children make
foolish choices when they have nothing to lose.
Children think twice about drinking, smoking,
stealing and becoming pregnant when they have
something to lose. Boys shoot people for stepping
on their shoes when they don’t feel good about
themselves. These acts really become suicide
missions. When boys behave like this in school, they
are indirectly expressing a desire to be expelled
because they don’t feel good about their
achievement. Even the “athlete student” who doesn’t
like his classes understands the difference between
a battle and a war. He will not defy a teacher if he
thinks it may impinge upon his privilege to play. A
boy who has self-esteem, identified talents, family or
racial pride, teacher or coach expectations,
scholarship, career plans, or faith in God will make
sensible choices between battles and wars.
Large numbers of Black boys have been
suspended because they refused to say yes or no
ma’am or sir, apologize, take off their hats, alter their
walk, talk more softly, smile or change their body
language. Robert Wagner survived the conspiracy
not because he was quiet in class but because he
found that talking more softly protected him from
getting caught. When he did get caught he was
smart enough to smile at the teacher, apologize and
get back to work. He did not think talking to his friend
in class was a war. It was a battle he would like to
have won, but if he fought the battle and lost, he
would not be around for the war. We have lost a lot of
brothers in battle; 
and in the war to save the Black
family, we have very few brothers available.


--- PAGE 226 ---
You cannot teach a child you do not love. You cannot
teach a child you do not respect. You cannot teach a
child you do not understand.
 
The objective of this book has been to pinpoint
why, when and how African American boys are
denied the skills necessary for manhood, and what
strategies can be developed to negate the
conspiracy and enhance African American male
development. We are involved in a cultural struggle.
Culture is more than your music, dress or the food
you eat. Culture is everything you do; it’s your
lifestyle which results from the way you perceive
yourself within the context of the world. A part of our
culture should be the successful transition from
boyhood to manhood. One measure of cultural
success can be defined as securing a high ratio of
boys making this transition. We must develop
cultural strategies, changes in our lifestyle, which
achieve this objective.


--- PAGE 227 ---
I sincerely believe it takes a man to develop boys
into men. Please do not misquote or misinterpret
me; I did not say a single female parent could not
develop her son into a man, but she does not need
to attempt such a significant act alone. African
American social scientists were quick to refute
Moynihan’s position that African American families
lacked male input by illustrating our extended family
tradition. Sixty-two percent of our children are reared
by single parents, but very few families received no
input from a male figure, e.g., grandfather, father,
brother, uncle, nephew, cousin, neighbor, lover or
friend. While social scientists were theoretically
correct to negate Moynihan’s analysis, until we
consciously utilize our extended family tradition to
eradicate the conspiracy, to whose benefit is its
existence? Very few African American women are
consciously aware that their son needs a positive
role model, that the family, streets, television, school
and church institutions come up lacking, and that a
concerted effort between them and a male extended
family member must actively fill the void. Until African
American women admit that only men can make
boys into men, and African American men become
responsible for giving direction to at least one male
child, the conspiracy will continue.
Every concerned African American man should
ask himself if he is providing some positive direction
to at least one male child. Concerned
administrators, teachers and parents should solicit
men to speak in the schools that sorely lack a male
presence. I don’t mean asking celebrities such as
Andrew Young and Jesse Jackson, but your local
bus driver, mailman, etc., who in his own way is
trying to be consistent. Hopefully, this will not only
inspire male children but motivate African American
men to become more responsible. African American
men, especially teachers, should offer to teach at
least one year in the primary division. Librarians and
teachers should make available as much literature
as possible about African American male
achievements, particularly outside the professions of
entertainment and sports.
Parents are quick to say, “Television is destroying


--- PAGE 228 ---
the minds of our children, and I can’t keep up with the
boy when he goes outside.” My response is: as
powerful as ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox and CABLE are,
they cannot force you to turn your television set on. If
television is a problem, it is because you are not
controlling your household. If the streets are a
problem, it is because you are not controlling your
child’s schedule. Children cannot raise themselves,
and parents should not allow television or the streets
to try. Conscientious parents create activities to
replace television viewing.
A single parent is different from single parenting.
Single parenting assumes the entire burden;
conscientious single parents enroll their child in
martial arts, little league, carpentry, band, etc.
Concerned parents realize their children want to
interact with their peer group, but what they do
should receive your input. My extended family,
grandparents, aunts, uncles, neighbors and friends
exposed me very early to the dangers of the streets
with functional field trips to drug abuse centers, jails,
and neighborhood hospitals on Friday evenings. The
experiences are memorable to this day and have
enhanced my desire to have a life-style free of dope
and crime.
The business community could benefit from a
reduction of street crime. Black businesses are
saddled with higher costs because of vandalism,
inventory shrinkage, and having to employ additional
security. Sales decline because the streets are not
safe for customers.
Businesses could help their plight by employing a
teenager, if for nothing more than 5 to 10 hours per
week. This short term expense may pay handsome
long-term benefits with less inventory shrinkage,
reduction of armed guards, and increased sales due
to safe streets. Businesses should take full
advantage of publicity to inform the African
American community of their intentions. Black
businesses should remove the “attitude” that they are
doing the customer a “favor” with their existence, and
express their concern for their customers. (Some
European Americans may be racist, but most show
their satisfaction with your patronage.) I am also a


--- PAGE 229 ---
strong advocate of youth volunteering their services
to learn necessary skills. One summer, I chose to
volunteer with an electrical firm. The employer could
not believe I wanted to volunteer, and I imagine his
shock motivated his approval. During my internship I
began to receive bus money, and a small salary, but
more importantly, I learned the mechanics of
electricity that will last a lifetime!
The million-dollar question that every group,
conference, and concerned committee asks is, “How
are we going to reach men between 18 and 30?” It
often amazes me that people who raise this question
discuss it in the Hyatt Regency, the Marriott and the
Hilton, while the people they’re discussing have very
little opportunity to pay the registration fees or to be
comfortable sharing in this kind of setting. I often
wonder whether they really want to reach this group.
It appears to me that most people are comfortable
talking with people that have similar experiences.
Some vegetarians don’t feel comfortable around
people that eat chitterlings. Some Christians are not
comfortable being around Muslims and vice-versa.
Some people that live in the suburbs and are middle
income aren’t comfortable around people who live in
the city and may be lower income. Do we honestly
think that having a conference about the plight of
Black males at a downtown hotel can solve their
problems? Do we leave these conferences with a
plan of action that will take us to their community?
Do we really love the very brothers that we talk
about?
I will never forget a National Urban League
Conference held in Atlanta. A street brother found
out about the program and came over to the hotel
and asked whether he could earn his registration fee
by doing some work because he wanted to
participate. It just blew the minds of most of the
participants that were there.
In order to save older men 18 to 25-years-old, we
are going to have to devise a marketing outreach
strategy. A design that was similar to that of Marcus
Garvey, the Nation of Islam, Jehovah’s Witnesses
and progressive Christian churches practicing
liberation theology. We will not save this group with


--- PAGE 230 ---
institutions that believe the only answers exist 
inside
of their buildings. I am so glad that Elijah Muhammad
did not wait for Detroit Red to be released from
prison to find him.
The review of teenage pregnancy programs
nationwide indicates that 90 percent counsel the
female. We must believe that men are also
responsible. Maybe we feel that this group is too
difficult to work with, or that it’s too burdensome to
organize them. I reiterate: I think the first step in
solving the problem for this age group is to ask
ourselves, “Do we really want to interact with this
group directly?” If the answer is yes, then the second
step is to quit having conferences at downtown
hotels and have the programs in the community
where these brothers reside.
Also, we have to quit designing these teenage
pregnancy programs around the table with coffee
and doughnuts. I suggest that a better way to attract
males would be with male counselors. A man would
play basketball with the male clients and discuss the
same issues without coffee and doughnuts. For the
basketball court, a counselor could substitute a
weight room, a vocational training room or a
pooltable, all situations that many female social
workers wouldn’t even consider.
As much as I dislike Jehovah’s Witnesses
knocking on my door, I respect them for believing in
their position and being willing to take it to the
streets. This is what we are going to have to do if
we’re going to save our males in the prime of their
lives.
After we have resolved the major hurdle, the will
and the commitment to want to interact with the men
directly, we must then provide them with shock
treatment.
This shock treatment would include taking them to
a prison and letting them talk to hard core but now
conscious inmates. We would take them to a drug
abuse program and let them witness how difficult it is
to withdraw. It would include a trip to a public hospital
on a Saturday at midnight to view the tremendous
volume of emergencies, and then to the morgue. It
would incorporate a movie on what crack does to the


--- PAGE 231 ---
brain.
I am not naive. I am very much aware that for some
brothers these experiences will not be a shock
treatment but will be business as usual. This is why
my research has tried to concentrate on intervening
at earlier ages. It is more difficult to shock someone
who has experienced 18 or more years of a negative
lifestyle. For many of our brothers who are moving as
fast as Detroit Red, only prison provides the
opportunity to fully know their predicament. We have
a very “captive audience” of approximately 800,000
African American males waiting for dedicated
teachers who can provide shock treatment.
The African American community cannot afford to
lose this many men, while America builds a billion-
dollar prison industry with poor White workers in rural
America — business that only rehabilitates 15
percent and has an 85 percent recidivism rate. We
need a major organization to negotiate with wardens
and have conferences at prison sites. Minister
Farrakhan from the Nation of Islam has already said
that he wants prisoners released and taken to an
independent land site. What are other leaders
saying?
Returning to my original statement that these
activities are forms of shock treatment, unfortunately,
for some of our males in this age group, this will not
be shocked. Some have experienced greater
atrocities and more horrifying experiences.
However, there are some males who would be
affected by this approach and for that reason it
needs to be implemented. For those that would not
be, we will unfortunately see them in prisons and
hopefully not the morgue. As long as they are 
alive,
we have an opportunity to 
rehabilitate
.
The second step after the shock treatment I label,
Kunjufu’s Holistic Approach, which includes
spirituality, African and African American history, an
understanding of racism, time management, talent
identification and development, proper diet and
nutrition, an understanding of economics, becoming
a member of a positive peer group, and joining an
organization. Let’s review these areas in some
detail.


--- PAGE 232 ---
I believe that any one of these areas can develop
our males to reach their full potential. The more
factors working congruently, the more effective the
process. When I provide consultations to social
service agencies, I recommend that the staff
determine which members will be responsible for
each area. Any client participating in the program
will have to interact with each staff member. The staff
will expose the participant to the necessary
information in all areas.


--- PAGE 233 ---
Spirituality
 
One of the major reasons for the rehabilitation of
Malcolm X was his coming to grips with his
relationship with God. I am a Christian and I am very
proud of my relationship with my Lord and Savior,
Jesus Christ. This book is not being used as a
vehicle to argue about God, to encourage males to
submit themselves to God. I have read numerous
articles on this topic; submission in any form is
difficult for males. I believe that this is also the major
reason for males having a much higher suicide rate
than females — the lack of desire to submit and
share their problems with God. In this area, males
should be taught the necessity of submission and
then should learn how to pray and read Scriptures.


--- PAGE 234 ---
African and African American History
 
I’m positive that one of the major reasons for the
success of the Nation of Islam and most Christian
churches that have been able to attract men is they
have provided the group with an opportunity to learn
and appreciate their culture. Many men have been
taught very little about their history. They, like our
people, have been given a history in which on the
first day we were in Africa, the second day we were
on the boat, and the remaining part of the course
was slavery in America. I suggest that if African
American men were able to internalize the
personalities of Imhotep, King Ramses, King
Akhenaten, Toussaint-Louverture, Nat Turner,
Marcus Garvey, Dr. King and Malcolm X, we would
experience self-love. Self-hatred and homicide
would decline.


--- PAGE 235 ---
Racism
 
Many of our males have not been taught that
racism is a sign of insecurity, not inferiority. People
that are secure are comfortable with differences.
Only insecure people have to rationalize that
because they are different. If African people were
inferior, then there would be no need for
discrimination. I argue that racists know more about
African Americans than we know about ourselves. In
this section, we would explain to the men how
special they are and how afraid this country is of
African American males reaching their full potential.
This explains lynching and castration.


--- PAGE 236 ---
Time Management
 
Time is the most important resource. It is more
valuable than cars, clothes, money or a mansion. Yet
many African American males waste the most
valuable resource standing on the corner. They have
allowed this country to reduce them to a dollar bill. If
the country no longer employs them, they hang out on
the corner and sulk. We would establish the need for
African American men to develop a time chart, so
that they will become conscience of how they’re
spending their twenty-four hours. We will also
encourage them so that when they cannot find work,
they will use their time either to acquire a skill or to
volunteer in an area where they can learn.


--- PAGE 237 ---
Talent Identification and Development
 
In my earlier book, 
Motivating and Preparing
Black Youth For Success
, I indicated that many
people will never find their talents. It is important that
a counselor or a concerned adult encourage males
to find out what their interests and strengths are and
to match careers with their interests. I want to stress
that talents are not just in sports and music, but are
also in reading, writing, language arts, computer
skills, concentration skills, eye-hand coordination,
and visual, creative, and mechanical skills.


--- PAGE 238 ---
Diet and Nutrition
 
African American males probably have the worst
diet in America. They smoke more cigarettes, drink
more liquor, use more hard drugs, eat less fruit and
salad, and consume more fried foods and red meat
than any other group. We need to teach African
American men how to reduce their red meat in-take,
to consume more natural products, to drink more
water, exercise, and stay away from nicotine,
caffeine and hard drugs. When Malcolm was
released from prison, rumor has it that he was so
disciplined that he never chewed gum or ate candy
any more.


--- PAGE 239 ---
Economics
 
Economics is a very important area, especially for
the 18-25 age group. History and culture alone are
not going to be effective if we cannot provide men
employment. One of the major reasons for the
success of the Nation of Islam, besides introducing
the males to God, is giving them 300 newspapers,
fish, bean pies and power products to sell. As much
as I dislike the drug dealer, he can be credited with
providing jobs in our community, while the Black
middle class works for someone else. We need
African Americans that will create jobs in our
neighborhoods. We are not going to save this age
group without providing them with employment.
There are only two ways of doing it: 
asking
 the
government to provide a national job bill and/or
providing
 the jobs in our community ourselves by
spending $300 billion with each other.


--- PAGE 240 ---
Peer Group and Organizations
 
When you allow anyone to have bad habits for 18-
25 years, it is very difficult to break those bad habits.
I often tell youth that the most important decision of
their lives will be the friends they choose. I say that
the group that you 
spend
 time with will be the group
that you 
end
 up with and it will shape your
personality. Therefore, a very easy way to become
successful is to choose positive friends and
organizations. Unfortunately, the gangs don’t receive
an enormous amount of competition from other
groups in the community. The combination of their
material possessions and the lack of competition
has allowed the gangs to become successful.
I’d like to offer this theoretical paradigm that
addresses the conspiracy to destroy Black boys.
1. What is the problem?
2. What caused the problem?
3. What are the solutions?
4. How can they be implemented?
 
In a typical one-hour workshop, you receive fifty-five
minutes for the problem, four minutes for causes,
one minute for solutions and no time for
implementation.


--- PAGE 241 ---
The Problem
 
By the year 2020, 70 percent of all Black males
will be unavailable to Black women. Eighty-five
percent of the African American children that are
placed in special education are African American
males. Approximately 1.5 million African American
males are in penal institutions. Forty-seven percent
of the penal population is African American. Only 3.5
percent of college students are African American.
We receive 37 percent of all school suspensions.
We have the lowest life expectancy. We have the
highest homicide and cancer rates. Thirty-one
percent of African American males ages 18-25 are
unemployed. (This is a very conservative figure;
some people think that it’s closer to 40 to 45
percent.)


--- PAGE 242 ---
The Causes
 
White male supremacy/institutional racism 
A capital intensive economy 
Drugs 
The male socialization process 
Double child rearing standards among parents 
Parental apathy 
Low teacher expectations 
Lack of understanding of the male learning styles 
Negative peer pressure and gangs 
The lack of positive male role models


--- PAGE 243 ---
Solutions
 
In order to correct the problems, the solutions have
to address the causes.
 
Racism
. We must understand and resist racism and
empower our community to reach its full potential.
 
High tech economy.
 We must lobby for a high tech
economy which would include a federal job bill, a
reduction in the defense budget, more money
allocated for education and training, a reduction in
foreign imports, and Black economic development.
 
Drugs
. We must patrol our borders, enhance self-
esteem, prevent stores from selling drug
paraphernalia, use the money from drug busts for
community programs, allocate more money for
treatment and increase community watch groups.
 
Male socialization process.
 We must increase Rites
of Passage programs and produce programs for
electronic media to portray Black male’s strengths,
mental and spiritual.
 
Parental double standard
. We must have
workshops and books for parents that inform them of
the necessity to teach their sons and daughters to be
equally responsible and self-sufficient.
 
Parental apathy.
 We must market the PTA to attract
parents, increase the number of families receiving
services from Chapter One and Head Start, and
provide more workshops.
 
Lower teacher expectations
. We must have
mandatory in-service training on expectations from
Africentric educational scholars.
 
Learning styles
. We must have mandatory in-service
training using books that explain the race sensitive
differences of boys, girls maturation rates and
learning styles. A moratorium on special education


--- PAGE 244 ---
placement for Black boys, a Black male classroom
and attracting more Black male teachers to the
classroom.
 
Negative peer pressure and gangs
. We must have
programs that teach boys the distinction between
battles and wars, conflict management and peer
group monitoring.
 
Lack of male role models.
 We must have a media
campaign showing Cub Scouts, classroom teachers
and other role models all being female and its dire
consequences for Black male development.
 
How can we develop an environment where Cody
could have remained Cody (See Chapter 11) or
become Sanyika? How can we reconcile Marlon’s
(See Chapter 8) Monday morning reality? How can
we increase the probability beyond two percent that
Jerome (See Chapter 10) graduates from college
and either becomes an entrepreneur or is gainfully
employed in the area in which he studied? How can
we assist mothers raising sons alone?
Over the past two decades, the problems of
African American males have escalated, and people
often ask me, do you believe you’re making a
difference? Do you believe it is possible to save the
African American male? My favorite answer is
always one of optimism. I still believe that we have
more on our side than they have on theirs, that all
things are possible for those that love the Lord.
Presently, we are experiencing a Friday afternoon,
but there will be a Sunday morning rising. If we give
up, we automatically lose. Only if we dare to struggle
do we dare to win. The quantitative answer is listed
below. Over the past two decades we have
developed:
1. Over 200 Rites of Passage programs
nationwide
2. 1,000 mentoring and role model programs
3. Over 100 Black male classrooms
4. Several African American male schools with
a 90 percent or better population


--- PAGE 245 ---
5. Hundreds of workshops to analyze the issues
6. Over 30 books written on the subject
7. Over 20 colleges that offer scholarships for
African American males that want to major in
education
8. Five states with commissions to address the
problems of the African American male
9. Lessons on teenage sexuality and
responsibility provided by Project Alpha and
the Urban League
 
I believe after 30 books and hundreds of
workshops and conferences, we know the problems,
what caused them and the solutions. The major
question is, what prevents us from moving from
theory to practice? Why have we not implemented
our solutions? The reasons and areas of
implementation are listed below:
1. Lack of information
2. Time
3. Work
4. Money
5. Bootstrap Theory
6. Ego
7. Fear
8. Personal problems
9. No consequences
10. Lack of faith
11. Lack of trust
12. Resistance to change


--- PAGE 246 ---
Lack of information
 
There remains a wide disparity between what the
conscious members know and the masses. If the
masses don’t read and will not pay $10-$100 for
workshops and conferences, and are completely
dependent on the mass media for information, how
will they be informed?


--- PAGE 247 ---
Time
 
Many people work eight hours per day, commute
two hours, eat three meals and sleep eight eight
hours. This schedule allows only three hours left in a
day. If they choose to spend that time watching
television, talking on the telephone, listening to
music, playing golf, bowling, working out in the health
club and on other recreational and entertainment
activities, there may not be time to stop the
conspiracy. I suggest everyone chart their twenty-four
hours and strive toward giving more hours back to
the community.


--- PAGE 248 ---
Work
 
I noticed that when we started Community of Men
and had two months to strategize, we had a building
full of talkers. I noticed that in my pastor’s manhood
class, where all they had to do was listen, the
numbers were staggering. But when it was time to
work in Rites of Passage, Role Model, Mentoring,
crime watch groups, junior business leagues, etc.,
the numbers plummeted. It is obvious that talk is
cheap and work is divine. When people want to talk
with me now, I tell them to put it in writing. I tell them
to meet me at the Rites of Passage program or at
Community of Men. We can talk while we work. I
don’t mind talking as long as we are working.


--- PAGE 249 ---
Money
 
In order to save our children, we will have to put
money on the table. We may have to provide the
capital to start the businesses. We may have to buy
the T-shirts and provide the money for the bus trips.
We may have to finance our youth’s business plans.
Two of our largest organizations, the NAACP and
the Urban League, are both dependent upon outside
resources to finance their programs. We can’t
finance our liberation struggle on grants.


--- PAGE 250 ---
Bootstrap Theory
 
This theory is led by people like Clarence
Thomas, Thomas Sowell, and Shelby Steele and
others who believe they made it because of hard
work and the Bootstrap Theory. They believe all
problems can be solved with individual effort. The
unfortunate thing is that they attribute self-help to the
Republican party and not African people. Secondly,
they really do believe that they made it completely off
the Bootstrap Theory and that the role model that
inspired them in sixth grade and the mentor that
inspired them to attend college had nothing to do
with their lives. I would like to ask the bookstrap
advocates if they would be successful if they were
the offspring of a fourteen-year-old mother on crack
who never told them she loved them, and there was
no significant role model in their lives. Would they
still be successful?


--- PAGE 251 ---
Ego
 
Many African American men have an ego problem
working with other men. Many men are more
effective when they work individually with boys in
Little League baseball or Boy Scouts rather than
working in organizations such as Rites of Passage,
Role Model or crime watch groups, where there are
numerous men involved in the activities.
 
In our organizations we have been effective by
using the motto: Leaving the ego at the door. We try
to develop all men to be leaders in the organization.
One of the ways I evaluate an organization,
especially the leader or president, is the level of
responsibility given to the “Lieutenants.” It is very
disappointing to see men involved in Rites of
Passage argue in front of the boys on who’s blacker
than who, who speaks more fluent Swahili, who has
read the most Black books, who has been to Africa
the most times and who’s been involved in the
liberation struggle the longest.


--- PAGE 252 ---
Fear
 
The more successful we become at developing
Black boys into men the more we become a threat to
White male supremacy. By doing so, many of us are
afraid we are going to lose our jobs, contracts,
houses and cars. We begin to compromise. It has
been said that if you give an African American man
a good job, you can write him off from the liberation
struggle. The job becomes more important than
freedom. My high school history teacher describes
this as our materialism being incompatible with our
quest for freedom.


--- PAGE 253 ---
Personal problems
 
Many African Americans are not involved in the
liberation struggle because they have personal
problems that have to be resolved. A person cannot
be faulted if he has an invalid relative at home that
he needs to take care of, if there is someone
hospitalized, if there is a wayward cousin or family
member that has some deep-seated emotional
problems that need to be addressed. Can you
criticize a brother who can’t make the meeting
because he has several young children? What if the
brother has high blood pressure or prostate cancer?


--- PAGE 254 ---
No consequences
 
Teachers are still paid regardless of whether
children learn to read. We had 175 men involved in
our crime watch group and now we have 21. There
were no consequences for the men choosing to do
something else or doing nothing. The Afri-can
American community knows a brother impregnated
a sister but will not hold him accountable for his
behavior. Without consequences, the liberation
struggle is reduced to people’s whims.


--- PAGE 255 ---
Lack of faith
 
Deep down in our gut, do we believe? Do we have
the faith? Do we have the willpower to believe that
we can develop Black boys into men? Have our
spirits been so broken that we believe the only boys
that we can save are between the ages of five and
nine? Do we have enough faith to believe that we
can save boys aged nine to thirteen or thirteen to
eighteen? The problem with faith is that you can’t buy
it or discover it intellectually. You either have it or you
don’t; you either believe or you don’t. Scripture
teaches, “Faith is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things unseen.” You don’t believe
with your ears; you don’t smell with your eyes; you
don’t see with your heart. The only way to believe is
to believe with your heart. We have to believe that
we can win.


--- PAGE 256 ---
Lack of trust
 
If all of us gave one dollar and there are 40 million
of us we would have 40 million dollars. If our 150
largest organizations chose not to meet in White
hotels for one year, we would save 16 billion dollars.
The problem is, who would we trust to hold that kind
of money?


--- PAGE 257 ---
Resistance to change
 
Many Black churches, colleges and civil rights
organizations’ favorite slogan is, “It should be
obvious that this way is not working.” We must
identify new ways to save our boys. Why are boys
more committed to the gangs and frats than to the
Lord and the liberation struggle? What can we learn
from gangs to reclaim our boys?
In closing, to reclaim our boys will require
marathon runners. The race against White
supremacy can’t be done with sprinters. I am often
asked, how long will it take? Slavery in America
lasted 246 years or 22 generations. We have been
physically free for 130 years or six to seven
generations. Some people feel it will take another 15
generations before African people return to the
zenith we created in Kemet. I can’t speculate on 15
generations, but on my day of judgment, I want God
to say, “Well done, good and faithful servant.”


--- PAGE 258 ---
References


--- PAGE 259 ---



--- PAGE 260 ---
Chapter One
 
1
 John Flint. Ceil Rhodes. Little Brown, Boston, MA
1974, pp 248-252.
 
2
 Anthony Browder. Nile Valley Contributions to
Civilization. Institute of Karmic Guidance,
Washington, D.C., 1992, pp 17-18.
 
3
 Holly Sklar. Trilateralism. South End Press,
Boston, MA, 1981, p. 1.
 
4
 Sidney Wilhelm. Who Needs the Negro?
Doubleday, New York, N.Y., 1970, p. xiii.
 
5
 A. Ralph Epperson. The New World Order. Publius
Press, 1990, p. xiii.
 
6
 Frances Cress Welsing. The Isis Papers. Third
World Press, Chicago, IL, 1991, pp. x, xi


--- PAGE 261 ---



--- PAGE 262 ---
Chapter 2
 
1
 Direct Interview National Center for Health
Statistics, July 5, 1990.
 
2
 Amos Wilson, “Developmental Psychology of the
Black Child,” (New York: Africana Research
Publications, 1978), p. 46.
 
3
 Diane McGuinness, “ When Children Don’t Learn,”
(New York: Basic Books), p. 47.
 
4
 Ibid., p. 21.
 
5
 Ibid., pp. 77-78.
 
6
 Jawanza Kunjufu, “Developing Positive Self-
Images and Discipline in Black Children,” (Chicago,
African American Images, 1984), pp. 38-39.
 
7
 McGuinness, op cit., pp. 190-192.
 
8
 Ray Rist, “Student Social Class and Teacher
Expectations,” Harvard Educational Review, Volume
40, No. 3, August 1970, pp. 411-449.
 
9
 Kunjufu, op cit., p. 17.


--- PAGE 263 ---



--- PAGE 264 ---
Chapter 3
 
1
 Harry Morgan, “How Schools Fail Black Children,”
Social Policy,
 Jan.-Feb., 1980, pp. 49-54.
 
2
 An unpublished survey made by the author.
 
3
 Nancy Arnex, “Implementation of Desegregation a
a Discriminating Process,” 
Journal of Negro
Foundation,
 1978, pp. 28-45.
 
4
 Bruce Hare, 
Black Girls: A Comparative Analysis
of Self-Perception and Achievement by Race, Sex
and Socio-Economic Background
, (Baltimore:
Center For Social Organization of Schools, John
Hopkins University, 1979).
 
5
 James Patton, “The Black Male’s Struggle For An
Education,” ed. Gary Lawrence (BeverlyHills, Black
Men Sage, 1981), p. 205.
 
6
 Leaching Semaj, “Meaningful Male/Female
Relationships in a State of Declining Sex-Ratio,”
Black Books Bulletin,
 Vol. 6 No. 4, 1980), Chicago,
Institute of Positive Education, p. 5-6.
 
7
 Black Child Care Conference, Columbus, Ohio,
September, 1981.
 
8
 Washington Post, May 13, 1978, p.4.
 
9
 Patton, op. cit., p. 203.
 
10
 Perkins, Eugene, 
Home is a Dirty Street
(Chicago: Third World Press, 1975), pp. 17, 26.


--- PAGE 265 ---



--- PAGE 266 ---
Chapter 4
 
1
 Jawanza Kunjufu. “Countering the Conspiracy to
Destroy Black Boys.” African American Images,
1983, Chicago, IL, p. 24
 
2
 Gordon Thomas, “The Black Adolescent,” ed. Gary
Lawrence: Mental Health, (Philadelphia: Dorrance,
1978), pp. 120,122-123.
 
3
 “Hazards of Being Male,” (New York: Signet,
1976), p. 175.


--- PAGE 267 ---



--- PAGE 268 ---
Chapter 6
 
1
 James Patton, “The Black Male’s Struggle for
Education.” ed. Gary Lawrence (Black Men, Beverly
Hills: Sage, 1981) p. 205.
 
2
 Nancy Arnex, “Implementation of Desegregation
as a Discriminating Process.” Journal of Negro
Foundation, 1978, pp. 28-45.
 
3
 Excerpts from “The Challenge of Blackness”
delivered by Lerone Bennett at the Institute of Black
World in Atlanta, GA, 1972.


--- PAGE 269 ---



--- PAGE 270 ---
Chapter 7
 
1
 Ronald Edmonds, “Effective Schools for the Urban
Poor.” 
Educational Leadership,
 October, 1979, pp.
16-22.
 
2
 Excerpts from “Black Children, Their Roots,
Culture, and Learning Styles,” delivered by Janice
Hale in Kenosha, Wisconsin, 1986.
 
3
 
Janice Hale. Black Children, Their Roots,
Culture, and Learning Styles.
 Provo: Brigham
Young University Press, 1982, pp. 32-35.
 
4
 
Culture Linquistic Approach Social Studies
Manual
, Chicago: Northeastern Illinois University
Center for Inner City Studies, 1974, pp. 14-15.
 
5
 Harry Morgan. “How Schools Fail Black Children.”
Social Policy
, January-February 1980, pp. 49-54.


--- PAGE 271 ---



--- PAGE 272 ---
Chapter 8
 
1
 Black Issues in 
Higher Education
, July 5, 1990, p.
8.
 
2
 Amos Wilson, 
Black on Black Violence
 (New
York: African World Info Systems, 1990), pp. 168-
169.


--- PAGE 273 ---



--- PAGE 274 ---
Chapter 9
 
1
 Margo Crawford, “Black Teachers Call Halt to
Seasoning,” (
Black Books Bulletin
, Vol. 2 No. 4,
Chicago, Institute of Positive Education, 1974), p.
45.
 
2
 Herb Goldberg, Hazards of Being Male, (New
York: Signet, 1976), pp. 43-44.
 
3
 Michael Brown, Image 
of a Man,
 (New York: East
Publications, 1976), p. 6.
 
4
 John and Garwood McDavid, and Gary S.,
Understanding Children, (Washington, D.C.: Health,
Lexington, 1978), p. 361.
 
5
 “The Difference in the Sexes,” 
Newsweek,
 May 18,
1981, pp. 74-75.
 
6
 McDavid, op. cit. p. 348.
 
7
 Amos Wilson, 
Developmental Psychology of the
Black Child,
 (New York: Africana Research
Publication, 1978), pp. 94-96.
 
8
 Janice Hale, 
Black Children, Their Roots, Culture
and Learning Styles
, Brigham Young University
Press, Provo, 1982, pp. 66, 170-171.
 
9
 United Nations Yearbook, 1979, p. 157.
 
10
 Interview with 
Guardian Newspaper
, May 15,
1981.
 
11
 Goldberg, op. cit. pp. 172 and 176.


--- PAGE 275 ---
12
 Elliot Liebow, 
Tally’s Corner
, (Boston: Little,
Brown, 1967), pp. 210-213.
 
13
 Lawrence Gary, 
Black Men
, (Beverly Hills: Sage,
1981), p. 53.
 
14
 United States Statistical Abstract, 1981, passim
 
15
 Nathan and Julia Hare, 
Bringing The Black Boy
to Manhood.
 San Francisco: Black Think Tank,
1985, p. 20.
 
16
 Frank Fair. 
Orita For Black Youth
. Valley Forge:
Judson Press, 1977, p. 11.
 
17
 Hare, p. 28.
 
18
 Ibid., p. 26.
 
19
 Ibid., p. 43.


--- PAGE 276 ---



--- PAGE 277 ---
Chapter 10
 
1
 
Black Issues in Higher Education,
 July 14, 1994,
p. 62.
 
2
 
Black Issues in Higher Education
, May 19, 1994,
p. 54.
 
3
 Jacqueline Fleming, 
Blacks in College
 (San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1984), pp. 141-145.


--- PAGE 278 ---



--- PAGE 279 ---
Chapter 11
 
1
 Leon Bing, 
Do or Die
 (New York: Harper Collins,
1991), p. 237.
 
2
 Cody Scott, Monster: 
The Autobiography of an
L.A. Gang Member
, 1993, p. 278.
 
3
 Wilson, op. cit, pp. X, 83.
 
4
 Ibid, p. 129.
 
5
 Ibid, p. 123.


--- PAGE 280 ---
PLEDGE ON BLACK MANHOOD
 
I am the Black man 
Some know me as Imhotep, Ramses, 
Martin or Malcolm. 
Others know me as the brother on the corner 
or in jail.
 
I am both, Detroit Red and Malcolm. 
From this day forward, I pledge my life 
to the liberation of my people. 
I will put God first in my life. 
Black women will feel safe when they see me. 
I will be a supportive, responsible, 
and loving husband. 
I will hug, talk and listen to, and 
educate my children. 
I will be involved in the Scouts, 
Role Model and Rites-of-Passage.
 
Why?
Because I am the Black man - the original man, the
one and only.
The one that other man are afraid of, because they
know whenever
I’ve seized the opportunity — I succeed.
 
JAWANZA KUNJUFU


--- PAGE 281 ---
Notes


--- PAGE 282 ---
Notes


--- PAGE 283 ---
Notes

