=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: David Chalmers~Backfire, How the Ku Klux Klan Helped the Civil Rights Movement.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 216
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:53:19.168653
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Backfire


--- PAGE 3 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
Backfire 
How the Ku Klux Klan Heked 
the Civil Rights Movement 
David Chalmers 
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD PUBLISHERS, INC. 
Lanham - Boulder - New York - Oxford


--- PAGE 5 ---
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD PUBLISHERS, INC. 
Published in the United States of America 
by Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. 
A Member of the Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group 
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706 
www.rowmanlittlefield.com 
P.O. Box 317, Oxford OX2 9RU, United Kingdom 
Copyright 0 2003 by David Chalmers 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Chalmers, David Mark. 
Backfire : how the Ku Klux Klan helped the civil rights movement / David 
Chalmers. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0- 742 5 -23 10- 1 (acid-free) 
1. Ku Klux Klan (1915- ) 2. Civil rights movements-United States. 
3. Racism-United States-History. 4. United States-Race relations. I. Title: 
How the Ku Klux Klan helped the civil rights movement. 
HS2330. K63 C487 2003 
323'.09736c2 1 2002014655 
11. Title. 
Printed in the United States of America 
@ TM The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper for 
Printed Library Materials, ANSI/NISO 239.48-1992.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents 
List of Key Players 
1 The Challenges of the 1960s 
2 Laissez-Faire, Violence, & Confusion after the School 
Decision 
3 Bombingham 
4 Friends in High Places: George Wallace 
5 Freedom Riding 
d The Long Hot Summer 
I Mississippi 
8 Selma 
9 Making the Justice System Work 
against the Jews of Mississippi 
10 Klansmen on Trial & the Klan’s Campaign of Terror 
11 Decline 
12 Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist Church & the 
Black Jesus 
vii 
1 
5 
15 
21 
27 
39 
47 
61 
67 
77 
87 
97 
13 Confrontation, Poor-Boy Politics, & Revival in the Late 
1970s 107 
14 Death in Greensboro 115 
15 David Duke Steps Forward 125 
V


--- PAGE 7 ---
vi Contents 
Id Klan Hunters: Morris Dees & the Southern Poverty 
17 Yesterday, Today, Forever: Klansmen, Klanswomen, 
18 The “Fifth Era”: An Explosion on the Right-Coda: 
Law Center 
Terrorists, & Loose Cannons 
Patrick J. Buchanan 
Essay on Sources 
Acknowledg.ments 
Index 
About the Author 
Art Credits 
137 
145 
163 
187 
195 
197 
205 
207


--- PAGE 8 ---
Key Players 
Sam Bowers 
Richard Butler 
Imperial wizard of the White Knights of Mississippi 
Patriarch of Christian Identity’s Aryan Nations, 
whose Idaho compound became the international meeting 
ground for white supremacists 
Morris Dees Cofounder and lead attorney for the Nan-fighting 
Southern Poverty Law Center 
John Doar Head of the Civil Rights Division and point man of 
the Justice Department in the South 
David Duke New-style Klan leader who combined National So- 
cialism with elective politics 
Henry Ford Sponsor of The International Jew and Christian 
Identity’s “Man of the Century’’ 
J. Edgar Hoover Legendary paranoid FBI director whom Presi- 
dent Johnson pressed into a campaign against the Klan in the 
South 
Lyndon B. Johnson Pushed Public Accommodation, Voting 
Rights, and Civil Rights Acts through Congress 
John Kennedy Sought to get the civil rights demonstrators off 
the streets and out of the headlines and became converted to 
their cause 
Robert Mathews Terrorist founder of The Order who set out to 
begin the revolution 
William Pierce Head of the neo-Nazi National Alliance who laid 
down the terrorist plan in his books The Turner Diaries and 
Hunter 
Robert Shelton Longtime imperial wizard of the Alabama-based 
United Hans of America 
vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
viii Key Players 
Gerald L. K. Smith America’s leading anti-Semite who helped 
George Wallace Governor of Alabama 
Michael Schwerner, James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, Vernon 
Dahmer, Michael Donald, Viola Liuzzo, Lemuel Penn, 
Cynthia Wesley, Denise McNair, Carol Robertson, and 
Addie Mae Collins 
Anti-Defamation League (ADL), Center for Democratic Re- 
newal (CDR), Center for New Community (CNC), and 
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Leading anti-Klan 
organizers 
turn British Israelism into Christian Identity 
Died at the hands of the Klan


--- PAGE 10 ---
The Challenges of the 1960s 
Americans like to think of terrorism being connected with Eu- 
rope, Latin America, or the Middle East, but one of the oldest liv- 
ing terrorist societies exists in the United States today. The Ku 
Klux Klan has been a loosely connected succession of racial terrorist 
societies in the United States from the post-Civil War Reconstruc- 
tion era to the present. Almost one hundred years after the Klan 
was first brought to life, the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s 
confronted the Klan with the third major challenge of its history. 
The first Klan came into being in the summer of 1866, orga- 
nized as a social club by six ex-Confederate officers in Pulaski, Ten- 
nessee. From their college Greek, they took the word kuklos 
(meaning “circle” or “band”), added the word “klan” for its allit- 
erative sound, and dressed in flowing robes and hoods for their 
mysterious nighttime initiations. The Klan’s night riders quickly 
developed into a terrorist organization, spreading throughout the 
South. With ex-Confederate cavalryman General Nathan Bedford 
Forrest as its grand wizard, the Klan acted to overthrow the Recon- 
struction Republican state governments and enforce the subordi- 
nation of the newly freed black people. Led by elites and drawing 
on a cross section of white male society, it did this through murders 
and assaults that totaled in the thousands. By the time that the na- 
tional government intervened, the Klan had done its job. In white 
southern legend, the Klan is remembered as the savior of a down- 
trodden people from what they saw as the fearfbl disorder of black 
equality. The national government soon withdrew from a concern 
for black civil rights, and the “redeemed” South began a hundred 
years of racial segregation. 
1


--- PAGE 11 ---
2 Chapter 1 
In the 1920s, the Klan reemerged, this time as the great frater- 
nal lodge and would-be political engine of white native-born Prot- 
estant American nationalism. It was no longer narrowly southern, 
and it enrolled literally millions of Klansmen and Klanswomen 
across the nation. It helped elect governors, senators, and other 
state and local officials literally from Maine to California. The Klan 
came to town as social excitement and Protestant morality and re- 
form. Prohibition was the great crusade, corrupt political machines 
a usehl issue, and Roman Catholicism the leading conspiratorial 
threat to a Protestant, Anglo-Saxon America. The aura of violence 
was an important part of the Klan appeal, although its actual prac- 
tice was mainly in the South and Southwest. Scandal, corruption, 
and struggles over money and power proved ruinous, the Roman 
Catholic threat illusory. People came to believe that the Klan was a 
civic disaster, and it rapidly declined. The Klan had no response to 
the Great Depression but lingered on in the Southeast, principally 
Georgia, Alabama, and Florida, as a violent enemy of blacks and 
labor unions. World War 11, gas rationing, and a large bill for back 
taxes closed down the second Klan. 
Brought back to life again in the Southeast after the war, the 
Klan was strictly working class and antiblack, fragmented, but dan- 
gerous and not going anywhere. In 1954, the U.S. Supreme Court 
decided that public school segregation was unconstitutional, and 
the civil rights struggle moved out into the streets of the cities. 
With Prohibition long since gone and anti-Catholicism, moral re- 
form, and broader nativism almost all but forgotten, an anti-Negro 
rage burned at the heart of the Klan’s third great challenge. 
The leadership potential in the South entered the battle for 
segregation through more favored and somewhat subtle instru- 
ments such as the Citizens’ Councils, state sovereignty commis- 
sions, federations for constitutional government, anti-Communist 
crusades, and regular party politics. Economic and political pres- 
sure were espoused more readily than violence, but the Civil Rights 
movement was in the streets, and more accustomed ways of control 
and dominance were failing. 
Would this be the Klan’s moment? Could Klan violence blunt 
and turn back an emerging black revolution? This was the chance 
to gain the active role and the increasing membership that had so


--- PAGE 12 ---
The Challenges of the 1960s 3 
long eluded it. Could the Klan recruit its legions by battling it out 
in the streets and build its own way to political power in the South? 
This was the Klan’s opportunity and challenge, but it was fraught 
with peril. Not to fight would be to betray the history and meaning 
of the Klan, but to fight and lose would be to cast it into irrele- 
vance. If the Klan eschewed violence, it was not the Klan, but when 
it acted like the Klan, what might be the costs that it would have 
to pay? The story of the 1960s was one of how Klan clubs, bombs, 
and bullets made a major unintended contribution to the civil 
rights revolution at an eventually increasingly costly price to Klans 
and individual Klansmen. 
At the beginning of the 1960s, Klan violence had what 
amounted to a general immunity from arrest, prosecution, and 
conviction. Although most white southerners looked down on the 
Klan, it did have friends in power. When Klansmen met the “free- 
dom riders” head-on in Anniston, Birmingham, and Montgomery, 
they might well have driven the Civil Rights movement out of the 
streets of the South. Instead, they called forth a new resolution of 
courage and activity among the young and prompted the reluctant 
involvement of the Kennedy administration and the national gov- 
ernment. 
Klan violence played an important role in the passage of the 
1964 Public Accommodation Law and the 1965 Voting Rights 
Law. Klan violence in Mississippi forced the Johnson administra- 
tion to turn a reluctant FBI into an effective Nan-fighting force, 
although prosecution sometimes had to wait until the death of J. 
Edgar Hoover or longer to release the crucial FBI files. Fear of 
Klan-produced anarchy and the possible employment of federal 
troops helped the Mississippi establishment minimally come to 
terms with the civil rights revolution. The failures of state courts 
led to a new role for the Justice Department and the federal courts, 
to landmark Supreme Court decisions expanding federal power, 
and to a new congressional civil rights law extending civil rights 
jurisdiction and protection. 
By the 1990s, local immunity was gone. Old crimes (and new 
ones) were being settled in state as well as federal courts. More 
than thirty years later, state prosecutors and juries were sending the 
Klan killers of the 1960s off to die in jail and new murderers to the


--- PAGE 13 ---
4 Chapter 1 
death chambers. In the first year of the new millennium, federal 
and state prosecutors combined to reopen the cases of the bomb- 
ing of Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist Church and Klan killings 
in Mississippi. Still the Klan hung on, crowded to the side of a 
larger chaotic and violent upheaval of the end-of-the-century white 
supremacist world, which is set forth in the final chapter of this 
book. 
Backfire tells four stories. The first, set against the rise and de- 
cline but not disappearance of the Klan, is how Klan violence 
forced the national and, belatedly, state governments into action. 
It tells the story of Birmingham, Montgomery, and St. Augustine, 
Florida, and of the murders of Mickey Schwerner, James Chaney, 
and Andrew Goodman in Philadelphia, Mississippi; Viola Liuzzo 
on the road to Selma, Alabama; Colonel Lemuel Penn on the high- 
way outside Athens, Georgia; and Vernon Dahmer in Hattiesburg, 
Mississippi. It also tells the story of the Mississippi Klan, the cam- 
paign against the Jews of Jackson and Meredian, and the path 
through the courts of Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, and the Su- 
preme Court of the United States in Washington, D.C. 
The second story is the four-decades struggle to punish the 
Klan murderers. The future Birmingham Church bombers, “Dy- 
namite Bob” Chambliss and the Eastview Klavern 13 gang, are in- 
troduced in chapter 3. The conviction of the last of them in 2002 
is told in chapter 17. 
The third story is Imperial Wizard Robert Shelton’s struggle to 
the top of the Klan world and his eventual downfall, related in 
chapter 16, at the hands of Morris Dees and the Southern Poverty 
Law Center. 
In the fourth story, the final chapter takes American history on 
“the road to Armageddon’s” violent racist emergence at the end 
of the twentieth century in which the Klan has lost its role as Amer- 
ica’s prime terrorist conspiracy.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Laissez-Faire, Violence, & Confbsion 
after the School Decision 
was the Supreme Court decision against public school segrega- 
tion on May 17,1954, that gave the “Invisible Empire’’ a new im- 
petus and environment for action. In a South marked by growing 
hysteria, the Klans burst into activity, and a resurgent proliferation 
of would- be leaders galloped about the landscape seeking support 
fiom old Klans and new Klansmen. 
Shortly after the school decision, a red-haired, bespectacled 
paint sprayer at GM’s Fisher body plant in Atlanta, named Eldon 
Edwards, revitalized the Klan in Georgia. Dr. Samuel Green, who 
had brought the Klan back to life after World War 11, had died in 
the rose garden of his home in Atlanta, and his Invisible Empire 
fragmented into anarchy. Now, with old Doc Green’s son Sam Ju- 
nior acting as lawyer, Edwards got the state to charter his U.S. 
Klans, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, which absorbed what was left 
of the old Association of Georgia Klans. 
Compared to the others, the U.S. Hans did well, partially be- 
cause Edwards talked tough and partially because he did not partic- 
ularly practice it. Controlling a reasonably unfiagmented kingdom 
in Georgia, he directed his primary efforts to expanding the fron- 
tiers of his domain. In competition with at least seven other would- 
be Klan organizations, Edwards’s U.S. Klans reached a peak mem- 
bership of perhaps between 12,000 and 15,000 followers early in 
1958. No other leader could, at best, claim more than a few thou- 
sand. 
Discipline and relative restraint, however, were not what many 
Klansmen wanted. Cross burnings, parades, motorcades, and 
5


--- PAGE 15 ---
6 Chapter2 
verbal violence were not quite enough. There were those who 
thirsted for a bit of the real thing, and there were others who took 
careful note of the money that the Klan brought in. Rivals reached 
out for Klan money and Klan power. Jesse B. Stoner was a slight, 
nervous man who had been orphaned in his teens and walked with 
a polio-induced limp. Thirty years old at the time of the Supreme 
Court decision, he had been an active Klansman for a dozen years. 
He had roamed through the world of Klandom, signing up re- 
cruits, running for Congress, or picketing the White House, one 
day opposing integration at Miami’s Orchard Villa School and the 
next arranging to become head of a new Klan in Virginia. Wherever 
he was, Stoner filled the mails with pleas to do away with the Jews 
through joining whatever his present Klannish enterprise happened 
to be. Finally, by the 1960s, he had settled down in Atlanta, shar- 
ing an office with James Venable, the scion of a distinguished old 
Peach State Klan family and owner of the pastures at the foot of 
the Klan’s sacred Stone Mountain. For probably as long as he has 
ever stayed in one place and tended to one task, Stoner handled 
the affairs of chiropractor Ed Fields’s bitterly anti-Semitic National 
States Rights Party, which drew its inspiration from Adolf Hitler 
and his Nazi storm troopers. 
Because of a World War I disability, Horace Miller necessarily 
lived a stationary life. He traveled instead on the wings of the Post 
Office, which carried his often-unintelligible newsletter and the ap- 
plication blanks of his mail-order Klan. When Klan material turned 
up in far portions of the globe among the neofascists in England or 
Austria, it usually began its journey fi-om Venable’s Stone Moun- 
tain or Miller’s Waco, Texas. 
The Bryant brothers, Arthur and Joseph, of Charlotte, North 
Carolina, were arrested in 1955 for sending their unsigned anti- 
Catholic and anti-Semitic literature through the mails. What the 
authorities found was not only a cache of dynamite and a rifle 
mounted over a truck windshield but also a pair of not unimpres- 
sive criminal records, extending from larceny and bad-check pass- 
ing to juvenile rape and adult solicitation for prostitution. 
When it came to talking tough, and maybe doing something 
about it, Alabama’s Asa Carter ranked high on the list of Klan en- 
terprisers in the mid-1950s. “Ace” was an Alabama farm boy who


--- PAGE 16 ---
Laissez-Faire, Violence, 0 Confusion after the School Decision 7 
went off into the Navy and, unlike most Klansmen, got a touch 
of college, studying journalism at the University of Colorado. He 
worked as a radio announcer and eventually found his way back 
home again to make something of a reputation for himself around 
Birmingham as a critic of “rock ’n’ roll” music. When he went into 
the Klan business, he took with him a “BE-BOP PROMOTES 
COMMUNISM’’ sign to put up on his office wall in the dmgy ex- 
movie house out on Bessemer Road, where he made his headquar- 
ters. When he was fired for attacking the Jews on his broadcasts, he 
was ripe for new action. Sam Engelhardt, a big planter down in 
heavily Negro Macon County, was signing up businessmen, plant- 
ers, bankers, and lawyers for the Alabama white Citizens’ Councils. 
This left out the common man and Carter. To the ire of Engel- 
hardt, who did not share his anti-Semitism, Carter began organiz- 
ing the mechanics, farmers, and storekeepers into a Klan-like white 
Citizens’ Council and then into a new Original Ku Klux Klan of 
the Confederacy. 
Where the white Citizens’ Councils elsewhere decried physical 
violence and Eldon Edwards generally tried to keep his Klansmen 
satisfied with strong talk and minimal night riding, Carter’s follow- 
ers eschewed moderation. One of his boys hit the headlines and 
the police blotters by leaping up on the stage of the Birmingham 
Municipal Auditorium to assault singer Nat “King” Cole. Four 
others got twenty years in jail for the turpentine-soaked castration 
of a black man, kidnapped for a Klan initiation ceremony. It was 
also some of Carter’s boys who went up to Tuscaloosa to demon- 
strate against the admission of black coed Autherine Lucy at the 
University of Alabama. Early in 1957 at a meeting in his movie- 
house auditorium, two of his Klansmen objected to Carter’s one- 
man way of running things and asked for an accounting of the fi- 
nances. Under such provocation, there was nothing that Ace could 
do but draw the revolver that he liked to wear strapped around his 
waist and “let ’em have it.” Both wounded insurgents recovered, 
and the attempted murder charges against Carter were dismissed. 
For a while, Carter hung about on the violent fringes of Klan- 
dom, and it seemed as though his dim star had just about flickered 
out, but Carter had a rare talent for reinventing himself. He had a 
way with words, and he would reappear in the 1960s as George


--- PAGE 17 ---
8 Chapter2 
Wallace’s speechwriter and author of Wallace’s most memorable 
defense of segregation. A decade later, in a different place and with 
a different persona and a changed name, he was to write one of the 
most popular child’s coming-of-age stories of his time, The Educa- 
tion of Little Tree. 
Another brief stellar luminary in the world of Klandom during 
the late 1950s was Frederick John Kasper, who gave an Ivy League, 
intellectual note to Klan affairs. He was a slender, well-groomed 
young man from a middle-class family in New Jersey. After leaving 
Columbia University, he ran a small bookstore in Greenwich Vil- 
lage and idolized the aging literary hero and wartime propagandist 
for Mussolini’s Italy, Ezra Pound. Kasper dated a black girl and had 
a good time in the free and mixed-race world of pseudobohemia, 
but this was not getting him anywhere. Pound told him that to be- 
come famous a man had to “do something,” to take sides, no mat- 
ter what the side was. Kasper picked white supremacy and stocked 
his new bookstore in Washington, D.C., with anti-Semitic litera- 
ture and the writings of Pound. 
Admiral John Crommelin was a masterful war hero who had 
been shot down when he bucked the Eisenhower administration 
brass over the decision not to build more aircraft carriers. When he 
launched a new civilian career by running for the U.S. Senate to 
save Alabama and America fiom the Jews, Kasper came down to 
help. There, Kasper met Carter, and the two informally teamed up 
to see what they could do to keep the schools of Charlottesville, 
Virginia, and Clinton, Tennessee, segregated. In a pamphlet titled 
“Virginians Awake,” Kasper used his best Pound-like style to sum 
up the nature of the problem they faced and offered a few solu- 
tions: 
Jail the NAACP! Hang the Supreme Court Swine! Destroy the 
Reds! Save the White! Now damn all race-mixers . . . they stink: 
Roose, Harry & Ike. God bless Jeff,/Jax & John Adams, also 
Abe. Loathe carpetbag, despise scalawag. Hate mongrel-izers 
(pink punks, hat-cheated high-brows, homos, perverts, freaks, 
golf-players, poodle dogs, hot-eyed Socialists, Fabians, scum, 
mould on top of the omelette). Myerization of News, liars for 
hire; the press-gang, degenerate liberals crying for petrefaction


--- PAGE 18 ---
Laissez-Faire, Violence, CT Confusion after the School Decision 9 
of putrefaction, complainings-used to be blacker and richer, So- 
cial democrats, new dealers, Said Ben: Better keep ’em out or 
yr/grand children will miss you. . . . 
Death for Usurers, money monopolists, obstructors of Dis- 
tribution (international finance, World Bank and Bunk, Unesco 
currency, Federal Reserve racket, Barney Baruch’s check book, 
Schiff and Warburg finance Bolshevik refolooshun 1917, Leh- 
man finances Newhouse $$ Birmingham News). (from “Virgin- 
ians Awake” [ Seaboard White Citizens’ Council pamphlet], 
quoted by James Rorty, “John Kasper’s Moment of Glory,” 
ADL Bztlletin, December 1956) 
Clinton was Kasper’s great moment. As a result of a week of 
door- to-door canvasing and haranguing, he turned the small com- 
munity into a raging, seething mob town that only the Tennessee 
National Guard could quiet. Clinton juries twice acquitted Kasper 
of incitement to riot, but eventually a federal judge sentenced him 
to a year in prison for contempt. Kasper never joined the Klan, but 
the hooded knights initially took him to their hearts as one of their 
own. While he appealed his several court sentences, he was a much- 
sought-after attraction on the Klan circuit, particularly in central 
Florida. However, when an investigating committee of the Florida 
legislature offered testimony, including pictures, that Kasper had 
consorted with black friends at mixed-race parties in New York 
City, a reaction set in. Many of his former Klan friends disowned 
him, although the newspapers in central Florida continued to re- 
ceive occasional letters from parents who testified that that well- 
dressed young fellow with such nice manners stood for what 
America was really all about. When Kasper was released from jail, a 
small group of friends, including Carter and Admiral Crommelin, 
were there to welcome him, but his moment was past. 
Of the Klan unsuccessfuls who splashed its name across the 
headlines in the post-school decision 1950s, the most woebegone 
was the Reverend James W. “Catfish” Cole of Marion, South Car- 
olina. In 1956, Imperial Wizard Eldon Edwards had commissioned 
him to organize North Carolina, but Cole soon came to feel that it 
would be a shame to have to divide the spoils and power with any- 
one else. Where the newly self-styled grand wizard made his fatal


--- PAGE 19 ---
10 Chapter2 
error, however, was in his decision to carry Klandom into Robeson 
County, North Carolina. The Klan had operated there in the early 
1950s until the county solicitor and the FBI caught some of them 
carrying victims over the state line for beatings. Solicitor Malcolm 
Seawell let the rest know that any more night riding meant first- 
degree burglary prosecution, which carried the death penalty. 
Now, in 1958, Reverend Cole had a new wrinkle. The popula- 
tion of Robeson County was fairly evenly divided between three 
groups: whites, blacks, and the Lumbee Indians. In order to ac- 
commodate each of them, the county had a system of three-way 
segregation in schools, restrooms, and other places of public use. 
The Lumbees were a proud and prosperous people who had never 
lived a reservation life. It was widely believed that they were the 
descendants of the lost colonists of Roanoke. Some of them had 
blue eyes, and many of them carried old English family names, such 
as Drinkwater and Oxendine. For a number of years, they were 
known as “Croatans,” after the single word found carved on a 
doorpost of the “lost colony.” 
Most of the Lumbees were farmers, but some had gone into 
business or served in city office. The town of Pembroke was largely 
Indian. While the Lumbees were unhappy over their own second- 
class status, there was one thing about which they felt most 
strongly, namely, the importance of setting themselves apart from 
black people. It was into this community that Catfish Cole’s Klans- 
men brought their flaming crosses as a warning against Native 
Americans mingling with whites and in which they planned a big 
outdoor rally. On the appointed chilly January night, some fifty 
Klansmen found themselves gathered in the center of a field near 
Maxton while hundreds of armed Lumbees watched impassively 
from the road and the surrounding fields. Several of the Lumbees 
had streaked their faces with lipstick war paint, and one was wear- 
ing a souvenir warbonnet with “See Rock City” printed along its 
side. 
At 8:30, when the meeting was supposed to begin, the Lum- 
bees converged on the Klansmen, who were clustered fearfully be- 
neath a single lightbulb suspended from a pole. As Klansmen des- 
perately threw off their robes, an enormous Lumbee reached out 
and broke the bulb with the barrel of his rifle. The darkness was


--- PAGE 20 ---
Laissez-Faire, Violence, ~3" Confusion after the School Decision 11 
immediately lit by repeated bursts of light as Lumbees fired their 
guns in the air and news photographers flashed away. The Klans- 
men, trusting to wisdom rather than valor, fled. 
There were a scattering of injuries and automobile tires riddled 
by shotgun pellets. A few bits of regalia, a Klan banner, and the 
public address system were left in the hands of the Lumbees. The 
state highway patrolmen moved in and arrested an armed and in- 
toxicated Klansman whom they found lying in a ditch. Sheriff Mal- 
colm McLeod warned the jubilant Lumbees to go home-that it 
was time to go home if they did not want to miss seeing Gunsmoke 
on television. Grand Wizard Cole was soon extradited to North 
Carolina and went to jail for incitement to riot. The press and mag- 
azines carried the story and pictures from coast to coast, and every- 
one laughed, except the Nan. The Kaspers, Coles, and Carters 
were doing it no good. 
Thus, in the highly competitive world of fiee-enterprise Klan- 
dom, nearly a score of nonaligned Klans pranced across the land- 
scape from Texas and Arkansas to the Carolinas. Despite the chal- 
lenge of the Supreme Court school desegregation decision and the 
threat of integration, the Klans failed to grow and prosper. Part of 
this was the fault of the kind of leadership that the Klans drew. On 
the whole, it was appallingly bad. Most wizards and dragons, like 
Florida's Bill Hendrix, were concerned with the Klan as a money- 
making organization. Many, like the Bryan brothers in North Car- 
olina, had considerable criminal records. Some, like Carter, were 
emotionally unstable and prone to sudden violence. Others, as 
shown most notably by the Reverend Alvin Horn of Alabama, were 
not inclined to practice the morality that they publicly preached. 
Most, like Reverend Cole, who took on the Lumbees, were prone 
to the unforgivable fault of bad judgment. Although they dreamed 
big, they thought small. 
Across the South, it was much the same story. In Tennessee, 
Chattanooga had ignored the Klan during Reconstruction and cra- 
dled it in the 1920s. Although the size of the Dixie Klans was 
small, it was important in city politics. Chattanooga was a manufac- 
turing and transportation hub. It combined a large industrial work- 
ing class and an affluent upper class, but for a city of its size, the 
ordinary middle class was remarkably small. The Klan's following


--- PAGE 21 ---
12 Chapter2 
was to be found in the East Lake and Highland Park sections of 
the city, which stretched along the foot of Missionary Ridge fiom 
Rossville, Georgia, north to the Tennessee River. In 1962, the tele- 
vised appeal from a reputed Klan spokesman helped elect a conser- 
vative Republican to Congress. 
There were at least three competing Klans in Texas and Arkan- 
sas, claims of a revival in northern Louisiana, and only small crowds 
at rallies in Virginia, somewhat better ones in North Carolina, and 
even better ones in the western parts of South Carolina. In Florida, 
the major strength of the Klan had coalesced in the northeastern 
corner of the state. Socially conservative Jacksonville was torn be- 
tween the polar roles of a modern expanding metropolis and the 
capital of crackerdom. With Mayor Hayden Burns preparing to 
bridge the two and cross over it into the governor’s mansion, the 
citizens acquiesced at the polls to rural small-county control of 
state affairs and usually sent like-minded representatives to the leg- 
islature. While this did not augment the strength of the various 
Klans, it did create a world in which they could hold on to a mar- 
ginal existence and occasionally score successes. One such success 
was the turnout for “Ax-Handle Saturday” in downtown Jackson- 
ville in August 1960, when Klansmen assaulted blacks participating 
in a sit-in while the police watched. 
The five would-be Klan empires that eked out a competitive 
existence in Jacksonville totaled less than 1,000 members. The 
most active was the Florida Klan, whose major Jacksonville unit, 
like so many Klans elsewhere, met under an assumed name. In this 
case, it was a fellowship club that convened in a rented hall on King 
Street, occasionally sponsoring meetings in the Duval County Au- 
ditorium or joining other Hans in rallies, institutes, and cross- 
burning recruitments. Although its numbers probably ran more 
than a hundred, only a dependable score or two were regulars. 
They gathered together on meeting nights, milling about infor- 
mally while engaging in the usual Klan small talk of guns and kill- 
ing. The hard-core membership included several retired ministers, 
a chiropractor, a plumber, car and jewelry salesmen, a high school 
student, and an occasional former politician. 
It was in Georgia and Alabama, however, that the real fortunes 
of a Klan revival rested in the early 1960s. When Eldon Edwards


--- PAGE 22 ---
Laissez-Faire, Violence, 0” Confusion after the School Decision 13 
was struck down by a heart attack, his successor was already waiting 
impatiently in the wings. Whereas Edwards had talked tough but 
sought to avoid going very far out on the limb with actual violence, 
Robert M. Shelton, a young rubber worker from Tuscaloosa, Ala- 
bama, appeared to be a man of action and seemed to be a real 
comer both within and outside the Klan ranks. He was a good or- 
ganizer, he seemed to have friends in high places, and he was lucky. 
His luck came most primarily from the fact that his chief competi- 
tion in Alabama Klan affairs, the Reverend Alvin Horn, had no luck 
at all. 
In 1950, Reverend Horn and a group of Klansmen had gone 
after a Pel1 City storekeeper, Charlie Hurst, who was shot when he 
struggled to get away. Horn was eventually acquitted, but it was 
bad publicity. His wife, depressed over an operation, killed herself. 
As the father of six children, it was natural that Horn should seek a 
new helpmate, but when he finally found her, there was a terrible 
public to-do. The trouble was that Reverend Horn was forty-six, 
and his runaway bride was only fourteen. The police brought her 
back and lodged Horn in jail for contributing to the delinquency 
of a minor. Her parents planned to annul the marriage on the 
grounds of nonconsummation. When it became obvious that this 
was a losing argument, they let the marriage stand. All this did not 
appear to meet the moral standards that the Klan claimed it repre- 
sented, and Shelton took over from Reverend Horn as grand 
dragon of Alabama. 
The ambitious Shelton soon quarreled with Edwards, was ex- 
pelled, and formed his own Alabama Klan. When Eldon Edwards 
died in August 1960, his boyish young protkgk, Georgia Grand 
Dragon Robert Lee “Wild Bill” Davidson, succeeded him. Unfor- 
tunately, Davidson’s nickname, which he earned with the attrac- 
tion-getting buckskin jacket that he wore as an insurance salesman, 
was more indicative of appearances than performance. Wild Bill 
was too nervous and high strung for an organization such as the 
Nan. His inherited box-salvage plant in Macon, Georgia, was not 
doing well, and his rejection of both Shelton and the National 
States Rights Party as too fanatical indicated that his reign was 
going to be a pale copy of Edwards. The fact that he appointed 
Reverend Horn as his Alabama lieutenant was a commentary on


--- PAGE 23 ---
14 Chapter2 
lmperial Wizard Robert Shelton 
the quality of talent available to him. After an explosive meeting 
early in 1961, his second in command, Calvin Craig, took the slim 
Georgia legions over to Shelton. Since Mrs. Edwards was disin- 
clined to relinquish her hold on the copyrights of the U.S. Klans, 
Shelton continued to style his “only authentic” organization as the 
United Hans of America. For the next thirty years, Imperial Wiz- 
ard Robert Shelton was to sit atop Klandom’s violent and slippery 
pinnacle.


--- PAGE 24 ---
.3. 
Bombingham 
Zhe leadership potential in the South entered the battle for segre- 
gation through more favored and subtle instruments, such as the 
white Citizens’ Councils, the Federation for Constitutional Gov- 
ernment, anti-Communist crusades, and regular party politics. 
Economic and political pressure was espoused more readily than 
violence. The Klan leadership tended to come from people who 
might well be described as marginal fanatics and mercenary oppor- 
tunists. Alas for the latter and for all sincere Klansmen, money was 
in short supply. It was obviously not going to come from the non- 
affluent membership of the Klan itself. Business communities did 
not support the Klan. A Klan sheriff usually meant the probability 
of a red-light district, gambling, drunkenness, absenteeism, and 
bad publicity, Businessmen in Clinton, Tennessee, and Little Rock, 
Arkansas, were frightened by the kind of men and passions at- 
tracted by racial violence. 
Violence remained the way of the Klan. In 1959, the Friends’ 
Service Committee, National Council of Churches of Christ, and 
the Southern Regional Council published a report on the first four 
years following the Supreme Court’s school decision. It listed some 
530 cases of overt “racial violence, reprisal and intimidation” and 
generally opined that law and order had been deteriorating in the 
South. The list of cases was a vastly mixed bag, and the various for- 
mations of the Ku Klux Klan were far from responsible for all of 
them, but there was case after case of the Klan’s involvement in 
threats, cross burning, floggings, and bombings. 
An admittedly partial list of overt violence, much of it the work 
of the hooded knights, included the following: 
15


--- PAGE 25 ---
16 Chapter3 
6 black people killed; 
29 individuals, 11 of them white, shot and wounded in racial inci- 
dents; 
44 persons beaten; 
5 stabbed; 
30 homes bombed; in one instance (at Clinton, Tenn.) an addi- 
tional 30 houses were damaged by a single blast; attempted 
blasting of 5 other homes; 
8 homes burned; 
15 homes struck by gunfire, and 7 homes stoned; 
4 schools bombed, in Jacksonville, Nashville, and Chattanooga, and 
2 bombing attempts on schools, in Charlotte and Clinton; 
7 churches bombed, one of them white, and an additional attempt 
1 church in Memphis burned; another church stoned; 
4 Jewish temples or centers bombed, in Miami, Nashville, Jackson- 
3 bombing attempts on Jewish buildings, in Gastonia, N.C., Bir- 
1 YWCA building in Chattanooga and an auditorium in Knoxville 
2 schools burned; 
Clinton, Tenn.; 
on a black church; 
ville, and Atlanta; 
mingham, and Charlotte; 
dynamited; 
In addition, 17 towns and cities were threatened by mob action. 
(Intimidation, Reprisal and Violence in the South’s Racial Crisis 
[19591) 
When the politicians pledged that the South would never inte- 
grate and officials and community leaders resisted openly and co- 
vertly by noncompliance and organized economic pressure, the ex- 
ample was already set. Society seemed ready to be saying “go 
ahead’’ at the same time it told the Hans that they had better be- 
have. Communication within society is at best only partial, for the 
Klan’s natural constituency did not listen to what community lead- 
ership had to say. The people who could send their children to pri- 
vate schools, who could move to a more expensive all-white neigh- 
borhood, who never ate at the lunch counters, and who were not 
likely to have to confront black people at their country clubs of- 
fered no competition for the Klan’s Cyclopes and dragons.


--- PAGE 26 ---
Bombingham 17 
The person who was important, the sheriff, was popularly 
elected. Deputies, for whom any form of civil service was unknown, 
completely depended on him for their jobs. The sheriff and his 
deputies often came out of the same world that the Hans did. The 
sheriff was the power in his county. While no one could predict 
single episodes, violent Klan activity meant, at the least, that the 
sheriff was not concerned about preventing it. 
While the southern attorneys general and governors con- 
demned the Klan, which had not had a “look-in” in a southern 
statehouse since the grand dragon addressed Strom Thurmond’s 
applauding South Carolina legislature in 1948, the Klan’s sporadic 
cross burning, beatings, and floggings continued. The new feature 
was the use of dynamite. Between January 1, 1956, and June 1, 
1963, at least 138 bundles of dynamite sent clouds of smoke rising 
upward above the scarred racial frontiers between the black and 
white worlds. Black churches, newly purchased homes in a white 
neighborhood, the residences of white moderates or civil rights 
sympathizers, newly integrated schools, the YWCA in Chattanooga 
and the Knoxville auditorium in Tennessee, and synagogues in 
Miami and Jacksonville, Florida; Gadsden, Alabama; and Nashville, 
Tennessee, bared their wounds or collapsed into rubble. 
Although the general response to the bombings was one of 
shock and condemnation, the dynamiter, Klansman or racial ex- 
tremist, was outside the ordinary community and not affected by 
its feeling. A special police intelligence organization, the Southern 
Conference on Bombing, was set up in 1958 under the sponsor- 
ship of the staunchly segregationist Mayor Haydon Burns of Jack- 
sonville to coordinate the efforts of southern law enforcement 
agents, but bombers were difficult to track down and even harder 
to convict. Would-be dynamiters were convicted in Charlotte, 
North Carolina, but despite a signed confession, others were ac- 
quitted in Montgomery, Alabama. In Atlanta, Klansman-Attorney 
James Venable successfully defended a group of National States 
Rights Party men against similar charges with the aid of character 
witnesses, including Klan Wizard Eldon Edwards, and an alibi pro- 
vided during a period of “temporary lucidity” by an inmate of a 
state mental institution. 
Although police efforts were not particularly successful,


--- PAGE 27 ---
18 Chapter3 
explosives did leave fingerprints behind for the trained expert. 
Careful police work and a growing cooperation among the states 
and with the FBI, which had carefully infiltrated the most promi- 
nent fkinge groups, promised some measure of control if only by 
promoting caution among the bombers. Only a portion of the dy- 
namitings, though a large one, had been carried out by organized 
resistance groups such as the Klan. 
In the free-enterprise world of dynamiting, two leading entre- 
preneurs emerged. They were the National States Rights Party’s 
J. B. Stoner and the United Klan’s Eastview Klavern 13. Stoner was 
a poor public speaker but a good hater. At a young age, he discov- 
ered the Klan and the “Jewish conspiracy,” moved from Chatta- 
nooga to Atlanta, got a law degree from an unaccredited law 
school, and committed his life to forming anti- Jewish organiza- 
tions and setting bombs. Willard Rose, who covered the South for 
the Miami Herald, told of a conversation in which Stoner was rag- 
ing on about “the nigger this . . .” and “the nigger that . . .” “Why 
do you say things like that to me?” Rose asked him. “You know 
that I don’t agree with you.” “You’re a white man ain’t ya?” 
Stoner replied. 
While Stoner was continually on the move about the South in 
the 1950s and 1960s, Eastview Klavern 13’s home territory was 
Birmingham, Alabama. Bob Chambliss and Pops Blanton were 
Klan old-timers. In the 1920s, Chambliss belonged to Bir- 
mingham’s then-mighty Robert E. Lee Klavern. He learned dyna- 
miting as a quarryman and worked in the city garage, but he got 
into trouble for taking part in a Klan flogging, making threats, at- 
tacking a newsman, and rioting against Autherine Lucy at the Uni- 
versity of Alabama. As black families began moving into white 
neighborhoods in College Hills and Fountain Heights, he helped 
College Hills become known as “Dynamite Hill” and Birmingham 
earn the nickname of “Bombingham.” The police knew him as 
“Dynamite Bob.” 
Bobby Frank Cherry learned explosives in the Marines. Almost 
half a century later, on trial for the bombing of Birmingham’s 16th 
Street Baptist Church, Cherry was identified from a photograph of 
men beating a black minister, Fred Shuttlesworth, who was trying 
to register his children at an all-white school. “Bopped 01’


--- PAGE 28 ---
Bombingham 19 
Shuttlesworth in the head,” Cherry boasted afterward, also com- 
menting on a different assault that he had “split a nigger’s head 
open.” Cherry was part of Eastview Klavern 13’s “action squad,” 
along with Chambliss and Pops Blanton’s son Tommy. As Robert 
Shelton was consolidating his hold on the Alabama Klandom, a 
bee@ brawler named Gary Thomas Rowe Jr. joined Eastview Klav- 
ern 13 at the direction of his FBI handler and became part of the 
action squad. 
Eastview Klavern 13 was giving Imperial Wizard Shelton prob- 
lems. He did not like Chambliss and the Blantons hanging out so 
much with the National States Rights Party crowd. It was alright 
to hate the blacks and the Jews, but being fiends with Nazis was 
downright un-American. Mainly, though, it was a matter of con- 
trol. Shelton expelled the Blantons, and they gathered with Cham- 
bliss, Cherry, and a dozen or so others down by the Cahaba River, 
which they took as the name of their group. 
Despite distractions, these were good days for Imperial Wizard 
Shelton. One splendid thing about being the Klan’s top honcho 
was getting one’s words (and face) in all the national magazines, 
particularly the sexy ones, such as Playboy and Penthouse. If what 
the American male wanted was sex and violence, Imperial Wizard 
Shelton could supply the violence. With a flow of words about 
“fluoridation,” “kosher food,” and the “United Nations” in his 
flat, toneless voice, he told Cavalier where he stood: 
The only thing for me is the Klan. The others may call a nigger 
a nigger all right, but do they call a Jew a Jew? The John Birchers 
may be all right for what they’re trying to do, but do they talk 
about the Jewish conspiracy? Even the White Citizens’ Council 
has plenty Jews in it. . . . Our aim is to educate the people to the 
conspiracy between Jews, niggers, and communists to take over 
the government. . . . We all know the nigger ain’t smart enough 
to manipulate the moves he’s makin’. It is the Jews who are back 
of this. 
Despite similar concerns about Jewish conspiracy, Shelton had only 
contempt for George Lincoln Rockwell and his American Nazis. 
Rockwell had never amounted to much. “He don’t believe in


--- PAGE 29 ---
20 Chapter3 
Christ. I’m a Methodist,” Shelton explained, “have a wife and 
three children; they’re all Methodists” (quoted in Per Laursen, 
“The 101% American,” August 1964). 
The attention given to the Jews was particularly significant. 
One of the most pronounced aspects of the post-World War I1 
Klan was its violent anti-Semitism. While this had long been a Klan 
theme, it had become increasingly strong. Without the resources 
to turn out their own propaganda, the Klans found a ready, inex- 
pensive supply of literature available from professional anti- 
Semites, such as Conde McGinley and Gerald L. K. Smith. The 
tone was right, and the words soon became their words. 
As the Klan turned more and more to anti-Semitic arguments 
and inspiration, the leadership of the two movements became more 
and more intertwined. Integration was denounced as a Commu- 
nist-Jewish conspiracy plotting to overthrow white Christian man- 
kind. Temple and synagogue bombings were described as attempts 
on the part of the Jews to gain sympathy; Eichmann did not really 
kill all those Jews, but “good for him” if he did. Hitler had the 
right idea. Arrested Klansmen were victims of Jewish persecution, 
and the “Jew-”’ was to blame for the troubled state of the world. 
A Nazi salute was used in South Carolina rallies; Asa Carter’s 
Klansmen dressed in storm-trooper outfits, and the Klan’s fi-iend, 
the violently anti-Semitic National States Rights Party, wore the 
Nazi “SS” insignia. 
The success of anti-Semitism stemmed fi-om the patness of the 
explanation it offered for the Klansman’s anxieties: his fear of race 
mixing, his financial and social insecurity, and his xenophobia. He 
experienced some difficulty in picturing the hitherto docile black 
people, to whom he was accustomed, as being in intense revolt. 
The explanation of a Jewish conspiracy proved most illuminating. 
When southern governors denounced the black revolt as the prod- 
uct of Communism and troublemaking outsiders, Klansmen 
adopted similar theories of their own.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Friends in High Places: 
George Wallace 
After the Klan’s fall fiom grace and power in the 1920s, only local 
scatterings remained from its once powerful network of political 
friends. Klansmen might be found on jury pools and among the 
ranks of city policemen and sheriffs’ deputies in the South, but by 
midcentury only in Georgia and Alabama and in symbolic national 
politics did the Klan have a larger role to play. For politicians, car- 
toonists, editorial writers, and much of the general public, the Klan 
represented society’s most violent racial extremism. To black 
Americans, even when it was not an immediate threat, the Ku Klux 
Klan represented all that was oppressive in their relationship with 
white America. 
It is possible that Richard Nixon’s first campaign to become 
president of the United States was a casualty of the symbolic power 
of the Klan image and of the intramural struggles among the Flor- 
ida Hans. In September of the 1960 presidential election year, Bill 
Hendrix, the hardened veteran of many Klan wars, announced that 
he was for Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus, the unwilling nomi- 
nee of the National States Rights Party. Since the bitterness be- 
tween Hendrix and his fellow would-be Florida grand dragon, 
W. J. Griffin, was well known, the press went to see what Griffin 
thought about things. This put the Tampa private detective in an 
embarrassing position. Hendrix had endorsed Faubus first, and to 
tag along behind his rival was too bitter a pill for Griffin to take. 
He swallowed hard, cleared his throat, and proclaimed that he was 
for Nixon. 
In October, in the third of the crucial Nixon-Kennedy 
21


--- PAGE 31 ---
22 Chapter4 
television debates, John Kennedy was questioned about the claims 
made by some of his prominent supporters that “all bigots will vote 
for Nixon.” Kennedy replied, “Well, Mr. Griffin, I believe, who is 
the head of the Klan, who lives in Tampa, Florida, indicated in a 
statement, I think, two or three weeks ago that he was not going to 
vote for me, and that he was going to vote for Mr. Nixon.” Having 
delivered his shaft, Kennedy went on to say that it was absurd to 
think that Nixon did anything but strongly disapprove of any such 
endorsement, a sentiment that Nixon was glad to echo. “I don’t 
give a damn what Nixon said,” Griffin retorted the next day, “I’m 
still voting for him.” In an election in which Kennedy’s narrow vic- 
tory depended so heavily on the overwhelming margins piled up in 
Negro precincts in cities such as Chicago, perhaps Griffin’s words 
helped make the difference. 
The story was different in Alabama politics. Among the candi- 
dates for governor in 1958 were State Attorney General John Pat- 
terson and Circuit Judge George Corley Wallace. Patterson’s chief 
political qualification was that his father had been murdered for at- 
tempting to clean up Phenix City, a red-light-district town across 
the river from Fort Benning and Columbus, Georgia. In the hyste- 
ria that was sweeping across the South in the wake of the Supreme 
Court school desegregation decision, the issue of race, always so 
close beneath the surface, became central. Patterson eagerly used 
it. His campaign manager was the banker Charles Meriwether, who 
had run Admiral John Crommelin’s campaign, which first brought 
John Kasper and Asa Carter together. Although Patterson had ear- 
lier signed the southern attorneys general’s resolution against the 
Klan, he now wrote to Imperial Wizard Bobby Shelton for support. 
The Klan endorsed Patterson and worked on his campaign. As he 
later told New rOrk Times reporter Howell Raines, the Klan was “a 
factor to consider. . . . They can do you great harm; they can do 
you great good. . . . And of course, I wasn’t about to run ’em off.” 
Judge Wallace, who had always treated black people with re- 
spect in his court, tried to turn the Klan issue against Patterson. 
Taking a bed along with him on the back of a pickup truck, Wallace 
would ask his audiences, “Where is John Patterson?” Then he 
would lift up the covers, peer inside, and call out “Who is down 
there between the sheets with you, John?” It was no use-Wallace


--- PAGE 32 ---
Friends in High Places: George Wallace 23 
was on the wrong side of the issue, and Patterson won, but Wallace 
had learned his lesson well. “I started off talking about schools and 
highways and prisons and taxes,” he explained, “and I couldn’t 
make them listen. Then I began talking about niggers-and they 
stomped the floor.” 
With Patterson victorious in 1958, Klansman Shelton’s star 
was in the ascendancy. He was appointed Goodrich Tire Com- 
pany’s state sales agent and managed to land it a $1.6 million con- 
tract from the state. In time, relations cooled between Shelton, his 
friends, and his employer. Governor Patterson came out in early 
support of Kennedy’s presidential hopes despite the fact that Ken- 
nedy was a Roman Catholic. Shelton told a Tuscaloosa courthouse 
convention of Alabama Klansmen that they “should stay away from 
Kennedy and keep an eye on John Patterson and Charles Meri- 
wether,” whom he claimed were tools of the Jews. While other Al- 
abama politicians soon came to attack the Kennedy administration, 
Meriwether, fiom his new post on the Export-Import Bank, obvi- 
ously was not too dissatisfied. Shelton, however, was soon sepa- 
rated from the Goodrich Tire Company in what they described as 
a reduction in force and he denounced as political persecution. 
In 1962, George Wallace was elected to the first of his four 
terms as Alabama governor (five if you count the stand-in term of 
his wife, Lurleen). In the 1930s and 1940s, Alabama, one of the 
nation’s poorest and neediest states, was the South’s strongest New 
Dealer. As best they could, Governor Bibb Graves, Senators Lister 
Hill and John Sparkman, and a group of northern Alabama con- 
gressmen represented the interests of workers and small farmers 
and businessmen. Then came the Dixiecrat revolt in 1948, the 
1954 school desegregation decision, and the civil rights revolution 
of the 1960s. Black demonstrators were out in the streets of the 
southern cities. As the leading Alabama historian Wayne Flynt 
wrote in Alabama: The History of a Deep South State, “When 
Northern liberals and Southern conservatives increasingly linked 
liberalism to race relations, the New Deal coalition began to un- 
ravel. ” 
Elected governor in 1947 and 1954, Big Jim Folsom was run- 
ning again in 1962. At six feet eight inches tall and 275 pounds, he 
was a maverick populist with a country manner and humor and a


--- PAGE 33 ---
24 Chapter4 
sympathy for the underdog, both black and white. He had been a 
formidable politician, but he had knotted himself up in corruption, 
sexual adventurism, and alcohol. And times had changed. George 
Wallace had been the southern Alabama manager of Folsom’s suc- 
cessful 1954 campaign and a tax reform and education leader in 
the legislature. Now, having been beaten on the race issue by the 
conservative Patterson in the previous election, Wallace was again 
running for governor. He had learned his lesson well, and in 1963 
he was sworn in as governor of Alabama. 
Wallace told his speechwriter, ha Carter, that he wanted an 
inaugural address that would make people take notice. Klansmen 
were accustomed to proclaim that as long as white men lived, “yes- 
terday, today, forever,” the Nan would continue to ride. Perhaps 
with this cadence in mind, Carter produced the words that drew 
local adulation and national attention to the Alabama governor. 
“Today I have stood where Jefferson Davis stood and taken an oath 
to my people,” Wallace asserted. “I draw the line in the dust and 
toss the gauntlet before the feet of tyranny, and I say ‘Seg.regation 
Now! SeHreJation Tomorrow! Segregation Forever!’ ” 
Wallace replaced State Safety Commissioner Floyd Mann, who 
had protected the lives of the “fieedom riders.” Mann’s successor 
was Al Lingo, Wallace’s violent racist crony, who had been his per- 
sonal pilot during the campaign. Through Lingo, Wallace let the 
Klansmen know when their presence was wanted. Making trouble 
in the streets would give the governor an excuse to close schools, 
but Klansmen were to stay away from Tuscaloosa. There, at the 
University of Alabama, Wallace played out his nationally televised 
drama of refusal, with a chalk line drawn across the entranceway, 
before stepping aside to let the black students enter. 
For Wallace’s first presidential run in 1968, Carter joined with 
the leading anti-Semite propagandist, Willis Carto, to produce and 
distribute a campaign pamphlet, lauding him for standing up to the 
blacks and the liberal Communist conspiracy. In 1970, Wallace was 
running for governor again and would have another go at the pres- 
idency in two years. Having fallen out with Wallace, Carter also en- 
tered the list but finished badly with only 15,000 votes in the Dem- 
ocratic primary. No one had a majority, so there was a runoff. 
Wallace had come in second, and President Nixon and his advisers


--- PAGE 34 ---
Friends in High Places: George Wallace 25 
saw this as a great opportunity. If they could help defeat Wallace 
in Alabama, he would not be a threat when Nixon himself ran for 
reelection. With Nixon’s operatives secretly giving $400,000 to 
finance his opponent’s campaign, Wallace was in trouble. Carter re- 
joined Wallace and helped put together an underground campaign 
of false letters, anonymous phone calls and leaflets, and doctored 
photographs of interracial sex. Despite President Nixon’s money, 
Wallace won again. 
Almost a quarter of a century later, in a 1991 op-ed column in 
the New Tork Times, Dan Carter, the Wallace biographer and prize- 
winning Emory University history professor, continued the Asa 
Carter story under the headline “The Transformation of a Klans- 
man.” After a falling out with Wallace over the governor’s “moder- 
ation,” ha Carter moved to Texas and reinvented his name, his 
livelihood, and his personal history. Borrowing from the name of 
the Confederate cavalry general and first grand wizard of the Nan, 
Nathan Bedford Forrest, for whom public schools are named 
across the South, Asa Carter became Forrest Carter and began 
writing western vigilante fiction. His first novel was made into his 
friend Clint Eastwood’s movie The Outlaw Josey Wales. After Car- 
ter’s death of a heart attack in 1979, his last fiction, a coming-of- 
age autobiography, became a prize-winning New Tork Times best- 
seller and a motion picture for children. True to the last to his prej- 
udices, The Education of Little Tree is the story of a life that Carter 
never lived, growing up Cherokee in the eastern mountains of Ten- 
nessee and having escaped from a coercive “guv-mints” betrayal. 
When Carter died in a moment of alcoholic rage, he was un- 
mourned by any member of his family. 
With Lingo’s state troopers to crack black heads in Bir- 
mingham and at Selma’s Edmund Pettus Bridge, the Klan seemed 
hardly necessary, and George Wallace had a larger vision. He had 
understood the political possibilities of a white backlash. NBC 
newsman Douglas Kiker capsulized the perception: “Great God! 
That’s it! They’re all Southern! The whole United States is South- 
ern!” In his Politics of Rag.e: Ge0rg.e Wallace, the &&ins of the New 
Conservatism, and the Transformation of American Politics, the his- 
torian Carter showed how Wallace shaped the race card into an at- 
tack on liberal government. “George Wallace had recognized the


--- PAGE 35 ---
26 Chapter4 
political capital to be made in a society shaken by social upheaval 
and economic uncertainty,” Carter wrote. “The politics of rage 
that George Wallace made his own had moved from the fkinges of 
our society to center stage.’’ Whether Wallace really believed it did 
not matter. On the fringes of those fringes, there has remained 
room for the Ku Klux Klan.


--- PAGE 36 ---
Freedom Riding 
Zhe black lunch-counter sit-ins, “freedom rides,” and massed 
demonstrations of the early 1960s offered a chance for the type of 
street-brawling violence in which the Klan excelled, and the en- 
hanced specter of a black menace gave the Klan a degree of ap- 
proval that it had lacked for many years. During the postwar 1940s 
and 1950s, the Klan had been mainly a status movement for its 
members. Only in its bombing along the racial housing frontiers in 
the southern cities did it act as a resistance movement. For the 
most part, merely by joining the Klan and participating in its verbal 
defiance, threats, and sporadic violence, the Klansman satisfied the 
urges that carried him toward membership. 
The Klan revival in the early 1960s centered in Georgia and 
Alabama, the homeland of the twentieth-century Klan. In Alabama 
it became a Klan-style resistance movement that threatened to 
sweep the new Civil Rights movement off the streets of the South. 
Klansmen grabbed clubs and dashed off to the bus stations of An- 
niston, Birmingham, and Montgomery and to state university cam- 
puses at Athens, Georgia; Tuscaloosa, Alabama; and Oxford, Mis- 
sissippi. Georgia Klansmen picketed the black sit-ins in Atlanta 
department stores and pushed state troopers aside to rally on Stone 
Mountain, but it was in Imperial Wizard Bobby Shelton’s Alabama 
that the first crucial battles were fought. 
For the most part, the Klan had not been active in the real 
black-belt counties of Alabama, where the black people made up 
most of the population but were seldom allowed to register and 
vote. It was in the center of the state that the Klans rode more freely 
than anywhere else in the South, except perhaps southwestern 
27


--- PAGE 37 ---
28 Chapter5 
Mississippi. If a rough four-sided figure were to be drawn to in- 
clude Tuscaloosa, Birmingham, Anniston, and Montgomery, the 
major area of Klan activity would have been enclosed. Ringed in 
would be the major civil rights arena in Alabama. It contained the 
Klan’s first line of defense against northern invasion in Anniston 
and Montgomery, where Martin Luther King Jr. and the bus boy- 
cott first made headlines. It contained the Birmingham battle- 
grounds of the freedom rides, the home of the Reverend Fred 
Shuttlesworth’s Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, 
and the stronghold of Police Commissioner Eugene “Bull” Con- 
nor where King’s marchers faced Connor’s pressure hoses and dogs 
and where a campaign of racial bombing reached its crescendo at 
the 16th Street Baptist Church. It contained the Talladega resi- 
dence of the Reverend Alvin Horn and the Tuscaloosa home of the 
University of Alabama and Robert Shelton’s United Klans head- 
quarters. Just to the south and west was Lowndes County, where 
Viola Liuzzo died on lonely U.S. Highway 80 on the way back to 
Selma after the Montgomery march. 
From 1958 until his 1963 defeat at the polls and in the courts, 
Police Commissioner Connor came close to making his own law. 
In its simplest form, Connor’s law read that blacks and whites were 
not equal in the eyes of either society or the police. By Connor’s 
violent tactics and his tacit acceptance of those private operators 
who followed his example, encouragement was held out to Bir- 
mingham’s Klansmen. Some 600,000 people lived in Bir- 
mingham’s Jefferson County, one out of every five people in the 
state. Forty percent were black. In the bustling steel centers of Bir- 
mingham and nearby Bessemer, the black man was a possible eco- 
nomic competitor of the working-class white, and the Bessemer 
highway was as close as there was to a Klan highway in America. 
When it came down to harassment and beatings, Birmingham 
blacks claimed that it was sometimes difficult to distinguish be- 
tween the Klansmen and the deputies. Also within the Klan’s 
charmed geographic quadrilateral was the governor’s mansion in 
Montgomery, where Alabama Governors John Patterson and 
George Wallace refkained fkom giving the impression that racial vi- 
olence was completely distasteful. 
In May 1961, CORE, the small, pacifist Congress of Racial


--- PAGE 38 ---
Anniston 
a 
Birmingham 
Tuscaloosa 
Selma MONTGOMERY 
@ 
a 
Freedom Riding 29 
IA 
ALABAMA


--- PAGE 39 ---
30 Chapter5 
Equality, sent a group of thirteen whites and blacks on a bus ride 
through the Deep South to integrate interstate bus station waiting 
rooms. They notified the Department of Justice and the FBI of 
their schedule. This information was relayed to local Alabama po- 
lice forces and through them to the Ku Klux Klan. When the first 
of the two buses arrived at the Greyhound station in Anniston, a 
mob pounded on the bus with clubs and pipes, smashed windows, 
slashed tires, and pursued it out of town. When the ruined tires 
brought the bus to a stop, the mob renewed the assault. A fire- 
bomb forced the passengers out into the mob. Fortunately for 
them, Alabama Public Safety Director Floyd Mann had placed a 
plainclothes state highway policeman on the bus. With gun in 
hand, the policeman held off the mob until other state troopers 
arrived to take the battered passengers back to Anniston. Treated 
in the reluctant local hospital, the passengers were besieged there 
until armed black rescuers arrived from Birmingham to bring them 
to safety. 
There was no such escape for the second group of riders. Al- 
though some of them were beaten on the bus in Anniston, their 
Burning "freedom riders" bus


--- PAGE 40 ---
Freedom Ridin8 31 
Trailways driver managed to get back on the highway and drove on 
to Birmingham. There, another mob was waiting, with no police 
in sight. As FBI undercover informant Gary Thomas Rowe later 
testified, Public Safety Commissioner Connor had met with Impe- 
rial Wizard Robert Shelton and promised Klansmen fifteen minutes 
without interference. It had been Mothers Day, and all the police- 
men were visiting their families, Connor later explained. The 
Klansmen initially gathered at the wrong bus station, but a call 
from police headquarters sent them running to the nearby Trail- 
ways station. As the riders emerged from the bus, the Klansmen 
beat them bloody with fists, lead pipes, clubs, and kicks. The next 
day’s newspapers around the world carried pictures of the beatings 
and the burning bus, and there was even a sympathetic front-page 
editorial in the segregationist Birmingham News. 
In the attorney general’s office in Washington, D.C., and at the 
White House, the Kennedys and their staffs debated what to do. 
Racial troubles would weaken the president in his upcoming meet- 
ing with the Soviets. The bus riders had to be protected, but using 
the Army or the National Guard would antagonize southern vot- 
ers. A no-longer-friendly Governor Patterson was not going to 
commit political suicide by giving in to what he described as “the 
goddamned niggers,” and the bus company rehsed to take the rid- 
ers on to Montgomery. Eventually, despite bomb threats, the gov- 
ernment got the battered “freedom riders” on an airplane and on 
their way to New Orleans. 
But it was not yet over. A crucial decision had been made by 
the Nashville student nonviolent movement. In Birmingham, 
Reverend Shuttlesworth received a call from Diane Nash, who told 
him that Nashville was sending riders to take up the bus journey. 
Shuttlesworth asked her whether she knew that the freedom riders 
had been almost killed in Birmingham. “Yes,” she replied, “That’s 
exactly why the ride must not be stopped. If they stop us with vio- 
lence, the movement is dead. We’re coming. We just want to know 
if you can meet us.” 
“Tell them to call it off!” President Kennedy ordered, but no 
one could. Led by John Lewis, eight black and two white riders 
arrived in Birmingham. Connor put them in “protective custody” 
and after midnight dumped them back across the Tennessee line.


--- PAGE 41 ---
32 Chapter5 
They contacted Nashville and returned. Robert Kennedy, the U.S. 
attorney general, persuaded Greyhound to provide a driver, and 
they were off to Montgomery. Alabama Public Safety Director 
Mann provided a convoy on the road. Police Commissioner L. B. 
Sullivan was to take over protection in Montgomery, but when the 
bus crossed the city line, there were no police anywhere. At the bus 
station, another mob was waiting. It beat them, men, women, and 
newsmen. President Kennedy’s special representative from Wash- 
ington, John Siegenthaler, lay on the pavement, bleeding and un- 
conscious, while FBI men across the street took notes. Mann ar- 
rived on the scene. Firing shots in the air, he forced assailants back 
from one of the fallen students, and his highway patrolmen arrived 
in time to rescue the rest. 
Through that night, the survivors, along with Martin Luther 
King Jr. and more than 1,000 mostly black people, were besieged 
in Reverend Ralph Abernathy’s First Baptist Church by a violent 
white mob. Despite promises ti-om Police Commissioner Sullivan, 
there were no police in sight. Federal marshals and prison guards, 
brought from the Maxwell Field Air Force Base, were beginning 
to lose their fight with the crowd when Governor Patterson finally 
declared martial law and sent in the Alabama National Guard. 
With Klan leaders Robert Shelton and Alvin Horn and their 
lawyers, along with Montgomery Public Safety Commissioner Sul- 
livan and the U.S. Justice Department representatives sitting be- 
fore him, Federal Judge Frank Johnson Jr. issued an order against 
any more disorder. “If there are any other occurrences of this sort, 
I’m going to put some Klansmen, some city officials and some po- 
licemen, and some Negro preachers in the federal penitentiary in 
Atlanta,” he said. Federal marshals, assigned to the judge’s protec- 
tion after the injunction, were to guard him for the next fourteen 
years. 
Judge Johnson had been a law school classmate of George Wal- 
lace. Appointed to the bench by President Dwight Eisenhower, 
Johnson was a Republican from Winston County in the northern 
Alabama mountains. The people of Winston had remained loyal to 
the Union in the Civil War, and Johnson’s great grandfather had 
been an anti-Klan sheriff during Reconstruction. Judge Johnson 
did not think much of discrimination, subterfuge, or demonstra-


--- PAGE 42 ---
Freedom Riding 33 
tions. The important civil rights decisions from the Montgomery 
bus boycott and Selma, through Morris Dees’s Southern Poverty 
Law Center cases, emerged from his courtroom. Faced with a re- 
calcitrant George Wallace and a segregationist state officialdom, at 
various times Judge Johnson took over supervision of Alabama’s 
prisons, highway patrol, property tax assessment, mental health 
facilities, and public school systems. 
Protected by the injunction and the U.S. attorney general’s ar- 
rangements with the governors of Alabama and Mississippi, twelve 
freedom riders, accompanied by sixteen reporters, rode the bus 
from Montgomery to Jackson under the protection of the police, 
highway patrol cars, the FBI, helicopters, Border Patrol airplanes, 
and the Mississippi National Guard. President Kennedy’s arrange- 
ments with the governor of Mississippi had not covered what was 
to happen after the arrival in Jackson. The freedom riders got off 
the bus in Jackson and walked into the “whites only’’ restrooms- 
and into a summer in jail and Parchman prison. 
When more freedom riders kept coming, the president and the 
attorney general were frustrated and angry. The administration’s 
purpose had not been racial justice but rather to get the demon- 
strators off the streets and out of the headlines. The Nan’s furious 
assaults on the freedom riders had forced the national government 
to act. Diane Nash and the Nashville group had understood how 
important it was that the rides go on after Birmingham and the 
Nan not be left triumphant to claim control of the streets and able 
to say, “See, this is the way to do it.” In the acrimonious negotia- 
tions behind the scenes with the Alabama governor, the national 
government had been forced to take a first major step toward be- 
coming involved in the civil rights struggle. An angry Attorney 
General Kennedy received reports on the Nan-police role in An- 
niston, Birmingham, and Montgomery and the names of the Nan- 
smen who had battered his representative, Siegenthaler, but the ad- 
ministration took no action. 
As the next year’s struggle over James Meredith’s entrance into 
the University of Mississippi would show, the national government 
had no plan for dealing with violence. The bloodshed and the 
courage shown by the riders in Anniston, Birmingham, and Mont- 
gomery had drawn the attention of television, the press, and the


--- PAGE 43 ---
34 Chapter5 
nation. The Klan attack on the newsmen and photographers was 
an implicit recognition of how important that was. 
The Kennedy administration pushed the Interstate Commerce 
Commission into ordering the desegregation of bus station facili- 
ties but offered no help for the imprisoned riders in Mississippi, 
who grew to some 300 over the summer. It did, however, quietly 
organize the privately funded Voter Education Project, under the 
direction of the Southern Regional Council, which it hoped would 
take the movement out of the streets and would be less confronta- 
tional. As the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee 
(SNCC) was to learn in the following years, the White Knights of 
the Ku Klux Klan in Mississippi did not recognize a difference. 
From the confrontation with the Nan mobs in Alabama and the 
experience of Mississippi’s dread Parchman prison came the matur- 
ing of the SNCC as a committed civil rights assault weapon across 
the black-belt South. 
As the freedom riders disappeared into the Mississippi jails, na- 
tional attention turned to Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). In 1963, the SCLC 
picked Bull Connor’s Birmingham-the most unyieldingly big city 
in the South, with a reputation for racial bombing and police bru- 
tality-as their integration target. Connor’s career as public safety 
commissioner had rested on support from lower-middle-class 
white voters and the “Big Mules,” the industrial and commercial 
leaders of Birmingham. The freedom rider violence helped con- 
vince a more moderate sector of the business and legal community 
that Connor was bad business. The moderates were still segrega- 
tionists, and Connor still held the police power long enough to 
make one last, unwitting major contribution to the civil rights 
drama. 
Historians disagree over whether the SCLC strategy was based 
on provoking Connor. The campaign began badly with a hesitant 
black community. Only in the Montgomery bus boycott seven years 
before did King have the black churches united behind him. Not 
until the young people joined the marches and the sit-ins did the 
support rally. The arrests soared into the thousands as Connor’s 
use of police dogs and fire hoses against the marchers made Bir- 
mingham the number one television news story.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Freedom Riding. 35 
In 1963, the network evening news was extended to a thirty- 
minute period, and the role of “anchorman” was created. For the 
first time, the news showed live action pictures, captured by newly 
developed lightweight cameras, that followed the demonstrators 
into the streets of the South and American soldiers onto the battle- 
fields of Vietnam. Aided and pressured behind the scenes by Presi- 
dent Kennedy, the business community moderates and the SCLC 
negotiated an agreement for the desegregation of downtown stores 
and the hiring of black salespeople. 
Influential leaders, including the Big Mule iron and steel exec- 
utives, and the Klan denounced the settlement. “A sellout by the 
Jew-dominated Chamber of Commerce,’’ the Klan labeled it. Be- 
fore a crowd of several thousand, Imperial Wizard Robert Shelton 
promised reprisals. Later that night, in an apparent attempt to 
catch King, dynamite bombs wrecked the home of King’s brother, 
the Reverend A. D. King, and SCLC headquarters at the Gaston 
Motel, for which Connor had refused guard. The result was a night 
of indiscriminate black rioting and burning and indiscriminate 
beatings by Connor’s police and the state troopers under the com- 
mand of Al Lingo, whom the new governor, George Wallace, had 
appointed to replace the capable Floyd Mann. 
With the news of the bombing and rioting, President Kennedy 
sent major Army units into Alabama on standby and was prepared 
to federalize the Alabama National Guard, which he later did in 
preparation for the admission of black students to the University of 
Alabama at Tuscaloosa. He continued to play an active behind-the- 
scenes role in attempting to persuade the economic leadership to 
support the Birmingham agreement, but he had come to believe 
that more was necessary. Up until now, the government had reluc- 
tantly responded to crises created by others. What was needed was 
a comprehensive approach to dealing with the whole problem. 
In a process of involvement that had begun, against his desires, 
with the mob attacks on the freedom riders two years before, the 
president had come to commitment. On June 11,1963, after Gov- 
ernor Wallace had announced his resistance and then stepped back, 
two black students entered the University of Alabama. That eve- 
ning, in what is often considered his most eloquent television ad- 
dress, President Kennedy endorsed the Civil Rights movement and


--- PAGE 45 ---
36 Chapter 5 
announced that he would propose meaningful legislation to Con- 
gress. Much more had gone in to this than actions of the Klan, but 
it had been an important part of an unpredictable unfolding. 
Several hours later that night, Medgar Evers, Mississippi state 
leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP), was shot in the back from ambush and died in 
the driveway of his home in Jackson. In the black-belt city of 
Selma, Alabama, SNCC organizer Bernard Lafayette was also bru- 
tally ambushed, only to be saved from death by a shotgun-carrying 
black neighbor. Lafayette had been part of the first fieedom ride 
into Montgomery. Now, he believed, the Klan had almost gotten 
him on its second try. Justice Department and FBI people, he re- 
lated later, told him that he, Evers, and a CORE activist in Louisi- 
ana, who was opportunely out of town, had been targeted for a 
triple Klan murder: leaders of three different civil rights organiza- 
tions-NAACP, SNCC, and CORE-in three different states- 
Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana. Contrary to Lafayette’s belief, 
Evers was the victim of a solitary assassin, Byron De La Beckwith, 
who only later joined the Klan. There has been no evidence of a 
conspiratorial aspect to the murder. 
A week after his televised speech and the murder of Evers, 
President Kennedy sent his proposed civil rights law to Congress. 
It had been almost a hundred years since the Reconstruction-era 
Congresses had enacted the first civil rights law. It had been passed 
over President Andrew Johnson’s veto in 1868, but the Supreme 
Court had soon after declared it unconstitutional. Now, for the 
first time, a president of the United States had taken an active civil 
rights role. 
The proposed law had many parts. The one that caught public 
attention was the prohibition of discrimination in public accom- 
modation, “including all places of lodging, eating, and amusement 
and other retail or service establishments.” There was no cer- 
tainty-and much doubt-that Congress would pass it in any 
meaningful form. As SNCC leader John Lewis noted, it would not 
do much about voting rights and did not say anything about pro- 
tection against violence. 
The summer of 1963 seethed with extremist anger, particularly 
among the Klansmen and their political fi-iends. The Birmingham


--- PAGE 46 ---
Freedom Riding 37 
City Council repealed its segregation ordinance despite Klan pick- 
ets outside. Connor was now out of office, but he and other rejec- 
tionists and opportunists were busy. It took a joint injunction from 
all of Alabama’s federal district judges and the president’s federal- 
ization of the Alabama National Guard to override Governor Wal- 
lace’s efforts to prevent token integration of the public schools. 
“Reporters for both state and national papers warned,” the histo- 
rian Wayne Flynt has written, “that Wallace’s speeches tended to 
reinforce the violence-prone lunatic fringe of racists who had long 
sought to protest Birmingham’s social order with bombs and 
guns.” Such warnings, Flynt continued, “fell on deaf ears.” 
Early in the morning of Sunday, September 15, a fifty-nine- 
year-old city auto mechanic named Robert Chambliss, known to 
the police as “Dynamite Bob,” and three fellow Klansmen from 
Birmingham’s Eastview Klavern 13 placed a large dynamite bomb 
against the basement wall of Birmingham’s black 16th Street Bap- 
tist Church. The firing mechanism was attached to a fishing float 
in a slowly leaking bucket. When the water drained out, the float 
settled, and the circuit was connected. The dynamite exploded at 
10:22 that morning and killed four young girls-Addie Mae Col- 
lins, Cynthia Wesley, and Carole Robinson, all fourteen years old, 
and Denise McNair, eleven-who were getting ready to be ushers 
at the morning service. The fishing float was found a block away by 
the FBI.


--- PAGE 47 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 48 ---
06. 
The Long Hot Summer 
In the fall of 1963, with characteristic irony, President John Ken- 
nedy cautioned his staff not to be too critical of Alabama Governor 
George Wallace. “After all,” the president commented, “he has 
done a lot for civil rights this year.” Although it was painful to all 
involved, the same could be said of the Ku Klux Klan. 
Kennedy had become president without a plan or a major con- 
cern for civil rights. It was not on his agenda. He believed that dis- 
crimination was wrong and that it would change over time, as it 
had for the Irish. He saw civil rights as a matter of politics, not mo- 
rality, and the politics of the situation was that he did not wish to 
lose the support of the southern senators, congressmen, and white 
voters. The way that his Justice Department and the new head of 
its Civil Rights Division, Burke Marshall, read the Constitution was 
that race relations was a matter of state jurisdiction. The national 
government had no power to police the South and, short of a situa- 
tion that needed the U.S. Army, had no forces adequate to under- 
take it. Attorney General Robert Kennedy was moved by a rising 
moral passion, but he saw the situation the same way. The adminis- 
tration’s policy was to do what it could by influence, negotiation, 
and the filing of law suits. J. Edgar Hoover’s FBI worked closely 
with southern police departments and shared their attitudes. While 
it had investigated the recent spate of southern bombings, the FBI 
did not hire black agents, did not intervene in racial conflict, and 
considered the Civil Rights movement and Martin Luther King Jr. 
to be dangerously subversive. 
The pressure of the Civil Rights movement in the streets of the 
southern cities and the violence of the Klan and others forced the 
39


--- PAGE 49 ---
40 Chapter6 
Kennedy administration to become involved. Often not knowing 
whether it was more angry at the civil rights leaders than at the 
southern governors, sheriffs, police chiefs, and the Klan, the ad- 
ministration had been forced to seek federal court injunctions and 
to use federal marshals, federalized state national guards, and the 
U.S. Army to protect bus riders, enroll college students at the Uni- 
versities of Mississippi and Alabama, and maintain order in the 
streets. The national commitment grew. The Birmingham cam- 
paign produced the first meaningful civil rights law since Recon- 
struction, and President Lyndon Johnson pushed it through Con- 
gress in the name of the fallen president. The violent activities of 
the Klan played an important role in producing this changing na- 
tional commitment. 
The major problem that continued to face and baffle the 
hooded knights was what to do about the civil rights revolution 
that was taking place all around them. The Klansman was sworn to 
resist it. He had pledged himself, in mystic oneness with his fellow 
Klansmen and in the mirror of his own self-respect, to succeed by 
whatever means. The Klansman’s traditional and cultural way was 
violence-“to get a little bit of action,” as Klansmen liked to de- 
scribe it. When he did, he was particularly vulnerable. Whether his 
violence was spontaneous or carefully planned, the police and the 
FBI, if they wished to do so, knew where to look. There was too 
much talk, too many Klansmen were in on a secret, and, as has 
been the way since the days of Klan trials in Reconstruction South 
Carolina, Klansmen under pressure told on each other. 
The Klans, therefore, successfully turned to more than spo- 
radic violence only where popular and police sentiment granted 
them a high degree of local immunity, where lawmen did not inter- 
fere and often joined, and where judges and juries did not indict, 
convict, or hand down serious sentences. During the long hot 
summer of 1964, Klansmen found such places in Bogalusa, Louisi- 
ana; southwestern Mississippi; northern Georgia; and St. August- 
ine, Florida. These efforts had their price for the Klan, as did road 
adventures in Madison County, Georgia, and the next year in Ala- 
bama’s Lowndes County. In the changing world of the 1960~~ 
doing what Klansmen liked to do best helped bring about federal


--- PAGE 50 ---
The Long Hot Summer 41 
intervention, new national civil rights laws, trials in less sympathetic 
federal courts, and, eventually, guilty verdicts from local juries. 
At a Klan rally in the fall of 1963 just outside St. Augustine, the 
Klan’s string-tie, traveling evangelical friend, Connie Lynch, had 
successfully heated up his audience with cries for blood. “I’ll tell 
you something else,” he had said. “You’ve got a nigger in St. Au- 
gustine ought not to live . . . that burr-headed bastard of a dentist. 
He’s got no right to live at all, let alone walk up and down your 
streets and breathe the white man’s free air. He ought to wake up 
tomorrow morning with a bullet between his eyes. If you were half 
the men you claim to be,” he harangued his listeners, “you’d kill 
him before sunup.” 
After his oratory had moved everyone more than an hour 
closer to sunup but without producing any blood, Lynch turned 
the platform over to his Jacksonville Klan host, and the crowd 
started to drift away. Suddenly, there were cries from the woods 
of “Niggers! Niggers!” and four black men, including the dentist 
Robert Hayling, who had been trying to spy on the meeting, were 
dragged forward at gunpoint. As the Klansmen began to beat them 
and cry for their mutilation and death, a spectator in the crowd 
slipped away and called the sheriff, who arrived in time to rescue 
the captives and arrest four Klansmen. Local juries found the 
Klansmen innocent of assault and battery but convicted the victims 
of attacking the Klansmen. In a right-thinking community like this, 
a useful organization such as the Klan might have a real future. 
There was, however, a serious problem. Since the 1920s, one 
of the patriotic duties of the Klan had been to protect America 
from Roman Catholic subversion, and rural Nan fundamentalists 
still occasionally preached the anti-Catholic evangels from Klan 
platforms. The old Spanish town of St. Augustine was primarily 
Catholic, which on the surface would have made it an unlikely field 
for the sowing of the Klan seed. However, St. Augustine faced a 
greater peril in the upward black push for equality. This in itself 
was distasteful, and the citizens of St. Augustine had learned from 
years of education by the John Birch Society, the Dan Smoot Re- 
port, the Florida Coalition of Patriotic Societies, and a succession 
of patriotic speakers that Communism lay behind the Civil Rights 
movement. It was not without justification that the mayor could


--- PAGE 51 ---
42 Chapter6 
boast that there was “more awareness of Communism” in his com- 
munity than in the rest of Florida. 
In the face of this more serious menace, Jacksonville Klansmen 
closed ranks with young Catholics from St. Augustine’s Minorcan 
community. The local activists, belonging to what an observant 
newspaperman called “the shirt-tail and mud-flap school of social 
expression,” were led by Holsted “HOSS” Manucy, whose curly 
sideburns, black cowboy hat, and impressive brawny girth were to 
become as famous symbols of resistance as Connie Lynch’s jutting 
jaw and string tie and Birmingham Police Commissioner Eugene 
“Bull” Connor’s dogs. 
The city of St. Augustine, on the eve of its quadricentennial 
celebration, drew its life from the tourists who came to view the 
preserved and re-created buildings and monuments of its Spanish 
origins. In many ways, St. Augustine observed a greater degree of 
racial politeness than hundreds of other southern towns. Having 
gone this far, however, the white community was determined that 
it would go no further. The black community, led by Dr. Hayling, 
was resolved that there was further to go. The white community 
leaders refused to meet with black leaders and talk things over. The 
mayor declined to appoint a biracial commission on the grounds 
that St. Augustine had no racial problems. The Florida Advisory 
Committee of the U.S. Civil Rights Commission reported that 
with the breakdown in communication between the communities, 
conditions were “considerably worse than in most, if not all, other 
cities in the state.” 
Black organization and demands brought threats of violence, 
economic pressure, beatings, and cries of police brutality. Shots 
were fired into Dr. Hayling’s home, and a young member of Ma- 
nucy’s Ancient City Hunting Club was shot and killed as he rode 
with friends, shotguns in hand, through the black district. St. Au- 
gustine was beginning to make the newspapers. Sheriff L. 0. Davis 
announced that he was not in the market for any black votes. “I 
used the word ‘nigger’ so they would know I meant it,” he ex- 
plained. 
Black leaders turned from the National Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Colored People to the Southern Christian Leader- 
ship Conference (SCLC) and asked Martin Luther King Jr. to


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Lon. Hot Summer 43 
come and take charge of their campaign. A civil rights bill was 
being debated in Congress, and St. Augustine offered the opportu- 
nity to create public pressure. When Mrs. Malcolm Peabody, the 
wife of a retired Episcopal bishop and mother of the governor of 
Massachusetts, was arrested as part of a mixed group seeking ser- 
vice in the downtown Monson Motor Lodge restaurant on Bay 
Street, it was national news. 
By the latter part of May, there were nightly speeches and pray- 
ers in the black churches, after which columns of singing demon- 
strators formed to march on the Plaza de la Constitution in the 
center of town. Sit-ins began at the Monson Motor Lodge. Klans- 
men from Jacksonville’s tough militant knights turned up for active 
duty. So, too, did longtime Klansman-lawyer J. B. Stoner, whose 
skills with dynamite and in defending dynamiters gave him particu- 
lar prestige in Klan circles. Stoner was not much of an orator, but 
the Reverend Connie Lynch was among the best. Ever on the 
move from coast to coast and organization to organization, with 
an uncanny sense of where his services might be needed, he arrived 
in his pink Cadillac to help prepare the defenses against “Martin 
Lucifer Coon” and the “Jew conspiracy” of race mixing. Demon- 
strators who violated undesirable guest and trespass laws in local 
restaurants and churches were carted off to jail, penned out in the 
broiling June sun during the day, and often locked in a sweatbox 
cell at night while SCLC officials scoured the ranks of its members 
and friends to send new waves to fill the jails. 
Marchers exhorted themselves and each other to refrain from 
striking back and formed ranks to face barrages of bricks, clubs, and 
blows from Klansmen, and Manucy’s “raiders” gathered in the 
plaza. Receiving no orders to the contrary from St. Augustine’s 
business leaders, Sheriff Davis’s officers refrained as long as possible 
from interfering. Angry segregationists turned their particular at- 
tention to white marchers and news photographers, and Manucy 
picked up a little change on the side by selling protection to UP1 
and ABC reporters. 
Town officials, police, integration lawyers, and state officials 
wrangled before Federal District Judge Bryan Simpson as to 
whether nighttime processions should be banned or permitted. 
Judge Simpson pressed the sheriff to maintain order and prevent


--- PAGE 53 ---
44 Chapter6 
violence. Inspecting a list of the sheriff‘s new deputies, the judge 
exploded when he came to the name of Holsted R. Manucy, whose 
civil rights were forfeited when Judge Simpson had previously sen- 
tenced him for bootlegging. 
King and the SCLC appealed for supporters to come to St. Au- 
gustine. Individuals and groups, rabbis and ministers, white stu- 
dents and college professors, and black teenagers went to jail. Ex- 
Deputy Manucy’s raiders tailed out-of-state cars and exchanged re- 
ports through citizens-band radios. Sentinels stationed at St. Au- 
gustine Beach called in carloads of reinforcements who came roar- 
ing across the sand with Confederate flags flapping, and club- 
wielding whites plunged into the surf after the racial interlopers. 
When Klansmen and segregationists paraded through their district, 
black people lined the sidewalks singing, “I love everybody.’’ Curi- 
ous spectators turned out nightly to watch Klan and black meet- 
ings, but the tourists, on whom St. Augustine depended for its eco- 
nomic life, had practically disappeared. Despite the newspapermen 
and state police officials who piled into the motels, business was 
suffering badly. 
The scene of the daily conflicts shifted from the old shedlike 
slave market in the plaza to the Monson Motor Lodge to the surf 
of St. Augustine Beach and then back again. The governor’s police 
maintained order for a few days until the Klansmen and raiders dis- 
covered that Sheriff Davis seldom booked them and that bonds for 
the attackers were rarely set above $25. Bail for those participating 
in sit-ins ran into the thousands of dollars, and Stoner and his 
Klansmen lounged about on the front steps of the jail. As the as- 
saults on marchers and wade-ins reached their peak, Klansmen and 
raiders broke through police lines. Beatings and injuries became 
more severe. 
King was arrested at the Monson Motor Lodge and then re- 
moved to a safer jail in nearby Jacksonville. He was bailed out in 
order to receive an honorary degree at Yale and then returned to 
St. Augustine again. When five black and two white integrationists 
jumped into the Monson Motor Lodge swimming pool, the man- 
ager James Brock could take it no longer. “I can’t stand it, I can’t 
stand it,” he wept. Brock and many of the other small businessmen 
were trapped in the middle. Although a convinced segregationist,


--- PAGE 54 ---
The Long Hot Summer 45 
Brock was willing to open up his establishment if required by law 
or requested by business leaders. He dared not be first. As he later 
explained it, “If I integrated, there wouldn’t be more than one 
Negro a month registered at the motel, but the first night I inte- 
grated, all my windows would be busted in.” 
Community leaders who had been willing to countenance vio- 
lence against black people and integrationists found that they were 
now unable to control it or turn it off, and state officials publicly 
agreed that St. Augustine businessmen must share the blame for it 
all. Appearing on national television with Lynch and Stoner, a 
prideful Manucy was asked whether he thought the trouble would 
continue in St. Augustine. In a booming voice that must have sent 
shivers down the spines of local businessmen, he happily replied, 
“Oh yes, there is going to be trouble for a long time!’’ 
After a painfully bloody and highly publicized month, Gover- 
nor Farris Bryant announced that he had appointed a secret biracial 
commission (which he had not), and the passage of the Public Ac- 
commodation Law managed to bring an uneasy peace. Pressure 
from the Klan and John Birch remained strong. Although local ho- 
tels and restaurants had agreed to comply, they held back. After a 
firebomb was thrown through the window of the Monson Motor 
Lodge’s restaurant, they resegregated, and it took the stern hand 
and careful guidance of Judge Simpson to prevent more than spo- 
radic violence. Klansmen Stoner and Lynch were arrested for illegal 
cross burning, and the court ordered Stoner to withdraw his Na- 
tional States Rights Party pickets from in front of integrated estab- 
lishments. Manucy managed to stay in the news by mistakenly 
turning in a Klan bomber in the belief that he was going to get a 
reward for helping capture the union dynamiter of the strike- 
bound Florida East Coast Railroad. Himself facing the courts yet 
again in the fall, Manucy changed his mind after an hour’s medita- 
tion in jail and supplied a list of the members of his Ancient City 
Hunting Club. 
On July 11, 1964, a little more than a week after things began 
to settle down in St. Augustine, they flared up in Mississippi and 
Georgia. Just as FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover had arrived in Jack- 
son, Mississippi, Lieutenant Colonel Lemuel Penn and several fel- 
low officers were returning home from summer army reserve


--- PAGE 55 ---
46 Chapter6 
training at Fort Benning, Georgia. Penn, who was director of adult 
and vocational education for the District of Columbia, had come 
safely through World War I1 in the Pacific, but he was a black, and 
conditions were unsettled on the roads passing through Clarke 
County, home of the University of Georgia and of the violent Ath- 
ens Klavern 244 of the United Klans of America. The Athens 
Klansmen had been beating local blacks and harassing and shoot- 
ing up motorists without interference from the police. Colonel 
Penn and his friends had loaded up with food and soft drinks and 
planned to drive through Georgia as quickly as possible. The three 
Klansmen on road patrol noted the District of Columbia license 
plates and decided that this was part of a rumored civil rights inva- 
sion. The Klansmen pulled alongside and emptied their shotguns. 
Colonel Lemuel Penn’s luck had run out. 
For a while it looked as though that of the Klansmen would 
follow suit. FBI men moved in and offered rewards. Klansmen 
talked, and the driver of the car confessed. Conviction turned out 
to be more difficult. Since murder was not a federal crime, it was 
up to Georgia to prosecute. The state did its best, but it was per- 
haps asking too much for a jury from a rural Georgia county to 
decree the execution of their neighbors for the killing of a black 
man. The defense attorney made the most of this, telling the jury 
that the president had sent hordes of federal men swarming into 
Georgia ordered to bring back “white meat.” “Never let it be 
said,” he continued, “that a Madison County jury converted an 
electric chair into a sacrificial chair on which the pure flesh of a 
member of the human race was sacrificed to the savage revengeful 
appetite of a raging mob.” The jury found the Klansmen innocent, 
and the sheriff stepped up to offer his congratulations. The best 
that the government could do was to hope that a charge of a lesser 
violation of civil rights might stick in the federal court.


--- PAGE 56 ---
Mis si s sip pi 
Although the summer was hot in Florida and Georgia, it was even 
hotter and longer in Mississippi. Some of the “freedom riders” had 
stayed on after Parchman prison in 1961. They worked with lead- 
ers of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP), including Medgar Evers, Aaron Henry, E. W. 
Steptoe, and Vernon Dahmer, to register black voters, attracting 
young students and teenagers and determined women. As bad as 
Alabama was, Mississippi was more intimidating. In The Children, 
his book about the Nashville group of the Student Nonviolent Co- 
ordinating Committee (SNCC), David Halberstam tells how they 
became silent as the bus from Montgomery crossed the state line 
with its signs “WELCOME TO MISSISSIPPI THE MAGNOLIA 
STATE” and “PREPARE TO MEET THY GOD.” 
Black suffering was not news, and in 1964, after three years of 
literally being beaten down to the ground, they made the decision 
to bring in young, white volunteers in the hope that this would 
draw media attention and protection by the national government. 
The first group of volunteers was going through orientation on the 
Oxford, Ohio, campus of Western College for Women. The Missis- 
sippi program director, Robert Moses, was speaking when a mes- 
sage was whispered to him. He stood silent for several minutes and 
then told the volunteers, “Yesterday morning, three of our people 
left Meridian, Mississippi, to investigate a church-burning in Ne- 
shoba County. They haven’t come back, and we haven’t had any 
word fiom them.” 
Early that spring, a young social worker named Michael 
(“Mickey”) Schwerner and his wife, Rita, arrived in Meridian to 
47


--- PAGE 57 ---
48 Chapter 7 
run a black community center for the Congress of Racial Equality 
(CORE). In addition to the perilous nature of trying to open up 
jobs and the voter rolls, he faced other disadvantages. He was 
white, a New Yorker, and a Jew. He lived in the black quarter and 
usually dressed in blue jeans, a sweatshirt, and sneakers. He also 
had a beard. As respectable Mississippians liked to say after his 
death, what else could be expected “when someone with a name 
like Schwerner comes down from New York to stir up things?” 
The better people of Mississippi looked down on the hooded 
knights, but if the Klan was trash, a nigger was a nigger, and the 
Mississippi way of life was under assault. Out-of-state “mixers,” 
presumptuous blacks, and incautious moderates were likely to be 
spit on, shot at, beaten, burned, and bombed. According to testi- 
mony at his trial, Sam Holloway Bowers, owner of the Laurel, Mis- 
sissippi, Magnolia Consolidated Realty Company and the Sambo 
Amusement Company (distributor and servicer of pinball and ven- 
ding machines) and imperial wizard of Mississippi’s White Knights 
of the Ku Klux Klan, had Schwerner marked for elimination. 
When Schwerner was joined at the community center by a 
young Meridian black man named James Chaney and Andrew 
Goodman, a white New York college student, they too were in- 
cluded in the White Knights’ final solution for Schwerner. On June 
21, at the beginning of the “Mississippi Freedom Summer,” the 
three drove out to Neshoba County to view the remains of the 
black Mount Zion Methodist Church that had been burned by the 
Klan. As his trial later established, the deputy sheriff from the 
county seat of Philadelphia, Cecil Price, was tipped off that the civil 
rights workers were there. He arrested Chaney for speeding and 
Schwerner and Goodman “for investigation.” Holding them in jail 
long enough to work out the necessary plans, he contacted the ex- 
alted cyclops of the Neshoba County Klan, the preacher Edgar Ray 
Killen. Klansmen from the Neshoba and Lauderdale County Klav- 
erns gathered at the Longhorn Cafe to wait until dark. Deputy 
Price let the prisoners pay their way out, stopped them again out- 
side of town, and turned them over to his fellow Klansmen. Schw- 
erner, Goodman, and Chaney were shot and their bodies buried in 
an earthen dam on the land of a local farmer named Olen Burrage. 
Parents, civil rights leaders, congressmen, and the press de-


--- PAGE 58 ---
Mississippi 49 
Neshoba County Deputy Sheriff Cecil Price (left) and 
Sheriff Homer Rainey (right). 7 964. 
manded that the national government find the missing men. Al- 
though President Lyndon Johnson and his advisers believed that 
constitutionally and politically they could do nothing to protect 
the living, the disappearance of the three young Neshoba County 
civil rights workers, two of them middle-class white northerners, 
pushed the government into action. The hotly debated SNCC de- 
cision to put white bodies on the line was painfully paying off. As 
with the attack on the freedom riders in Alabama, James Mere- 
dith’s admission to the University of Mississippi, and the demon- 
strations in Birmingham, something big enough had happened to 
gain Washington’s attention and force its hand. 
Robert Kennedy, who had remained on as attorney general, 
justified involvement in the search under the 1936 “Lindbergh 
Law” on the grounds that the kidnappers might have crossed the 
state line, and President Johnson and his Justice Department aides 
spent long hours in the Oval Office discussing what the national 
government could do. To the ire of FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, 
a team of Kennedy’s Civil Rights Division lawyers had already been


--- PAGE 59 ---
50 Chapter 7 
down to look into the violence festering in southwestern Missis- 
sippi. The division’s chief, Assistant Attorney General Burke Mar- 
shall, reported that it was “very dangerous.” Now, with the rising 
clamor over the disappearance of the three civil rights workers, 
President Johnson sent former CIA head Allen Dulles to talk to the 
governor and state leaders. World War I1 had gotten Hoover ex- 
cited about spy catching and espionage, and he looked enviously at 
Dulles and longingly at the CIA post. Taylor Branch, the historian 
of America in the King. Years, speculates that sending Dulles to 
Mississippi was the president’s wake-up call to the FBI head. 
“Edgar,” Johnson told him, “I want you to put people after 
the Klan and study it fiom one county to the next. I want the FBI 
to have the best intelligence system possible to check on the activi- 
ties of those people.” 
Flying into Jackson in Air Force One to open the FBI’s first 
state headquarters, Hoover privately warned the state’s leaders that 
Klan violence had to stop. Investigating the Klan became a primary 
concern for the FBI, which was reluctantly pushed into action by 
events and by Johnson. Where there had been only fifteen FBI 
agents in Mississippi, now there were ten times that many, with a 
tough, experienced inspector, Joseph Sullivan, in charge and an 
equally able agent, Roy Moore, heading the new Jackson office. 
“Starting immediately,” the orders from Washington directed, 
“every Ku Klux Klan member in Mississippi is to be contacted by 
agents for the purpose of developing any information in his posses- 
sion regarding the whereabouts of the three missing civil rights 
workers; any information concerning past, present, or future plans 
of violence on the part of the Klan or others: and an effort should 
be made to develop each Klan member into an informant or source 
of information.” 
The charred remains of the missing men’s blue Ford station 
wagon were found by Indians from the nearby Choctaw reserva- 
tion. FBI men and sailors fkom the Meridian Auxiliary Naval Air 
Station began searching the nearby swamps and rivers while white 
Mississippians watched, scoffed, joked, and lamented their state’s 
crucifixion by the federal invasion. FBI agents initially made little 
progress in Neshoba County, where they believed that the sheriff 
and his deputy had been part of the Nan abduction, but they per-


--- PAGE 60 ---
Mississippi 5 1 
severed, and word was passed around that the proper piece of in- 
formation would be worth $30,000. On the forty-fourth day, the 
FBI moved in heavy equipment and began to dig up the rotting 
bodies from the center of Olen Burrage’s dam. Seth Cagin and 
Philip Dray, in We Are Not Afraid: The Story of Goodman, Schw- 
erner, and Chaney and the Civil Rhhts Campahn for Mississippi, 
report that the local comment was not “Who did it?” but “Who 
The trial of the accused slayers was not held for three more 
years. A local grand jury refused to return an indictment. State of- 
ficials complained that the FBI was holding back information. For 
their part, the federal representatives were perhaps equally justified 
in their mistrust of the state officials and the premature exposure of 
their witnesses. Since the state apparently was not going to try the 
Klansmen, the federal government brought charges under the old 
Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy Act of 1870, as it had with the killers of 
Lemuel Penn in Georgia and Viola Liuzzo in Alabama. Obstructed 
by the Mississippi- born federal referee and by Federal District


--- PAGE 61 ---
52 Chapter 7 
Judge Harold Cox, the government could not get indictments and 
a trial until 1967. 
While the murder investigation continued its slow path, Klan 
violence mounted, and neither local authorities nor the Justice De- 
partment offered protection for civil rights workers. Nevertheless, 
some 650 mostly white, mostly upper-middle-class college stu- 
dents fi-om the North spent the summer alongside the freedom rid- 
ers and local people, working in freedom schools, community pro- 
grams, and voter registration. Almost a hundred years before, 
during Reconstruction, white middle-class teachers from New En- 
gland had come to the South to teach in the new black schools and 
had met with ostracism and violence. Schools and churches had 
been burned, and teachers, male and female, had been beaten and 
some murdered. Now, in 1964, in a “second Reconstruction,” 
civil rights workers were shot at, beaten, and jailed. During that 
summer, there were nearly 1,000 arrests of black and white civil 
rights workers, eighty beatings, and the burning or bombing of at 
least sixty- five homes, churches, and other buildings. At least eight 
people died at the hands of the Klan. 
Mississippi had not been much of a Klan state since Recon- 
struction, not even in the 1920s, but now things were different. 
The initial organizers came from Louisiana’s Original Knights of 
the Ku Klux Klan, who, by the summer of 1964, numbered 1,000 
members in the Florida parishes east of Baton Rouge. In Bogalusa, 
just across the Pearl River from Mississippi, the Original Knights 
had launched a reign of terror. When a group of leading citizens- 
including ministers, the former head of the state bar, and the local 
newspaper editor and radio station owner-invited former Arkan- 
sas Congressman Brooks Hays to speak on improving race rela- 
tions, Klan threats, boycotts, smashed windows, and gunfire forced 
a cancellation. In response to a wave of abductions and beatings, 
the shotgun-carrying Deacons for Defense and Justice was orga- 
nized in the black community. With everyone going about armed, 
it took a federal court action to prevent open warfare. In December 
1965, a three-judge federal panel in New Orleans enjoined the 
Original Knights and their “dummy front” Anti-Communist 
Christian Association from interfering with the civil rights of black 
citizens. In a familiar story, internal fights over where the money


--- PAGE 62 ---
Mississippi 5 3 
was going split the Original Knights, and Robert Shelton’s United 
Hans was there, as usual, to pick up the pieces. 
In the spring of 1964, the Original Knights came into Missis- 
sippi and began recruiting among the white factory workers in the 
old river town of Natchez. Soon there was the usual internal con- 
flict over power and money, and amid charges, countercharges, 
and banishments, most of the Klansmen went over to Mississippi’s 
own newly organized White Knights. Leading the switch were the 
Laurel businessman Sam Bowers and E. L. McDaniel, a young Red 
Ball Express Company worker with a dubious financial history who 
launched his Natchez Klavern on a campaign of racial beatings and 
bombings. 
Sam Holloway Bowers, the imperial wizard of the new White 
Knights, was not usual Klan stock. He came fiom planter class on 
his mother’s side, and his paternal grandfather had been a four- 
term Mississippi congressman. Bowers was considered a deep 
thinker in the Klan ranks. After four years in the Navy during 
World War 11, he had a year of college at Tulane and finished almost 
another one in engineering at Southern California. As a small busi- 
nessman and with his fascination with guns and explosives, he was 
more representative of the culture from which the Klans drew 
members. 
Across the Klan world, all the competing Klans shared the 
same basic ritual, creed, and organizational hierarchies of wizards, 
dragons, titans, Cyclopes, Muds, and such. In half a century, no one 
had improved on the efforts of the master ritualist, Colonel William 
J. Simmons, who had brought the Klan back to life on a cold No- 
vember night in 1915 atop Stone Mountain, Georgia. The ritual 
that Shelton’s United Klans and Bowers’s White Knights shared 
was somewhat simplified and much shortened, however, and the 
White Knights had an oath of secrecy that provided for no excep- 
tions. The fealty to the U.S. Constitution contained the proviso 
“as originally written.” Membership was restricted to white, gen- 
tile, native-born male persons, excluding Papists and Mormons. 
Like most Mississippians, Klansmen were mainly Baptists and 
Methodists. The goal was “strict segregation of the races and the 
control of the social structure in hands of the Christian, Anglo- 
Saxon white men.”


--- PAGE 63 ---
54 Chapter7 
Black voting and the whole civil rights invasion was a “Com- 
munist plot” directed by the Jews. Throughout the Man world, the 
ideology of the California evangelist Wesley Swift was spreading. 
As the traveling evangelist Reverend Connie Lynch was preaching 
it in St. Augustine and elsewhere in the South, Sam Bowers was 
absorbing the “Christian Identity” message fiom Swift’s tapes and 
printed sermons. Bowers saw himself as a “warrior priest” and 
called on white Protestant Christians to join him in the race war 
that was part of the “cosmic battle” against Satan’s blacks and 
Jews. 
Imperial Wizard Bowers was not interested in extending his 
White Knights beyond the borders of Mississippi and unlike other 
Klans did not go in for public rallies. Secrecy and discipline were 
all-important. The White Knights had defined four levels of vio- 
lence: Number l was a cross burning, number 2 a whipping, num- 
ber 3 a firebombing, and number 4 a killing. Bowers’s personal ap- 
proval was necessary for a number 3 or a number 4, and he took 
part in the planning of the Schwerner, Chaney, Goodman, and 
Dahmer killings. With the growing pressure from the FBI and leaks 
within the Klan, Bowers tightened up secrecy. In the 1967 cam- 
paign against the Jewish communities of Jackson and Meridian, 
only a small group-including Bowers, the bomber Tommy Tar- 
rants, and the pretty schoolteacher Kathy Ainsworth-were in on 
it. 
Crosses blazed across Mississippi. By the fall of 1964, Shelton’s 
United Hans had some seventy-six klaverns in the state and Bow- 
ers’s White Knights another fifty-two. According to the historian 
John Dittmer, the prize-winning author of Local People: The Strug- 
Jle for Civil Rhhts in Mississippi, it had been the most violent sum- 
mer in Mississippi since Reconstruction. The SNCC, CORE, and 
their summer volunteers clung desperately to their belief in nonvio- 
lence. Police violence ruled the daylight hours, and at night, black 
farmers and householders kept guard with their shotguns ready. As 
Imperial Wizard Sam Bowers told his legions, “Ours is a nocturnal 
organization. We work best at night.” 
The Klan was initially strongest in the southwestern Mississippi 
hill country. The mills and railroad machine shops of McComb 
supplied members for the Klan in Pike County, and the civil rights


--- PAGE 64 ---
Mississippi 5 5 
Memphis 
0 
Oxford 
0 
Grenada 
0 
MISSISSIPPI 
Philadelphia 
0 
JACKSON 
@ Meridian 
0 
Laurel 
0 
Hattiesbu rg 
0 
0 
Bogalusa 
BATON ROUGE 
@ 
LOU IS I AN A


--- PAGE 65 ---
56 Chapter 7 
workers in Amite bitterly commented that there was a department 
in Washington called “Justice” and a town in Amite County 
named “Liberty.” Testieing before a Senate committee a decade 
later, Assistant Attorney General John Doar related that by the 
spring of 1964, even before the Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman 
murders, Klan violence had begun to show “alarming propor- 
tions.” In Pike County, between April 1 and June 30, “three black 
homes and a barbershop were firebombed; three reporters and two 
local blacks were beaten. In Adams County a black church was van- 
dalized; two civil rights workers were pursued and shot at; four 
blacks were whipped; another was seriously wounded by shotgun 
fire; and a local black man was killed. In Madison County, the 
Freedom House in Canton was shot at twice and bombed; and a 
civil rights worker was assaulted. Throughout the state, seven other 
black churches were damaged or destroyed; eight black homes or 
stores were bombed or shot into; numerous blacks and civil rights 
workers were harassed or threatened.” 
Pike County was primarily United Klans country, and to the 
east in Jones County, Bowers ran his Sambo Amusement Company 
out of the Forrest County seat in Laurel, within easy reach of Nes- 
hoba County and of Vernon Dahmer’s home in Hattiesburg. (For- 
rest County was named for Nathan Bedford Forrest, Confederate 
cavalry general and grand wizard of the first Klan.) In many places, 
policemen joined the Klan-so, too, did Byron De La Beckwith 
after his second hung jury for the murder of state NAACP director 
Evers. Beckwith had become disappointed with the conservatism 
of the Citizens’ Councils, and the Klan promised more action. He 
was a great hit at Klan meetings, and Klansmen crowded around 
him for his autograph. In 1965, Bowers made him a kleagle, and 
Beckwith traveled around Mississippi selling fertilizer for the Delta 
Liquid Plant Food Company and klandom. 
Not only were black churches, homes, and businesses being 
firebombed or dynamited, so too were white newspapers whose ed- 
itors saw things wrongly. The Leader-Call in Laurel and Hazel 
Brannon Smith’s weekly Northside Reporter in Jackson were dyna- 
mited, and shots were fired through the windows of the Bill Mi- 
nor’s Capitol Reporter. As the Klan’s attacks accelerated through 
the summer, particularly targeting the voter registration campaign,


--- PAGE 66 ---
Mississippi 5 7 
it was surprising that there was not a mounting death toll. Smith 
had been marked for elimination, but she was out of town when 
her newspaper was bombed and lived to receive a Pulitzer Prize for 
her journalistic courage. In Greenville, in the Mississippi River 
delta, although editor Hodding Carter I1 was not an integrationist, 
most white Mississippians considered him a radical for being what 
the civil rights activists called a “fair-play segregationist.” Carter 
commented that “Mississippians are generally polite until they de- 
cide to kill YOU,” and he kept a loaded revolver in the drawer of his 
desk at the Delta Democrat-Times. 
McComb had been particularly dangerous territory for black 
people, and Bob Moses and a number of the early SNCC organiz- 
ers received their first serious Mississippi beatings there. Hodding 
Carter told the story of a McComb insurance man, “Red” Heffner, 
who agreed to talk with several of the white volunteers. He had 
been his company’s “Salesman of the Year,” his wife was the 
daughter of the governor’s law partner, and their daughter was the 
winner of the state “Miss Mississippi” pageant. He thought that 
he was safe and that there was nothing wrong in looking into 
things. He was wrong. His family was threatened, his dog was poi- 
soned, and his wife and daughter were ostracized by people they 
had known all their lives. With his business wrecked, “Red” Heff- 
ner and his family left McComb and Mississippi. 
The Heffners’ troubles were dramatic, but the Heffners were 
white and could start again elsewhere, interestingly working for the 
Community Relations Service and Headstart in Washington, D.C. 
Civil rights workers were beaten on the Mississippi streets, and 
black home owners, businessmen, ministers, educators, and their 
families, narrowly escaping injury and death from the midnight dy- 
namiters, faced hostile police and indifferent FBI agents who ac- 
cused them of the crimes from which they suffered. 
By the end of the summer, the Klan’s bombing campaign in 
McComb had become an indiscriminate effort to intimidate the 
black community. It was in the national news. The New Tork 
Times called it “open warfare” and hinted about federal action. 
Local business was suffering. Someone in Washington phoned 
local officials and Mississippi Governor Paul Johnson with the 
rumor that federal troops were being alerted to impose martial law


--- PAGE 67 ---
58 Chapter 7 
on Pike County. When the governor told local officials that he was 
going to beat Washington to it and send in the state National 
Guard, they asked for two days’ delay. For the first time, they 
began arresting the Klan bombers. As historian John Dittmer tells 
the story, despite a possible death penalty under Mississippi law, 
the Klansmen pleaded “guilty” or “no contest,” obviously con- 
fident that they knew what the local judge would do. He gave 
them suspended sentences, reasoning that they had been “unduly 
provoked” by agitators who were of “low morality and unhy- 
gienic. ” 
Although the McComb bombing ceased, Klan attacks and po- 
lice harassment continued until Oliver Emmerich, the editor of the 
Enterprise-Journal, risked his paper and his life to describe what 
had been happening and call for an end to it. McComb civic and 
business leaders joined him in a “Statement of Principles,” calling 
for the end of threats and harassment and for equal treatment 
under the law for all citizens. After a brief, well-publicized celebra- 
tion of openness, life in McComb reverted to segregation, and a 
somewhat more cautious Klan remained a feared presence. Never- 
theless, Dittmer concludes, the McComb story was a triumph for 
the local black people who, in the middle of Klan country, had or- 
ganized themselves and rehsed to back down in the face of vio- 
lence. 
The growing strength of Bowers’s White Knights excited com- 
petition. E. L. McDaniel once again jumped ship, this time to be- 
come grand dragon of Shelton’s United Klans. He and Shelton 
toured Mississippi in a series of nighttime rallies, giving Klansmen 
the public excitement that they had missed under the more secre- 
tive Bowers. Klaverns were increasingly crossing over from the 
White Knights to the United Klans, and both Klans planned new 
violence. The United Klan’s method was to have the names and 
addresses of intended victims drawn from a hat so that no one else 
would know who was going to do which bombing. 
Nevertheless, a reaction was mounting against it, and the 
aroused concern of state governors and federal agents had become 
enough to make the Klan jittery. Governor Johnson began sending 
his special investigators into violence-troubled parts of his state. 
With a list from J. Edgar Hoover, he had dismissed anyone from


--- PAGE 68 ---
Mississippi 5 9 
the state highway patrol who remained in the Man. The FBI had 
identified those who had taken part in the Schwerner, Chaney, and 
Goodman killings, although it would not be until 1967 that they 
would face a jury.


--- PAGE 69 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 70 ---
*8* 
Selma 
Ey the mid-l960s, southern politicians were no longer saying 
“NwEY!” quite so loudly. The use of force by southern policemen 
such as Eugene “Bull” Connor in Birmingham and Sheriff Jim 
Clark in Selma, Alabama, served to advance change rather than 
contain it. The Ku Klux Klan, which had long been calling for ra- 
cial war, remained unyielding, but having no greater plan than 
striking back blindly and forcefully, the Klan became the captive of 
its enemies. 
President Lyndon Johnson told Martin Luther King Jr. that 
there would be no new civil rights legislation in 1965. Congress 
had just passed the most important civil rights law since Recon- 
struction, which opened up public accommodations and promised 
much more. In the view of much of white America, it was time to 
relax and let tempers and tensions cool, to follow things up slowly, 
and to consolidate. Black leaders saw it differently. There were still 
many more rights that needed protection. The right to vote, which 
meant a seat at the table where decisions were made, was the key 
to other rights. Black people were not allowed to vote in many 
parts of the South. Mississippi and Alabama were the worst. The 
Department of Justice estimated that only 14 percent of the eligi- 
ble black voters in Alabama and 6 percent in Mississippi were regis- 
tered compared to half or more of the whites. Across the South, 
there were twenty-seven counties where a majority of the people 
were black but where none of them could vote. The right to vote 
was the big issue, and this was tied in with the need for greater 
protection against violence, not only from vigilantes and Klansmen 
but often from police officers and local juries and judges as well. 
61


--- PAGE 71 ---
62 Chapter8 
For the Civil Rights movement, the choice, as the activists saw 
it, was between black and white cooperation and black separate- 
ness. In 1965, the appeal was to cooperation. Martin Luther King 
Jr. was its leader. While the young workers of the Student Nonvio- 
lent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in Georgia, Alabama, and 
Mississippi labored to build grassroots confidence and organiza- 
tion, King appealed to black pride and white conscience. “We must 
be ready for a season of suffering,” he warned. His plan, however, 
was simpler than his path. He would bring his marchers out into 
the streets until someone cracked somewhere-in Selma, in the 
statehouse in Montgomery, in Washington, D.C., or perhaps even 
in the klaverns of the Klan. If would-be black registrants could not 
get on the voting books, then they must approach the ballot by 
way of public demonstrations. “We are going to bring a voting bill 
into being in the streets of Alabama,” King told his people. 
There was no Man in the small but important black-belt city 
of Selma, birthplace of Birmingham Police Commissioner Eugene 
“Bull” Connor and of the first Citizens’ Council in Alabama. What 
there was in Selma was Sheriff Jim Clark and his mounted posse, 
Colonel Al Lingo’s state troopers, and SNCC organizer Bernard 
Lafayette with his wife, Colia. Local officials and white citizens 
agreed that the blacks must be kept in their place, but for more 
than two months, beginning in January 1965, black men and 
women gathered in front of Brown Chapel of the AME Church to 
march on City Hall-or to wherever else their human petition was 
most likely to gain attention. Soon there were ten times more black 
names on the police blotter than on the voting rolls, and the barri- 
cade, the billy, and the prod had become standard forms of police 
response. Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Lead- 
ership Conference joined the SNCC organizers in Selma in an un- 
easy partnership, and with them came the national media. 
Although more than a month of demonstrations brought 
headlines and volunteers, there was no sign of a breakthrough, and 
so James Bevel announced a march on the state capitol in Mont- 
gomery. On Sunday, March 7, a flying wedge of police and troop- 
ers followed by a mounted posse swept into the marchers at Ed- 
mund Pettus Bridge over the Alabama River. With tear gas, whips, 
clubs, and cattle prods, they routed the petitioners, beating the


--- PAGE 72 ---
Selma 63 
fallen and pursuing the rest back to Brown Chapel, sending more 
than a hundred to the hospital. Sheriff Clark, Lingo, and their men 
had done what Martin Luther King had not been able to do: They 
had scored a breakthrough for civil rights. 
With a promise from the president for a strong voting bill, a 
protective order from Judge Frank Johnson, and troops and federal 
marshals, the success of the march to Montgomery was assured. 
The gathering in front of the state capitol, with Alabama Governor 
George Wallace watching through binoculars from behind the 
blinds of his office windows, symbolized the victory the marchers 
felt was sure to be theirs. The cost of that victory had already been 
the lives of a black woodcutter and a white Boston clergyman, and 
there would be one more. 
Among the thousands of students, newspapermen, ministers, 
priests, rabbis, nuns, FBI and Justice Department men, and citizens 
who poured into Selma after “Bloody Sunday” was a middle-aged 
mother of five from Detroit: Mrs. Viola Gregg Liuzzo. A member 
of the transport committee, she was assigned to drive carloads of 
marchers back to Selma from Montgomery. On her second trip to 
Montgomery for passengers, she had just crossed Big Swamp 
Creek in rural Lowndes County, where the demonstrators had 
spent the third night of their march, when a car swept past her on 
a curve of U.S. Highway 80. Two shots were fired, and Liuzzo 
slumped forward as her Oldsmobile swerved off the road into a 
barbed-wire fence. 
Just after noon the next day, President Johnson announced 
over national radio and television that Klansmen had been arrested 
for the murder. Describing the Klan as a “hooded society of big- 
ot~” disloyal to the United States, he declared war on the “Invisi- 
ble Empire.” He praised Liuzzo’s sacrifice and promised to fight 
the Klan, as his father had done in Texas during the 1920s. Even 
Governor Wallace felt that things had gone too far. “Life simply 
should not be that cheap,” he commented. 
Finding the Klan suspects had not been difficult for the FBI 
men who had quickly fanned out to check the highway and inter- 
view witnesses. The black educator Lemuel Penn had died in the 
same manner the summer before in northeastern Georgia. Night 
patrolling had long been a Klan routine, a way to give the boys


--- PAGE 73 ---
64 Chapter8 
“a little action,” particularly in Alabama, where the Bessemer-to- 
Birmingham road occasionally came close to becoming a Klan 
highway. The FBI knew where to look, for this time one of its 
undercover informants had been in the car with Liuzzo’s killers. 
The Klansmen, all members of the United Klan’s Birmingham 
chapter, were quickly arrested. 
As the case moved toward trial, a curious document appeared 
in the hands of the Alabama police and the Klan. A request fiom 
Baker County Sheriff Jim Clark to the Detroit police had produced 
a badly distorted report on the Liuzzo family. The word now 
passed around that she was a frumpish, neurotic woman who had 
abandoned her family to come to Alabama, and the national media 
picked up the story. 
More than a decade later, a Liuzzo family suit under the post- 
Watergate Freedom of Information Act unlocked something of the 
byzantine passages of the FBI and the tortured mind of J. Edgar 
Hoover. At the same time that the FBI was investigating Klan mur- 
derers, Hoover was falsely suggesting to President Johnson that Li- 
uzzo was taking drugs and involved in interracial sex in Alabama 
and that her Teamsters Union husband had Mafia connections. 
Even after Hoover’s death, the FBI sought to cover its trail. It had 
only reluctantly shared its information on the bombers of Bir- 
mingham’s 16th Street Baptist Church and Mississippi, and it took 
the intervention of the American Civil Liberties Union and Michi- 
gan Senator Donald Riegle to shake loose a heavily censored copy 
of Liuzzo’s file to her angry sons. 
The shooter, Collie Leroy Wilkins, was twice tried for murder 
in the Alabama courts in 1965. In Wilkins’s first trial, his lawyer, 
the Klan’s imperial klonsel, made much of the fact that the FBI in- 
former, Gary Thomas Rowe Jr., was violating a Klan secrecy oath 
in testifjing. Ten members of the jury voted for a manslaughter 
conviction, but the remaining two explained that they could not 
believe a man who violated his oath, and the judge had to declare 
a mistrial. 
In the retrial, Alabama Attorney General Richmond Flowers 
took over the prosecution, and Arthur Hanes, the former mayor of 
Birmingham, handled the defense. The Alabama Supreme Court 
refused to allow the prosecution to exclude Citizens’ Council


--- PAGE 74 ---
Selma 65 
members and white supremacists from the second jury, which 
found Wilkins not guilty. Wilkins was now a celebrity at Klan pa- 
rades and rallies. In separate incidents in the Selma voting rights 
campaign, a Unitarian minister, James Reeb, had been beaten to 
death. An Episcopal seminarian, Jonathan Daniels, and a young 
black man, Jimmy Lee Jackson, who tried to shield his mother 
from being beaten by a state trooper, had been shot. In all three 
cases, the killers went unpunished. 
The confi-ontation in Selma made the headlines in the eastern 
press, and President Johnson decided to propose a new voting 
rights law. With television sets simultaneously tuned to catch all 
three of the networks, the president had watched the coverage of 
“Bloody Sunday” at the bridge, with growing anger. A week later, 
he addressed a joint session of Congress, promising a new voting 
rights law in the name of “the outraged conscience of a nation.” 
As the television cameras focused in on him, he leaned forward and 
forcefully enunciated the words that had become the anthem of the 
movement, “We shall . . . overcome!” Republican Minority Leader 
Everett Dirksen delivered enough Republican votes to end the 
southern filibuster in the Senate, and on August 6,1965, President 
Johnson signed the bill into law. The Voting Rights Act suspended 
literacy tests, empowered the national government to send regis- 
trars to counties where access to the ballot box was denied, and 
required Justice Department approval of suspected discriminatory 
changes in voting procedures. 
With the Civil Rights movement out in the streets and high- 
ways of the South, explosions of Nan violence had helped produce 
the Public Accommodation Act of 1964 and the 1965 Voting 
Rights Act. As these laws took effect, the Klan remained a violent 
guerrilla resistance movement. Its chaotic reaction to the black rev- 
olution in the mid-1960s had resulted in at least a dozen murders. 
Most of them were committed by Mississippi’s White Knights, and 
it was not over yet. In January 1966, five months after the passage 
of the Voting Rights Act, Sam Bowers’s White Knights struck again 
in Mississippi. Vernon Dahmer, a successful black storekeeper and 
civic leader in Hattiesburg, was collecting poll tax money to get 
black voters registered and died when the White Knights fire- 
bombed his home.


--- PAGE 75 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 76 ---
*9* 
Making the Justice System Work 
In June 1966, James Meredith, who had entered the University of 
Mississippi with the aid of the federal judiciary, 500 federal mar- 
shals, and the U.S. Army, set out on a solitary march from Mem- 
phis to the Mississippi state capitol in Jackson. The purpose of his 
“walk against fear” was to convince black people that they should 
not be afraid to vote in the upcoming Democratic primary. As 
Meredith crossed the state line fiom Tennessee on U.S. Highway 
5 1, an assassin hiding in the bushes brought him down with a shot- 
gun blast fiom behind. 
While Meredith recuperated in the hospital, black leaders 
rushed to Mississippi to take his place. It was on that renewed 
march, in the delta city of Greenwood, that an angry Stokely Car- 
michael first raised the cry of “black power.” Temporarily detour- 
ing from the march, Martin Luther King Jr. joined a memorial ser- 
vice for the three murdered Neshoba County civil rights workers. 
Surrounded by a hostile white crowd that included Deputy Sheriff 
Cecil Price, King told the mourners, “I believe in my heart that the 
murderers are somewhere around me at this moment.” “You’re 
damn right,” Price muttered, “They’re right behind you right 
now” (David Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., 
and the Sonthern Christian Leadership Conference, 483 >. 
It had been two years since the deaths of Michael Schwerner, 
James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman, but their killers still walked 
free. Across the South, blacks and civil rights workers were beaten 
on the streets and in the jails; no law officers stood trial, and local 
juries set accused Klansmen fiee. Victims, such as Dr. Hayling in 
St. Augustine, were charged with assault on their assaulters, and in 
67


--- PAGE 77 ---
68 Chapter 9 
Mississippi and elsewhere black people whose homes were fire- 
bombed were often accused of arson. The 1954 U.S. Supreme 
Court school desegregation decision and the 1964 and 1965 Civil 
Rights Laws opening up public accommodations and the right to 
vote contained great potential for change. In the mid-l960s, Klan 
violence threatened to destroy it in the streets of the Deep South. 
Local justice systems refused protection, and the U.S. government 
believed that it did not have the constitutional right to step in. 
Under the American federal system, most crimes of violence, in- 
cluding murder, fell under state jurisdiction. If the state did not 
act, Washington could not. That was the governing belief. The cm- 
cia1 battle was to change both federal constitutional theory and 
state behavior. 
Neither seemed very likely. In focusing on voter registration, 
the young civil rights workers knew where the power lay. As they 
liked to say, there was more at stake than being able to sit down at 
a lunch counter and eat a hamburger. When black people were not 
on the voting rolls, they could not serve on juries or affect the elec- 
tion and actions of sheriffs and judges. As long as the police re- 
mained hostile and the court system did not hnction, the problem 
of protection remained a life-and-death affair. 
In his highly useful history Federal Law and Southern Order: 
Racial Violence and Constitutional Conflict in the Post-Brown 
South, Michal Belknap writes that “the ultimate security for perpe- 
trators of racist violence was the jury system.” Despite FBI evi- 
dence that often included signed confessions, local prosecutors did 
not prosecute, grand juries failed to indict, and trial juries refused 
to convict Klansmen. Despite confessions obtained by the FBI, 
prosecutors refused to prosecute the killers of Charles Moore and 
Henry Dee, whose beaten and dismembered bodies were fished 
out of a Mississippi River bog. Juries set bombers free in Jackson- 
ville, Atlanta, Birmingham, and Montgomery. They failed to con- 
vict the killer of Medgar Evers, Mississippi state leader of the Na- 
tional Association for the Advancement of Colored People; the 
killer of the white “Freedom Walk” mailman William Moore, who 
was shot down on the road to Anniston; the killers of the black 
educator LemueI Penn, who was gunned down on the highway


--- PAGE 78 ---
Making the Justice System Work 69 
outside Athens, Georgia; and the Klansmen who killed Viola Li- 
uzzo on the road between Selma and Montgomery. 
If Klansmen, such as the Anniston bus burners and the Mc- 
Comb bombers, should happen to get convicted, sympathetic local 
judges could be counted on to see that they spent only a short 
time-or none at all-in jail. The Klansman who gunned down 
Meredith was sentenced to five years in prison, with three sus- 
pended. For more serious sentences, in the tradition of Georgia’s 
earlier governor, Eugene Talmadge, who had set a Klan flogger 
free, there was the possibility of a pardon from Arkansas Governor 
Orval Faubus or Alabama Governor George Wallace. 
Even so, the tide was turning. One important factor in that 
change was the Ku Klux Klan itself. The cumulative effect of Klan 
violence and the police brutality in Birmingham helped pass the 
broad 1964 Civil Rights Act, which forbade discrimination in pub- 
lic accommodations. Again, conflict and police brutality in Selma 
and the Klan murder of Viola Liuzzo helped produce the 1965 
Voting Rights Act. Many southern politicians became noticeably 
more cautious as the number of black voters rose. In Mississippi, 
the increasing tempo of Klan bombing and dynamiting alarmed 
Governor Paul Johnson and other state leaders who had lost con- 
trol of a resistance that seemed to be turning into anarchy. 
By mid-decade, Washington was finally willing to confront 
Klan violence directly where state prosecutors and juries would 
not. Both state and national action depended on the FBI. The 
breakdown of law and order in Mississippi forced a new activist role 
on that reluctant agency. Having pushed the U.S. Supreme Court 
to new interpretations of the Reconstruction-era Ku Klux Klan 
laws (discussed later in this chapter), the Justice Department’s Civil 
Rights Division, led by John Doar, brought the killers of Lemuel 
Penn and the killers of the three Philadelphia, Mississippi, civil 
rights workers into federal court. 
The response of the FBI depended on its able but authoritar- 
ian, paranoid director, J. Edgar Hoover. Hoover had ruled the bu- 
reau with an iron hand since its founding four decades before. With 
an eye for publicity and a fierce defensiveness against any challenge, 
he had built the FBI into a national icon. He had seen attorneys 
general and presidents come and go, and he knew all the Washington


--- PAGE 79 ---
70 Chapter9 
secrets. The Kennedys did not dare to replace him, and Lyndon 
Johnson kept him on, saying that like a camel allowed into a desert 
tent, it was better to have Hoover “pissing OU~” than have him 
outside “pissing in.” 
Hoover disliked minorities, the Civil Rights movement, and 
black leaders, particularly Martin Luther King Jr. He ordered sur- 
veillance and was keeping files on the Southern Christian Leader- 
ship Conference, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Commit- 
tee, the Congress of Racial Equality, and the summer volunteers. 
The FBI had no black agents and, apart fiom its bombing investi- 
gations, had little experience with racial and civil rights cases. Field 
agents in the South worked with local police forces and often 
shared their racial attitudes. Until the disappearance of Schwerner, 
Chaney, and Goodman, the FBI had little interest, no state head- 
quarters, and few field agents in Mississippi. The Justice Depart- 
ment’s Civil Rights Division found FBI reports of so little use for 
its voting rights cases that it was forced to spell out elaborately de- 
tailed instructions and often use its small staff of attorneys to do 
the basic investigative fieldwork. 
Once fully committed, however, the FBI worked hard at in- 
vestigating Klan violence, but there were continuing problems over 
the FBI’s role and what Hoover would do with the evidence. Dur- 
ing the 1961 “freedom rides” in Alabama, the FBI’s Birmingham 
Klan informer, Gary Thomas Rowe Jr., told the FBI of the arrange- 
ment between the police and the Klan, but Hoover did not warn 
the Justice Department. While the “freedom riders” were beaten 
by the Klansmen, including by Gary Rowe Jr., FBI agents only 
watched from the sidelines. The FBI did supply evidence for the 
trial of the Anniston bus burners and gathered the evidence that 
would eventually send the bombers of Birmingham’s 16th Street 
Baptist Church to die in prison. In the mottled world of racial poli- 
tics in Alabama, the FBI’s careful investigation of the bombing was 
disrupted when Governor Wallace’s public safety director, Al 
Lingo, jumped in and arrested the chief suspects. Robert Cham- 
bliss and two of his coconspirators were given suspended sentences 
for misdemeanor possession of dynamite. After that, Hoover never 
told the Justice Department what evidence he had. It was not until 
after his death in 1972 that the FBI reluctantly helped Alabama’s


--- PAGE 80 ---
Making. the Justice System Work 71 
new attorney general, William J. Baxley, to prosecute and convict 
Chambliss. 
In Mississippi, FBI agents now aggressively interviewed all 
known and suspected Klansmen, keeping them under surveillance, 
returning again and again for further questions, talking with their 
wives when they were not home, and conspicuously parking in 
front of their houses. When a Klansman threatened to shoot any 
FBI man who set foot on his property, agents walked up to his 
door and, standing on separate sides of his porch, politely asked 
him what he intended to do about it. 
FBI agents did not themselves infiltrate the Klan. Only rarely 
did someone from the outside, such as Stetson Kennedy in the late 
1940s and investigative Tennessean reporter Jerry Thompson in the 
early 1980s, penetrate the close in-group class world of the klavern, 
but the FBI successfully developed sources. Across the South, the 
FBI claimed close to 2,000 informants. Klansmen, always inclined 
to talk too much about their deeds, found their boasts being used 
against them. Others recoiled fiom Nan violence, collapsed under 
FBI surveillance and questioning, or were enticed by cash pay- 
ments and promises of lighter sentences. Since the days of the Re- 
construction Klan, there has almost always been a Klansman to 
“tell all” in court. FBI informant Thomas Gary Rowe Jr. was in 
the murder car fiom which Viola Liuzzo was gunned down on the 
highway between Selma and Montgomery. Their consciences trou- 
bled by the Neshoba murders, a Meridian police sergeant and a 
young Baptist minister, high up in Imperial Wizard Sam Bowers’s 
White Knights, became FBI informants and testified when the Klan 
killers were finally brought to trial. 
Initially, the evidence and confessions did not produce convic- 
tions and meaningful sentencing. Liuzzo’s killer had been found 
not guilty in Alabama. Despite an experienced prosecutor ap- 
pointed by the Georgia governor, Colonel Lemuel Penn’s killers 
were acquitted. The Schwerner-Chaney-Goldman accounting was 
hung up in the intricacies of Mississippi judicial politics and seemed 
unlikely to come to trial. 
At this point, a frustrated Justice Department began what 
would amount to a major constitutional move. Since murder con- 
victions could not be had in state courts, the Justice Department


--- PAGE 81 ---
72 Chapter 9 
would now attempt to try Klansmen for violating the civil rights of 
their victims. Although it involved the same actors and the same 
victims, it would be a different charge and thus would not legally 
be double jeopardy, but the question of states’ rights still re- 
mained. The FBI had already become the investigative arm of both 
state and national government in cases of racial violence. Under the 
American system of federalism, what would the U.S. Supreme 
Court make of the Justice Department and the federal courts be- 
coming the trial courts? 
In 1870 and 1871, during Reconstruction, Congress had at- 
tempted to control the mounting violence against the newly freed 
slaves and Republicans. The two Enforcement Acts and a third law, 
generally known as the Ku Klux Klan Act, were designed to protect 
the rights of U.S. citizens from private conspiracies or those in 
which state officials took part. If a policeman or sheriff were in- 
volved in the violence, this action, “under color of law,” could 
bring in the national government. These laws were based on the 
“equal protection” and the “rights of U.S. citizens” clauses of the 
Fourteenth Amendment (1868) and the “voting rights” clause of 
the Fifteenth Amendment (1870). The Fourteenth Amendment 
began with a definition of dual citizenship, both of the state in 
which a person resided and of the United States. The states were 
not to violate the rights that came from U.S. citizenship and had to 
provide equal protection to all citizens. As with other amendments, 
Congress was authorized to make laws to enforce these rights. In 
1875, a Republican-dominated Congress did just that, passing a 
Civil Rights Act prohibiting both public and private discrimination. 
The supremacy of the Union over the states had been deter- 
mined on the battlefields of the Civil War, but federalism still re- 
mained. Democrats opposed, and many Republicans felt uneasy 
over the expanded powers of the national government. The central 
constitutional question was, What were the national citizenship 
rights as protected by the Fourteenth Amendment? 
The Supreme Court agreed with the doubters. In a series of 
landmark cases, which marked the retreat from Reconstruction, the 
Court rejected the nationalist position. In the Slaug-hterhouse Cases 
(1873), U.S. v. Cruikshank (1876), and U.S. v. Harris and the 
Civil Rkhts Cases (both of 1883), the Court narrowly limited the


--- PAGE 82 ---
Making the Justice System Work 73 
definition of “national77 rights and held that the national govern- 
ment could act only when these rights were violated by state ac- 
tion. When a Louisiana courthouse was burned by a large mob of 
whites and a hundred black people were killed, the Cruikshank 
Court ruled that the national government could do nothing about 
it. In the Civil R&hts Cases ten years later, the Court struck down 
the 1875 law against discrimination by private individuals. With 
Plessy v. Ferguson’s 1896 acceptance of a “separate but equal” that 
was never equal, the federal court had all but abandoned the pro- 
tection of black people and their civil rights. 
The gains of the post-World War I1 Civil Rights movement 
have obscured much of the fact that civil rights was a very new con- 
cern. It was not until well into the twentieth century that the fed- 
eral judiciary became interested. Beginning with a case under a 
New York State criminal anarchy law in Gitlow v. New rOrk (1923), 
the Supreme Court began a process of “incorporation,” whereby 
it increasingly applied the Bill of Rights’ restrictions on the federal 
government to the states as well. Conversely, somewhat later and 
most notably with the 1954 school desegregation decision in 
Brown v. Topeka and the 1964 Public Accommodation Act and the 
1965 Voting Rights Act, the federal courts and the national gov- 
ernment became increasingly involved in areas that had previously 
been considered the primary, if not the sole, concern of the states. 
The response of the Johnson administration to Klan violence 
marked a major turning point in the national government’s protec- 
tion of minorities and civil rights workers. It produced Supreme 
Court decisions, new laws, and successful anti-Klan prosecutions. 
In the spring of 1966, the Supreme Court handed down crucial 
decisions in the cases of the Schwerner-Chaney-Goldman murders 
in Mississippi and the Penn murder in Georgia. In Mississippi, ob- 
struction and dismissal in federal court had kept the case from com- 
ing to trial. In Georgia, after the accused had been acquitted in 
state court, a federal court had denied the jurisdiction of the na- 
tional Reconstruction-era laws. 
The Justice Department appealed, and in unanimous decisions 
handed down on the same day in March 1966, the Supreme Court 
agreed with the government’s argument. The alleged participation 
of Deputy Sheriff Price, the Court decided in U.S. v. Price, brought


--- PAGE 83 ---
74 Chapter9 
the Schwerner-Chaney-Goodman murders under the “state ac- 
tion” provision of the 1870 Enforcement Act. Penn’s murder, U.S. 
v. Guest declared, violated his privilege as a U.S. citizen to engage 
in interstate travel. 
Arguing before the Court for the right of the national govern- 
ment to act, Burke Marshall and John Doar had been fearful of the 
precedent of the twenty-year-old Supreme Court ruling in the 
1945 Screws v. U.S. decision. Claude Screws, sheriff of Baker 
County, Georgia, and two deputies had gone to the home of Rob- 
ert Hall, a young black man, and arrested him for stealing a tire. At 
the jail, a handcuffed Hall was taken out of the car and beaten to 
death. In a unique action, the federal government tried Sheriff 
Screws under the old Reconstruction protection law, and a federal 
jury found him guilty. Screws appealed on the grounds that the 
federal government had no jurisdiction. When his appeal reached 
the Supreme Court, it decided that while the sheriff‘s action might 
have come under the government’s jurisdiction, the federal trial 
judge had not properly instructed the jury. Killing the handcuffed 
prisoner to prevent escape, as the sheriff maintained he had done, 
did not make it a federal case. Only if the sheriff‘s action had been 
a “willful” effort to deprive the prisoner of his constitutional rights 
could it bring in the federal government. To this, Justices William 
0. Douglas, Hugo Black, and all but one of the other justices 
agreed. The case was sent back for retrial, and Sheriff Screws was 
found not guilty. Faced with the intractable evidentiary problem of 
proving intent, for two decades the Justice Department brought 
no further cases under the Reconstruction law. Now, in 1966, 
what the Supreme Court would do with Price and Guest could not 
be predicted. 
Times change, minds change, and personnel on the bench 
changes. In its unanimous March 1966 decisions, the Court ig- 
nored the problem of “intent” and reinstated the federal cases. In 
the Guest decision, six of the justices went beyond upholding the 
federal jurisdiction to try the killers of Penn. In what was taken as 
an invitation to Congress, they expressed their belief that Congress 
had the power to punish civil rights violence, whether or not there 
had been state involvement. President Johnson responded by di- 
recting the Justice Department to draft a civil rights protection law.


--- PAGE 84 ---
Making the Jutice System Work 75 
It was clear that the Supreme Court and the president were re- 
solved to act against anti-civil rights violence. 
The proposed protection law, which increased penalties up to 
life imprisonment where death resulted and extended the reach of 
the law beyond conspiracies to single violators, was added to an 
“open housing” bill. A senatorial filibuster and a backlash against 
“black power” initially kept it from passing. In 1968, the reaction 
to the murder of Martin Luther King Jr. and the rising tide of 
ghetto riots made the difference. To please conservative lawmakers, 
a provision, sometimes known as the “Stokely Carmichael and H. 
Rap Brown clause,” was added, making it a crime to cross a state 
line to incite a riot. On April 11, 1968, President Johnson signed 
the Housing Bill, with its civil rights protection and its antiriot 
clause (US. Code, Title 18, Sections 241,242, and 245), into law.


--- PAGE 85 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 86 ---
Klansmen on Trial & the Klan’s 
Campaign of Terror against the 
Jews of Mississippi 
Zhe Department of Justice did not intend to let the murder of 
Viola Liuzzo rest. In December 1965, Klansman Collie Leroy Wil- 
kins, having been acquitted in the state courts of Alabama, now 
faced Assistant Attorney General John Doar in Judge Frank John- 
son’s federal court. The Supreme Court’s Guest decision was still 
three months off, and there was question over just what rights 
came under federal jurisdiction. The government argued that Mrs. 
Viola Liuzzo was covered by Judge Johnson’s order protecting the 
Selma-to-Montgomery march. Judge Johnson, presiding over the 
trial, agreed. 
With the departure of Burke Marshall, Doar had become the 
head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division. He was a 
northerner, arguing his cases before southern juries. With the trial 
held in federal court in Montgomery, Doar had an upper-middle- 
class jury, unlike the farmers and small-town jurors who had served 
in state court. The legal historian Michal Belknap pointed out that 
although the charge was the conspiracy, Doar handled it as a mur- 
der. Unlike Baxter’s attack on racism that had resulted in the state 
court acquittal, Doar presented the case as a law-and-order ques- 
tion. None of the defendants took the stand, and defense appeals 
to prejudice and attacks on the informer Gary Rowe were ineffec- 
tual. The jury found Wilkins and other Klansmen guilty, and the 
federal appeals court upheld the verdict. Since the case under fed- 
eral law was for conspiracy to deny civil rights, not for murder, the 
77


--- PAGE 87 ---
78 Chapter10 
maximum legal punishment was ten years in prison, and Judge 
Johnson gave it to them. 
Doar, a Republican, had originally been appointed by Presi- 
dent Dwight Eisenhower. Kept on by the Kennedys and Lyndon 
Johnson, he became the point man in the Justice Department’s 
voting rights cases. Finding that the FBI was not producing the 
necessary investigative information, he had gone in person to inter- 
view evicted sharecroppers in Tennessee’s Haywood County and 
had traveled the back roads of Mississippi gathering evidence on 
voter discrimination. In another decade, he would be the counsel 
for the House Judiciary Committee’s impeachment investigation 
of President Richard Nixon. He had reported to Attorney General 
Robert Kennedy on the beating of the “fieedom riders” in Mont- 
gomery, helped bring James Meredith on campus at the University 
of Mississippi, negotiated between Martin Luther King Jr. and the 
businessmen of Birmingham, and stood in the middle of the street 
between angry black protestors and the heavily armed police in 
Jackson, Mississippi, after the funeral of Medgar Evers. 
With the Supreme Court now having upheld federal jurisdic- 
tion in the GHest decision, the Justice Department moved on to 
Georgia. The killers of Lemuel Penn had been acquitted in state 
court, but the government again prevailed on the federal charges. 
Penn’s killers were found guilty of violating his civil rights and, like 
Liuzzo’s murderer, received the maximum ten-year sentence. 
Now it was Mississippi’s turn, and Doar again headed up the 
federal prosecution. In reality, the trial and the ultimate conviction, 
which neither Mississippi nor a national audience expected, were 
probably made possible only by the delay. In 1964, it was not likely 
that a Mississippi judge and jury would have produced a guilty ver- 
dict. By 1967, the federal case had been tightened against proce- 
dural error, and local feeling was changing. The all-white, working- 
class federal jury, drawn from a larger and integrated district panel, 
listened soberly and attentively to confessions of three Klan partici- 
pants and to Doar’s low-key presentation of the evidence. The de- 
fense offered character and alibi witnesses. None of the defendants 
took the stand. 
Doar summed up for the prosecution, giving the jury reason to 
separate themselves from Klan lawlessness:


--- PAGE 88 ---
Klansmen on Trial &- the Klan’s Campaa>n of Terror 79 
This crime was not the act of any loyal citizen of Mississippi. . . . 
This was no representative group of the State of Mississippi; but 
this was a small, secret, militant group, masterminded by a fa- 
natic who singled out Schwerner as a man who had to be elimi- 
nated. Not to preserve or protect Mississippi, but rather to sat- 
isfy his own consuming hatred. . . . If you find these men . . . not 
guilty of this conspiracy, it would be true to say that there was no 
night-time release from jail by Cecil Price; there were no White 
Knights; there are no young men dead; there was no murder. If 
you find that these men are not guilty, you will declare the law 
of Neshoba County to be the law of the State of Mississippi. 
The defense denounced the prosecution’s “paid witnesses” 
and attacked the victims who had “violated the American constitu- 
tion by messing in local affairs in a local community.” “Mississippi- 
ans righthlly resent some hairy beatnik from another state visiting 
our state with hate and defying our people,” the Klansmen’s lawyer 
argued. 
When the jury initially reported itself deadlocked, Judge Har- 
old Cox sent them back again, telling the dissenters that although 
they ought not to yield their own convictions, they should give fa- 
vorable consideration to the position of the majority. Lawyers and 
reporters call this the “dynamite charge,” and Judge Johnson had 
used it to bring a verdict in the Liuzzo trial. When the jury con- 
vened the next morning, it quickly brought in a verdict. Klan Wiz- 
ard Sam Bowers, Neshoba Deputy Sheriff Cecil Price, and five 
other Klansmen were pronounced guilty. Klansmen who had not 
been identified as present at the killing were either acquitted or, 
like Neshoba Klavern leader preacher Edgar Ray Killen, escaped 
when the jury could not agree on a verdict. Price and another 
Klansman, who had commented within earshot of the judge that 
they might give the jury a “dynamite charge” of their own, were 
denied bail while the judge considered the sentencing. 
Because Price had taken part in the murders, this made the 
Klansmen part of a conspiracy “under the color of law” and 
brought the killing under the old Reconstruction-era Enforcement 
Acts. As a result, the Klansmen were convicted not of murdering 
Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman but of violating their civil


--- PAGE 89 ---
80 Chapter 10 
rights. Judge Cox sentenced Bowers to the maximum ten years, 
Price to six, and the others to three. In 1970, with all appeals ex- 
hausted, the men entered federal prison, where Price served four 
years and Bowers six. 
For Bowers, there were still more indictments to face. In the 
summer of 1965, Robert Shelton had mounted a major campaign 
to take control of Mississippi Klandom fi-om Bowers. Crowds of 
1,000 and more turned out for his United Klan rallies across the 
state from Natchez to Meridian, and Shelton claimed switch-overs 
of whole klaverns of former White Knights. Neshoba Sheriff Law- 
rence Rainey and his deputy, Price, disappointed over Bowers’s 
failure to raise more defense money, were among the United Klans’ 
conspicuous new recruits. 
Pushed by the competitive pressure, the White Knights 
stepped up their harassment, cross burning, nocturnal shotgun 
blasts, arson, and bombing in the Laurel-Hattiesburg area. Bowers 
was particularly angry over Vernon Dahmer’s voter registration 
campaign and impatiently ordered a number 3 and a number 4 on 
the black storekeeper. 
After Bowers had rehearsed his hit team in a nearby graveyard, 
they made several drive-by reconnnaissances and then struck after 
midnight. Two carloads of Klansmen set Dahmer’s store and home 
on fire with gasoline bombs and fired into the house with pistols 
and shotguns. Dahmer, awakened from sleep in the back of the 
house, picked up his shotgun and stood firing through the flames 
while his wife and three children, four sons being away in the ser- 
vice, escaped out the back. Dahmer’s lungs were seared by the 
flames, and he died in the hospital the next day. 
FBI agents hurried over from Jackson, set up headquarters in 
Hattiesburg’s Holiday Inn, and began their investigation. There 
was much to go on at the crime scene. There were plastic gasoline 
containers, ejected shells, a dropped pistol, and, a short distance 
away, one of the Klan cars, a blue Ford, which had been mistakenly 
shot up by Klansmen from the other car. Local opinion was out- 
raged by the killing, and the county sheriff and state police helped 
with the investigation. A wealthy farmer and oil-well owner who 
had been one of Bowers’s first recruits and financial contributors 
agreed to help persuade other participants to confess. The FBI


--- PAGE 90 ---
Klansmen on Trial C? the Klan’s Campaign of Terror 8 1 
soon had a list of suspects, all members of Laurel Klan No. 4. One 
of the shooters, who had driven the other attack car, was a success- 
ful businessman with four young children, a PTA and Boy Scout 
leader, and president of the Laurel Jaycees. His selection as “Jaycee 
of the Year” was followed shortly by his indictment for the murder. 
Eventually, in 1968, a local jury convicted four of the Klansmen. 
The Jaycee and two others went to Parchman prison on life sen- 
tences, but in a year he was home again on various leaves and work 
release. By the end of the 1970s, all the Klansmen were out of 
prison. 
When the Dahmer killing first came to trial in 1968, Imperial 
Wizard Bowers was free on appeal of his 1967 conspiracy convic- 
tion for the Neshoba murders, and there had been two more Klan 
killings-a black farmer and the treasurer of the National Associa- 
tion for the Advancement of Colored People in Natchez-and a 
bombing campaign against the Jewish communities of Jackson and 
Meridian. Bowers was the planner; others carried out the attacks. 
Repeatedly brought to trial on various charges in Dahmer’s death, 
Bowers escaped through a mistrial and three hung juries. Local 
sentiment was turning against him. The vote in his first trial for 
arson was eleven to one for conviction. In his second trial, this time 
for murder, it was ten to two. Unconvicted and unshaken, Bowers 
was angry at what he saw as the “Jew-Communist” plot against 
the white people of Mississippi. His reign of terror was not yet 
over. 
As Klan membership collapsed under FBI pressure, informers, 
and indictments, Bowers’s belief in the importance of secrecy was 
forcefully confirmed. His rancor against the Jews, whom he be- 
lieved were behind the civil rights revolution, grew. The Neshoba 
trial, which had resulted in the conviction of Bowers and six other 
Klansmen for violating Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman’s civil 
rights, had taken place in Meridian. While the appeal process went 
on, a rash of Klan bombings seemed intended to punish the com- 
munity for such impiety, and Bowers’s campaign against the Jews 
of Mississippi accelerated. 
There were 1,000, mostly old, established Jewish families in 
Mississippi. They lived in the cities, such as Jackson and Meridian, 
making their living mainly in commerce and the professions. Jewish


--- PAGE 91 ---
82 Chapter 10 
Mississippians had fought on the southern side in the Civil War and 
often shared the racial attitudes of other white Mississippians. Mis- 
sissippians were a friendly people except where matters of honor 
and race were concerned. Although Jews were not invited to be 
members of the country club, they fit in. Jewish Mississippians had 
no intention of causing disturbance, but times were changing, and 
so were the internal pressures within the Jewish communities. The 
Civil Rights movement added to the pressures, not the least being 
that a significant number of the summer volunteers were Jewish. 
In her book The Temple Bombing, Melissa Fay Green told of 
how a new rabbi from the North challenged the passive assimila- 
tionist culture and segregationist values of Atlanta’s German Jewish 
community. Jack Nelson, the Los Angeles Times’ prime southern re- 
porter, told a similar story in his account of the Klan’s campaign 
against the Jews of Mississippi, Terror in the Night: The Klan’s 
Campaign against the Jews. Like Rabbi Jacob Rothschild in At- 
lanta, Rabbi Perry Nussbaum emphasized the distinctiveness of 
Jewish religion and life, and, to the alarm of many in Jackson’s 
Temple Beth Israel congregation, Nussbaum reached out to Mis- 
sissippi’s small but growing interracial Civil Rights movement. He 
took a lead in the Committee of Concern’s fund-raising to rebuild 
black churches and brought meetings of the racially mixed Missis- 
sippi Council on Human Relations into the newly dedicated Beth 
Israel. 
In September 1967, a month before the trial of the Neshoba 
Klansmen was scheduled to begin in Meridian, a dynamite bomb 
wrecked Jackson’s Temple Beth Israel. This was followed by the 
bombing of the homes of black and white civil rights leaders, in- 
cluding Rabbi Nussbaum’s. Five black churches were burned in 
Meridian, and in May 1968 a powerful explosion wrecked Meridi- 
an’s Beth Israel synagogue. The bombing of the Jackson syna- 
gogue had produced condemnation from many but not all of the 
Christian pulpits, the leading Baptists being among the silent. Gov- 
ernor Johnson, who had said nothing about the burning of black 
churches, denounced the synagogue bombing as “almost unthink- 
able . . . in this civilized state among our civilized people.” 
Pushed by Mississippi Senator James Eastland, J. Edgar Hoo- 
ver poured resources into the hunt for the bombers, but FBI in-


--- PAGE 92 ---
Klansmen on Trial & the Klan’s Campaign of Terror 83 
formers and renewed pressure on Klan suspects produced no re- 
sults. Having been brought to court in both the Neshoba and the 
Dahmer trials through the testimony of informers, Bowers had 
painful justification for his belief in secrecy. With a small inner 
group now carrying on the new bombing campaign, he had reason 
to believe that he was safe from the FBI’s informants. Central to 
his campaign were his bomb maker, a well-to-do electrical contrac- 
tor, and the twenty-one-year-old Thomas Albert Tarrants 111. Tar- 
rants had grown up in Mobile, Alabama, with an angry segrega- 
tionist father and a love of guns. He had hung out with the fiercely 
anti-Semitic National States Rights Party and Minuteman people. 
Like Bowers, he had listened to the tapes of the Church of Jesus 
Christ Christian’s Wesley J. Swift, who preached the early Christian 
Identity anti-Semitic gospel. Now, in the summer of 1967, Tar- 
rants came to Laurel to meet Bowers and became his bomber. He 
kept his distance from the Klan and its hangouts, where the FBI 
was looking for the bomber. 
On July 1,1968, the headline on Jack Nelson’s page 1 story in 
the Los Ang-eles Times read, “Mississippi Police Thwart Dynamiting-: 
One Dead, One Wounded.” A police and FBI stakeout at the home 
of a Jewish businessman in Meridian had captured Tarrants, who, 
though badly wounded, had fought back with pistol and subma- 
chine gun and had almost escaped. His armed companion in the 
car, an attractive, young fifth-grade Jackson schoolteacher named 
Kathy Ainsworth, died in the hail of bullets. While her new hus- 
band was away in National Guard camp, she had become Tarrants’s 
nocturnal accomplice. She had grown up in Florida with a mother 
who vented her hatred of Jews and gone to school at Mississippi 
College, where her prejudices were heled by an arch-segregationist 
professor and the Wesley Swift tapes of her roommate’s father. She 
teamed up with Tarrants, whom she had met in Mobile, and joined 
the Klan and Americans for the Preservation of the White Race. 
During the day, she was the friendly fifth-grade teacher; at night, 
she learned weapons and bomb making. Wearing a tight, low-cut 
blouse and high-cut shorts, she rode with Tarrants. Now she was 
dead, and Tarrants was in prison. 
Two years later, Nelson had a new headline in the Los Ang-eles 
Times: “Police Awang-e Trap: Klan Terror Is the Target.” The troubled


--- PAGE 93 ---
84 Chapter 10 
head of Mississippi’s Council on Human Relations had given him 
the lead, and Nelson had returned to Mississippi and traced down 
the rest of the story. The FBI and the Meridian sheriff, who had 
cleaned Klan influence out of his department, had decided that the 
only way to stop the wave of terror was to lure the Klan bombers 
into ambush. With enough pressure and money, they believed that 
they could get insiders to help set up the unknown bombers. Their 
own names were already on the Klan hit list, and now they brought 
in the regional director of the Jewish Anti-Defamation League 
(ADL) to listen to a tape of Klansmen plotting to blow up syna- 
gogues during services. A total of forty-five thousand dollars was 
secretly raised, and the FBI and the Meridian police began the tor- 
turous secret negotiations for the delivery of the unknown 
bombers. 
All this was set forth in Nelson’s story and in his book Terror in 
the Nbht. The informants were the Roberts brothers: Alton Wayne 
Roberts, who had shot civil rights workers Mickey Schwerner and 
Andrew Goodman, and his brother Raymond. Out on appeal fiom 
the conviction in the Neshoba killing, Alton Wayne had the trust 
of Tarrants and his fellow bomber. They agreed that the bombing 
target would be a Jewish Meridian businessman, Meyer Davidson, 
who had been outspoken against the Klan. The FBI secretly evacu- 
ated Davidson and his family. With the agents and an army demoli- 
tion team standing by, dark-clad police officers from the Meridian 
sheriff’s special squad staked out the area around Davidson’s 
house. Nothing happened the first night. On the second night, 
they took their positions once again. Raymond Roberts managed 
to phone the police that the second hit man, Danny Joe Hawkins, 
was fearful that he was being watched by the FBI and would not 
be on this assignment. A woman wearing shorts had replaced 
Hawkins, but Roberts did not know who she was. 
As Tarrants approached the Davidson house carrying the 
bomb, a detective called out for him to stop. He dropped the 
bomb and fired. The police opened up with rifles and shotguns, 
and Kathy Ainsworth died as she reached across the fiont seat to 
help Tarrants back into the car. Although wounded, Tarrants got 
the car going and escaped a roadblock by cutting across a lawn. 
Rammed by a police car, he jumped out firing his submachine gun,


--- PAGE 94 ---
Klansmen on Trial @ the Klan-’s Campa@n of Terror 85 
wounding an officer and killing an unlucky civilian. He was finally 
brought to the ground by an electrified fence and bullets and shot- 
gun pellets. By now, a crowd of neighbors had gathered, and the 
police could not carry out the final step in their ambush. 
J. Edgar Hoover was furious over the second story detailing 
the planning of the ambush execution and denied that the FBI had 
played any part in it. Placing Nelson at the top of his “enemies 
list,” Hoover denounced him as a “drunk” and ordered the FBI 
to cease all contact with Los Angeles Times reporters. 
Meridian surgeons saved Tarrants’s life and stitched him back 
together. Recaptured after a jailbreak, Tarrants initially plunged 
deeper into Klan and Nazi literature before turning to the Bible 
and serious philosophy. This, in time, led to a religious conversion. 
Both the Baptist minister who had first told Nelson about the en- 
trapment story and the FBI agent who had arranged it visited Tar- 
rants regularly and believed that he was sincere. Though he refused 
to testify about the Klan and his fellow bombers, they worked for 
his early release and brought Al Binder, the lawyer who had orga- 
nized the fund-raising for his ambush, to see him. 
An informant working for both Binder and the FBI brought 
news that the Klan was plotting the murder of the New Orleans 
ADL director. The hit man was to be Byron De La Beckwith, the 
ambush killer of Medgar Evers. A close watch was kept on Beck- 
with, and when the informant reported that Beckwith was on his 
way, word was passed to the New Orleans FBI and Police Depart- 
ment. A trap was set, and just after midnight, the New Orleans po- 
lice stopped Beckwith at a roadblock on an isolated stretch of road 
outside the city. In his car, they found a revolver, several rifles, parts 
of a .50-caliber machine gun, a map marked with the route to the 
ADL director’s house, and the large, ticking dynamite bomb. 
Beckwith served three years in Louisiana’s Angola state prison. 
Tarrants ingratiated himself with the Parchman staff, who 
found his intelligence useful and believed that his was no contrived 
“jailhouse conversion.” His friends, the warden, and eventually 
Binder, who had come to believe that Tarrants had truly changed, 
supported his application for early release. He was accepted for col- 
lege by Duke, Rutgers, Earlham, and the University of Mississippi. 
In 1976, after eight years in prison, without Tarrants having given


--- PAGE 95 ---
86 Chapter 10 
testimony about the Klan, the governor signed his release. He was 
an “A” student at the University of Mississippi, concentrating in 
Greek and the New Testament. He spoke at the governor’s annual 
prayer breakfast and published a book on his prison life and reli- 
gious conversion. Testi$ing that his racism and anti-Semitism had 
long since been washed out by Christian love, Tarrants left Missis- 
sippi to marry, raise a family, and teach at a training school for mis- 
sionaries where Jack Nelson interviewed him for the book on the 
Klan’s war against the Jews of Mississippi. 
As Tarrants walked out of Parchman prison in 1976, the Klan’s 
power and organization in Mississippi had long since disappeared. 
In the same year, the last of the Neshoba killers, Imperial Wizard 
Bowers, was released from federal prison. Under his rule, according 
to the FBI’s count, the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan had 
been responsible for nine murders and at least 300 beatings, burn- 
ings, and bombings. Bowers had served six of his ten-year federal 
sentence for violating the civil rights of Michael Schwerner, James 
Chaney, and Andrew Goodman. No one had yet been tried under 
the laws of Mississippi for their murder. In the murder of Vernon 
Dahmer, Bowers, thanks to the deadlocked juries, still walked free. 
Without the testimony of Bowers or Tarrants, the bomb maker and 
the other hit man in the war against the Jews of Mississippi were 
never arrested. 
Byron De La Beckwith had been tried twice in 1964 for the 
murder of Medgar Evers. Both all-male, white juries deadlocked 
at ten to two for conviction, and Beckwith also remained fiee. In 
Birmingham, the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church, in 
which the four young girls had been killed, was still listed as un- 
solved.


--- PAGE 96 ---
err. 
Decline 
fiississippi had been the most resolutely white supremacist and 
racially repressive of the southern states, home of the Citizens’ 
Councils and the State Sovereignty Commission, most unwilling to 
recognize the rights of its black citizens. Professor Jim Silver, who 
left the University of Mississippi under pressure after having 
chaired the history department and taught there for nineteen years, 
described Mississippi as a “closed society” in which a silent minis- 
try and a controlled educational system, media, and public life did 
not permit discussion and differing points of view to be expressed. 
The official State Sovereignty Commission spied and kept files on 
Mississippians and helped fhd the Citizens’ Councils. The coun- 
cils, first organized in Indianola, Mississippi, after the Supreme 
Court school decision in 1954, spread across the South, trumpet- 
ing white supremacy and segregation and pressuring those who 
disagreed. 
Jackson’s family-owned Clarion -Ledger and the Daily News 
were the only newspapers with statewide distribution, and they 
took a hard line in their headlines, news coverage, and editorials. 
When Byron De La Beckwith, who had been five years old when 
his mother brought him back to Mississippi, was arrested by the 
FBI, the Clarion-Ledger headlined it “Californian Is Charged with 
Murder of MedBar Evers.” Jackson’s NBC and CBS affiliates cen- 
sored network programming, and national magazines were gener- 
ally not available. Even a “fair-play segregationist’’ such as Hod- 
ding Carter I1 was seen as a dangerous radical. 
Mississippians were encouraged by their political and cultural 
leadership to believe that they were facing an oppressive national 
87


--- PAGE 97 ---
88 Chapter 11 
government and an invasion of race mixers, probably Communist 
directed. This did not mean that they necessarily liked the Klan, 
but it was usually safer to be silent. Testieing before a U.S. Senate 
Committee a decade later, former U.S. Attorney General Nicholas 
Katzenbach summed up the “unique difficulty” in Mississippi and 
parts of Alabama and Louisiana of “gathering information on fun- 
damentally lawless activities which have the sanction of local law 
enforcement agencies, political officials and a substantial segment 
of the white population.” 
The murders of Evers, Viola Liuzzo, and other Klan victims 
were initially helpful to the Klan, which drew its membership al- 
most exclusively fiom that resentful portion of society that looked 
on physical resistance as the necessary and suitable expression of 
beleaguered white manhood. Violence swelled Klan ranks. There 
was also a wider pool of supporters who saw the Klan as the only 
organization that did anything to counter the black push into their 
lives. Even as late as 1967, Evers’s assassin, Beckwith, although 
coming in last in a field of six when he ran for lieutenant governor, 
drew 34,675 votes. Yet despite initial increase in membership, stir- 
rings of growth and power were merely illusionary. 
By the mid-l960s, times were changing, even in Mississippi. 
School desegregation and the new 1964 Public Accommodation 
Act were being minimally observed, and the 1965 Voting Rights 
Act was changing the electorate across the Deep South. Although 
black people made up a larger portion of the population than in 
any other state, Mississippi had had the smallest percentage of 
black voters. By 1970, the eligible black voters who were registered 
had increased from less than 7 percent to 60 percent. Despite ma- 
nipulation of voting districts and at-large elections and the impact 
of deep racial poverty, politics would never be the same. President 
Lyndon Johnson’s young aide, Bill Moyers, told the historian 
David Halberstam of a conversation with Johnson the night that 
the Voting Rights Act was approved by Congress. Moyers was sur- 
prised to find the president depressed. “I think we’ve just handed 
the South over to the Republican party for the rest of our lives,” 
Johnson told him. By the end of the century, Mississippi would 
have the largest number of elected black officeholders and two 
white Republican senators, one of them the majority leader in the


--- PAGE 98 ---
Decline 09 
U.S. Senate. A Mississippian had been chairman of the Republican 
National Committee, and in presidential elections, Mississippi 
proved to be the safest state for Republican candidates. 
This would have been difficult for most people to foresee in 
the mid-1960s. Klan violence had become too reckless to be ig- 
nored. The political leadership believed that Mississippi faced a col- 
lapse into anarchy and possible intervention by federal troops. This 
is what had happened in Arkansas at Little Rock’s Central High 
School and at the University of Mississippi. As reckless as Alabama 
Governors John Patterson and George Wallace might be, they 
knew when to draw back, and Mississippi’s Paul Johnson was no 
bumbling Ross Barnett. Having removed Klansmen fi-om the state 
highway patrol, Johnson was quietly cooperating with the Justice 
Department. 
When the Public Accommodation Act was passed, it was not 
the state politicians but rather the business community that, how- 
ever reluctantly, led the acceptance. A useful study edited by Eliza- 
beth Jacoway and David Colburn, Southern Businessmen and De- 
seg.regation, shows the role that business considerations played in 
fourteen major southern cities. While many politicians called for re- 
sistance, businessmen read the costs of social disruption and the 
boycott of downtown stores, the loss of new industry, and the pos- 
sible cutoff of federal aid. 
Governors Burt Combs of Kentucky and Fritz Hollings of 
South Carolina helped their states adapt. Governors Harry Byrd of 
Virginia and Jimmy Davis of Louisiana resisted but did not get 
their states in as much trouble as Arkansas’ Orval Faubus, Missis- 
sippi’s Ross Barnett, and Alabama’s John Patterson and George 
Wallace. State legislators, city commissions, and aldermen echoed 
the Citizens’ Council’s line, but Mayors William Hartsfeld and 
Ivan Allen Jr. helped keep the peace in Atlanta, and Lester Bates 
led Columbia, South Carolina, in winning LOOPS ‘‘All-American 
City” award in 1964. Most mayors followed a rear-guard action 
and hoped that rioting would not break out in their cities. 
In southern cities, power was held by the business and civic 
elites-owners, managers, bankers, lawyers, and doctors-who had 
little desire to end segregation. They belonged to the Citizens’ 
Councils and hoped that the trouble would go away. Each city had


--- PAGE 99 ---
90 Chapter 11 
its own story of success or failure. In some cities, such as Tampa, 
Dallas, and Columbia, there were biracial committees, and civic 
leaders guided the changes. In St. Augustine, the motel owners 
and small businessmen were willing to accommodate if the power 
structure would give them cover, but the leading banker declined, 
and the John Birch-minded doctors and lawyers vowed to resist. 
In city after city, faced with school closings, loss of business 
and economic development, civil rights demonstrations, and Klan 
violence, elites and business communities belatedly became in- 
volved. Merchants’ associations, committees to open or keep open 
the schools, councils of 100, chambers of commerce, and other 
business-oriented groups helped negotiate the end of public dis- 
crimination and the quieting of the streets. The board of the Jack- 
son Chamber of Commerce, with an assist from the Roman Catho- 
lic bishop, called for compliance with the new 1964 Civil Rights 
Act, and a Mississippians for Public Education committee was or- 
ganized. With support from business groups across the state, the 
Mississippi Economic Council called for lawful acceptance. 
In McComb, Enterprise-Journal editor Oliver Emmerich had 
rallied business and civic leaders to take a stand against Klan vio- 
lence. Now in the fall of 1965, in Sam Bowers’s own hometown of 
Laurel, after a year of Klan terrorism, the newly elected mayor, Wil- 
liam Henry Bucklew, stepped forward. Mayor Bucklew was not 
one of the white moderates who were beginning to raise their 
heads. He had been a three-state director of George Wallace’s 
1964 presidential campaign and on the Speakers Bureau of the 
Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission. Combining both Klans- 
men and integrationists in his denunciation of “the flood of scum, 
degenerates, free-lovers, night riders, church burners, home bomb- 
ers and hooded thugs running loose,” he gathered the county’s 
sheriff, police chiefs, and prosecuting attorneys to sign a statement 
condemning the Klan. The Laurel Leader-Call published their 
statement on its front page along with a listing of the dates, places, 
and victims of thirty-five acts of Klan terrorism. 
Going on local television, Mayor Bucklew explained that he 
believed in segregation but was tired of fighting the Civil War and 
was now speaking out-out of shame-for all those who, like him- 
self, had preferred to remained silent. “Many of these fanatics,” he


--- PAGE 100 ---
Decline 91 
said, “talk so much about God. Can you imagine a loving, merci- 
ful, forgiving God blessing the act of any creep who would burn a 
home or a place of worship.” He called on the people of Laurel to 
sign petitions supporting the right of everyone, of whatever race, 
color, or creed, to be free from violence or harassment. The Jones 
County Baptist Association passed a resolution of support, and 
civic spokesmen pointed out the damage of Klan terrorism to eco- 
nomic development. Klan leaders demanded equal time. They 
went on television to deny that they were involved in violence, and 
people were anonymously warned not to sign antiterrorist petitions 
being circulated by the churches. When the Leader-Call published 
the names of some 500 signers, the list included bankers and the 
representatives of Masonite, which was Laurel’s major employer. 
Although Klan terrorism eased in Laurel, the rage in the heart of 
Laurel businessman and Imperial Wizard Bowers still burned, and 
the assault on the life of Vernon Dahmer and on the Jews of Missis- 
sippi lay ahead. 
Governor Johnson sent Mayor Bucklew a letter of praise, but 
he and other Mississippi elites, such as Harold Cox, federal judge 
for Mississippi’s southern district, were not racial moderates. Gov- 
ernor Johnson’s idea of political humor had been to identifjr the 
initials of the National Association for the Advancement of Col- 
ored People (NAACP) as standing for “Niggers, Apes, Alligators, 
Coons, and Possums.” Cox had gotten his appointment to his fed- 
eral judgeship through the power of his college roommate, Missis- 
sippi’s senior senator, James Eastland, who chaired the Senate Judi- 
ciary Committee. President John F. Kennedy had wanted to 
appoint the top NAACP lawyer, Thurgood Marshall, to the U.S. 
Court of Appeals, and that meant going through Eastland’s Senate 
Judiciary Committee. “Give me COX,” Eastland told the president, 
“and you can have the nigger.” As judge, Cox treated civil rights 
workers and black people with contempt-“chimpanzees,” he 
called them-and he had obstructed the government’s initial ef- 
forts to try the Neshoba murders. 
By the time they finally did come to trial, however, Cox pre- 
sided with stern control. On the first day of testimony, Neshoba 
Klavern leader and preacher Edgar Ray Killen had his lawyer ask a 
witness whether young blacks had signed promises to rape white


--- PAGE 101 ---
92 Chapter11 
women. Judge Cox demanded to know the source of the question, 
warning, “I am not going to allow a farce to be made from this 
trial, and everybody might as well get that through their heads, in- 
cluding every one of the defendants, right now.” 
Governor Johnson denounced the killers of Vernon Dahmer as 
“vicious and morally bankrupt criminals. ” Increasingly, sheriffs 
and local policemen were willing to help the FBI, which held out 
the prize of a prestigious training course at FBI headquarters in 
Washington, D.C. It was not that they had given up their racial 
beliefs to protect civil rights workers; rather, the Klan was now an 
outcast. It was no longer seen as an upholder of the cause but an 
embarrassment and a civil disrupter and danger. With the arrest of 
Klansmen for the Neshoba and Dahmer murders and Imperial 
Wizard Bowers being charged in both cases, fear and distrust swept 
through the klaverns. There was the usual conflict over where the 
money went and who was going to pay for the lawyers and trial 
expenses. E. L. McDonald was again having trouble over his han- 
dling of Klan finances. In the summer of 1966, Imperial Wizard 
Robert Shelton expelled McDonald from the United Hans and de- 
cided that what was left of his Mississippi realm would have to be 
run from his own office back in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. 
The key elements in the Penn, Liuzzo, and Neshoba convic- 
tions were a growing southern feeling against the Klan and its vio- 
lence, combined with testimony from informers, confessions, and 
forceful efforts by the federal government. With the state leader- 
ship more outspoken, the FBI digging up the facts, and the Justice 
Department’s lawyers presenting them in court, the hooded 
knights complained that they were being terrorized. Juries had 
been integrated, and broader jury selection was under way. Federal 
juries, still southern but taken from larger, regional pools, were 
more likely to convict for racial violence. The expanded federal civil 
rights protection law was not passed until 1968, and most cases of 
violence were still in the hands of state courts, where convictions 
were possible but sentences seldom hlly served. 
During the winter of 1965-1966, the Klan had further bad 
luck, this time in the form of the House Un-American Activities 
Committee (HUAC). After the murder of Viola Liuzzo on the 
Selma-to-Montgomery highway, President Johnson called for a


--- PAGE 102 ---
Decline 93 
congressional investigation of the Klan. The more liberal Justice 
Committee did not want to touch it, so the HUAC stepped in. It 
seemed ironic for this committee, whose primary concern had been 
making accusations about Communist influence in America, to be 
investigating the Ku Klux Klan, which believed that integration 
and the Civil Rights movement were a Communist conspiracy. To 
the surprise of the liberal media and congressmen, who distrusted 
all HUAC investigations, the subcommittee resolutely dug into the 
Klan. 
Between October 1965 and February 1966, with information 
supplied by the FBI, a HUAC subcommittee questioned 187 wit- 
nesses, including Robert Shelton, Samuel Bowers Jr., J. B. Stoner, 
Byron De La Beckwith, and a roster of grand dragons and other 
Klan officials. Led by Louisiana Congressman Edwin Willis and 
Charles Weltner, a young liberal from Atlanta, the subcommittee 
produced the best report on the Klan ever to come out of Con- 
gress. 
Although all but a few of the subpoenaed witnesses used the 
Fifth Amendment and various other amendments to avoid answer- 
ing questions, the committee staff produced a report that told 
much about the fifteen competing Klans and their 714 klaverns. It 
listed the klaverns, their locations, their names, cover names and 
fronts, and officers and reported on their meetings, arsenals, and 
special violent “action” groups. It identified the top state Nan 
leaders and reported on their educational shortcomings, their crim- 
inal records, and how they helped themselves to their members’ 
dues and contributions. 
When first subpoenaed, United Hans Imperial Wizard Robert 
Shelton told the press, “I’ll be there with my boots on,’’ but before 
the committee he appealed to his rights under the Fifth, First, 
Fourth, and Fourteenth Amendments to rehse to answer ques- 
tions and turn over Klan records. Under the Constitution, he was 
within his rights not to answer questions, but Nan records had no 
such protection. After the full House of Representatives cited him 
for contempt and the courts upheld it, Imperial Wizard Shelton 
went off to a year in federal prison. 
At their peak in 1964, Bowers’s White Knights and Shelton’s 
United Klans had each numbered approximately 6,000 members


--- PAGE 103 ---
94 Chapter11 
in Mississippi. By the beginning of 1967, the HUAC estimated the 
White Knights to be down to 400 members and the United Klans’ 
Mississippi contingent at no more than 750. All together, Shelton’s 
United Klans counted 15,000 members in seventeen states, but the 
FBI privately claimed nearly 2,000 of them as sources and infor- 
mants. In Mississippi the Klan world was crumbling, although 
Bowers’s remaining fragment was still particularly deadly. 
Throughout the South, there was a growing opposition to the 
Nan. Only a limited number of communities, whether through 
fear or approval, countenanced its night riding. In others, law was 
enforced, and distaste for the Klan was openly expressed. The 
mayor and local businessmen of Hemingway, South Carolina, pro- 
tested that Klan rallies nearby gave the false impression that the 
town approved of the hooded knights. High school students 
erected signs along the highway with slogans such as “Stamp out 
Boll Weevils, Tobacco Worms, and the KKK.” When the house of 
a North Carolina black leader was burned down, his fellow towns- 
people, white and black, contributed money and labor to rebuild 
it. In Anniston, Alabama, civic and business leaders signed a letter 
to the newspapers announcing that the Klan was not wanted in 
their community, and the $20,000 reward they offered led to solu- 
tion and conviction in a local racial murder. 
During the early 1960s, Klansmen met the Civil Rights move- 
ment head-on in the city streets of Alabama and the towns and 
country roads of Mississippi. The outcome hung perilously in the 
balance. By mid-decade, the Hans seemed no more effective a re- 
sistance force than had been the politicians, Citizens’ Councils, and 
the police, sheriffs and their deputies. 
In important part, the Klan onslaught had pushed the national 
government into action, and the southern states were beginning to 
follow suit. Responding to the leadership of Presidents Kennedy 
and Johnson, Congress passed the 1964 Public Accommodation 
Act, the 1965 Voting Rights Act, and the 1968 Housing and Pro- 
tection Act. The FBI, both within and outside the law, was putting 
pressure on the Klans, and juries were bringing in guilty verdicts. 
Black voting blocs were beginning to elect black councilmen, legis- 
lators, and sheriffs. White officeholders were becoming more ra- 
cially cautious. In much of the Deep South, beatings and deaths at


--- PAGE 104 ---
Decline 95 
the hands of the Klans had been the direct cost of each of these 
steps, but by the end of the 1960s, the costs were being shared. 
Into jail went the killers of Colonel Lemuel Penn on the high- 
way outside Athens, Georgia, and of Viola Liuzzo in Lowndes 
County, Alabama; seven of the murderers of Mickey Schwerner, 
James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman in Neshoba County, Missis- 
sippi; and four of the men responsible for the firebombing death of 
Mississippi black leader Vernon Dahmer. Klansmen were arrested 
for plotting the murder of Charles Evers, the newly elected black 
mayor of Fayette, Mississippi. Byron De La Beckwith, whom earlier 
juries had failed to convict for the sniper murder of Charles’s 
brother Medgar, went to jail for the planned bombing attempt on 
the Jewish Anti-Defamation League (ADL) leader in New Orleans. 
So did Tommy Tarrants after a shootout cost the life of the young 
teacher Kathy Ainsworth. South Carolina Grand Dragon Robert 
Scoggins and United Klans’ Imperial Wizard Shelton served time 
in federal prisons for refusing to provide Klan records to the 
HUAC. Robert Miles, the grand dragon of Michigan and future 
Christian Identity leader, and four of his followers went to jail for 
bombing school buses in Pontiac, Michigan. Each conviction and 
imprisonment sapped the energy of Klansmen and the reputation 
and strength of their organizations. Although federal juries were 
more likely to convict than were state juries, local and state police 
were increasingly willing to take action against Klansmen.


--- PAGE 105 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 106 ---
72 
Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist 
Ch&h &the Black Jesus 
was the disappearance of Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman in 
Neshoba County, Mississippi, that was responsible for the redefi- 
nition of the FBI’s general mission in relation to the Ku Klux Nan. 
While the FBI had worked on bombing cases elsewhere in the 
South, J. Edgar Hoover and the bureau had not been much inter- 
ested in civil rights or the Klan. Hoover had explained to an earlier 
attorney general that the bureau should not be giving so much at- 
tention to “investigating murders, lynching, and assaults, particu- 
larly in the Southern states” because it only stirred up agitation. 
From 1964 on, the FBI took an active role that was essential 
in securing the evidence and testimony that sent Klansmen to jail- 
and there was more. In 1956, the FBI began a program of illegal 
surveillance and sabotage against the Communist and Socialist 
Workers Parties, to which it added Martin Luther King Jr., Black 
Power movements, and the New Left. In the summer of 1964, the 
FBI hrther added seventeen Klans and six other hate groups to the 
“disrupt and neutralize” efforts of its covert Internal Security 
Counterintelligence Program, known as COUNTERINTELPRO. 
With Hoover’s approval, the program set out to “take advantage 
of our experience with a variety of sophisticated techniques suc- 
cesshlly applied against the Communist Party USA.” The “sophis- 
ticated techniques” included not only the use of informers and 
theft of Klan records but also all manner of planted newspaper sto- 
ries, rumors, anonymous letters, and postcards revealing Klan 
membership and accusing Nan leaders of everything from drunk- 
enness, adultery, and misuse of funds to being informers for the 
97


--- PAGE 107 ---
98 Chapter12 
FBI itself. Favored newspapermen, such as the Atlanta Constit%- 
tion’s Ralph McGill, were leaked information. By the 1970s, the 
bureau claimed that one out of every six Klansmen worked for the 
FBI. This included at least one state leader, and there was talk of 
attempting to dethrone the United Klan’s imperial wizard, Robert 
Shelton, and replace him with an FBI informant. 
Though the program was successful in stirring up trouble 
within the klaverns, Hoover feared that its illegal operations might 
become known to the public. His fears were realized in 1971, 
n 
Postcard messages sent to the Ku Klux Klansmen by the FBI


--- PAGE 108 ---
Birmin.ham’s 16th Street Baptist Church &” the Black Jesus 99 
when an antiwar group calling itself the Citizens Commission to 
Investigate the FBI broke into an FBI office in Media, Pennsylva- 
nia, and began making public the contents of the FBI surveillance 
files. The Media burglary did not reveal the existence of COUN- 
TERINTELPRO, but Hoover cautiously closed it down. Four 
years later, an NBC reporter, Carl Stern, heard about the program 
and used the Freedom of Information Act to find out more about 
it. Hoover had died in 1972, and now a U.S. Senate investigation, 
chaired by Idaho’s Senator Frank Church, revealed something of 
COUNTERINTELPRO’s extent. A new freedom-of-information 
suit by a group of reporters made public some 52,000 pages and 
began a long battle over access and preservation of FBI records. 
Sharing the headlines with the wiretapping and the FBI cam- 
paign to discredit Martin Luther King Jr. was the portly figure of 
the bureau’s onetime top Klan informant, Gary Thomas Rowe Jr. 
Of the bureau’s more than 1,000 “domestic intelligence infor- 
mants,” Rowe was the star. Recruited in 1960, he surfaced five 
years later to finger the Klansman who had gunned down Viola Li- 
uzzo on the road between Selma and Montgomery. Rowe had 
been one of the men in the killer’s car, and his testimony sent two 
brother Klansmen to federal prison. Wearing a mask that resembled 
a torn paper bag, Rowe told congressmen that he had been in on 
almost everything, from beating the “freedom riders” in Bir- 
mingham to an FBI-ordered disruption campaign by having sexual 
relations with the wives of fellow Klansmen. And there was more, 
including beatings, perhaps a murder, and, the word was to come 
later from the Birmingham police, possible involvement in the 
1963 bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church. 
Between 1960, when he was first recruited by the FBI, and 
1965, when he broke cover to testifir in the Liuzzo trial, Rowe was 
paid more than $20,000 by the bureau, first for information and 
then to relocate with a new identity-hence the mask. Although 
his cover was destroyed by his testimony, Rowe profited from the 
exposure. Bantam Books reportedly paid him and his ghostwriter 
$25,000 for a slim paperback autobiography titled My Undercover 
Years with the Ku Klux Klan. The book was characterized by the 
kind of writing that fills the pages of magazines for men, replete 
with exclamatory verbs and virile conversation but lacking any sort


--- PAGE 109 ---
100 Chapter 12 
of modifjring description or understanding. According to his liter- 
ary testimony, Rowe had bested-and outwitted-his brother 
Klansmen of Birmingham’s fearsome Eastview Klavern 13 in drink- 
ing, fighting, and sexual conquests. 
Before concern began to mount about the nature of the vio- 
lence that Rowe himself had perpetrated while on government re- 
tainer, Columbia Pictures added $25,000 to his take for the rights 
to film his life for NBC television. Football broadcaster and former 
Dallas Cowboys quarterback “Dandy” Don Meredith played 
Rowe as a rough but well-meaning battler for the law. NBC swal- 
lowed hard and presented its somewhat tarnished drama, The Free- 
dom Riders, in the fall of 1979. Meanwhile, the Justice Department 
was being forced to face the question of whether Rowe had been 
an agent provocateur. Had he actually instigated the incidents of 
violence, and had the FBI approved and covered up his actions? 
Rowe claimed that they had and that he was told that J. Edgar 
Hoover approved. 
Three court suits against the U.S. government, all of them on 
behalf of white victims, came out of Rowe’s role as the FBI’s most 
valuable informer. He had told the FBI about the violence planned 
against the freedom riders, and now two of the riders who had sus- 
tained permanent damage from the beatings claimed that the gov- 
ernment had failed in its duty to protect them. Federal judges 
agreed and awarded James Peck $25,000 and Walter Bergman 
$50,000. Viola Liuzzo’s family was less fortunate. The Klan plans 
were less definite, and the judged ruled that the government had 
not been negligent. The Liuzzo family would get no damages, and 
they would have had to pay the government’s $80,000 court costs 
if it had not been for an angry story on ABC television’s Z0/20 and 
the intercession of two U.S. senators. The crucial two-sided ques- 
tion was over the responsibility of the government to protect peo- 
ple when it knows that violence is coming as opposed to its inter- 
ests in protecting its sources. In addition, there was often the 
additional question of the FBI sharing what it knew, which was to 
affect prosecution of 1960s murders for the next forty years. 
No one loves an informer, including police officers who em- 
ploy him, but without him the hands of justice would often be tied. 
Contrary to the heroic image put forth by motion pictures and


--- PAGE 110 ---
Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist Church 0” the Black Jesus 101 
television, it is seldom the police officer who infiltrates. Rather, it 
is the member who informs, whether out of patriotism, morality, 
revenge, a desire to escape prosecution himself, or a need for 
money. It was informers such as Rowe (plus testimony of fiight- 
ened or penitent Klansmen) and painstaking investigative work 
that combined to produce the FBI’s success against the Klan. 
Of the killings that marked the struggle of the 1960s, the 
deaths of the four black teenagers in the bombing of Birmingham’s 
16th Street Baptist Church remained the chief unsolved crime. 
Within days after the dynamite bomb went off against the wall of 
the church, federal agents were sure that they knew who set it. 
However, the problems of surveillance and gathering evidence 
were soon overtaken by the need to protect the evidence fiom mis- 
use. Alabama Governor George Wallace had taken as strong a stand 
as anyone against integration, but the church bombing murders 
were hardly the kind of publicity he was counting on to launch his 
campaign for president. Martin Luther King Jr.’s telegraph mes- 
sage, “The blood of our little children is on your hands,” was sure 
to upset voters. After an unsuccessful attempt to somehow pin the 
bombing on “unknown black perpetrators,” the governor’s inves- 
tigators arrested the FBI’s prime suspects. The best that the state 
could do was to charge Klansman “Dynamite Bob” Chambliss 
with the illegal possession of dynamite. The prime suspects were 
now warned, and the bombing went into the “unsolved” file. 
Rowe later claimed that this was where the Alabama state police 
and the Klan intended it to stay. 
Murder has no statute of limitations in Alabama, and a rising 
young lawyer named William Baxley kept this in mind. He first 
heard about the bombing while at his Kappa Sigma fraternity 
house on the University of Alabama campus in nearby Tuscaloosa. 
It made him sick to his stomach, and he said that he did not eat 
that day. Son of a prominent judge from Dothan and a mother 
deeply involved with her church, Baxley had a sense of justice that 
did not condone racism or unpunished murder. With his law 
school classmates helping him organize his statewide campaign, he 
rose fiom being a local state’s attorney to attorney general of Ala- 
bama by the time he was thirty. When he came up for reelection in 
1974, no one thought it worthwhile to run against him.


--- PAGE 111 ---
102 Chapter 12 
After his first election, Baxley reportedly wrote four names on 
his state telephone card. They were Cynthia Wesley, Denise Mc- 
Nair, Carol Robertson, and Addie Mae Collins. Denise McNair 
was eleven and the others were fourteen years old when they died 
in the bomb blast. That had been eight years before, but Baxley 
had not forgotten them, and now he saw their names whenever he 
used his state telephone card. It took four more years and threats 
of newspaper publicity before the FBI would begin making their 
files available. It was not without justification that the FBI had 
been hesitant in 1963 about revealing its evidence and informants 
to the Alabama police. Now Baxley’s sincerity impressed them. 
Of at least equal importance was the death of J. Edgar Hoover 
in 1972. Hoover had rescued the FBI from the bad reputation of 
its 1920s corruption but had plunged it into even deeper scandal in 
the 1950s and 1960s. Shortly after the bombing of the 16th Street 
Baptist Church and some fourteen years before Alabama’s Attor- 
ney General Baxley would bring one of the bombers to trial, the 
FBI had cracked the case and had strong evidence against Robert 
Chambliss and at least three other men who had helped set the dy- 
namite. Hoover had twice rehsed the Birmingham office permis- 
sion to seek prosecution and told it not to let the Justice Depart- 
ment suspect how much the FBI knew. 
After finally seeing what he thought were all the FBI files, Bax- 
ley believed that there had been enough evidence to go to trial 
within weeks of the bombing, though Hoover may well have been 
correct in his assumption that in 1963 the all-white juries of Bir- 
mingham were not likely to convict, even for such a heinous crime 
as this. By 1977, the man believed to have made the bomb was 
dead. Baxley’s staff pressed the investigation. In September 1977, 
an Alabama grand jury indicted Chambliss on four accounts of 
first-degree murder. 
Baxley hoped that Gary Rowe would strengthen the case 
against Chambliss and others involved in the bombing, but Rowe’s 
lie detector tests produced disturbing results. When questioned 
about the bombing, Rowe’s polygraph reading indicated “strong 
and consistent unresolved deceptive responses.” Rowe, it seemed, 
was telling less than all he knew. Baxley’s investigators began to 
suspect that Rowe might have been in the car that carried the


--- PAGE 112 ---
Birmin.ham-’s 16th Street Baptist Church e? the Black Jesus 103 
bombers to the church. At the very least, the trial would have to 
go on without Rowe as a witness for the prosecution. 
The trial was held before a jury made up of three black and 
nine white jurors. Most of the latter were middle-aged, working- 
class housewives. The evidence was circumstantial but powerful. 
Chambliss’s niece by marriage, now a Methodist minister in Bir- 
mingham, testified that Chambliss, whom she called “a racial fa- 
natic,” was angry over integration in the Birmingham schools. He 
had “enough stuff out away to flatten half of Birmingham,” he 
told her. “YOU just wait until after Sunday morning, and they will 
beg us to let them segregate.” Another witness had wandered into 
a room in the Chambliss house and seen his store of dynamite, 
piled like “oversized firecrackers.” A Birmingham policeman re- 
membered Chambliss describing how to make a “drip bomb,” in 
which a fishing float would complete the circuit and set off the ex- 
plosives when enough water had dripped out of a leaking bucket. 
An FBI expert testified that light objects frequently survived and 
that a fishing float had been found after the explosion. Chambliss 
was identified as having been seated in a parked car across the street 
early in the morning of the explosion. Chambliss’s niece told of her 
uncle watching a television program about the bombing and pro- 
testing, “It wasn’t meant to hurt anybody; it didn’t go off when it 
was supposed to.” 
Chambliss did not take the stand. His attorney was Arthur 
Hanes Jr., whose father had been mayor of Birmingham in 1963 
and later defended the accused murderers of Viola Liuzzo. Hanes 
had worked with his father on the Liuzzo case and had been an 
attorney for the killer of Martin Luther King Jr., James Earl Ray. 
Hanes argued that the charges against Chambliss were not proven. 
Everyone “talked rough” in those days, he explained. Baxley’s 
summation for the prosecution lasted ninety minutes and brought 
many of the jurors to tears. “You’ve got a chance to do some- 
thing,” he told them. “Let the world know that this is not the way 
the people of Alabama felt then or feel  OW." 
The decision was not easy for the jury, the foreman related, 
and it had taken nearly all the evidence to convince them. After six 
hours, they brought in a verdict of guilty of murder in the fist de- 
gree. In the Alabama justice system, Chambliss’s life sentence


--- PAGE 113 ---
104 Chapter 12 
meant a minimum of ten years in prison before he would be eligible 
for parole. “This is a terrible thing to do to a seventy-three-year- 
old man,” he complained. 
Attorney General Baxley repeatedly stated that Chambliss had 
not acted alone and promised additional arrests for the more than 
fifty bombings that had shaken Birmingham during the 1960s. The 
grand jury that had named Chambliss also indicted National States 
Rights Party lawyer J. B. Stoner for another of the bombings. No 
one had as many connections in the Klan world as Stoner, who 
once commented that Hitler had been “too moderate.” For more 
than three decades, Stoner carried his message of hatred for Jews 
and black people to the klaverns of the hooded knights and de- 
fended their members when they got in trouble. 
Aware of the propaganda opportunities that arise during elec- 
tions, Stoner repeatedly ran for office, often gaining a respectable 
number of votes. During one gubernatorial race in Georgia, Jerry 
Ray, the brother of Martin Luther King Jr.’s assassin, had man- 
aged Stoner’s campaign. Facing extradition to Alabama, where 
placing a bomb against an inhabited dwelling constituted a capital 
crime, Stoner had an even greater incentive to be elected. As gov- 
ernor of Georgia, he could claim to be fully within his rights in 
refusing to extradite himself to stand trial in Alabama. When the 
Federal Communications Commission ruled that it was also 
within his rights to say what he wanted in his campaign, he infuri- 
ated many Atlantans with television spots denouncing integration 
as “a nigger plot” to take over white women. “You cannot have 
law and order and niggers too,” his political ads proclaimed. 
However, the man elected governor was not Stoner. Instead, 
Stoner had to face the new breed of law and order in Birmingham, 
which proceeded to convict him. In 1980, Stoner was sentenced 
to ten years in prison for the 1958 bombing of Birmingham’s 
Bethel Baptist Church. He served six years before his release, part 
of them as Chambliss’s cell mate. In 1985, Chambliss died in 
prison. 
Denise McNair’s father was elected to the Alabama legislature. 
A black lawyer whose house had been bombed became a member 
of the Birmingham City Council. In the fall of 1979, the voters 
elected a black man mayor of Birmingham. At the 16th Street Bap-


--- PAGE 114 ---
Birmin.ham’s 16th Street Baptist Church t? the Black Jesus 105 
tist Church, where the stained-glass window of the sanctuary de- 
picts a black Christ hanging on his cross, a memorial plaque con- 
tains the pictures of Denise McNair, Cynthia Wesley, Carol 
Robertson, and Addie Mae Collins smiling. The inscription reads, 
“May men learn to replace bitterness and violence with love and 
understanding.”


--- PAGE 115 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 116 ---
Confrontation, Poor-Boy Politics, 
&Revival in the Late 1970s 
Zhe 1970s did not seem very promising for the Ku Klux Klan. Al- 
though Klansmen might have the weapons and the will for “a little 
action,” the chances of being caught were becoming much too 
high, and the behavior of judges and juries was downright discour- 
aging. Still, the various competing, though shrunken, hooded em- 
pires, peopled by Klansmen, Klanswomen, and FBI informants, 
continued to rally and parade in Walker, Louisiana; Pensacola, 
Florida; Macon and Stone Mountain, Georgia; Aurora, Illinois; 
and Chenango County, New York; and to burn occasional crosses 
in New Jersey and school buses in Pontiac, Michigan. Attempts 
were made to project a better image. Klansmen would “light up” 
a cross rather than “burn” one because that sounded more respect- 
ful. Attorney James Venable’s National Knights and David Duke’s 
Knights dropped their bans against Roman Catholics. Duke, a 
young Louisiana State University history graduate, carried his mes- 
sage to the college campuses and told working-class listeners in 
South Boston that the Klan would help them “protect, preserve, 
and advance the white race.” A real celebrity, the lovely woman 
jockey Mary Bacon made the television evening news and lost most 
of her contracts for endorsements by revealing her Klan member- 
ship. “We are not just a bunch of illiterate southern nigger killers,” 
she reassured her fellow Klanspeople. “We are good white Chris- 
tian people, hard-working people working for a white America.” 
She added, “When one of your wives or one of your sisters gets 
raped by a nigger, maybe you’ll get smart and join the Klan.” 
The newly elected grand dragon of a splinter Texas Klan 
107


--- PAGE 117 ---
108 Chapter 13 
attributed his success to a Dale Carnegie course, and an Indiana 
grand dragon complained about Klansmen showing up at rallies 
out of uniform: “If you join the Shrine you buy a fez, or the 40 & 
8, you get a chapeau. . . . If you can’t afford a robe,” he sputtered, 
“you can’t afford to belong to the Klan.” The Hans survived, but 
their ranks seemed destined to remain depleted. There was almost 
a melancholy note to the Florida grand dragon’s explanation that 
the Nan existed because “the white people has rights just like any- 
body else.” 
And then, at the end of the 1970s, something happened. 
There was a dramatic increase in the number of cross burnings, ral- 
lies, marches, confrontations, and shootings. Klan ranks grew. In 
1978, the Jewish watchdog Anti-Defamation League (ADL), 
which for a generation has known at least as much about the Klans 
as the Hans themselves, called it “a minor renaissance.” By the 
next year, the ADL reported not only an increase in visibility but 
also impressive proportionate gains in membership. Since mid- 
decade, Klan membership had increased from some 6,500 to 
10,000. Perhaps more significant, Klan approval and support ap- 
peared to have grown substantially. In the media, television com- 
mentators and editorial writers announced “the Klan revival” and 
talked of “the New Klan” and “the amazing rebirth.” The wire 
services and the press reported, “Klan hasn’t folded up its sheets,” 
“Klan’s growing militancy reminiscent of sixties,” and “Klan rises 
again in the South.” 
What had really happened? Ten thousand Klansmen and Klans- 
women were not a large number out of the 225 million Americans 
or even of some seventy million southerners. They did not compare 
in power with the several hundred thousand Reconstruction-era 
Klansmen, the millions of the second Klan during the 1920s, or 
even the thousands that the “third-era” Hans mustered during the 
civil rights battles of the 1960s. Since Doc Samuel Green’s death 
in 1949, no one had been able to unite the Klans and rule an undi- 
vided empire as Hiram Wesley Evans, William J. Simmons, and 
Confederate Cavalry General Nathan Bedford Forrest had done in 
times past. Revival did not mean unity, and Klan ranks remained 
thin. 
The “fourth-era” revival of the Hans was a matter of place,


--- PAGE 118 ---
Confrontation, Poor-Boy Politics, & Revival in the Late 1970s 109 
confrontation, and economic anxiety. Its home was in the towns 
and smaller southern industrial cities. The confrontations that took 
place in northern Mississippi and Alabama-Tupelo, Holly Springs, 
Byhalia, Lexington, Corinth, Okolona, Elkmont, Moulton, Court- 
land, Huntsville, Cullman, Tarrant City, Fairfield, and Decatur- 
were not of the old pre-1960s variety. Although the fading Klan 
entrepreneur of Stone Mountain, James Venable, might complain 
about “niggers calling white girls by their first names,” the day of 
punishing the “uppity” black was gone. 
In bygone times, the Klan patrolled the borders of race rela- 
tions in the South. Now the erosion of those borders had produced 
a limited but potentially deadly Klan revival as an expressive form of 
poor-boy politics. Its essence was the inability of the rural-minded 
southern working-class white to either prevent or accept racial 
change. It was this powerlessness that caused the revived Klans to 
play the game of violence as an expressive alternative to actual 
power for controlling larger events. 
In the renewed world of Klandom at the end of the 1970s, Bill 
Wilkinson’s “Invisible Empire” was the most militant. What hap- 
pened was actually a version of the standard scenario. Police vio- 
lence and questions about the quality of justice meted out to black 
people would produce a protest that would grow to include issues 
of jobs and poverty. An organization would then be formed, and 
its members would take to the streets to march on city hall and 
perhaps boycott downtown merchants. Wilkinson would come to 
town to encourage white resistance and Klan recruitment. Black 
and Klan demonstrators would jostle each other in the streets. 
Crosses would be burned. Nighttime rallies would draw applaud- 
ing spectators and new members for the Klan. Since everyone was 
armed, there would be incidents in the streets and on country 
roads, and shots would be fired into the homes of black and some- 
times white leaders. 
As downtown business suffered, mayors would say, “Why us? 
We’ve always gotten along so well!” Klansmen fiom neighboring 
counties, civil rights marchers from Atlanta, and agents fiom the 
Justice Department in Washington would arrive. Efforts to ban 
marches would be declared in violation of the First Amendment to 
the Constitution. At high cost to municipal budgets, riot police


--- PAGE 119 ---
1 10 Chapter 13 
with bulletproof vests and shotguns, aided by state troopers and an 
occasional patrol helicopter, would keep blacks and Klansmen 
apart and marches separate. With the help of civil rights lawyers, 
now often black and federally funded, the black protesters would 
usually win the courtroom battles. The Justice Department’s Com- 
munity Relations Service would help city commissions make rules 
for marches and public meetings and ban the carrying of weapons 
by marchers or spectators. With mediation, compromises, some ar- 
rests and convictions, and numerous suspended sentences, con- 
fi-ontations would simmer down to hostile standoffs and ultimately 
an uneasy peace. 
Black men killed by police officers, testimony of rape and beat- 
ings in county jails, a “suicide” found hanging in his cell with 
hands and feet bound, and the refusal of local government and ju- 
ries to act moved black protest into the streets of northern Missis- 
sippi. Alfred “Skip” Robinson had begun to organize his United 
League of Mississippi in the mid-l960s, and it remained a 1960s- 
type civil rights organization. Its members wore T-shirts that read 
“Justice for All,” not “Black Power.” Robinson, a brick mason 
and contractor in Holly Springs, was a stubborn man who had ded- 
icated his life to organizing his people and, said his white detract- 
ors, seeking office and political power. The United League was an- 
chored in the black churches. Robinson spoke to them in the 
language they understood, and they cheered him as he told them 
“my knees won’t bend.” 
To their demands that the police officers accused of beating 
black prisoners be fired, the United League added that city govern- 
ments and white merchants must hire more black people. Marches 
for justice and boycotts for black jobs damaged business in Oko- 
lona and Tupelo, raised community tempers, and brought in the 
Klan and the national media. Local and state politicians denounced 
the Klan as “a bunch of hoods covered up with a sheet” and not 
representative of the people of Mississippi, but the crowds at Impe- 
rial Wizard Wilkinson’s rallies grew, and they cheered as he prom- 
ised to “restore this government to the white people.” 
Klansmen attacked black marchers in Tupelo and Okolona and 
shot at cars on the highways outside town at night. In many Missis- 
sippi towns, there were token black councilmen and school board


--- PAGE 120 ---
Confrontation, Poor-Boy Politics, C? Revival in the Late 1970s 11 1 
members, and the politicians and merchants were inclined to seek 
compromise with the black demands. However, neither action nor 
inaction was likely to satisfjr the United League or the Klansmen. 
As a city councilman commented, Tupelo was a stage on which a 
potentially violent drama was being acted out. 
It was Alabama that gave Wilkinson’s Invisible Empire its big- 
gest chance. A young retarded black man named Tommy Lee 
Hines was accused of robbing and raping three white women. 
Many members of the black community felt that Hines, whose I.Q. 
was only thirty-nine, was incapable of such actions as driving the 
car involved in the abduction. The Reverend R. B. Cottonreader 
organized protest marches, and a “Justice City” tent community 
camp-in on the Decatur City Hall lawn brought Klan leader Wil- 
kinson to town. His aggressive rhetoric drew crowds of 5,000 and 
then 10,000 people to the biggest rallies that anyone could re- 
member since the great days of the 1920s. Wilkinson seemed to 
have discovered the way to build Klan power, and he meant to 
make the most of it. In a trial that had been moved to nearby Cull- 
man, an all-white jury found Hines guilty, and he was sentenced to 
thirty years in jail. A reversal on appeal for Hines, plus other trials 
coming up, meant a prolonged season of protest and counterpro- 
test. However, the confiontation was moving beyond Hines. 
Imperial Wizard Wilkinson’s style was one of tough talk and a 
display of weaponry. Although he might look benign with his large 
“mod” Gloria Steinem glasses and slightly rotund figure dressed in 
a three-piece blue suit and his belted and booted, uniformed body- 
guards, with their pistols, rifles, shotguns, and Thompson subma- 
chine guns, looked anything but peaceful. As one Alabaman de- 
scribed him, Wilkinson was a “gun-toting, cigar-chewing, cow- 
pasture Klansman, a man unafraid of action, proud to be a red- 
neck.” 
Klansmen and black demonstrators clashed in the parking lot 
outside a supermarket where a black man had been arrested for 
shoplifting. Having already banned tent cities from the lawn, the 
Decatur City Council forbade the carrying of weapons at a demon- 
stration. The Klan responded with a nighttime motorcade of 
pickup trucks past the mayor’s house, with the drivers waving their


--- PAGE 121 ---
112 Chapter 13 
rifles. “If the mayor wants our guns, he’ll have to come and get 
them,” a Klan leader proclaimed. 
Black demonstrators, led by Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference President Joseph Lowery, came up from Atlanta to 
support Reverend Cottonreader. The black marchers found their 
route blocked by a line of Klansmen with lead pipes, ax handles, 
and baseball bats who shouted, “Niggers, that’s as far as you go!” 
In the melee that followed, the Decatur police tried to keep the 
groups apart. There was a pistol shot in the direction of the Klans- 
men, followed by an erratic exchange of fire in which the police 
also joined. 
Although no one could have foreseen it, the Decatur confion- 
tation was to be catastrophic for the Klan world. Curtis Robinson 
was not one of the marchers, but inadvertently he had been caught 
up in its traffic jam. Now he was on trial for firing a pistol at a 
Klansman who had menaced his family. Lawyer Morris Dees of the 
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) came up fiom Montgomery 
to defend Robinson and became concerned over the revived activ- 
ity of the Klan. As a result, Dees set up a “Klanwatch” in the SPLC 
to track and litigate against the Klan. From this came a powehl 
new weapon. Beginning with the Decatur street confiontation, the 
SPLC’s Klanwatch began suing various Klans in federal court for 
civil rights violations, seeking damage awards so great that they 
could put the Klan out of business. 
The new role of the SPLC was not immediately felt as club- 
carrying Klansmen in the municipal building hallways stamped 
their feet and shouted, “white power!” The Klan summer of 1979 
was launched in northern Alabama. Weekends meant cross burn- 
ings and rallies, and Klansmen stopped cars on the roads at night 
to collect donations “to fight the niggers.” State and FBI investi- 
gations led to conviction of Klansmen for shooting into homes of 
black leaders and interracial couples as the violence spread to the 
central part of the state. Nighttime gunshots were becoming a part 
of life, but heavily armed police managed to keep peace as Klans- 
men and black protesters paraded separately through Decatur. 
The state of Alabama passed a law forbidding firearms within 
1,000 feet of a public demonstration. When in August 1979 Wil- 
kinson’s Invisible Empire decided to repeat Martin Luther King


--- PAGE 122 ---
Confiontation, Poor-Boy Politics, &” Revival in the Late 1970s 11 3 
Jr.’s famous 1965 march from Selma to Montgomery, the police 
were waiting for them at the Montgomery city line. If the Klan 
ranks, which had swelled to more than 170, were somewhat less 
impressive than the 10,000 who had marched into Montgomery 
with King, they made up for it in armament. The pile of weapons 
confiscated by the police at the entrance to the Klan’s campsite in- 
cluded pistols, rifles, chains, knives, bayonets, brass knuckles, and a 
submachine gun. When the marchers crossed the city line the next 
day, they were arrested for parading without a permit. 
How had the Klansmen felt when their march took them past 
the spot where Viola Liuzzo died fourteen years before? There was 
no remorse apparent. “She was doing an unsanctimonious thing, 
helping those niggers,” Imperial Wizard Wilkinson explained. 
What had been the purpose of the Klan march? “To protect the 
civil rights of white people,” he said. Martin Luther King Jr.’s 
marchers had been permitted to rally on the capitol steps in Mont- 
gomery, but Wilkinson’s demonstrators were arrested for parading 
without a permit. The difference in treatment symbolized what the 
Klan was protesting. The Klan’s working-class constituency be- 
lieved that a reversal had taken place in America. The black man 
had been elevated, and the white man had taken his place in the 
ditch. Wilkinson summed up the theme sounded on every Klan 
platform when he attacked government programs, saying, “I for 
one am sick of Negroes and other minorities being given jobs I de- 
serve. ” 
While the Klan revival was limited, it represented a lingering 
racism in American society. It sprang from an unwillingness to ac- 
cept the changing role of black people and fiom the conditions and 
conflicts that were the result. Confiontation over justice and jobs 
in northern Mississippi and Alabama produced the kind of racist 
response that gave impetus to the upswing in the cycle of Nan 
membership. Behind the clashes in Tupelo and Decatur was the old 
populist resentment and suspicion that times were not going to be 
good and that jobs and promotions were going to someone else. 
That that someone was black was too much to accept. Integration, 
welfare, affirmative action, hard times, and Reverend Cottonread- 
er’s tent city blacks camped out on the city hall lawn and throwing 
beer cans into the shrubbery because a black man was convicted for


--- PAGE 123 ---
1 14 Chapter 13 
raping a white woman were more than a white man should be 
asked to bear. There was enough feeling in enough people so that 
when David Duke, Bill Wilkinson, or Bobby Shelton could call 
out, “What do we want?” they responded, “White Power!” 
“What?” “White Power . . . White Power!” 
While there was a broader audience for the Klan’s issues, the 
expansion of various Klan organizations was much more limited. 
In addition to the pressure fiom Dees and the SPLC, Nan leaders 
often ran into other difficulties. In 1981, someone leaked to the 
Nashville Tennessean that Wilkinson had long been an FBI infor- 
mant, and his Klan evaporated.


--- PAGE 124 ---
./4. 
Death in Greensboro 
Greensboro was a middle-sized industrial city in the North Caro- 
lina piedmont. Despite its five colleges, the first response of North 
Carolinians when asked to describe the city was “blue collar.” In 
addition to P. Lorillard tobacco and Vics chemicals, there are the 
textile mills-Burlington, J. P. Stevens, and Cone Mills-which 
each year produced enough denim to more than cover the entire 
state of North Carolina. The approaches to Greensboro were thick 
with the typical fast-food restaurants, gas stations, used-car dealer- 
ships, and suburban shopping centers. The aging downtown build- 
ings of the immediate post-World War I1 boom, none higher than 
eight stones, did not give a distinctive skyline or feeling. 
Greensboro’s main claim to fame was that General Nathanael 
Greene turned back the British there at the battle of Guilford 
Courthouse and started General Cornwallis on his retreat to the 
Yorktown surrender that ensured American independence. Such 
history was favored by most city boosters, for the distant past 
tended not to offend, but the name of Greensboro joined those of 
Montgomery, Oxford, Albany, Birmingham, Selma, Memphis, and 
the other southern cities where the racial history of America has 
been written. 
North Carolinians liked to say that “moderation” has been the 
keynote of relations between blacks and whites in their state. By 
the 1950s, Greensboro had already elected a black city councilman, 
and there was a black member on the school board. When Gover- 
nor Luther Hodges spoke to the black student body of North Car- 
olina Agricultural and Technical State University (hereafter A&T), 
he urged them to keep things cool by following a policy of voluntary 
115


--- PAGE 125 ---
1 16 Chapter 14 
segregation, and state legislators saw token integration as the way 
to maintain separation of the races. 
In 1956, Martin Luther King Jr. and the black bus boycotters 
had walked to victory in Montgomery, Alabama, but civil rights did 
not become a mass movement until February 1, 1960, when four 
nervous but determined black freshmen sat down at Greensboro’s 
Woolworth lunch counter. David Richmond, Franklin McCain, Jo- 
seph McNeil, and Ezell Blair Jr. had hatched the idea during a dor- 
mitory bull session the night before. It had been stimulated, how- 
ever, by nights of such talk at group meetings of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, a growing 
awareness of black history, the Montgomery example, Martin Lu- 
ther King Jr.’s speech at A&T, and the fact that Joseph McNeil had 
been refused service at the Greensboro Trailways bus terminal 
lunch counter. 
The sit-ins spread across the South. They flowed into the 
“freedom rides”; into the streets of Albany, Birmingham, St. Au- 
gustine, and Selma; on to the back roads of Mississippi; and into 
the national civil rights laws. They set in motion the movement of 
black people into the politics and mainstream of southern life. With 
it all came a furious response and then the decline of the Ku Klux 
Klan. Once black people became a factor in southern politics, white 
politicians toned down their rhetoric, white sheriffs began to be 
somewhat more restrained, and some black legislators, policemen, 
and sheriffs began to appear among the white ones. Andrew 
Young, a promising young black minister turned congressman 
from Atlanta, summed it up: 
When not many black people could vote, the politicians used to 
talk about “the niggers.” When we got 10 to 15 percent voting, 
they called us “nigras.” When we got up to 25 percent, they 
learned how to say “Nee-gro.” Now that we have 60 to 70 per- 
cent registered and voting, they say how happy they are to see 
“so many black brothers and sisters here tonight.” 
On February 1,1980, twenty years after the Woolworth sit-in, 
there was a civil ceremony in Greensboro. With the mayor looking 
on, David Richmond, Franklin McCain, Joseph McNeil, and Ji-


--- PAGE 126 ---
Death in Greensboro 117 
breel Khazan (formerly Ezell Blair Jr.) were welcomed at the lunch 
counter by Woolworth’s black manager, and historical markers 
were unveiled outside. 
Even so, it had not been easy in Greensboro. “Moderation” 
meant maintaining things as they were. Although kept out of the 
national headlines, under pressure fkom the students at A&T, Ben- 
nett College for Women, and occasionally the white colleges, 
Greensboro experienced a decade of sit-ins, demonstrations, mass 
arrests, and confrontations with the Klan. On the day that the 
Woolworth sit-in was honored, a memorial to a student who had 
been shot during a National Guard sweep of the campus in 1969 
was unveiled at A&T. In the mid-l960s, the student leader at 
A&T was Jesse Jackson. During the even more difficult times later 
in the decade, the student leader was an Air Force veteran named 
Nelson Johnson. It was not until 1971 that the Greensboro public 
schools were integrated, among the last in the South. Jackson had 
gone off to Chicago, and Johnson remained, working with the 
poor in Greensboro. 
Across the nation on February 1, 1980, the media retold the 
story of the original Woolworth lunch counter sit-in that had 
touched off the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s. People spoke 
with pride about the racial progress that had resulted. The next 
day, February 2, in a plot twist that might have intrigued Greens- 
boro’s famous native son, the writer 0. Henry, more than 5,000 
angry people, black and white, took to the streets in a new racial 
protest. They had come from Chicago and Detroit, from the east- 
ern seaboard cities, and from the South to protest the killing of 
four white men and a black woman by a band of Klansmen and 
Nazis in the streets of Greensboro. 
Shortly before noon on Saturday, November 3, 1979, a nine- 
car caravan worked its way into the narrow streets of Greensboro’s 
black district, where an anti-Klan rally was forming in front of the 
Morningside Homes at Everitt and Carver Streets. There were 
shouted insults. Demonstrators in the street pounded on the cars 
with sticks and clubs. Someone in the lead car fired a pistol into the 
air. Then, as television camera crews filmed away, half a dozen men 
climbed out of a sedan and a yellow van in the rear of the proces- 
sion, opened the trunk of the sedan, and took out rifles and shotguns.


--- PAGE 127 ---
1 18 Chapter 14 
With cigarettes dangling from their lips, they leaned over the hood 
of the car and opened fire on a shrieking, scattering crowd of men, 
women, and children at a distance of no more than twenty-five 
feet. Within seconds, the wounded and dying lay bleeding in the 
street. Of the dead and dying, one was a Duke University computer 
operator, and three were doctors, graduates of Duke and the Uni- 
versity of Chicago and Virginia medical schools. The black woman 
had been student body president at Bennett College. 
At the end of the 1970s, there were no large-scale left- or 
right-wing groups in America, but there were many fragments at 
both ends of the political spectrum. Two of them had met violently 
in the streets of Greensboro. For several years, a devoted Maoist 
group who called themselves the Workers Viewpoint Organization 
(WVO) had been attempting to organize the Greensboro textile 
mills. Working part time in clinics and hospital emergency rooms 
or hiding their education and professions in order to get jobs at 
Cone Mills or J. P. Stevens, they sought to lead “the struggles of 
oppressed people” and the coming anticapitalist revolution. One 
of the doctors killed in the shooting had been president of his tex- 
tile union; another was a shop steward and was running for union 
president. The leader of the group, who survived the fusillade of 
Klan and Nazi bullets, was the integrationist battler of the 1960s, 
Nelson Johnson. 
Like radical idealists of times past, the WVO members had 
given up promising careers to work and live among the poor. They 
saw the working classes as the essential revolutionary element and 
had gone to the mills to reach and radicalize them. They had been 
“turned off” by the system. In their study groups, reading and dis- 
cussions had convinced them that the revolutionary moment was 
at hand. For them, the capitalist system was violent, and therefore 
the struggle against it could not be nonviolent. In Durham and 
Greensboro, they worked with the black poor, with the university 
and hospital service workers, and in the mills. It would be difficult, 
but, they believed, the working classes would rise. 
By the summer of 1979, the WVO was having trouble in the 
mills. Despite the heat, the deafening noise, and the fiber-filled air 
that caused brown lung disease, the management position was 
strong. No one had yet organized the southern mills, even for


--- PAGE 128 ---
Death in Greensboro 119 
trade union goals. The WVO were well liked, but they were caught 
between management and the national union. The Amalgamated 
Cotton Textile Workers Union (ACTWU) did not wish to share 
the labor movement, slim though it was, with the revolution. The 
National Labor Relations Board upheld the dismissal of WVO 
member Dr. James Waller for omitting his medical degree from his 
job application at Cone Mills, and the national ACTWU had taken 
over direction of Cone Mills locals on the grounds that the elected 
officers did not properly represent all the workers. 
Squeezed between capital and labor, the WVO seemed very 
much in need of new tactics. They changed their name to the 
Communist Workers Party (CW) and challenged the Klan. The 
newly renamed CW clashed with the Klan at nearby China Grove, 
burned a Klan banner, and disrupted a Klan showing of the film 
The Birth of a Nation. A “Death to the Klan” march was scheduled 
for November 3 and was well advertised. Open letters to the lead- 
ers of the White Knights of Liberty and to the Federated Knights of 
the Ku Klux Klan announced that Klan cowardice would be further 
exposed by the march. “Death to the Klan!” The CWP would 
“physically smash the racist KKK wherever it reared its ugly head.” 
There were at least five competing Hans in North Carolina, 
and those Klansmen who did not find the various “Invisible Em- 
pires” active enough often wound up in one of the even smaller 
National Socialist or Nazi parties. The Klansmen and Nazis who 
drove into Greensboro in the caravan that Saturday morning were 
mainly mill workers or laborers, in their thirties, from around 
WinstonSalem and small towns in Lincoln County on the South 
Carolina line. Concerned about “saving America” from race- 
mixing Communism and such, many of them were new to Klan- 
dom. As the New Tork Times’ Wayne King described it, “These 
guys are not what you’d call real successfd.~’ 
When Joe Grady, leader of the White Knights, chose not to 
accept the CW’s invitation to “face the wrath of the people,” rival 
Klan leader Virgil Griffin decided that this was his chance. His In- 
visible Empire had been meeting with the National Socialists to 
work out a United Racist Front, and he brought some of his Nazi 
allies along with him. They intended to show the Communists that 
they were not going to let anyone call them cowards.


--- PAGE 129 ---
120 Chapter 14 
A third party to it all, though not consulted, was the black 
housing project neighborhood where the rally was to begin. A 
fourth party was the police. The anti-Klan marchers had promised 
not to carry weapons, had filed the route of the parade, and had 
been given a permit. The CW publicized its rally and march. 
When a Klansman asked for the route plan, the city attorney ruled 
that it was a public document, and he was given a copy. Twenty-six 
men under the direction of a black officer were assigned to keep 
things orderly, and the police had an informant among the Klans- 
men and Nazis who came in that morning on the interstate high- 
way. As the starting time approached, the police found rallies going 
on in two different places. No one would give information to the 
sergeant, who checked out the Morningside Homes site, and the 
crowd added a “fascist pig” chant to their denunciations of the 
Klan. The police were split between the two locations, and the ser- 
geant decided to avoid provocation and keep his men at a &stance 
from the Morningside housing project. With the warning to be on 
post by half an hour before the start of the march, some of the men 
were given permission to go for food. 
There were thirty to thirty-five Klansmen and Nazis. Having 
come to town early, they had been standing around and were eager 
to get going. Although the police had been informed that their in- 
tent was to heckle, some of them had weapons. According to the 
police report afterward, there had been no legal grounds for stop- 
ping and detaining them. Some eight cars started out, and a ninth 
joined them. It was forty minutes before parade time, and a num- 
ber of the police officers had not yet come back from eating. The 
Klansmen claimed that they had intended to leave their rifles and 
shotguns behind in the trunk of Ray Caudle’s Ford sedan. This 
would have left them armed only with the six dozen eggs they had 
bought on the way. One of the Klansmen took the Ford and went 
off for food, but the rest were impatient, so someone got on the 
citizens-band radio and called him back. The Klan caravan started 
out, and the Ford sedan with the weapons in its trunk joined at the 
end of the line. 
By the time the police caught up with the caravan, four people 
were dead, one was dying, and the wounded were scattered on the 
street outside Morningside Homes. It took less than two minutes


--- PAGE 130 ---
Death in Greensboro 121 
for the police to arrive, and the ambulances followed soon after. 
The yellow van was stopped, and twelve Klansmen and Nazis were 
arrested. Murder charges were eventually placed against fourteen 
of the assailants. Presumably on the informant’s report that the 
shooting had not been planned in advance, conspiracy charges 
were not placed, and the people in the other Klan cars were not 
arrested. Four days later, the editor of the Greensboro Daily News 
summed it up: “As the fifth victim, a medical doctor turned textile 
worker died in a Greensboro hospital, his alleged murderers sang 
‘Onward, Christian Soldiers’ and ‘My Country ’tis of Thee’ in a 
Greensboro jail.” It was both “puzzling,” he said, and “tragic.” 
There was a sense of disbelief and horror in white Greensboro 
and anger in black communities across the country. For black peo- 
ple in the South, the Klan was a never-ending racial oppression. 
The grieving CWP survivors blamed the deaths on the police as a 
“pig-Klan assassination conspiracy.” President Jimmy Carter or- 
dered the FBI to investigate. The Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference (SCLC), locked in conflict with Klansmen in northern 
Mississippi, Alabama, and Georgia, had already met in Norfolk 
with representatives of more than thirty organizations to work out 
a national anti-Klan campaign. Now the SCLC called a major plan- 
ning session for Atlanta in December. 
“The Klan is for real,” SCLC President Joseph Lowrey stated, 
adding that it did not exist in a vacuum. Neither did the anti-Klan 
protest. The clash in the streets represented larger problems and 
conflict. The CWP’s blood had been shed in a black neighborhood 
by white racists. The police had knowingly permitted the armed 
convoy of Klansmen and Nazis to drive into the Morningside 
Homes area and were not there when the shooting took place. 
Now “the press and the establishment” were talking about “prov- 
ocation” and were trying to pass it all off as a shootout between 
radical fringe groups, and CWP leaders as well as Nazis and Klans- 
men were under arrest. The problem for black churches and orga- 
nizations was how to share the protest over Greensboro and oppo- 
sition to the Klan without becoming too closely associated with the 
CWP’s dangerous martyrs and survivors. One could not fail to be 
moved by Dale Sampson’s quiet, dry-eyed description of her


--- PAGE 131 ---
122 Chapter 14 
husband’s death, but few civil rights leaders wanted to join the call 
for a Communist revolution in the streets of Greensboro. 
An interfaith memorial service filled Greensboro’s Bethel 
Church with an interracial crowd of politicians and concerned citi- 
zens, but it was carellly timed to keep it separate fi-om the funeral 
march for the slain activists. The larger national memorial that took 
place three months later on February 2 was marked by the same 
ambivalence. The December planning meeting in Atlanta had fo- 
cused on the march as a major undertaking for its new Anti-Nan 
Network. Endorsement, support, and marchers were energetically 
recruited around the country, but until the last moment, there was 
a struggle to pledge the CWP not to carry weapons during the pro- 
cession. 
During the march, the CWP contingent pushed forward 
toward the head of the line, lofting their “AVENGE THE CWP 5” 
and “DEATH TO THE KLAN” signs as they chanted antipolice 
slogans at the heavily armed parade escorts. Contingents of pro- 
testors, bused in from New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, 
Tennessee, West Virginia, and Georgia, swelled the number of 
marchers to close to 7,000, but the absence of many national black 
and civil rights organizations indicated that the anti-Klan world 
was perhaps as divided as that of the Invisible Empire. 
There had been five people killed and one crippled, all leaders 
of the CWP, and eight others wounded. None of the dead and 
wounded had been Klansmen or Nazis. Over the next six years, 
there were five trials: a state murder trial (North Carolina v. 
Fowler), two conspiracy trials of Nazis who talked of blowing up 
Greensboro in the event of conviction, a federal civil rights viola- 
tion trial ( U.S. v. Grzfin), and a civil damages suit, listing Klans- 
men; Nazis; local, state, and federal agencies; the city of Greens- 
boro, the Chamber of Commerce; and the textile mills as 
conspiratorial defendants ( Waller v. Butlzovich). 
Only the Nazi bomb plotters went to jail. The state’s first-de- 
gree murder prosecution was well presented, bolstered by the foot- 
age that television cameramen had taken of the whole melee, but 
the state labored under several disadvantages. The defendants had 
a fiend on the jury who worked for their acquittal, and the CWP 
survivors refused to cooperate with the prosecutors and stood up in


--- PAGE 132 ---
Death in Greensboro 123 
court and denounced the conduct of the trial as part of a conspiracy 
against them. The defense lawyers, as Elizabeth Wheaton sums it 
up in her book on the Greensboro killings, Codename Greenkill 
(1987), presented their clients as having gone to Morningside 
Homes “to protest Communism, to stand up for the flag and 
America.” They were just “good 01’ boys,” the lawyers argued, 
“who had been provoked beyond endurance and then attacked by 
gun-wielding Communists.” The jury started out with a majority 
for conviction but on the eighth day came in with a verdict of not 
guilty. 
The subsequent federal case, based on the new 1968 Civil 
Rights Protection Act (Title 18, Section 245), stumbled over the 
need to prove a racial motivation for a killing in which four of the 
five victims were white. Both cases were confused and complicated 
by the roles of two government undercover agents among the 
Klansmen and Nazis and by controversy over the analysis of gun 
sounds taken fkom the television tapes. It was clear who had fired 
the killer rifle and shotgun shells, but had the first shots come from 
the anti-Nan demonstrators? Both sides had their expert witnesses 
to argue the point. This time the survivors did testify, but it was 
not helpful. Again the jury brought in verdicts of acquittal. 
No Klansman was ever convicted for the killings. In 1985, in 
the CWP survivors’ broad civil suit for damages, the jury concluded 
that five Klansmen and Nazis, an informant, and two city police 
officers were liable in the death of one of the five anti-Klan demon- 
strators and injury to two others. The police fault had been a failure 
to control their agent within the Klan and to take sufficiently timely 
action to prevent the shootout. In a confusing distribution of re- 
sponsibility and payment, the award amounted to close to 
$400,000. For its part, the city of Greensboro paid a settlement of 
$351,500.


--- PAGE 133 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 134 ---
David Duke Steps Forward 
&I Wilkinson had served his apprenticeship as principal lieutenant 
and editor of David Duke’s Crusader before breaking away in 1975 
to build his own Klan. As the result, Duke found his Knights of the 
Ku Klux Klan facing competition from Wilkinson’s new “Invisible 
Empire” as well as from the senior Klan leader Robert Shelton’s 
somewhat more numerous but fading United Klans. Duke claimed 
not to be interested in what he called the “illiterate, gun-toting, 
redneck” kind of Wilkinson’s cow-pasture Klandom. Although 
Duke’s Klansmen faced the same kind of troubled economic fb- 
ture, he sought a broader, higher-quality audience. “We’re not just 
a bunch of fools running around in bed sheets,” he explained. “We 
believe that white people in America face discrimination in employ- 
ment, promotions, scholarships, college entrance, and union ad- 
mission.” 
Being a Klan leader and organizing the revival was a demand- 
ing, all-consuming business. It involved continuous travel, speak- 
ing to large as well as small groups, and the danger of physical vio- 
lence. Duke dropped the Klan’s traditional bars against Roman 
Catholics and turned away from the usual ladies’ auxiliary path, in- 
tegrating Klanswomen into his ranks instead. Both he and Wilkin- 
son sought to recruit high school students for their Klan youth 
corps, and Duke distributed leaflets calling on white students to 
fight for white power against the “black, Chicano, and Yang crimi- 
nals who break into your lockers and steal your clothes and wal- 
lets.” Reaching across the country, he and his lieutenants worked 
the high schools in Buffalo, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Diego. 
The young soldiers in the armed services were another quarry. 
125


--- PAGE 135 ---
126 Chapter 15 
Although he won no more than a handhl of recruits, the publicity 
payoff was enormous when black and white Marines fought in 
Camp Pendleton, when there were racial clashes on Charleston- 
and Norfolk-based supply ships and aircraft carriers, and when 
crosses were burned at sea. 
In the media of the 1970s, Duke became a real pop culture 
celebrity. He was paid for speaking on college campuses and was 
sought after for radio and television interviews and talk shows. 
Through these, he began to win at least a hearing from middle- 
class America. By contrast, Wilkinson was working the Klan’s tradi- 
tional recruiting ground, the “good old boy” world of bourbon 
and Coke and pickup trucks with the rifle on the rack. He and 
Duke parted with the usual bad feelings and dispute over money 
that traditionally marked the emergence of new entrepreneurs in 
the competitive Klan world. Wilkinson was practically an illiterate, 
Duke commented disparagingly, “a man who has never read any- 
thing.” 
Duke was a reader, a new kind of Klansman, and the smooth- 
est-talking salesman since D. C. Stephenson, Indiana’s ambitious 
grand dragon of the 1920s. But there was a difference: Duke had 
convictions. Escaping from an increasingly dyshnctional home as 
a teenager, he hung out in the office of the New Orleans Citizens’ 
Council, reading about segregation and race. In high school, he 
joined the Klan, and in college, under the influence of the mentor 
whom he had met at the Citizens’ Council, he was reading Gerald 
L. K. Smith and other anti-Semitic writers. As a boy, Duke devel- 
oped a fascination with Adolf Hider (whose birthday he continued 
to celebrate), World War 11, and the Jews. This helped lead him 
into the tangled world of the American Nazi movement and re- 
mained with him on the Louisiana State University campus, in the 
Klan, and afterward. 
Duke was both a racialist and a racist. The unchanging core of 
his belief was race and the superiority of the Americans of northern 
European descent. For all others, he felt a contempt that he could 
never completely hide even as he sought a broader audience. As 
Duke described his “awakening,” research for his eighth-grade civ- 
ics assignment had led him to the Citizens’ Council library in 
downtown New Orleans on Carondolet Street. At the age of thir-


--- PAGE 136 ---
David Duke Steps Forward 127 
teen, he was captured by the arguments of Yankee segregationist 
Carleton Putnam’s Race and Reason, and he began a lifetime of 
racialist reading. The writings of Arthur Jensen, Nobel laureate 
William Shockley, and other noted scientists added support for 
Duke’s great discovery of the reality of race. The evolutionary 
process, he came to believe, had produced profound differences in 
physical traits, intelligence, and social behavior. From this came 
differences in racial giftedness, mental retardation, permissiveness 
and aggressiveness, size of sexual features, proneness to sexually 
transmitted diseases, need for instant gratification, cultural achieve- 
ment, and racial patterns of illegitimacy and criminality. 
Race explained everything. “Racial dynamics,” he wrote, 
“constituted the essence of both mankind’s history and future.” 
Out of the European genes had come the people who had created 
American society. Now, with a nonsustaining birthrate and “inun- 
dated by massive immigration and proliferating non-European 
genes,” America was facing racial suicide. 
On Carondolet Street, Duke also learned that Communism 
was Jewish. His study of Judaism did not take him into the “Sa- 
tanic couplings in the Garden of Eden” theology of the rising new 
Christian Identity churches, but he found it easy to believe that the 
Jews were behind the Civil Rights movement. The struggle was not 
really about civil rights but about Jewish drives for power. Judaism, 
Duke came to believe, was based on what he labeled “genetic ex- 
clusionism” and “supremacism.” With what seemed like a shoebox 
full of three- by five-inch cards of facts and quotations, ranging 
fkom the Bible and the Talmud to newsmagazines, history books, 
and the writings of anti-Semitic extremists Edwards Fields and Wil- 
liam L. Pierce, Duke argued that the Jews were loyal only to their 
own kind and were deliberately undermining America’s European 
roots and culture. Through control of the media, they hid what 
was going on from white Americans. Illustrating this in a parable, 
Duke told the story of New Ybrk Times editorial page chief A. M. 
Rosenthal accompanying Texas Rangers patrolling the Rio Grande. 
In the middle of their search for illegal aliens, Rosenthal realized, 
as he described it, “I am one of them, the wetbacks, and not of 
them, the hunters.” Rosenthal’s loyalties, Duke went on, were not


--- PAGE 137 ---
128 Chapter 15 
with those who wanted to preserve the American way of life but 
rather with the aliens who were changing it. 
After college, Duke became serious about the Klan. Rising 
quickly through the local ranks, he soon had a Klan of his own. His 
attempt to appeal to a more educated middle-class America re- 
quired that he live a dwided life. While other Klan salesmen could 
freely offer their rural audiences the “nigger and Jew” litany that 
pervaded the world of Klandom, Duke had to take the path of rea- 
sonableness before the media and still manage to hold on to the 
traditional Klan constituency. This was a paradoxical situation, for 
none of the other Klan leaders was as deeply focused on the “Jew- 
ish menace” as Duke or as well read in history, the racial literature, 
and the story of Nazi Germany. Although all the various Klan lead- 
ers considered the root of the nation’s problems to be a Jewish- 
Communist menace and were in touch with the various anti-Se- 
mitic groups on the Right, they considered Duke’s Nazi fixation to 
be extreme. 
Off camera, Duke was not to be “outniggered.” On the plat- 
form, he had the orator’s skill so generally lacking in the Klan 
world. In interviews and on television, he was poised, articulate, 
low key, and sincere. Tall, slim, and blond with razor-cut, blow- 
dried hair and stylish clothing, Duke’s youthhlness and articulate- 
ness set him off from the rest. When he ran for the Louisiana Sen- 
ate, he drew a respectable one-third of the votes. Was this a vote 
for the Klan? “Right wing,’’ snapped the distinguished Louisiana 
State University historian and Huey Long biographer T. Harry 
Williams. “They got rich and are afraid of someone taking it away 
from them.” To those who voted for him then, and when he ran 
again in the suburban New Orleans district in 1979, Duke was that 
nice young man who campaigned door to door and was opposed 
to busing, gun control, taxes, criminals, discrimination against 
white people, and all that regulation and interference from Wash- 
ington. 
Duke counted literally hundreds of radio and television appear- 
ances. A college speaking engagement might earn him more than 
$1,000 as well as a chance to spread his message and win converts. 
Only in his public television interview for a 1978 special, “The 
New Nan: Heritage of Hate,’’ did he come a cropper. This time


--- PAGE 138 ---
David Duke Steps Forward 129 
he was up against the New Tork Times star southern reporter Wayne 
King. Unlike most of Duke’s other interviewers, King had the evi- 
dence: 
WAYNE KING: You sell things. You pass out things called “Nigger 
DAVID DUKE: No, we do not. I do not pass out-I do not. . . 
WAYNE KING: You do not, but your lieutenants do. Maybe you 
DAVID DUKE: Well, I don’t. . . 
WAYNE KING: He’s your grand dragon, isn’t he? 
DAVID DUKE: No. He’s a great titan. 
WAYNE KING: It says, “HAVING PAID THE LICENSE FEE 
(somebody’s name) IS HEREBY LICENSED TO HUNT 
AND KILL NIGGERS,” in caps, “DURING THE OPEN 
SEASON IN TEXAS.” This is beautiful, David. 
Huntin’ License” . . . 
do. It came fi-om Louis Beam. 
DAVID DUKE: Well, it is a joke. Yes, it is satire. 
WAYNE KING: For a guy who says you don’t belittle other 
races-I mean this is really pretty scurrilous stuff and pass your- 
self off as a New Klansman. Here’s another one. There’s very 
violent rhetoric in there, and some very-some of the alleged 
Jewish-“Ratstein” pictures of. . . who look like rats. 
DAVID DUKE: Now that, I think is excellent satire. . . . 
WAYNE KING: You really do? 
DAVID DUKE: It’s humor. 
[In his calm, slow spoken way, Wayne King bored in.] 
WAYNE KING: [showing Duke a picture of a young man in a Nazi 
uniform holding a sign saying, “Gas the Chicago Seven”] You 
may remember this. That’s you. 
DAVID DUKE: Yeah, that’s me. Okay. 
WAYNE KING: That’s amazing, David. “Gas the Chicago Seven”? 
DAVID DUKE: It’s not amazing. I was young. 
WAYNE KING: You still sell the Nazi literature. 
DAVID DUKE: Well, I sell books on all sorts of subjects, but I 
WAYNE KING: You don’t? 
DAVID DUKE: No. 
WAYNE KING [showing a book list] The Nameless War, Mein 
Kampf; Hitler Was My Friend, Germany’s Hider, The Testi- 
mony of Ado& Hider. 
don’t sell Nazi literature as such.


--- PAGE 139 ---
130 Chapter 15 
DAVID DUKE: Now, wait a second. . . 
WAYNE KING: The Hitler We Loved and why, UFOs: Nazi’s Secret 
(“The New Klan: Heritage of Hate,” M’V Publications, broadcast 
Weapon, My Part in Germany’s Fight, Dr. Joseph Goebbels . . . 
by PBS television, November 19, 1978) 
Duke complained that from a two-hour interview, the only por- 
tions used were brief selections that made him look bad. 
Duke’s media hosts and questioners on the networks were sel- 
dom as well prepared. Duke came across low keyed, thoughtful, 
polite, and winning. His positions and philosophy held up, he 
claimed, because they were informed and consistent. He had no 
animosity toward any other race. He was only for the rights of 
white people. The Chicanos had La Rasa, blacks had the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and the Jews 
had their organizations. No one ever complained about all-black 
fraternities. He was not aflainst black people. He was for white 
people. Jesse Jackson and the Reverend Ralph Abernathy debated 
him; Carl Rowan confronted him; Tom Snyder, Barbara Walters, 
Jack Nelson, and scores of others interviewed him; 0%; and Playboy 
magazines profiled him; and Candice Bergen photographed him- 
but none pressed him as King had done, and many found him sin- 
cere and impressive. Listeners phoned in, polls favored him, and his 
mail grew. For a brief, seemingly incandescent moment, the Ku 
Klux Klan had a star. 
A historian who had come to interview Duke asked him, 
“David, what is your plan for the future? The Klan is not going 
anywhere. The Klan is a loser. Where do you want to be in five 
years, in ten years from now?” Duke had obviously been thinking 
along the same lines. A year later, in 198 1, he publicly turned from 
the Klan and founded a National Association for the Advancement 
of White People (NAAWP). It was less than a graceful transition, 
as Bill Wilkinson secretly taped and then made public the negotia- 
tions for the sale of Duke’s Klan membership lists. 
Now, at least formally, free of the Klan, whose mailbox he con- 
tinued to share, he might be able to do better under the banner of 
the NAAWP. His mind was set on the possibilities of electoral poli- 
tics. In 1980, he had played with the idea of running for president.


--- PAGE 140 ---
David Duke Steps Forward 131 
olc#rd wm -*-’ htUdand8 1=-/hO@d 
David Duke editorial cartoon in Fort Lauderdale Star-Sentinel, December 17, 7978 
In 1988 on the steps of the Georgia capitol, with a National Social- 
ist campaign manager, before a small crowd that included Klan and 
National States Rights Party leaders, he opened his campaign for 
the Democratic nomination. Within a few months, Duke had 
switched parties and was running as the presidential candidate of 
Willis Carto’s Populist Party. Carto was the founder of the Liberty 
Lobby, whose weekly SpotliJht newspaper was read across the 
whole of the far Right. Carto had organized the Populist Party four 
years before as part of a white supremacist, anti-Semitic effort to 
break into the political system. Duke had attended conferences of 
the Institute for Historical Review, which Carto had organized to 
prove that the Holocaust had never happened. The Populist Party


--- PAGE 141 ---
132 Chapter 15 
now provided Duke with funding and nationwide organization, 
helping him win 150,000 votes. 
Having run for president as a Democrat and then as a populist 
in 1988, Duke now switched to the Republican Party to continue 
his never-ending campaign for office. He was narrowly elected to 
the Louisiana legislature and campaigned for the U.S. Senate 
twice, for governor of Louisiana, and twice in the Republican pri- 
maries for president. 
Duke’s initial and only victory came in the mostly white Met- 
airie suburb of mostly black New Orleans. President George Bush 
and ex-President Ronald Reagan denounced him, the national Re- 
publican Party sought to separate itself from him, and the state Re- 
publican leaders remained silent. His fellow legislators did not take 
him seriously. He continued selling Nazi books from his legislative 
office and went off to a Populist Party convention in Chicago to 
tell skinheads and Nazis, at a closed session, that his victory in Lou- 
isiana was a victory for them and that they should follow his lead. 
Within a year, the Republican Duke ran for the U.S. Senate in 
Louisiana against the conservative four-term Democratic incum- 
bent J. Bennett Johnston. Although Senator Johnston won with 56 
percent of the total, Duke captured 57 percent of the white voters. 
With statewide and national fame, he was now poised to run for 
governor. As a U.S. senator, Duke would have had a national plat- 
form and prestige, but standing alone in the Senate he would have 
been without power. As governor, he would be in charge of the 
administration of Louisiana, with its state bureaucracy, including 
the state police. It would be a measureless opportunity. 
With memories of Huey and Earl Long in a state divided be- 
tween the rich and the poor, black and white, and a Protestant 
north and the Catholic Cajun parishes of the south; the “big easy” 
city of New Orleans; oil, petrochemical, and utility industry politi- 
cal money; low-paying blue-collar jobs; a hard-pressed “forgotten” 
middle class that felt itself victimized; and a world of bottomless 
corruption and public cynicism, Louisiana was an opportunity 
threshold for a maverick politician. 
State legislator, ex-National Socialist, and ex-Klansman Duke 
was now the best-known extremist in public life. His years of expe- 
rience had taught him how to use the national media that rushed


--- PAGE 142 ---
David Duke Steps Fornard 13 3 
to report and exploit him. Soft spoken and affable, his Aryan face 
now enhanced by cosmetic surgery, he spoke to the cameras, not 
his questioners. New Orleans media consultant and critic Gary 
Esolen explained how Duke did it. Sure, he had done those things, 
Duke would say. He was young. It was a long time ago. That was 
not important now. Why would they not let him talk about the 
real issues? Why were they afraid of his message, about welfare and 
affirmative action, and how the white, European Christian culture 
was being dragged down by a black, government-favored under- 
class on your tax money? 
Louisiana campaign law skipped over party primaries. There 
was just one big election in which anyone could run. If no one had 
a majority, there would be a runoff between the top two. Fresh 
fi-om his senatorial campaign with total name recognition, Duke 
faced Edwin Edwards, who was seeking a comeback after three ear- 
lier, scandal-filled terms as governor. Although Duke was weak 
among more affluent conservative Republicans, he drew his major 
support from resentful white working- and middle-class Demo- 
crats. This was not a Klan or a hate vote; rather, as Tulane Univer- 
sity political scientist Lawrence Powell summed it up, “Duke’s 
coded rhetoric” fed “a growing middle-class economic resentment 
that is not exclusive to Louisiana.” Duke “had managed to rally 
an entire movement around the folklore that welfare spending is 
responsible for high taxes and blacks are taking jobs away from 
whites” (Gary Esolen, “More Than a Pretty Face: David Duke’s 
Use of Television as a Political Tool,” and Lawrence Powell, 
“Slouching toward Baton Rouge: The 1989 Legislative Election of 
David Duke,’’ in Douglas Rose, ed., The Emergence of David Duke 
and the Politics of Race). 
Again, the national talk shows gave Duke an easy ride, but he 
was pressed hard by more skilled newsmen and on Meet the Press. 
The intellectuals of the anti-Duke Louisiana Coalition Against Na- 
zism and Racism supplied the press and neighborhood canvassers 
with information, and Duke ran into trouble on the candidate fo- 
rums when questions were raised about his military service, tax re- 
cords, and anti-Semitism and his hmbling of the questions about 
his newly claimed evangelical Christian faith. 
In a record voter turnout, Governor Edwards overwhelmed


--- PAGE 143 ---
134 Chapter 15 
Duke with 61 to 39 percent of the vote, 5 percent more than Sena- 
tor Johnson’s victory the year before. Duke had again carried a ma- 
jority of the white voters, both Protestant and Catholic, and had 
done the best among the born-again and families with incomes 
below $50,000 a year. Of the 10,000 people who responded to 
Rush Limbaugh’s nationwide phone-in poll on whom they would 
support if they could vote in Louisiana, 82 percent named Duke. 
His loss was not due to any surge of fondness for Edwards. Ed- 
wards’s victory had come from an enormous black turnout and 
from a combination of upper-income and business groups that 
were disdainful of Duke and fearful that his election would mean 
racial unrest and would damage tourism and convention business 
and drive away new investment. The result can best be represented 
by two of the many bumper stickers that became popular during 
the campaign: “VOTE FOR THE LIZARD, NOT THE WIZ- 
ARD” and “VOTE FOR THE CROOK. IT’S IMPORTANT!” 
Although his perpetual campaign for office continued, never 
again did Duke soar so high. A perennial candidate in Republican 
primaries, he could not call on the lower-income white Democrats 
who had supported him in the open contests, but many expected 
him to run again for governor. The $150,000 paid for his support- 
er’s list by the Republican Mike Foster, who did win the governor- 
ship, was believed to be a payoff for staying out of the race. How- 
ever, the next year, Duke was again on the campaign trail, this time 
in the 1996 Republican presidential primaries. The campaign of 
Duke’s fellow Republican hopeful, Patrick Buchanan, against wel- 
fare and affirmative action, with its disdain for African Americans, 
Jews, and immigrants, did not differ from Duke’s, but Buchanan 
did not carry Duke’s Nazi and Klan baggage. In Republican pri- 
maries across the South, including Louisiana, Buchanan pulled the 
votes of people who liked Duke’s message but felt uneasy about 
the messenger. Buchanan, who always liked to batter someone, an- 
nounced that he had come to Louisiana to bury Duke in the bay- 
ous, and he proceeded to do just that. 
For those who stuck with Duke, there was no question about 
their racial beliefs. In 1999, Duke was again on the ballot, this time 
in a highly conservative white district just north of New Orleans. 
Republican Congressman Robert Livingston had been slated to be


--- PAGE 144 ---
David Duke Steps Forward 135 
speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives until HustLer maga- 
zine let out the news about his extramarital doings. Livingston re- 
signed from Congress, and in the open primary to replace him, 
Duke announced as a Republican. The national party leaders de- 
nounced him, but the Republican governor and state party chair- 
man still remained silent. There were nine candidates, all conserva- 
tive. Duke’s 24,000 votes placed him in third with 19 percent, just 
out of the runoff. In commenting on the election, New Orleans 
University political scientist Susan Howell told the New Tork Times 
that “people over the years have asked me what percentage of the 
vote in Louisiana or in a district like the First is hard-core racist, 
and I never knew what to say. Now we know, and it’s one out of 
five.” 
At the beginning of election year 2000, Duke sat as chairman 
of the Republican Party in St. Tammany Parish, the largest Repub- 
lican parish in the state of Louisiana. His newest fund-raiser was 
the National Organization for European American Rights, or 
“NOFEAR,” but while Duke was off meeting with anti-Semitic 
leaders in Russia, agents from the FBI, the Internal Revenue Ser- 
vice, and the Postal Inspection Service raided his home in search of 
evidence that he had been using white supremacist dollars in high- 
stakes gambling in Mississippi, Louisiana, and Nevada casinos.


--- PAGE 145 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 146 ---
16 
Man Hunters: Morris Dees & the 
Southern Poverty Law Center 
fintgomery, the capital of Alabama and the first capital of the 
Confederacy, is a strange place. The small brick Dexter Avenue 
Baptist Church, which was Martin Luther King Jr.’s first pastorate 
and home of the Montgomery bus boycott, sits at the foot of Capi- 
tol Hill in plain view of the governor’s office in Alabama’s monu- 
mental domed capitol building. Scattered among empty lots and 
single-story, motel-style lawyers’ offices rise the gleaming towers of 
the Lumber Association, the Teachers Association, the Farm Bu- 
reau, and all of the other interests that tell you that this is indeed a 
state capital. A few blocks away on Washington Avenue, on a small 
slope, is the home of the Southern Poverty Law Center (hereafter 
the Center). The black granite memorial fountain in front was de- 
signed by Maya Lin, who also designed the National Vietnam Me- 
morial in Washington, D.C. The fountain’s waters flow down over 
the words that Martin Luther King Jr. had quoted from the 
Prophet Amos-“until justice rolls down like waters and righ- 
teousness like a mighty stream”-and then across names of men, 
women, and children who had died in the American civil rights 
struggle. The Center itself is state-of-the-art defensive concrete, 
steel, and electronics, for the Center is both hunter and hunted. 
The Center’s investigations and lawsuits have played a major role 
in hastening the demise of the “fourth-era” Ku Klux Klan and cut 
deeply into the “fifth-era” white supremacist world. Striking back, 
Klansmen torched the Center’s first headquarters, and the Center’s 
creator and director, Morris Dees, heads the assassination lists of 
both fourth- and fifth-era extremists. Linger more than briefly 
137


--- PAGE 147 ---
138 Chapter 16 
Civil Rights Memorial fountain 
beside Maya Lin’s fountain, and a security person will stroll over 
and begin a conversation. 
The blond, blue-eyed son of an Alabama Baptist tenant farmer, 
Dees is a self-made millionaire who pioneered a legal assault that 
has shaken the white supremacist world. Using familiar tort law 
principles that make organizations and their leaders liable for the 
misdeeds of their representatives, Dees and his Southern Poverty 
Law Center have won multi-million-dollar suits against major 
Hans for murders and other crimes committed by members of 
their local chapters and added courtroom victories over major 
white supremacist organizations. In 1991, NBC told the story of 
his life in a television movie titled Line of Fzye. 
Through Dees’s efforts, in 1987 an Alabama jury closed down 
the nation’s oldest Klan empire, Robert Shelton’s United Hans of 
America, with a $7 million dollar judgment for the mother of a 
young black man, Michael Donald, lynched by Klansmen from 
Mobile. In 1990, a Portland, Oregon, jury hit White Aryan Resis- 
tance leaders Tom Metzger and his son John with a $12.5 million


--- PAGE 148 ---
Klan Hunters 139 
penalty for the skinhead murder of an Ethiopian student. In 1998, 
with the Klansmen who had set fire to the Macedonia Baptist 
Church already in prison, a jury assessed $37.8 million in damages 
and punishment against the leader and members of South Caroli- 
na’s Christian Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. The small rural black 
church and other victims and their families would never see much 
of the money, for the Klans had few assets, but the message was 
clear: “Hit them in the pocketbook,” Dees had said. “Put them 
out of business.” Pursuing the white supremacists into the new 
millennium, in 2000, Dees closed down the Hayden Lake com- 
pound of Aryan Nations patriarch Richard Butler with a $6.3 mil- 
lion judgment for the violent misbehavior of the compound’s 
guards. 
In other cases, the Center had gotten the federal courts to en- 
join Klan harassment of Vietnamese fishermen in Galveston, Texas; 
closed down Klan paramilitary training camps in Texas, Alabama, 
and North Carolina; and successfully prosecuted Klan violence 
against black civil rights marches in Decatur, Alabama, and Forsyth 
County, Georgia. In yet another legal victory, the Center protected 
a victim’s damage award money that the white supremacist World 
Church of the Creator, sought to divert to William Pierce’s neo- 
Nazi National Alliance. All together, it was a punishing set of victo- 
ries for Dees and the Southern Poverty Law Center that burned 
across the supremacist world. 
As a boy, Dees worked in the fields alongside black people, 
whom his father taught him to respect. As a young, married stu- 
dent at the University of Alabama, he watched most of the civil 
rights struggle fiom the sidelines, though he tells the story of being 
removed from his Sunday school position for asking the congrega- 
tion to pray for the children killed in Birmingham’s 16th Street 
Baptist Church bombing. He came to resent society’s racial preju- 
dice and injustice and the privileges and racial meanness of wealthy 
white Alabama. 
A real go-getter, he had organized a birthday-cake-delivery 
business for his fellow students at the University of Alabama, be- 
ginning a career from which he was to make millions in mail-order 
sales ventures and then use that skill in political and civil rights 
fund-raising. In 1967, he was one of the national Junior Chamber


--- PAGE 149 ---
140 Chapter 16 
of Commerce’s “Outstanding Young Men in America.” Using his 
know-how, he raised more millions for the presidential campaigns 
of George McGovern, Jimmy Carter, Ted Kennedy, and Gary 
Hart, but his compelling interest was in the law. 
Forming a partnership with Millard Fuller, a fellow Alabama 
law school graduate who was later to found the Habitat for Hu- 
manity program for building homes for the poor, Dees represented 
the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) in cases dealing with 
free speech, rights of women and minorities, and the death penalty. 
In a case that brought him bitter criticism from Montgomery’s 
elite, he forced the desegregation of the YMCA, which had become 
the city’s device to avoid integrating swimming pools and other 
recreational facilities. 
In 1971, Dees and a like-minded lawyer, Joe Levin, incorpo- 
rated the nonprofit, tax-exempt Southern Poverty Law Center. 
With presidential candidate George McGovern’s contributors list 
and Dees’s mail solicitation skills, they built a staff of investigators 
and litigators to back up Dees. Civil rights veterans Julian Bond, 
John Lewis, Charles Evers, and Fannie Lou Hamer; ACLU counsel 
Charles Morgan; Stanford law professor Tony Amsterdam; and 
newspaper editor Hodding Carter I11 have served on the board or 
as advisers. 
The Center sued to integrate Alabama’s state police, open up 
jury selection, and reapportion the state legislature. It took on capi- 
tal cases of black defendants, including that of Joan Little, accused 
of killing a jailer whom she claimed had attempted to rape her in 
her cell. When the jury found her innocent, she thanked Dees and 
the other lawyer who had helped her by denouncing them as ex- 
ploitative white lawyers. 
Dees and the Center soon found themselves facing off with the 
hooded empire. Crucial to the Center’s history was the violent dis- 
ruption of the 1979 black protest march in Decatur, Alabama, by 
members of Bill Wilkinson’s “Invisible Empire” Klan. The FBI ini- 
tially failed to find evidence of deliberate plotting to attack the 
marchers. It took a decade-long effort by the Center’s investigators 
to produce civil damages, jail for some, and a civil rights seminar 
for others. To accomplish this, an appeals court had to overrule and


--- PAGE 150 ---
Klan Hunters 141 
then replace a Reagan-appointed federal judge so that the Center’s 
evidence could be used. 
Decatur led the Center to set up “Klanwatch” to monitor and 
take legal action against the Klan. Dees and some of his leading 
investigators came out of the same world that traditionally fed re- 
cruits into the Klan, and they knew how to talk to them and to the 
juries of their peers. Sometimes, Klansmen experienced remorse. 
Sometimes, unable to pay for a lawyer, Klansmen found it easier to 
offer testimony in exchange for clemency. Sometimes, they threat- 
ened to get even with Dees and the Center. Backing up the skill of 
Dees and his courtroom litigators were Randall Williams, Bill Stan- 
ton, Danny Welch, and the other Center investigators who took to 
the back roads of the South to identify witnesses and gather evi- 
dence. With probably the nation’s largest archive on Klan and 
other hate-group activities, Klanwatch has provided data to the 
FBI; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms; the Justice 
Department; and Congress and has exchanged information with 
state and local police departments. 
In addition to the circulation of its regular SPLC Report news- 
paper, its Intellig.ence Report has grown into a glossy quarterly that 
is distributed to police agencies around the country. Its “Teaching 
Tolerance” films, magazines, and packets are widely distributed to 
schools and teachers. Three of documentary filmmaker Charles 
Guggenheim’s films for the Center--The Klan: A LeJacy of Hate 
in America (1983), A Time forJustzce (1995), and -The Shadow of 
Hate ( 1996)-have been Academy Award winners or nominees. 
Despite pressure by the Center, the Klan world hangs on. Klans- 
men continue to be capable of violent outbursts, but, lacking in 
leadership, resources, and skilled legal counsel, they are pressed 
hard. 
To fund Klanwatch and the Center’s other activities, Dees used 
his well-honed skills to organize an impressive fund-raising ma- 
chine. A steady stream of warning letters, reports, publications, 
photographs of victims and armed Klansmen, and solicitations, 
often signed by national figures such as George McGovern and 
Senator Ted Kennedy, brought the funds that built and sustained 
the Center. Above operating expenses, a growing endowment that 
many a college might well have envied reached over $100 million.


--- PAGE 151 ---
142 Chapter 16 
When the original Center buildings were torched in 1983, pictures 
of the smoldering ruins went out to potential contributors. As anti- 
Semitism intensified within the Klan and its fifth-era allies, the 
Center targeted solicitations to Jewish contributors. 
The staff remains small, generally five litigators and less than a 
hundred supporting investigators, paralegals, researchers, educa- 
tional and publishing specialists, and other staff, with increasing ef- 
fort and hnds going into the highly successful “Teaching Toler- 
ance” program. Longtime Center workers mix with young interns 
and legal fellows from top national universities and law schools. 
The very success of its fund-raising and the battles with the Klan 
produced dissension within the Center in the early days. Attorneys 
and other members of the staff believed that the campaign against 
the now crippled Klan did not warrant the concentration of Center 
resources at the expense of other civil rights, poverty, and death 
penalty litigation. 
At the core of the controversy is Dees himself, as hard to live 
with as to face across a courtroom. He is a brilliant, imaginative, 
compulsive, driving man, for whom winning means taking risks. 
Dees is the center of the Center. Being associated with him is excit- 
ing. Both he and the people who work with him feel deeply about 
the causes for which they fight. People both trusted Dees and felt 
used by him. Marriages did not last; coworkers disagreed and de- 
parted. In the mid-l980s, much of the legal staff and the chief in- 
vestigator resigned, but with replacements, the successes of the 
Center continue. Victories closed out the Donald, Decatur, Metz- 
ger, Forsyth, World Church of the Creator and National Alliance, 
and Aryan Nations cases. The Klansmen who had set fire to the 
Center’s original offices and the North Carolina White Patriot 
Party members who were trying to buy a rocket to blow up the 
new Center went to prison. With its financial success, the Center 
helps lawyers and advocacy groups in death penalty, civil rights, 
and poverty cases. 
In February 1994, the Montgomery Advertiser published the 
results of a two-year investigation of Dees and the Center. For 
eight days, the Advertiser ran its story, with front-page headlines 
and pictures, entire pages on the inside, eye-catching graphics, and 
occasional foreboding editorials. Whether it was lingering elite re-


--- PAGE 152 ---
Klan Hunters 143 
sentment over the YMCA case or the required negative cast of in- 
vestigative journalism, the tone was heavily critical. Along with 
Dees’s success story and the Center’s accomplishments came a 
steady drumbeat of criticism. In addition to the internal confltct 
over the Center’s Klan emphasis and staff departures, there was 
Dees’s imperviousness, salesmanship, and hyperbole. The Adver- 
tiser complained that there were not enough &can Americans in 
top jobs and leadership positions, that Dees’s friends filled the 
board, that he had offended the civil rights community in lobbying 
for the appointment of a pro-death penalty federal judge, and par- 
ticularly that he pushed his fund-raising too hard and too success- 
fully, was too concerned with endowment, and refused to open up 
his financial records to the press. The two years of investigation 
brought no evidence of misbehavior and concluded weakly with 
the recommendation that nonprofit fund-raising needed to be 
more open and watched more carefully. 
As he told the Trial LatayersJownal, the Klans of the late 
1990s were “very few and small,” but there was still work to be 
done. Dees’s interest, however, was turning elsewhere. “There’s 
been a change in the racist, white supremacist, neo-Nazi-type indi- 
viduals in this country. They’ve gone fiom the Man into paramili- 
tary and skinhead groups,” he told the lawyers. Dees’s campaign 
against the Klan had already involved him with the violent rising 
on the Right. After The Order’s armored car robbery in Ukiah, 
California, its leader, Robert Mathews, had shared part of the loot 
with Texas Klansman Louis Beam and North Carolina’s Glenn 
Miller. After The Order’s 1984 murder of Denver radio talk show 
host Alan Berg, Dees’s name moved up to the head of its assassina- 
tion list. Mathews died in a shootout with the FBI on Whidbey 
Island, Washington, but plots against Dees’s life continued. In the 
new fifth-era world, Louis Beam had joined the Aryan Nations at 
Richard Butler’s Idaho compound, and in San Diego, Tom Metz- 
ger gave up the Klan and was recruiting skinheads for his White 
Aryan Resistance. 
By the summer of 1994, the Southern Poverty Law Center was 
tracking the militia movement touched off by the siege at Ruby 
Ridge and the attack on the Waco, Texas, Branch Davidian com- 
pound. That October, Dees wrote to U.S. Attorney General Janet


--- PAGE 153 ---
144 Chapter 16 
Reno that he believed the growing involvement of white suprema- 
cists and other extremists in the growing militia movement was “a 
recipe for disaster.” Six months later, 168 people died when Timo- 
thy McVeigh’s bomb exploded at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal 
Building in Oklahoma City. Although it had brought no cases into 
court, the Center’s Militia Task Force was pursuing the expanding 
militia movement with the same intensity that it had the Nan. The 
“racist right,” Dees wrote in his book Gutherin8 Storm: America’s 
Militia Threat, had changed “from a disparate, fiagmented group 
of pesky-and at times dangerous-gadflies to a serious, armed, 
political challenge to the state itself.” In the Klanwatch/Militia 
Task Force report the next year, Fulse Patriots: The Threat of Anti- 
Bovernment Extremists (1997), and in its fund-raising letters, the 
Center quoted Militia of Montana spokesman Bob Fletcher’s 
warning: “Expect more bombs.”


--- PAGE 154 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever: 
Klansmen, Klanswomen, Terrorists, 
& Loose Cannons 
1 was standing in the small crowd of spectators at a Ku Klux Klan 
rally outside Lake Butler in northern Florida. A young woman 
made her way across the field to where the grand titan, in his flow- 
ing robes, stood. She identified herself as a reporter for the Brad- 
ford County Herald, expertly flipped her notebook open, steadied 
it on top of her purse, and demanded, “Who are you, and what are 
you doing here?” In this chapter, I examine who the Klansmen and 
Klanswomen are-what they are still “doing here.” 
For many years, Raphael Ezekiel, a University of Michigan so- 
cial psychologist, now at the Harvard School of Public Health, in- 
terviewed major Klan and white supremacist leaders and Detroit 
inner-city young Nazis. In The Racist Mind: Portraits of American 
Neo-Nazis and Klansmen, Ezekiel divided white racists into four 
categories: leaders, ordinary members, loose cannons, and poten- 
tial terrorists, all joined by the belief in the centrality of race, the 
superiority of whites, and the thrill of violence. In employing this 
highly useful typology, I want to add “conspiracy” to the list of 
defining beliefs. It is conspiracy that explains to them why the 
world is as it is, why the virtuous white race is forced on the defen- 
sive, and who the enemies (and the enemies behind the enemies) 
are. It is conspiracy that is the wine into which many of them dip 
their own wafer of violence. 
The high point in Klan membership after World War I1 was in 
the mid-1960s. The investigations of the House Un-American 
145


--- PAGE 155 ---
146 Chapter 17 
Activities Committee, prompted by violence against civil rights 
workers in the Deep South, estimated that there were close to 
17,000 Klansmen and Klanswomen, belonging to the 714 chap- 
ters, or klaverns, of fifteen different, competing Klans. According 
to the prime Klan-watching organizations, the Anti-Defamation 
League and the Southern Poverty Law Center, membership fell in 
the later 1960s and early 1970s, rose to about 11,000 during the 
brief “fourth-era” revival of the late 1970s, and leveled off to a 
“fifth era” of approximately 4,000 at the end of the century. Klans- 
men have always believed that thousands more secretly support 
their struggle. 
At the end of the twentieth century, other active white suprem- 
acists included some 35,000 to 50,000 members of the Aryan Na- 
tions, Christian Identity, and Posse Comitatus; perhaps 3,000 to 
4,000 skinheads; and 1,500 National Alliance neo-Nazis. More be- 
longed to other racist groups, such as the White Aryan Resistance 
and the World Church of the Creator, with much sharing and 
movement in and out of organizations. Of an American population 
of 270 million, the organized racial supremacists numbered per- 
haps some 50,000, or less than one-twentieth of 1 percent of the 
population. They are a tiny but enduring part of American society, 
and they are significant way beyond their numbers. 
Over the past half century, the class base of Klansmen and 
Klanswomen and their leaders has remained unchanged. Larry 
Payne testified that he joined the Klan to “get out of the house and 
drink some beer.” Payne was a member of the newly formed Jus- 
tice Knights in Chattanooga, Tennessee, led by William Church, 
whose father had headed the city’s Dixie Klan in the 1950s. The 
wanna-be Klansman son was seeking to become part of Bill Wilkin- 
son’s “Invisible Empire.” One night in April 1980, Church, 
Payne, and another Klansman drank some beer and lit a cross over- 
looking the black district of East Chattanooga. Then as they drove 
down East Ninth Street, they fired a shotgun out of the car window 
and lacerated five elderly black women with buckshot and flying 
glass. At their trial, the Klansmen claimed that they were just 
“good 01’ boys” who had drunk too much beer and who had not 
intended to hit anyone. When an all-white jury let the shooter off 
with a nine-month sentence and acquitted Church and Payne,


--- PAGE 156 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 147 
black Chattanooga erupted in three nights of rioting, causing 
widespread property damage and leading to nearly 200 arrests. 
The Klansmen soon found themselves back in court under the 
Reconstruction-era Ku Klux Klan conspiracy law. In federal court 
this time, the New York-based Center for Constitutional Rights 
used attitudinal polling for jury selection and expert witnesses, in- 
cluding a historian, the Southern Poverty Law Center’s top investi- 
gator, and a federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms ex- 
pert, to win a damage award and a class-action injunction against 
the Klan. The Center for Constitutional Rights offered its success 
as a model for fighting Klan intimidation and violence. The South- 
ern Poverty Law Center had come up with an even more devastat- 
ing method of attack. 
In 1981, the members of the Mobile, Alabama, Klavern of 
Robert Shelton’s United Klans murdered a nineteen-year-old black 
student. Behind it lay the inability of a Mobile jury to agree in the 
trial over the shooting of a white police officer. As sixty-four-year- 
old Grand Titan Bennie Jack Hays, Shelton’s South Alabama 
leader, told his klavern, “If a black man can get away with killing a 
white man, we ought to be able to get away with killing a black 
man.” Henry Francis Hays, Bennie’s twenty-six-year-old son, and 
seventeen-year-old James “Tiger” Knowles went out hunting for a 
victim. Michael Donald was on his way to a gas station for a pack- 
age of cigarettes. They kidnapped him at gunpoint, beat him into 
unconsciousness, pulled a hangman’s noose tight, and, to make 
certain, cut his throat twice. After bringing Donald’s body back to 
Bennie Hays’s house to show off their deed, they left it dangling on 
a tree across the street. From his porch, the grand titan expressed 
approval. “That’s a pretty picture. It’s going to look nice. It is 
going to look good for the Klan,” he said. 
Despite the cross that Bennie Hays’s son-in-law had lit in front 
of the courthouse, the Mobile police were strangely reluctant to 
believe that the Klan was involved in the murder. Eventually, with 
information from an informer, the FBI got a confession from 
Knowles. Testifjmg in exchange for escaping a death sentence, he 
explained in court that “it was done to show Klan strength in Ala- 
bama.” The jury found Henry Francis Hays guilty of murder and 
recommended life without parole. The judge exercised his judicial


--- PAGE 157 ---
148 Chapter 17 
right not to follow the jury recommendation and sentenced Hays 
to death. 
Lawyer Morris Dees watched the trial in court and came up 
with the idea that was to prove so devastating to the Klan world. 
Suing in civil court, he made his first use of the argument that the 
Klan could be held financially responsible for the actions of its rep- 
resentatives. On behalf of Beulah Mae Donald, Michael’s mother, 
Dees brought Imperial Wizard Shelton and the United Hans of 
America into court and convinced the all-white jury that Donald’s 
killers had been carrying out Klan policy. The jury took only four 
hours to award Donald’s mother a seven-million-dollar judgment 
against the Mobile Klan members and the United Klans of 
America. 
Bennie Hays and another Klansman went to jail. Lawyer Dees 
then turned his attention to the collection of the judgment. In 
1987, the headquarters of the United Klans of America, a single- 
story, 7,400-square-foot building at the end of a dirt road outside 
Tuscaloosa, Alabama, went on the block. America’s largest and old- 
est Klan-whose members had beaten the “freedom riders” on the 
streets of Alabama, bombed Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist 
Church, and gunned down Lemuel Penn on a highway outside 
Athens, Georgia, and Viola Liuzzo after the Selma-to-Montgom- 
ery march-and Imperial Wizard Shelton were out of business. 
Some ordinary Klansmen, such as “Dynamite Bob” Cham- 
bliss, who planted the bomb at the 16th Street Baptist Church, 
were longtime members. Some, such as Henry Francis Hays and 
Chattanooga would-be Klan leader William Church, had daddies 
who were “kluxers,” and some, such as Larry Payne, just wanted 
to “get out of the house and drink some beer.” The ordinary 
Klansmen have been blue-collar whites, looking for belonging in 
a world that offered them little recognition and material reward. 
Particularly in the South, they come from a hard-drinking world 
that accepts aggressiveness as a measure of honor. Race is para- 
mount. Black people are dehumanized, hated, and despised. 
Boundaries are all-important to self-definition. The Klansman 
knows that, however mean his condition is in the eyes of a more 
affluent society, he has heroic worth because he is not black. Be-


--- PAGE 158 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 149 
cause the black man is degraded and lacks worth, violence against 
him is acceptable. 
Go to a Klan rally and listen to the responses of the faithful. 
Amid the denunciation of Communism, Jews, foreigners, and the 
national government, it is the appeal to race that stirs the support- 
ers. The “Jewish conspiracy” is part of the rhetoric, but it resonates 
more within the leadership than the rank and file. The 1920s and 
1930s role of the Klan as the enforcer of Prohibition and protector 
of the home and white moral behavior has long since disappeared. 
In a society in which the Klan can no longer enforce racial domi- 
nance or boundaries, “White power . . . white power!” is a defiant 
defensive cry. 
But if the black man is degraded and inferior, why has the 
white man always been on the defensive-and never more than 
now? The answer is conspiracy. There is a sense of powerfbl ene- 
mies and the excitement of violence that has always clung to the 
image of the man. Although the hood and robes draw ridicule 
fiom others, for the Klansman they connect him with an honored 
tradition. They serve as a warning of the Klan militant to outsiders 
and an appeal for the recruitment of like-minded people. 
The small-town Mississippi Klansmen who killed the three civil 
rights workers near Philadelphia, Mississippi, during the 1964 
“fieedom summer” included a deputy sheriff, three truck drivers, a 
farmer, a service station attendant, a used-car salesman, a bulldozer 
operator, a chemical plant worker, a former nightclub bouncer and 
trailer salesman, a Baptist preacher, and a mobile home park owner. 
The Georgia Klansmen who gunned down Lemuel Penn were a 
mechanic, a textile worker, and a gas station attendant. Viola Liuz- 
zo’s killer was a high school dropout and self-employed auto me- 
chanic who had done time for petty larceny and malicious destruc- 
tion of private property. In the car with him were a mechanist, a 
retired steelworker, and Tommy Rowe, the FBI’s informant, a 
sometimes bartender, ambulance driver, laborer, and brawler. 
Over the decades, the kind of people drawn to the Klan does 
not change. The Klansmen and Nazis tried for the 1979 killing of 
the Communist Workers Party leaders in Greensboro, North Caro- 
lina, included a tire salesman; a logger; construction, furniture 
factory, and textile workers; and a former Marine on medical


--- PAGE 159 ---
150 Chapter 17 
disability. Except for the Birmingham Klansmen, most lived in 
small towns or rural areas, were school dropouts usually by the 
ninth or tenth grade, had theft records, were into second mar- 
riages, and were fathers of several children. Although some had 
been Klansmen for a while, most were recent joiners, shifbng back 
and forth among Klans and Nazis, concerned about race mixing 
and Communism, seeking a bit of action. 
In the mid- 1960s, Alabama’s attorney general told Look maga- 
zine that the Klan was “a channel for their frustrations” for school 
dropouts with a background of social and economic failure. By the 
1990s, the oldest operating Klan was Thom Robb’s Knights of the 
Ku Klux Klan, and the most active was Jeff Berry’s new Indiana- 
based American Knights. The Klansmen whom Robb and Berry led 
through the streets of the Midwest reflected national demograph- 
ics. Their education level was a little higher, but they still basically 
came from the blue-collar, mobile home, school dropout ranks, 
getting by week by week, worried about jobs, affirmative action, 
reverse discrimination, black crime, and unhlfilling lives. Member- 
ship in the Klan offers meaning and companionship. 
For the most part, the leaders have continued to come from 
much the same class background. What the House Un-American 
Activities Committee had to say in 1967 about this leadership was 
not flattering, but it continues to hold true. The committee re- 
ported constant breakaways and reorganization and perpetual dis- 
agreement over aspirations for power, authority, and money. In the 
1960s Deep South, a small proportion of the leaders “held posi- 
tions of responsibility” in the general society: ministers, a chief of 
police, a municipal judge, a city engineer, a number of local busi- 
ness owners, and two members of the Mississippi state legislature. 
For the rest, the record was less impressive. 
Half a dozen grand dragons were high school dropouts, and 
three had less-than-honorable discharges from the armed services. 
A Virginia grand dragon had been dismissed as an insurance agent 
for financial irregularities. A Mississippi grand dragon had been 
ousted by both the White Knights and the United Klans as well as 
a previous employer for theft of funds. Klan officials had records


--- PAGE 160 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 15 1 
of grand larceny, aggravated sexual assault, burglary, theft, armed 
robbery, and other crimes. 
For more than a quarter of a century, as others came and went, 
Robert Shelton, imperial wizard of the United Klans of America, 
which claimed branches in seventeen states, represented compara- 
tive stability. Discharged from the Army on a Korean War hardship 
disability and from the University of Alabama with failing grades, 
Shelton had shared the violent resistance to the civil rights revolu- 
tion in the 1960s with Mississippi’s Sam Bowers. The Klan pro- 
vided an income and full-time employment for Shelton and his wife 
(who kept the books) and a number of his grand dragons. It paid 
for his Cadillac, his groceries, and his diamond ring. Like the 
wagon of an old-time traveling medicine show, his specially de- 
signed, one-of-a-kind executive camper opened up as a stage, with 
Shelton’s rostrum and microphone surrounded by Klan flags, em- 
blems, posters, and displays. 
As Shelton stoically soldiered on through the 1970s, Klan for- 
tunes fell to a low level. The various Klans were riddled with FBI 
informers, and the turnover of would-be leaders and followers was 
rapid and often weird. New Klan entrepreneurs, particularly in the 
North, had been active in the American Nazi Party and might even 
be Roman Catholic (before David Duke had officially opened up 
his ranks) and, on occasion, covertly Jewish. 
In the mid-l970s, a new, dynamic, younger leadership briefly 
exploded into the languishing Klan world, only to find it too lim- 
ited a vehicle for their ambitious martial dreams. David Duke, a 
committed National Socialist, was a history graduate fi-om Tulane 
University, well read in racial social theory. Among the lieutenants 
whom he initially drew around him in his new Knights of the Ku 
Klux Klan, Alabama Grand Dragon Don Black was a University of 
Alabama history graduate, Louisiana Grand Dragon Bill Wilkinson 
was a former Navy nuclear submarine cryptographer, and Texas 
Grand Dragon Louis Beam had been a helicopter tail gunner in 
Vietnam. Some still fit the old, small-businessman, artisanal pat- 
tern. Ex-Army corporal and California Grand Dragon Tom Metz- 
ger was a television repairman. Arkansas Grand Dragon Thom 
Robb was a printer. Georgia’s Dave Holland, who organized the 
Forsyth County march, built fences. Glenn Miller, who marched


--- PAGE 161 ---
152 Chapter 17 
his renamed White Patriot Party through the streets of North Car- 
olina, was an ex-Army Ranger and Vietnam veteran. 
As a new image spokesman, Duke did well on the television 
interview and college speaker circuits, but this had its limits. Duke, 
Beam, and Metzger realized that the Klan was going nowhere, and, 
along with former insurance man and Republican fund-raiser Rob- 
ert Miles, they left for leadership roles elsewhere in the racialist ris- 
ing of the 1980s and 1990s. As Duke was testing electoral politics, 
Metzger and his son John were recruiting skinheads on the West 
Coast for his White Aryan Resistance, and Louis Beam was a rising 
light in the Aryan Nations in Idaho. 
Bill Wilkinson, who remained with the Klan, was a better orga- 
nizer than Duke, and his tough talk of guns and race brought a 
brief revival in the late 1970s. However, when the Nashville Ten- 
nessean revealed that he had been on the FBI payroll, his new Invis- 
ible Empire collapsed. With the others gone, Thom Robb inher- 
ited Duke’s Knights and struggled on through the 1980s and 
1990s. 
The Klan was not going anywhere, but it endured. The pattern 
seemed fixed. At any one time, there would be some two score dif- 
ferent Klans, each with anywhere from one to twenty chapters or 
klaverns, mainly in the South and the Midwest. They recruited 
their members through family, work, bar, or neighborhood; public 
rallies and marches; rowdy appearances on Geraldo, Sally Jessy Ra- 
phael, Morton Downey, Montel, or Jerry Springer; and websites. 
Thom Robb was a bit of everything: John Bircher, anti-Semite, 
neo-Nazi, and Christian Identity pastor. Following Duke’s pattern, 
he sought an improved public image, but he could not prevent the 
usual Klan breakaways. Marches in midwestern cities were not ex- 
citing enough, and he lost members when he tried to put hoods 
and robes aside. His main competition came out of Butler, Indiana. 
The Klansmen who signed up with Jeff Berry’s new American 
Knights found their excitement in belonging, talking tough, chili 
in Berry’s kitchen, armed sentry duty at cookouts and barbecues, 
confrontations (safely behind police lines), and the importance of 
dressing up in Klan regalia. As long as he would recruit members 
and share with the imperial wizard, almost anyone could become a 
grand dragon.


--- PAGE 162 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 15 3 
Berry’s Indiana grand dragon was escaping from a dirty 
foundry job and life in a crowded trailer with an unappreciative, 
younger, second wife and the children from his first marriage. For 
the grand dragon of New York and New Jersey, with a clerical job 
upstate, it was a matter of pride and respect. It was exciting to in- 
vade New York City for a rally and be front-page news. In a New 
Trk Times interview, he explained the meaning of his grand drag- 
on’s robe. It was white like an ordinary knight’s, “but it has three 
green stripes on the sleeves and a green cape on the back and a big 
dragon patch on the back, a Christian cross on the left chest, and a 
dragon on the right chest, and on the right side-I have to think- 
let me get my robes, otherwise I can’t remember [ then continuing] 
the right-hand sleeve has the American flag on top and POW/MIA 
flag underneath it. The left-hand sleeve has the Confederate flag 
on top. These are custom-made robes. We have special seamstresses 
to do this. They measure you for it” (Dan Barry, “You Don’t Want 
the Colors to Run,” New Tor& Times, October 24, 1999). 
And what about the ladies? There are no reports of Recon- 
struction-era Klanswomen. The mothers, wives, daughters, and 
sweethearts stayed home and sewed the robes. They did not, like 
the heroine in a Rita Mae Brown novel, cut their hair, bind their 
breasts, put on uniforms, and ride off to join the Confederate cav- 
alry. Although Klansmen prided themselves for acting to protect 
the white womanhood of the South, when it came to black 
women, according to congressional testimony, Klansmen freely 
beat, sexually abused, raped (regardless of age), and killed black 
women and children. 
In the revived Klan of the 1920s, women joined by the tens of 
thousands to be incorporated as the ladies’ auxiliaries of the great 
fkaternal lodge of white Protestant, native-born America. They or- 
ganized its family picnics and youth activities; took part in its 
county fair days, ceremonials, weddings, baptisms, and church visi- 
tations; sang in its glee clubs; and marched with the men in well- 
drilled units down Pennsylvania Avenue in the great Klan parades 
in Washington, D.C., attired in their neatly tailored robes, capes, 
and pointed hoods. Half a century later, survivors told the sociolo- 
gist Kathleen Blee, as she reported in Women ofthe Klan: Racism


--- PAGE 163 ---
154 Chapter 17 
and Gender in the 1920s, how good spirited and community build- 
ing it had all been. 
Klanswomen also played a role in the Klan’s dark side. Helping 
to act out its prejudices, they formed whispering squads, gossip 
networks, and “TWK” (Trade with a Klansman) boycotts of Jews 
and Roman Catholics. They sought to have Roman Catholic 
schoolteachers fired and campaigned for daily classroom readings 
from the King James Bible. 
White Protestant morality was a complex mix of negative and 
positive values. The Klan’s appeal was both fraternal and moral up- 
lift. It came to town as a reformer, the militant arm of Protestant 
morality and enforcer of a dry America. Klan campaigns against 
vice, bootleggers, and corrupt city political machines and for better 
school funding as well as the Protestantization of the classroom at- 
tracted women from social lodges and church and civic groups, 
Prohibitionists, and other activists. Prohibition was an important 
Klan issue, and it had strong appeal among the Methodists. During 
the flush early days, the Klan meant the protection of home and 
family. The involvement of thousands of women and young people 
in Klan auxiliary organizations, Professor Blee concluded, helped 
normalize the Klan as “a part of ordinary white Protestant life.” 
Women contributed to the brief success of the Klan in the 
1920s, and their history mirrored its downfall as well. Klanswomen 
were disillusioned by corruption and immorality within the Klan. 
As with the men’s organizations, power struggles between the na- 
tional Klan and state and local organizations helped destroy the 
women’s Klans in almost every state. The great Klan of the 1920s 
had appealed to many women who had been active in their com- 
munities. Some of them had fought in the great Prohibition and 
women’s sufiage campaigns, and others wanted to go further with 
a women’s Equal Rights Amendment. The Klan drew political ac- 
tivists, particularly from the Republican Party. Never again would 
the Klan be able to reach into such a talented civic-minded, middle- 
class constituency. 
As the Nan disappeared everywhere outside its diminished le- 
gions in the South, its role as family morality enforcer remained. In 
her study of the records of the 1920s Klan in Athens, Georgia, Be- 
hind the Mask of Chivalry: Tbe Makiqg of the Second Ku KLux Klan,


--- PAGE 164 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 155 
historian Nancy MacLean described how women continually called 
on the Klan as a court of last resort to “straighten up” and punish 
errant husbands and misbehaving family members and neighbors. 
This role continued through the 1930s and in some rural and 
small-town areas of the South into the 1950s. 
During the Klans’ 1960s “third-era” resistance to the civil 
rights revolution in the South, the congressional investigators re- 
ported that Robert Shelton’s United Klans had fifty-six women’s 
units but did not report significant activity. So it was to remain. 
Various Hans have often integrated male and female members to 
fill their depleted ranks. There were a substantial number of 
women in David Duke’s Knights. Some held office, and a martial 
arts-trained woman was chief of Duke’s security guard. Women 
took part in the 1979 attack on the civil rights marchers in Deca- 
tur, Alabama, that launched Morris Dees and the Southern Poverty 
Law Center into their anti-Nan role. 
There were no women leaders of Klans at the end of the twen- 
tieth century, and women seldom spoke at rallies despite women’s 
websites and recruiters and estimates from qualified observers that 
perhaps as much as a quarter of the members of the Klan and other 
extremist groups are women. In 1999, when ABC presented 
“Women of Hate” on a 20/20 report, all they could find to inter- 
view was Klan leader Thom Robb’s daughter, White Aryan Resis- 
tance chieftain Tom Metzger’s daughter-in-law, and the daughter 
of a homophobic midwestern preacher. The Klan is a man’s thing, 
and the Klanswomen are not drawn in by its ideology. Raised in it 
or being brought into it by their husbands or boyfriends, Klans- 
women stand in the sacred circle, often with children in arms, the 
Nan’s next generation, cutely dressed in miniature Klan robes. 
With its legions so diminished and its resources and leadership 
so impoverished, why do we still pay so much attention to the 
Klan? Part of it is because the Klan plays such an important sym- 
bolic role in American culture and history. Its flowing robes, 
pointed hoods, and masks and its flaming crosses are the graphic 
and immediately recognizable symbol of prejudice, race conflict, 
and violence. They are the editorialist’s and the cartoonist’s de- 
light. For African Americans, the Klan says it all. Everyone has a 
story. Malcolm X believed that Klansmen killed his father, crushed


--- PAGE 165 ---
156 Chapter 17 
Klan wife and mother, Davie, Florida. 
his head, and left him to die on the trolley tracks in East Lansing, 
Michigan. Rosa Parks remembered sleeping on the floor beside her 
grandfather’s rocking chair in Tuskegee, Alabama, as he kept an eye 
out for the Klan with a shotgun across his knees. For black people, 
the Klan represents both past oppression and what they are up 
against today. Even when there is no Klan, black people talk about 
the “klanishness” they face in the white world. 
The other part is the Klan’s continued capacity to do violence. 
By the end of the twentieth century, it might well have seemed that 
Klan violence would be a thing of the past. Justice was overtaking 
the last of the 1960s most highly publicized murders. The state 
courts of Mississippi had finally called the killers of Medgar Even


--- PAGE 166 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 157 
and Vernon Dahmer to account. For three decades, Myrlie Evers 
and Ellie Dahmer had campaigned for punishment of their hus- 
bands’ killers. William Waller, later to be governor of Mississippi, 
twice tried Byron De La Beckwith for the ambush murder of 
Medgar Evers, state leader of the National Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Colored People, but the all-white juries deadlocked. 
Then, in 1994, thirty years later, Bobby DeLaughter, a young 
white prosecutor, searched out the old records and evidence to try 
Beckwith again. With additional testimony, part of which the FBI 
had kept secret, an integrated jury found him guilty. In the Holly- 
wood tradition, the movie Ghosts of Mississippi told of the struggles 
of the white prosecutor DeLaughter rather than the life of the 
black civil rights leader Evers. 
Sam Bowers, imperial wizard of Mississippi’s White Knights, 
spent six years in federal prison for ordering the killing of the three 
civil rights workers in Philadelphia, Mississippi. He had been tried 
in state and federal court for planning the murder of Vernon 
Dahmer, the storekeeper who was spearheading the voter registra- 
tion campaign in Forrest County. As with the early trials of Byron 
De La Beckwith, the all-white jurors were overwhelmingly for con- 
viction, but holdouts deadlocked the juries. This time, as with 
Beckwith, there were a committed young white prosecutor, an in- 
tegrated jury, material now made available by the FBI (and in this 
case fi-om the official 1960s state segregationist spy organization, 
the State Sovereignty Commission), and a changed racial environ- 
ment. Klan witnesses testified that Beckwith and Bowers each had 
boasted of what they had done. “Don’t ~~rry,” Bowers had said, 
“No jury in the state of Mississippi is going to convict a white man 
for killing a nigger.” Now, in 1998, Bowers was not so confident, 
commenting that he did not have the influence he once had. On 
his conviction, the judge sentenced him to life in prison. 
The same year, South Carolina executed a white man who had 
murdered a black woman and carved “KKK” into her body. The 
year before, the State of Alabama had executed Klansman Henry 
Francis Hays for the murder of Michael Donald. It was the first 
time in eighty-four years that Alabama had executed a white man 
for killing a black man. In a changing South, with strong black po- 
litical clout and a new, young, white generation of law officers and


--- PAGE 167 ---
158 Chapter 17 
prosecutors, old racial murders fkom the 1960s were being reexam- 
ined. Television’s proliferating magazine journalists competed for 
the stories, with Connie Chung interviewing accused Mississippi 
Klansmen on 20/20 and a federal prosecutor reopening a case 
when an ABC News investigation discovered that the murder had 
taken place on federal land, where no statute of limitations applied. 
Robert Chambliss, one of the bombers of Birmingham’s 16th 
Street Baptist Church, had been convicted in 1977 and died in 
prison. There had not been enough evidence to try his confeder- 
ates, but the memory and the wound remained open. Books were 
written. There was a black majority on the Birmingham City Coun- 
cil. In 1997, the filmmaker Spike Lee produced the documentary 
4 Little Girls. The new head of the FBI’s Birmingham office told a 
group of black ministers that he was working through the files. 
With a state grand jury indictment and newly discovered tapes and 
testimony, the two surviving Klansmen, Tommy Blanton and 
Bobby Frank Cherry, were scheduled for trial. Bobby Frank Cherry 
was seventy-one years old, and the judge initially ruled that physical 
and mental ailments, described as “vascular dementia,” made him 
unable to stand trial. 
Birmingham’s U.S. Attorney Doug Jones, who had skipped 
law school classes a quarter of a century before to watch the Cham- 
bliss trial, handled the Blanton prosecution for Alabama. Using 
focus groups and a professional jury consultant who had also 
worked on the Beckwith and Bowers trials in Mississippi to under- 
stand community attitudes, the prosecution concentrated on the 
bombing of the church and the death of the children, not the Klan. 
As in the Chambliss trial, the prosecution had the testimony of the 
accused’s family members. As former Alabama Attorney General 
Bill Baxley, who had prosecuted Chambliss, commented, abused 
wives and girlfriends were a “common thread” in Klan convictions. 
This time Alabama had something more. It had tapes. Quickly 
identifjring Blanton as a suspect, the FBI had rented the apartment 
next door and installed a wiretap in Blanton’s kitchen. More tapes 
had come from the car of a fellow Klansman, recruited by the FBI, 
with whom Blanton and Cherry liked to drive around town, often 
after a night of drinking, parking across the street across fkom the 
16th Street Baptist Church.


--- PAGE 168 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 159 
“Ladies and Gentlemen,” U.S. Attorney Jones began his case, 
“it’s been a long time.” Despite fading memories and the circum- 
stantial evidence of the case, the jury quickly found Blanton guilty, 
and he was sentenced to four life terms in prison. “Justice delayed 
is still justice,” Jones concluded. 
Many did not agree. Former Alabama Attorney General Bax- 
ley, who had convicted Chambliss, was particularly angry. No one 
had ever told him about the tapes. It had taken him five years to 
get the evidence that had sent Chambliss to prison, and then only 
because Jack Nelson, Los Angeles Times Washington bureau chief, 
threatened to make public the FBI’s refusal to cooperate. “Dyna- 
mite Bob” Chambliss had remained free for fourteen years before 
being convicted, Tommy Blanton for thirty-seven years. Of the re- 
maining two bombers, one had died, and Bobby Frank Cherry was 
declared too infirm to be tried. Just as these recriminations against 
the FBI mounted, a storm blew up over the discovery of at least 
3,000 pages of evidence that the FBI had failed to share with the 
attorneys of Timothy McVeigh, bomber of Alfred P. Murrah Fed- 
eral Building in Oklahoma City. 
That the last of the surviving bombers had never been called to 
account stuck in the craw of Birmingham’s black community and 
the Jefferson County court system. Mer more court-ordered tests, 
it was decided that Cherry was mentally fit to stand trial. He “has 
been restored to competency,” Circuit Court Judge James Garrett 
announced, and in May 2002, prosecutor Doug Jones was back in 
court again. 
There were no witnesses to actually place Cherry on the scene 
of the bombing, but the prosecution made the most of his career 
of violence and his boasts about the bombing. Estranged family 
members testified, and there was crucial testimony of his involve- 
ment with the other bombers in the days leading up to it. With the 
large screen turned away from the view of family members sitting 
in the court, the jury looked at photographs of the mangled bodies 
of the young girls, saw a video of a dynamite explosion, and lis- 
tened to tapes of Cherry and other Klansmen talking about 
churches, the FBI, and the making of bombs. The prosecutions 
sought to re-create the feeling of a segregated, violent 1960s Bir- 
mingham and the character of Cherry and his fellow Klansmen.


--- PAGE 169 ---
160 Cbapter 17 
There was to be no room for the suspension of belief about what 
was going on and what Cherry and his friends actually did. The 
jurors, prosecutor Jones told them, needed to look at the overall 
picture shown by the evidence. 
Cherry did not take the stand in his own defense. The prosecu- 
tion had destroyed the alibi that he had been home that night, tak- 
ing care of a cancer-sick wife and watching wrestling on television. 
His wife’s cancer had not yet been diagnosed, and there had been 
no wrestling on television that night. Nevertheless, his attorney ar- 
gued, the prosecution’s case was too old, too circumstantial, and 
too flawed. Character witnesses, including his present wife and two 
grandsons, denied that he was a racist. The minister of the small, 
mixed, nondenominational church that Cherry had joined in 1977, 
about the time that the investigation was reopened, testified that 
he got along well with black members. Cherry was a segregationist 
in the 1960s, his attorney Mickey Johnson argued, but so was the 
State of Alabama, which held the same beliefs for which he was 
now being prosecuted. 
The jury was composed of six white women, three black men, 
and three white men. In 1963, some of them must have been of 
the same age as the young girls who were killed in the bombing. 
Others had not yet been born. After nearly seven hours, the jury 
came in with a verdict of guilty, and the judge sentenced Cherry to 
life in prison without parole. “Today the people of the state of Ala- 
bama for the second time in about a year,” Jones stated, “have 
proved that justice delayed does not have to be justice denied.” 
The last of 1963’s 16th Street Baptist Church bombers was 
now in prison, and people talked of Birmingham having reached 
“closure .” Some called for “healing and reconciliation.” Others 
still felt the pain. Journalist Diane McWhorter, a daughter of Bir- 
mingham, had returned home to find out whether her father had 
been a Klansman and to write the story of the white elites for 
whom the Klan did the dirty work. Her 2002 Pulitzer Prize for 
Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama: The Climactic Battle of 
the Civil Rkbts Revolution and her classic blond good looks made 
her a natural for television. “Closure,” she told the camera, “is a 
cheap form of redemption.” 
At various times in its history, the Klan has been a social re-


--- PAGE 170 ---
Yesterday, Today, Forever 16 1 
former and a rally for white Protestant nationalism. It has always 
been a fiaternal lodge, and it has always traded in violence. The 
aura of violence has been its distinguishing nature and an impor- 
tant part of its appeal for its members. The high point of its orga- 
nized terrorism was during Reconstruction afier the Civil War, 
when its violence helped drive the freedmen and Republicans out 
of politics in the South. In the twentieth century, the revived Klan 
never did its violence on so broad a scale and with so clearly defined 
a purpose. Only where there had been a fi-iend in power, such as 
Florida’s Lake County Sheriff Willis McCall in the 1950s, could 
the Klan ride fi-eely and terrorize both black and white. 
In the 1960s, Robert Shelton’s Klansmen confi-onted fieedom 
riders in the streets of Alabama’s cities, but he had no grander 
plans. His instructions to the Klan road patrollers, who hung on 
the flanks of the Selma-to-Montgomery march, was no more spe- 
cific than “you know what to d~.” Viola Liuzzo turned out to be 
a target of opportunity. Only Sam Bowers’s bombing frenzy in 
Klan repeats King’s Selma-to-Montgomery march.


--- PAGE 171 ---
162 Chapter 17 
southern Mississippi approached what seriously could be called a 
terrorist campaign. At the end of the century, if forty members be- 
longed to a klavern or turned up for a rally, then it could be marked 
down as a success. For the most part, Klans were too poor in imagi- 
nation and resources to do more than talk wildly, but this did not 
mean violence was absent. Being a Klansman meant being part of 
a gang culture where primal honor was proven in violence. Though 
less mindlessly violent than the skinheads, in the Klan’s obsessive 
racist atmosphere, there are always loose cannons. 
It takes no more than two or three-or one-to spray paint Klan 
graffiti, yell racial slurs, make a threat, light a cross, damage property, 
burn a church, shoot up a home, assault a passerby or an interracial 
couple, ambush a black man, or drag a chained victim with a pickup 
truck. There is little likelihood that the Klan will ever again gain any 
of the tacit elite support or permissiveness that in the past gave it 
periods of local immunity. Even so, there will always be Klans as long 
as a would-be entrepreneur will appeal to the old mystique and 
gather a group of blue-collar fiends to drink beer, talk about guns 
and race, and “doing somethin’ ’’ about it.


--- PAGE 172 ---
The “Fifth Era”: 
An Explosion on the Right 
Coda: Patrick J. Buchanan 
&ce Thanksgiving Eve in 1916, when Colonel William J. Sim- 
mons lit his blazing cross atop Georgia’s Stone Mountain and rein- 
vented the Ku Klux Klan, the “Invisible Empire” has expanded 
and contracted, fractured, and endured. Since the death of Atlanta 
obstetrician Dr. Samuel Green in 1949, no one has been in charge 
at the top, but Klandom still has always been mostly an anarchy in 
which the local klaverns did whatever they wanted. Joined together 
only in name and reputation, the Klan’s competing empires stum- 
bled along as America’s only enduring political terrorist move- 
ment. 
Since the Klan’s great days in the 1920s, there have always 
been other militants-Brown Shirts, Black Shirts, and Silver Shirts 
as well as Columbians, the National States Rights Party, Minute- 
men, Sentinels, and others-but the Klan remained the big show. 
However, this was changing. In the 1980s, in what Robert Miles- 
the bearded ex-grand dragon of the Michigan Klan; pastor of the 
Cohoctah, Michigan, Mountain Church of Jesus Christ; and Aryan 
Nations chaplain-called the “fifth era,” a faltering and beset Klan 
found itself being shoved aside in an increasingly crowded and vio- 
lent Right. 
Tracking across the 1980s and 1990s, there emerged a loose, 
violent white supremacist network of cults, compounds, tax resist- 
ers, constitutionalists, churches, racists, nativists, anti-Semites, 
163


--- PAGE 173 ---
164 Chapter 18 
Nazis, paramilitary training camps, posses, militias, survivalists, 
bombers, bank robbers, skinheads, and millennialists as well as the 
bedraggled and depleted legions of Klansmen and Klanswomen. 
Where the Klan had been violently preservationist, the boiling ex- 
tremist cauldron at the end of the century was part anarchy and 
part revolution. With little creative energy of its own, the Klan fed 
on the beliefs of the white supremacist world. Klansmen read Spot- 
light, The Turner Diaries, and the jeremiads of the Church of Jesus 
Christ Christian; absorbed Christian Identity theology; and fed on 
supremacist nativism, anti-Semitism, and conspiratorial theory. 
The paranoid nationalist pride out of which the great Klan had 
grown in the 1920s had lingered on, particularly in inland America, 
in the Midwest, across the Great Plains, and into the mountain 
West. Writing about the 1920s, John Higham, a historian of Amer- 
ican nativism, described the insecurity within a rapidly changing so- 
ciety that was absorbing waves of new immigrants who were no 
longer of the old northern European stock. For many older stock 
Americans, Higham writes, “The great problem was . . . outsiders 
of all kinds, alien in blood and faith and heritage.” 
Now, half a century and another world war later, the pace had 
only quickened, and there were those who could not abide it. The 
national population, which had been 76 million in 1900 and 150 
million in 1950, had grown to 276 million at the end of the cen- 
tury. The massive black migration to the cities and the civil rights 
struggles of the 1960s and after, as well as the growing flood of 
non-European immigrants, made race the basic subtext in Ameri- 
can society and politics. For a small but angry portion of white 
America that believed that race determined behavior, culture, and 
destiny, it was the only text. 
To a much larger part of the population, there were economic 
changes and pressures that made them sometimes accessible to the 
racialist explanation of their problems. Life at the top was great. 
The number of millionaires more than quadrupled. If you were the 
head of a great corporation, your income had soared to hundreds 
of times more than the wages you paid the men and women on 
your production line. For many working people, however, real 
wages declined, wives went to work to maintain family income, and 
production jobs disappeared across the Mexican border and over-


--- PAGE 174 ---
7he “Fifrh Era” 165 
seas. The high crop prices that led farmers to borrow money and 
buy more land in the 1970s yielded to a depression in the 1980s 
that brought farm bankruptcies and foreclosures. There was uncer- 
tainty and real pain on the family farms both in the heartland and 
in the towns that depended on their business. 
In his book Bitter Harvest: The Birth of Paramilitary Terrorism 
in the Heartland, North Dakota newsman James Corcoran de- 
scribed the ideological rage that exploded in the life of North Da- 
kota wheat farmer Gordon Kahl, who killed two federal marshals 
in a roadblock shootout and later died in the fortified farmhouse of 
a fellow tax resister in the Ozarks. Kahl, Corcoran writes, “believed 
that the government, manipulated by the Jews through the Inter- 
nal Revenue Service, the federal courts, and the Federal Reserve 
Board, with the support of minorities, communists, and eastern 
banking interests, had conspired to take from him and his fellow 
believers, their farms, their land, and their way of life.” Under the 
burden of his struggles, Kahl had become part of much that was 
percolating on the Right. He was a tax resister; a member of the 
Posse Cornitatus, which refused to recognize any authority higher 
than the county sheriff; and a Christian Identity believer, and he 
had been willing to defend his beliefs with his life. 
An important part of America has been the conviction that it is 
something different and better, an escape from the evils of the Old 
World. According to the racial version, those who came here 
first-Anglo-Saxons, Danes, Celts, and Germans (Nordic peoples, 
according to late nineteenth-century racial thinking)-were of a 
particular virtue. It was they who had built the nation. In the 
American heartland, American nationalism took on an isolationist 
hue. George Washington had said it in his Farewell Address: There 
should be no entangling alliances, foreign wars, and adventures, 
and Europe should stay out of our affairs and we out of theirs. 
America was a great escape story, relived on the frontier-a 
world of individualism, open land, forests and mountains, far from 
the Old World, distant from the intrigues of government in Wash- 
ington, D.C., and from New York, the city of bankers, immigrants, 
and, after World War 11, the internationalism of the United 
Nations, the Rockefeller’s Council on Foreign Relations, the


--- PAGE 175 ---
166 Chapter 18 
Bilderbergers and Trilateral Commission conspiracies, and the New 
World Order. 
Amid the millions of law-abiding citizens of the heartlands, 
the fifth-era rebels, rejectionists, separatists, and revolutionaries 
planned their paths. Here on the Great Plains, the Posse Comitatus 
was born, and in the 1980s, a reborn racist Populist Party, financed 
by Willis Carto’s Liberty Lobby, agitated among embittered farm- 
ers. Here in Idaho, Richard Butler planted his Aryan Nations com- 
pound at Hayden Lake, and Randy Weaver built his cabin on Ruby 
Ridge. Survivalists could “go off the grid” by themselves or retreat 
to the fortified Christian Identity compound, Zarephath-Horeb, in 
the Ozarks (renamed CSA for “the Covenant, the Sword, and the 
Arm of the Lord”) or to Elohim City on the Arkansas-Oklahoma 
border. Robert Jay Mathews drew his Silent Brotherhood around 
him in the hills of eastern Washington. While David Lane served 
his 150-year sentence for the murder of the Denver radio talk show 
host, his wife Katja ran the Wotansvolk-14 Word Press (named for 
Lane’s fourteen-word slogan-“We Must Secure the Existence of 
Our People and a Future for White Children”-which the move- 
ment adopted as its own) out of St. Maries, Idaho. It was in Colo- 
rado’s Estes Park that Christian Identity Pastor Pete Peters called 
the militants together for the “Rocky Mountain Rendezvous,” 
which birthed the modern militia movement. In Montana, John 
Trochmann lectured to the Militia of Montana about the “one- 
world conspiracy” of the Jewish bankers, and the Unabomber built 
his lonely cabin. 
To the multilayered fifth-era racialist world of the 1980s and 
1990s, the great evil was the federal government, run by an inter- 
national Jewish conspiracy. William Pierce’s murderous 1978 novel 
The Turfier Diaries gave the enemy the name of “ZOG” (Zionist 
Occupational Government). This was the message preached from 
Christian Identity pulpits, carried across the racialist Right in the 
Liberty Lobby’s weekly Spotlight, and repeated at Aryan Nations 
gatherings and at neo-Nazi, Posse Comitatus, Populist, Patriot, 
and Nan rallies. 
It might seem unlikely that the growth of violent extremism 
should have take place in the 1980s. Even for those on the far 
Right but still within the American political system, there must


--- PAGE 176 ---
The “Fiflb EraJJ 167 
have been some satisfaction or hope from seeing Ronald Reagan in 
the White House. Reagan had begun his presidential campaign in 
the South with a “states’ rights” speech at the Neshoba County 
Fair in Philadelphia, Mississippi, the otherwise obscure small town 
of 6,000 people whose only claim to significance was the death of 
the three young civil rights workers at the hands of the Klan. Presi- 
dent Reagan denounced Russian Communism’s “evil empire,” 
boosted military spending and a “star wars” missile defense system, 
pushed for a tax cut, and attempted to rein in the regulatory agen- 
cies. To run the nation’s public land policy, he picked James Watts, 
an end-times anticonservationist, as secretary of the interior. That 
the Reagan presidency seemed to have no effect on the movement 
was an indication of how hermetically sealed are its dreams of race 
hate and Armageddon. 
Robert Jay Mathews was ready to begin the revolution that 
Richard Butler and the Aryan Nations only talked about. Pierce’s 
Turner Diaries was Mathews’s model. He swore his small group of 
commandos into a Bruders Scheiyen (Silent Brotherhood), some- 
times calling it “The Order” after the Central Council in The 
Turner Diaries. Progressing from counterfeiting to robbery (first 
small shops and then banks and armored cars), in June 1984 they 
murdered Alan Berg, a brash Jewish Denver talk show host, who 
liked to make on-air fun of Klansmen and other racists. Next they 
took $3.8 million in a Brinks armored car ambush in Ukiah, Cali- 
fornia, and began preparing for attacks on dams, utility lines, and 
urban water systems. Mathews shared the money from the Brinks 
robbery across the racist network. First visiting Pastor Butler at the 
Hayden Lake compound, Mathews drove across the country giving 
large sums to Richard Miles in Michigan; to Klan leader Glenn 
Miller in North Carolina; to his hero, neo-Nazi William Pierce, au- 
thor of The Turner Diaries, in Virginia; and to Klan leaders in Ala- 
bama. Brinks money also went to White Aryan Resistance leader 
and ex-Klansman Tom Metzger in San Diego and ex-Texas Klan 
leader Louis Beam, who was setting up the Aryan Nations com- 
puter bulletin board system. 
According to The Turner Diaries, the next stage would be 
urban sabotage, but as the Silent Brotherhood planned the step-up 
to the new level, the FBI moved in. Helped by an informer and


--- PAGE 177 ---
168 Chapter 18 
tracing the gun that Mathews had dropped in the Ukiah Brinks 
robbery, it rounded up the members of the Silent Brotherhood. 
Mathews escaped one trap but died in a flaming shootout with FBI 
SWAT teams on isolated Whidbey Island in Puget Sound, Wash- 
ington. Two dozen members of the no-longer-silent Brotherhood 
stood trial in Seattle on charges of racketeering and conspiracy. 
Half of the accused gave evidence and pleaded guilty, and all went 
to prison for long terms. In a series of trials across the country, the 
government sent would- be terrorists to prison, including Glenn 
Miller, whose Carolina Knights had become the White Patriot 
Party, and survivalist James Ellison, after an FBI siege of his CSA 
compound. 
Having invested major resources and with these successes be- 
hind it, the Justice Department now moved to strike boldly at the 
heart of the revolutionary white supremacist movement. Previous 
prosecutions had targeted individual organizations. With Opera- 
tion Cleansweep, the Justice Department sought to tie them all to- 
gether. Conspiracy has sometimes been called “the prosecutor’s 
dream.” The term “conspiracy” comes from the Latin word con- 
spirare, meaning “to breathe together.” In law, a group of people 
who have met together can all be held responsible for whatever 
crime one of them subsequently commits in carrying it out, if the 
prosecutor can convince a jury that they had been in on the plan- 
ning. Thus, the Justice Department bundled an indictment of 
Aryan Nations leaders Richard Butler, Robert Miles, and Louis 
Beam together with already convicted members of Robert Jay Ma- 
thews’s Silent Brotherhood and others who had been involved with 
tax resister and Posse Comitatus member Gordon Kahl and CSA 
terrorist Richard Wayne Snell, both of whom had killed Arkansas 
lawmen. Louis Beam eluded arrest for almost half a year and ap- 
peared on the FBI’s “Ten Most Wanted” list before being captured 
in Mexico. In February 1988, all fourteen went on trial in Fort 
Smith, Arkansas, variously accused of seditious conspiracy for the 
forceful overthrow of the U.S. government through counterfeit- 
ing, robbery, sabotage, bombs, and the planned assassination of an 
FBI agent and a federal judge. 
Butler, Miles, and Beam expected to be convicted, and not 
without good reason. While other white supremacists, including


--- PAGE 178 ---
The ‘‘Fifth Era’.’ 169 
Klansman Thom Robb, National States Rights Party leader Ed 
Fields, and White Aryan Resistance warlord Tom Metzger rallied 
outside the courthouse, the government set forth a pattern for vio- 
lence hatched at Hayden Lake’s 1983 Aryan World Congress. Cru- 
cial to the prosecution’s case was the testimony of white suprema- 
cist leaders who were already serving long prison terms. In return 
for reduced sentences and entrance into the witness protection 
program, CSA leader James Ellison, his second in command, and 
White Patriot Party leader Glenn Miller outlined the plot in which 
The Order and the CSA compound were to be centers of the sabo- 
tage and terrorism. 
The defendants denied being part of a violent conspiracy. They 
were racial separatists who had exercised their constitutional rights 
to fieedom of speech and association, but no criminal undertakings 
had been discussed at Hayden Lake. It did seem unlikely that plans 
would have been hatched at such an open gathering, and the cross- 
examination of defense witnesses was not effective. Ellison and 
Miller came across as self-serving, and the government failed to 
convince the jury that the line between speech and action had been 
crossed. In Scottish law, there is a distinction in verdicts between 
innocence and charges “not proven.” At least for the Fort Smith 
jury, charges were unusually difficult to prove. The judge had 
seated the jury in a single day and had not disqualified at least one 
juror who shared the same beliefs as the defendants. Two women 
jurors may have been even more difficult to convince. One of them 
married a defendant after the trial, and another might well have 
done the same had it not been for the long sentence that the object 
of her favor was already serving. 
Although the Justice Department was not able to win its case 
in the Fort Smith trial, it was not wrong in its belief that the thread 
of conspiracy ran through the loose weave of the white supremacist 
world. In 1998, the Center for New Community, a faith-based 
organization that prepared church and community leaders to 
deal with hate groups, concluded that the line between legitimate 
far-Right politics and revolutionary terrorism had become increas- 
ingly blurred. The Center, which tracked far-Right organizations 
in the Midwest, summed up the white supremacists in four catego- 
ries: “the biblically-based bigotry of Christian Identity, the


--- PAGE 179 ---
170 Chapter 18 
Constitutionalist racism and paramilitary organizing of Christian 
patriots, the hooded terror of the Ku Klux Klan, and the Hitler- 
worship of neo-Nazis and racist skinheads.” 
The soft face of white supremacy was the claim to be racialists 
rather than racists. They did not hate other races, but they loved 
their own white race. Their goal was not racial supremacy and 
dominance but racial separation in a territory of their own. What 
Robert Miles called the “10 percent solution” would be a white 
homeland in the Pacific Northwest, formed of parts of Washington, 
Oregon, Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming. To Pastor Richard But- 
ler, this would-be Aryan nation was a “territorial imperative.” 
For all who might say otherwise, however, racial hatred lay at 
its heart, and in the fifth era, hatred of black people had been over- 
shadowed by hatred of the Jew. In the tribal world of white su- 
premacy, the crucial adhesive was a paranoid conviction of gran- 
deur and persecution. The “Great Race” was under attack, and it 
was the struggle against these powefil malignant forces that gave 
the supremacist movement its meaning and its excitement. There 
was a great deal of testosterone invested in white supremacy, and 
the thrill of violence permeated the movement. Themselves a con- 
spiracy, they saw themselves menaced by an epic conspiracy that 
only an inevitable race war could defeat. Christian Identity 
churches read the Book of Revelation and talked in biblical terms 
of end times, tribulation, and the great race war that must be 
fought before the Second Coming. Neo-Nazis dreamed of Hider’s 
Nuremberg rallies, Stuka dive-bombers, and the “final solution.” 
Metzger’s White Aryan Resistance and skinheads saw it being 
fought out in the nation’s streets, and everyone read the descrip- 
tion in Pierce’s Turner Diaries of the “Day of the Rope,” when 
Jews and race traitor white women who married or were living with 
blacks or Jews would be hanging from city trees and lampposts. 
The history of the twentieth-century Nan has been a story of a 
struggle against imagined conspiracies. For the great Klan of the 
1920s, a Protestant America was threatened by a Roman Catholi- 
cism in thralldom to the alien Roman pope. The historic outsiders, 
the Jews, were initially the object of less concern. By the end of the 
century, they had become the heart of supremacist demonology as 
the only conspiracy great enough to sustain its eschatology.


--- PAGE 180 ---
The “Fifth Era’’ 171 
The Jew is the oldest conspiratorial fantasy of Christendom, 
complicit in the crucifixion of Christ, bearer of the Pauline curse 
and nearly two millennia of tales, rumors, and refusal-the perpet- 
ual other. Southern Jews had fought for the Confederacy, and 
some of them presumably rode with the first Klan during Recon- 
struction. The Jewish population in the South was small. Jews 
opened the dry-goods store on the square, lived quietly, and fitted 
in. The change of their image, in the South and in the American 
heartland, came with the turn-of-the-century growth of industrial 
and financial capitalism and the large-scale “new” immigration, 
which included several million Jews from Eastern Europe. 
Faced with hard times during the farm depressions of the 
1880s and 1890s, the western farmers were caught in a world of 
big banks, big railroads, and big corporations. Not without justifi- 
cation, small producers have nourished populist suspicions of those 
in the distant eastern cities who controlled prices and the money 
supply. Although banking was predominantly gentile, there were 
enough Jewish financiers, such as Jacob Schiff and Bernard Baruch, 
around to make suspicions plausible. Since its enactment in 1913, 
Woodrow Wilson’s Federal Reserve System has been a major target 
of conspiratorialists, and the powerful European banking family of 
Rothschild has been seen as the heart of an international financial 
conspiracy. The face of the conspiracy grew. The Bolshevik Revo- 
lution, financed by a “crypto-Jew,” John D. Rockefeller, and the 
spread of Communism were also Jewish. 
The logical problems of reconciling banker-Bolshevik conspir- 
acy theories have been simplified by the existence of a turn-of-the- 
century manuscript, forged by the police of czarist Russia. The Pro- 
tocols of the Learned Elders of Zion was an alleged Jewish plan for 
world domination. No matter how often its authorship has been 
disputed, the story of Jewish conspiracy has been too useful to be 
given up, and it has been used to show how Jewish capitalists and 
Jewish Communists have conspired to dominate the world. 
One crucial believer was Henry Ford, who found in it an expla- 
nation for all the things he disliked: big government, the growth of 
monopolies, the decline in family values, and, most of all, the big 
bankers who wanted to take over his company. In 1920, his Dear- 
born Independent newspaper, which was required reading for all


--- PAGE 181 ---
172 Chapter 18 
Ford dealers, used The Protocols in a crusade against what it claimed 
was Jewish control of the American economy, culture, and politics. 
In 1920, the articles were collected into a book, The International 
Jew: The World’s Foremost Problem, which was widely distributed 
and translated into many other languages. In 1927, Ford was per- 
suaded that his crusade was bad for his motorcar business. He de- 
nied knowing anything about the articles and closed down his 
newspaper, although, according to the historian of the old Chris- 
tian Right, Leo Ribuffo, Ford continued to believe it. No one in 
America had done more to spread the belief in a Jewish conspiracy. 
At the end of the twentieth century, Christian Identity’s widely 
read newspaper, the Jubilee, joined the game of picking the “Man 
of the Century.” In its January 2000 issue, it announced that it was 
Ford. Eventually, Ford’s grandson, Henry Ford 11, was able to take 
control of the company fi-om the old man by threatening to sell his 
and his mother’s shares to the hated bankers. 
The Protocols and The International Jm were standard fare for 
paramilitary organizers and radical fringe preachers. Across the 
Midwest, powerhl evangelists Gerald B. Winrod and Gerald L. K. 
Smith warned against the international Jewish conspiracy. Winrod, 
known as “the Jayhawk Fuhrer” because of his admiration for Hit- 
ler, carried the message in The Defender, which he published out of 
his Wichita, Kansas, tabernacle and in his radio message beamed 
out of Mexico when the U.S. networks refused to carry him. 
No one could speak to the country folk as well as Smith, who 
eventually drifted into war against Communism and the Jews after 
the death of his hero, Huey Long. Encouraged by Henry Ford, 
Smith kept The Protocols and The International Jew in print and 
pounded out the message in his magazine The Cross and the Flu&. 
In his old age, as his notoriety as America’s leading anti-Semite de- 
clined, he focused his efforts on building the seven-story-high 
Christ ofthe Ozartts statue in Eureka Springs, Arkansas, and the 
production of a passion play in which the Jews could be held re- 
sponsible for the death of Christ. 
Buried near his towering statue in 1976, America’s most fa- 
mous anti-Semite had been involved in a dark world deeper than 
the traditional and now fading “Christ-killer” accusation, the 
crude pornographic images and cultural stereotypes, social rejec-


--- PAGE 182 ---
The “Fafib Era” 173 
tion, and the belief in the capitalist-Communist conspiracies of the 
Learned Elders of Zion. Smith had had contact with the British Is- 
raelite movement through William Cameron, Henry Ford’s 
spokesman and author of The International Jew articles. Having 
moved to California in the 1950s, Smith drew together the men 
who were turning a benign British Israelism into a fierce Jew-hat- 
ing Christian Identity. 
One of the mysteries of the ancient world is what happened to 
the “lost ten tribes of Israel,” carried off by the Assyrians in the 
eighth century B.C.E. Differing theories have connected them with 
Ethiopia, Arabia, India, Persia, and America, most notably through 
the Mormons. In Victorian England, British Israelite theorists ar- 
gued that the lost tribes had migrated across Europe and, as the 
conquering Anglo-Saxons, had made Englishmen the biblical in- 
heritors of Israel’s special destiny. 
In the twentieth century, British Israelism was spread to Can- 
ada and the United States. As preached in Herbert W. Armstrong’s 
great Worldwide Church of God’s glass cathedral in Los Angeles, 
British Israelism was not hostile toward the Jews, but, in the hands 
of Gerald L. K. Smith’s California friends, it was turned into a reli- 
gion of hate. The racial gospel preached by Klansman Wesley Smith 
and Posse Comitatus organizer William Potter Gale took hold in 
extremist right-wing circles. British Israelism had become Christian 
Identity . 
If the true inheritors of God’s promise to Israel were the white 
Aryans, who were the Jews? As Identity theology evolved in the 
1950s and 1960s, the “so-called Jews” were the product of either 
a mongrelized breed or, at the extreme, a satanic seed. At best, the 
Jews were a degenerative mix of other Mediterranean people. The 
ancient Hittites had provided the Semitic features, and the descen- 
dants of the Khazars, a people out of Asia who had converted in 
the seventh century A.D., became the Eastern European Jews. At 
worst, in the “two-seed” version, the Jews were the product of Sa- 
tan’s pre-Adamite coupling with Eve in the Garden of Eden. From 
Cain, born of the devil’s seed, had come the people known as Jews, 
while blacks and other races were less than human “mud people,” 
created out of the slime of the earth. With a heightened necessity 
brought on by the approaching end of the millennium, the Aryan


--- PAGE 183 ---
174 Chapter 18 
people were faced with the struggle to save the world from a Sa- 
tanic Jewish conspiracy. Setting down his prophetic Revelation 
while in exile on the island of Patmos off the shore of Asia Minor, 
St. John the Divine had written into Christian eschatology a warn- 
ing against “the blasphemy of them whch say they are Jews, and 
are not, but are the synagogue of Satan” (Rev. 2:9, 3:9). All told, 
with its apocalyptic vision of the great final battle of Armageddon, 
there was little of Jesus and much of Satan in Christian Identity. 
Across the white supremacist world of the Aryan Nations, 
Posse Comitatus, survivalists, compounds, and klaverns, where 
Christian Identity doctrine was preached, the battle was already 
begun. From Wesley Swift’s Church of Jesus Christ Christian in 
Lancaster, California, the Reverend Connie Lynch carried the mes- 
sage to the Klansmen battling civil rights marchers in St. August- 
ine, Florida, and stumped the segregationist South with his Na- 
tional States Rights Party ally J. B. Stoner. White Knight leader 
Sam Bowers listened to Wesley Smith’s Christian Identity tapes in 
Mississippi. Bowers’s bomber, Thomas Tarrants, growing up in 
Mobile, had heard Lynch and Stoner, and the schoolteacher Kathy 
Ainsworth, had listened to Swift’s tapes in her roommate’s Missis- 
sippi home. After Swift’s death in 1970, Richard Butler, an aero- 
nautical engineer whom Swift had ordained, left Los Angeles and 
in 1973 established his own Identity church and its Aryan Nations 
political arm in rural Idaho, where his Hayden Lake compound be- 
came the international meeting ground for white supremacists. 
According to Pastor Butler’s creed, the Aryan Nations is 
Christ’s regathering of His people: 
WE BELIEVE that Adam, man of Genesis, is the placing of 
the White Race upon this earth. Not all races descended from 
Adam. Adam is the father of the White Race only. . . . 
WE BELIEVE that the true, literal children of the Bible are the 
twelve tribes of Israel, now scattered throughout the world and 
now known as Anglo-Saxon, Germanic, Teutonic, Scandinavian, 
Celtic peoples of the earth. . . . 
WE BELIEVE that there are literal children of Satan in the 
world today. These children are the descendants of Cain, who was 
a result of Eve’s original sin, her physical seduction by Satan. We


--- PAGE 184 ---
The ‘%fib EraJJ 175 
know that because of this sin, there is a battle and a natural enmity 
between the children of Satan and the Children of The Most High 
God.. . . 
WE BELIEVE that there is a battle being fought this day be- 
tween the children of darkness (today known as Jews) and the chil- 
dren of light (God), the Aryan race, the true Israel of the Bible. 
(Encyclopedia of White Power, ed. Jeffrey Kaplan, 468-72) 
This “revolutionary millenarian” anti-Semitism is not a Chris- 
tian fundamentalist doctrine or belief. Fundamentalists generally 
accept the modern-day Jews as “people of the book,” and leading 
preachers such as the Moral Majority’s Jerry Falwell have been 
strongly supportive of the state of Israel. For them, it is the conver- 
sion, not the destruction of the Jews, that is to prepare the way 
for the Second Coming. In its anti-Semitism, Christian Identity has 
gone far afield from British Israelism’s roots and finds no favor in 
the Mormon Church, which also traces its descent fi-om ancient Is- 
rael. 
Not all white supremacists have a theological turn of mind. 
During his campaign for governor of Louisiana, David Duke at- 
tempted to reap political benefit from religious conversion but 
could not remember what the name of his church was, and he did 
not show an interest in Christian Identity’s feverish imaginings of 
“Satanic couplings” in the Garden of Eden. Tom Metzger briefly 
undertook an Identity ministry, but the skinheads whom he and 
his son John sought to recruit for his White Aryan Resistance were 
not generally interested. National Socialists and skinheads are more 
likely to dei@ Adolf Hitler and be atheists or converts to new jail- 
house pagan sects, such as Odinism, created out of warlike Norse 
mythology. The youthful disciples of the antireligious World 
Church of the Creator are anti-Christian as well as antiblack and 
anti-Jewish. Many Identity believers, such as Pastor Butler, also 
greatly admire Hitler, but across most of the white supremacist 
world, Christian Identity has had the widest appeal. To conspiracy 
believers, it offers the greatest conspiracy ever told and brings reli- 
gion into line by replacing Christian love and forgiveness with the 
call to racial war. 
The leadership and followers of the racist rising come fiom a


--- PAGE 185 ---
176 Chapter 18 
different class and background than that of the mainly southern 
blue-collar Klan. Geography and social location do not alone indi- 
cate any behavioral susceptibility. Millions who share the back- 
ground-and often some of the prejudices of the Aryan Nations, 
Christian Identity, National Alliance, Posse Comitatus, and other 
militant groups-have not taken up the call. Almost everyone has 
at some time negatively personalized the forces shaping his life and 
society. For the militants, it is something more. They are seekers. 
A compelling search for answers finds it in one great answer: con- 
spiracy. For the “patriots” of the Posse Comitatus and the militias, 
it is the federal government, responsible for the oppressions of the 
Internal Revenue Service; the FBI; the Bureau of Alcohol, To- 
bacco, and Firearms; the indifference of the Veterans Administra- 
tion; the loan policies of the Department of Agriculture; and the 
fears of gun control. For the white supremacists, it is the Jew. For 
the militants, the two conspiracies-the Jews and the national gov- 
ernment-increasingly merge. 
Compared with the Klan, the initial leaders of the new racialist 
rebellion were older and better educated. American Nazi leader 
George Lincoln Rockwell attended Brown University, and Turner 
Diaries author William Pierce, who took over after Rockwell’s 
death, had a doctorate and briefly taught physics at Oregon State 
University. Fellow Hitler admirer Willis Carto, founder of the Lib- 
erty Lobby whose Spotlig-ht is read across the extremist Right, is a 
graduate of Denison University. Others also were college gradu- 
ates, ministers, engineers, small businessmen, and retired military. 
They had been officers rather than enlisted men and veterans of 
World War I1 rather than Vietnam. William Gale, cofounder of the 
Posse Comitatus, had been a colonel on General McArthur’s staff 
and had organized guerilla war against the Japanese in the Philip- 
pines. Aryan Nations founder Richard Butler served as an aeronau- 
tical engineer in India. Colonel Jack Mohr is a decorated veteran 
of both World War I1 and Korea. 
An early step for many in their search for the answer was the 
John Birch Society. They were drawn to the society by fear of 
Communism, and it offered them the message of conspiracy. Carto 
and Pierce had been members, as were Gale, Minuteman founder 
Robert DePugh, and The Order leader Robert Mathews, but the


--- PAGE 186 ---
The “F@h Era-” 177 
John Birch Society did not go far enough. It was not anti-Semitic 
and not rebellious enough. 
Christian Identity fills the need for an overarching philosophy 
by combining conspiracy and religion, turning away from a confus- 
ing doctrine of humility and love for the hard face of Christianity. 
The Reverend Wesley Swift was a spellbinding preacher. Son of a 
fundamentalist minister, bodyguard and prottgt of Gerald L. K. 
Smith, and onetime Klan recruiter, he introduced William Gale and 
Richard Butler to the joys of paramilitary organization and apoca- 
lyptic anti-Semitism. Out of the Christian Defense League and 
Christian Identity came the Posse Comitatus and the Aryan Na- 
tions. As the traditional elite anti-Semitism of college quotas, re- 
stricted real estate covenants and corporate hiring policies, and so- 
cial exclusion were disappearing in the general society, a new kind 
was emerging. There is no report that Gale, Butler, and outstand- 
ing Posse Comitatus and Christian Identity ministers such as James 
Wickerstam and Pete Porter have had much contact with minori- 
ties, but blacks and Jews fill strongly felt eschatological and emo- 
tional needs. 
Most of the followers have also had little experience with mi- 
norities. They do not, like the skinheads, live in an inner-city world 
characterized by broken homes, single parents, school dropouts, 
fast-food jobs, and dead ends. As the sociologist James Ah0 reports 
in his carefully researched study of the Christian patriots of Idaho, 
Politics of Righteousness: Idaho’s Christian Patriotism, the militants 
were generally at least high school graduates, lower middle class, 
and drawn into various movements by the influence of parents, 
teachers, friends, coworkers, and pastors. 
Robert Jay Mathews, the martyr-hero of white supremacy who 
had already launched his war against the United States before his 
death in a fiery shoot-out, grew up in a stable, supportive family in 
small-town Arizona. His father was a struggling small businessman 
who did not speak ill of minorities and argued against his son’s 
growing rejectionism. Beginning as an anti-Communist teenage 
John Bircher and tax resister, Robert Mathews worked beyond that 
with the help of the National Alliance, The Turner Diaries, and 
Christian Identity at Pastor Butler’s compound in Idaho. 
To help get his revolution going, Mathews gathered a diverse


--- PAGE 187 ---
178 Chapter 18 
group together in the hills of eastern Washington and swore them 
into his Silent Brotherhood. It was the relationship with Mathews 
that carried them into his dream of an Aryan victory and bonded 
them together. There were some angry loners, but mainly they 
were family people with a lot of children, often into a second mar- 
riage, and not securely settled into job or career. There was a pre- 
med student from Boise State University, a bright former seminar- 
ian from Florida, and two older students from Eastern Washington 
University. Mainly, they were high school graduates, some with 
good job skills. They included a construction engineer and electri- 
cian, an industrial engineer who had lost his Boeing job but was a 
skilled printer and with his wife became Mathews’s counterfeiters, 
and a storekeeper whom Mathews help set up in business. There 
were a janitor from Philadelphia, fearful of black people; a rage- 
filled neo-Nazi from Denver; a paramilitary training expert in need 
of a full-time job; and a martial arms instructor. Only one member 
of The Order had a prison record, a former AWOL Marine in for 
burglary, a violent man who had learned about the Aryan Nations 
in prison. None came from a settled life, and before Mathews drew 
them together, most had already entered the racialist world 
through tax protest, the Klan, the National Alliance, Christian 
Identity, and particularly Aryan Nations-all told, a background 
that made Mathews’s passion seem reasonable. 
Across the resurgent racialist world, white supremacy means 
male supremacy. There is a substantial women’s membership, but 
despite rare exceptions and women-run websites, there are no real 
roles for the independent, single woman in a hypermasculine 
world. She can be wife or daughter but not “woman.” Only 
among the skinheads and in Metzger’s White Aryan Resistance do 
women play an active, sometimes leadership, sometimes violent 
street-brawling part. In the more patriarchal precincts of Christian 
Identity, Aryan Nations, and the National Alliance, the proper role 
is to be supportive of their husbands and to produce, homeschool, 
and raise white Aryan children. On the infrequent occasions when 
a woman takes the pulpit in the supremacist world, it is as the wife 
of a grand dragon or Identity minister. The widows of the racialist 
heroes Gordon Kahl and Robert Mathews remarried within the 
movement, and it was Debra Mathews’s new husband and some-


--- PAGE 188 ---
The “Fafib Era-” 179 
times Aryan Nations compound guard who, in the summer of 
1999, took his AR-15, his Uzi, and his Glock nine-millimeter to 
shoot up the Jewish Community Center in Los Angeles and kill a 
Filipino American postman. 
While Christian Identity spread through the white supremacist 
movement and in small-town and rural churches in the Midwest 
and mountain states, there was an explosion on the Right that 
promised even greater opportunity. It was the combination of the 
government’s siege of Ruby Ridge; the attack on the Branch Da- 
vidian compound in Waco, Texas; and the passage of the Brady gun 
control law that touched it off. Randy Weaver, a survivalist and a 
Christian Identity believer, refused to become a federal informant 
and failed to show up in court for the sale of an illegal sawed-off 
shotgun. An FBI siege of his cabin in the northern Idaho moun- 
tains resulted in the deaths of Weaver’s wife and son and a federal 
marshal. Eventually, Weaver was tried, acquitted, and received a 
$3.1 million settlement from the government. 
Six months later, in another bungled operation, agents from 
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms raided the armed 
compound of an obscure Branch Davidian religious cult near 
Waco, Texas. Four agents were killed in an initial failed attack. On 
April 19, 1993, a fifty-one-day siege ended in a fiery conflagration 
in the compound that took the lives of more than eighty men, 
women, and children. The date of their death became sacred for 
the government haters and the new emerging militia movement, 
similar to the importance of Hitler’s birthday for neo-Nazis and 
David Duke. It was on Hitler’s birthday, April 20, six years later, 
that the two young killers would storm into Columbine High 
School in Littleton, Colorado. 
After the Ruby Ridge siege, Identity Minister Pete Peters in- 
vited extremist leaders from around the country to a “rendezvous” 
in Colorado’s Estes Park. At that weekend in October 1992, a 
loose alliance of the far Right agreed on a plan to fight against the 
governmental and New World Order conspiracy. The battle plan 
was what Klansman-Aryan Nations theorist Louis Beam called 
“leaderless resistance,” the traditional cell form of underground 
preparation for guerrilla action. The new militia movement had 
been born.


--- PAGE 189 ---
180 Chapter 18 
The next year, the Brady gun control law, which banned cer- 
tain kinds of assault rifles and required background checks for gun 
buyers, brought a whole new angry constituency into what its 
members call the Patriot Movement. Far exceeding the three mil- 
lion members of the politically potent National Rifle Association, 
vast numbers of Americans hunt, take target practice, collect guns, 
keep them for protection, and believe that the right to do so is 
guaranteed to them by the Second Amendment to the Constitu- 
tion. There are few issues in the national life that produce such 
fierce proponents as does the “right to keep and bear arms.” Con- 
vinced of a conspiracy to take away their guns and worse, a number 
of gun owners were becoming a conspiracy of their own. They 
were the “unorganized militia,” sometimes composed of indepen- 
dent cell units that a malevolent government would have difficulty 
tracking down and controlling. 
Like a prairie fire, militias formed across the United States, 
meeting to discuss government conspiracies and the black helicop- 
ters of the New World Order, gathering arms and munitions, and 
taking part in military field training and maneuvers. Despite the 
involvement of racial extremists in the Estes Park founding of the 
movement, the Patriot militias are not, for the most part, white su- 
premacists. As Morris Dees, whose Southern Poverty Law Center 
(SPLC) tracked the movement, wrote in his Gathering Storm: 
America’s Militia Threat, the militiamen are “mainly white and 
middle class. Most hold jobs, own homes, wear their hair short, 
don’t use drugs,” and “get a daily dose of anti-government venom 
from radio talk shows, respectable lobbying organizations, and 
even members of Congress.” They are moved by “the fear of, 
and anger at a government that overregulates, overtaxes, and, 
at times, murders its citizens,” a government that they believe 
threatens to violate the Constitution and take away people’s right 
of self-protection. 
As thousands of fearfid and angry citizens joined the growing 
militias, Dees wrote to Attorney General Janet Reno that the SPLC 
“has confirmed the active involvement of a number of well-known 
white supremacists, Posse Cornitatus, Identity Christians, and 
other extremist leaders and groups in the growing militia move- 
ment.” Six months later, on April 19, 1995, the anniversary of the


--- PAGE 190 ---
The “Fifth Era” 18 1 
destruction of the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas, fol- 
lowing the recipe in his favorite book, The Turner Diaries, Timothy 
McVeigh-admirer of Hider, hater of African Americans, reader of 
Spotlig-ht, and sometimes militia attender-blew up the Alfred P. 
Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, killing 168 people and 
wounding many more. 
At the end of the twentieth century, the Patriot Movement was 
composed of a loose web of militias, Common-Law Courts, tax re- 
sisters, Liberty Lobby members, John Birchers, and other antigov- 
ernment organizations-without a hierarchical leadership or uni- 
fied structure, reduced in numbers after Oklahoma City, and 
moving to the right. In addition to close to 500 Klan, Christian 
Identity, neo-Nazis, skinhead, black separatist, and other “hate 
groups,’’ the SPLC listed more than 200 active Patriot groups. It 
was the absence of a clear racist commitment and the millennial call 
to war that separated the Patriot Movement from the white su- 
premacist Right, but this seemed to be weakening. As the less com- 
mitted dropped out, many of the remaining militiamen take a more 
extreme line. When Michigan leaders sought to offer a more mod- 
erate image-a “chamber of commerce with a Doberman,” they 
called it-extremists forced them out. 
The conspiratorialist world is an extremely busy one. Willis 
Carto’s Spotlight and Christian Identity’s Jubilee are basic reading. 
There are Patriot and supremacist journals and newsletters, short- 
wave and public access radio, and talk shows. In addition, almost 
every group has its own website, with the Hans and the neo-Nazis 
particularly active. If end times should be not yet, the Internet of- 
fers a possible new dimension. In the last part of the twentieth cen- 
tury, the old racism of Klan and anti-Semite and the suspicion of 
government experienced protean explosions in the form of Chris- 
tian Identity and Aryan Nations, Posse Comitatus, and the militias 
of the Patriot Movement. In the new century, might the Internet 
provide a way to recruit a whole new cohort of would-be racists? 
Among the mounting millions of website hits are those of young 
people-rebellious, adventuresome, and susceptible-who other- 
wise would have been unreachable. 
Teens and skinheads listen to supremacist music such as “Ag- 
gravated Assault’’ and “Stretched by the Rope” on CDs from


--- PAGE 191 ---
182 Chapter 18 
Resistance Records. People order movement tapes and videos off 
the Internet, read Tim LaHaye’s Lej2 Behind and other end-times 
books, and get together at gospel gatherings, music fests, Aryan 
fests, heritage festivals, and preparedness expos. Many believed that 
the government was deliberately planning a year-2000 crisis to 
stage an armed New World Order takeover. At preparedness expos, 
survivalists bought generators, purifiers, and rations and exchanged 
reports of the massing of Russian and UN troops already standing 
by in the United States. 
Concern about the approaching millennium had not been the 
possession of survivalists and racists alone. For many mainstream 
Christians, there was a quickened interest in prophecy, which they 
shared with the Reverends Jerry Falwell, Pat Robertson, and Billy 
Graham and President Ronald Reagan. The quiet passing into the 
new century is not likely to have had much effect on dedicated mil- 
lenarians and conspiratorialists. Failures of prophecy in the past 
have not necessarily changed the faithful. The time was not yet, but 
the intensity of belief would still hold. Although the postponement 
of Armageddon will not affect the anti-Semites, it remains to be 
seen whether a weakening sense of millennialism and prophetic im- 
mediacy might limit the spread of Christian Identity. 
Within the racialist movement, it should have been time for a 
generational replacement, but that was not taking place. Gerald 
L. K. Smith and Wesley Swift had birthed Christian Identity in the 
1950s and 1960s. In its second generation in the 1970s and 1980s, 
Richard A. Butler, William Potter Gale, and Robert Miles led it 
into becoming an armed territorial movement at war with the 
United States. With the reborn Populist Party, his Liberty Lobby’s 
Spotlig-ht, and his Institute for Historical Review, Willis A. Carto 
networked across the extremist Right, but the only forceful actor 
from the older generation was William Pierce, who had taken over 
an anemic American Nazi movement and given white supremacy a 
sacred fantasy in The Turner Diaries. In his sixties, Pierce selected 
young, active lieutenants with experience in youth and armed ser- 
vice underground organizing, strengthened his youth outreach 
with the purchase of Resistance Records (the prime producer of 
racist music), and worked on ties with Canadian and European 
neo-Nazi groups. In the summer of 2002, Pierce died of cancer at


--- PAGE 192 ---
The “Fifib Era” 18 3 
the age of sixty-nine. The second generation was gone, and there 
were no promising successors. 
The activism of the 1980s and 1990s has brought an increasing 
response from state and national authorities. States and the federal 
government prosecute Freemen and Common-Law Court mem- 
bers for false liens and filings, fraud, and harassment of government 
officials. While most militia activity is aboveground, members are 
going to jail on domestic terrorism charges, including weapons and 
explosives, assault, and planned bomb plots and assassinations. De- 
spite state laws upping the penalties for “hate crimes,” Nan and 
skinhead street violence continues, and terrorist planning increases 
across the extremist underground. This, in turn, has brought rising 
attention from the FBI. Mark Potok, editor of the SPLC’s newly 
expanded Intell&ence Report, reported in the summer of 200 1 that 
since the Oklahoma City bombing, the government has been able 
to prevent at least twenty-nine serious terrorist plots, including 
bombings of federal buildings and the Internal Revenue Service, at- 
tacks on armories, and assassinations of judges and federal officials. 
For an American nation that will soon number 300 million 
people, the racialist Right seems too far out, too violent, too cha- 
otic, too poor, and too lacking in leadership to become a political 
force. But how firm are the institutions and values that hold to- 
gether a tolerant, multicultural America, particularly after the ter- 
rorist attacks of September ll? The racial and ethnic mix of 
America is rapidly changing. Is there the possibility of a rising eth- 
nic nationalism and a reaction to Middle East terrorism on whose 
ragged edge the white supremacists can find a place? 
The best test of whether there is enough anger in the country 
to he1 a movement was the pit-dog presidential candidacy of Pat- 
rick J. Buchanan. Buchanan was an established media celebrity and 
an intellectual spokesman for the right wing of the Republican 
party. He wrote speeches and planned dirty tricks for President 
Richard Nixon and liberal-bashing speeches for Vice President 
Spiro Agnew. He had been White House communications director 
for President Reagan. Buchanan believed that the mushy centrist 
Republicanism of the Robert Doles and George Bushes meant op- 
portunity on the Right for a nationalist leader, and he was ready. 
He had fire in his belly, the oratorical skills, the contacts, and the


--- PAGE 193 ---
184 Chapter 18 
public attention. Television talk shows Crossfire and The McLaugh- 
Zin Grozlp liked his brash, chuckling wit, and his role as lecturer, 
writer, and media personality made him independently wealthy. 
Buchanan’s politics combined an updated “America first” na- 
tionalism, the “cultural war” social philosophy of the religious 
Right, and a populist attack on big business and capitalist greed. 
To this, he added a belligerent nativism that shared many of the 
prejudices that drove the racial extremists, some of whom turned 
up in his political campaigns. If there was the possibility of building 
a mainstream following on the far-Right edge, it might come fi-om 
the multi-million-dollar conspiracy- hawking campaign of movie 
celebrity Charlton Heston, president of the National Rifle Associa- 
tion, and the nationalist politics of Buchanan. 
Buchanan made his first move at the 1992 Republican Na- 
tional Convention in Houston. To the dismay of the Republican 
establishment, he called for “a religious war” for the soul of 
America. As the Los Angeles police had taken back the streets 
“block by block’’ from the racial rioters, he proclaimed, “we must 
take back our cities, and take back our culture, and take back our 
country.” 
Four years later, in 1996, running for the Republican presiden- 
tial nomination, Buchanan bested Senator Robert Dole, the even- 
tual nominee, in the New Hampshire primary and took Louisiana 
away from David Duke. 
In 1996, there were two masterful television performers: Presi- 
dent William Jefferson Clinton and Patrick Buchanan. In the 2000 
presidential election, there was only Buchanan, now in possession 
of the fractious remains of Ross Perot’s Reform Party, with its $12 
million of federal campaign financing. 
Buchanan had grown up in a patriarchal “better Hider than 
Stalin” family in which the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco and 
Senator Joseph McCarthy were household heroes. Buchanan’s 
Jesuit-nurtured Catholicism did not disturb the conservative Chris- 
tians who shared his support for the traditional family, school 
prayer and vouchers, and opposition to abortion, homosexuality, 
and multiculturalism. “Our culture is superior,” Buchanan pro- 
claimed, “because our religion is Christianity.” 
He condemned the United Nations and the globalist elites and


--- PAGE 194 ---
The “F@h Era” 18 5 
their supernational organizations, the use of American troops as 
peacekeepers outside North America, foreign aid, the free-trade 
treaty with Canada and Mexico, special trade relations with China, 
and the immigrant flood of peoples from the non-European world. 
Immigration should be closed for five years, he proposed, and then 
reopened on a more limited, selective basis. 
And there was something more, stepping close to, and some 
people felt over, the line that separated right-wing from racist poli- 
tics. Although there is a difference between criticism of Israeli pol- 
icy and anti-Semitism, Buchanan’s repeated comments led many, 
including his onetime idol, conservative critic William F. Buckley, 
to call his comments anti-Semitic. His Holocaust-minimizing de- 
fense of accused Nazi war criminals, his praise of Hitler, and the 
words he wrote for President Reagan to speak over the SS dead in 
the Bitburg cemetery were treading on the edge. 
With both Al Gore and George W. Bush and their parties 
crowding the political center, Buchanan saw the opening on the 
Right. Only a little more than half of the 200 million voting-age 
people in the United States ever bother to vote. A quarter of them 
are not even registered. In the 2000 election, Buchanan sought to 
offer a powehl alternative both for alienated conservatives and for 
those outside the political system. A surge for Buchanan could 
mean possibilities hrther to the Right. The excitement of a close 
election did draw a larger-than-usual vote for the centrist Demo- 
cratic and Republican Parties. Gore and Bush each received some 
fifty-eight million votes, but there was no swell on the Right. Bu- 
chanan’s share was 441,000 votes, or less than four-tenths of 1 per- 
cent. There was going to be no new mainstream rally on the far 
Right. 
Without an infusion of political support or cover and the emer- 
gence of a new young leader or plan, the white supremacist insur- 
rection stumbled on, anarchic and deadly. The second-generation 
leaders were aging or gone. The closest that Aryan Nations patri- 
arch Richard Butler came to creating a white homeland out of the 
Pacific Northwest was his twenty-acre fortified Hayden Lake com- 
pound. Now, Morris Dees and the SPLC had taken it away from 
him-trophies, flags, bust of Hitler, everything. Militiamen were 
either getting tired and going home or getting into trouble and


--- PAGE 195 ---
186 Chapter 18 
going to jail. Judges and juries were more likely to find Klansmen 
guilty and to increase the penalties. Former Aryan Nations leader 
Butler’s guards went to prison, and he lost his Hayden Lake com- 
pound because the guards had harassed passersby, and American 
Knights leader Jeff Berry drew a seven-year prison term for similarly 
mistreating television journalists. 
Although the twenty-first century did not give promise of 
mainstream acceptability or a compelling leadership and a unified 
movement, the ingredients of an economy of hate still fed a violent 
right wing. The soaring growth of a non-European population mix 
in the United States heled an ethnic nationalism that believed that 
a white American civilization was under attack. The SPLC reported 
that the web of association between northern European fascists and 
American right-wing extremists was thickening. There were in- 
creasing ties with racial nationalists and neo-Nazis from England to 
Russia, where David Duke visited with the leaders and had a Rus- 
sian translation of his autobiography. 
The American mainstream may have breathed too easily when 
the world slipped out of the old millennium without an explosion. 
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, it threatened in the 
form of two geographically based apocalyptic populisms that re- 
jected modern, open society. One connected racial nationalists of 
North America and Europe, and the other cut a radical Islamic 
swath across the Middle East. Each was prepared to defend vio- 
lently a culture that it believed was under attack by outsiders. As 
the traditional expression of racial prejudice and violence in the 
United States, no matter how ragged and diminished the Klan was, 
it was not going to disappear.


--- PAGE 196 ---
Essay on Sources 
leading spokesmen for the white supremacist movement have 
been The Fiery Cross (1960-1987), the official organ of Robert 
Shelton’s United Klans of America, and David Duke’s The Cru- 
sader (Metairie, La.), the Liberty Lobby’s Spotl(ght (Washington, 
D.C.), and Christian Identity’s Jubilee (Midpines, Calif.). The 
Turner Diaries (Washington, D.C., 1978), by neo-Nazi National 
Alliance Leader William Pierce (pen name Andrew Macdonald), 
provided the plan and the inspiration for Robert Mathews’s The 
Order and the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building 
in Oklahoma City. The only personal writing to come out of the 
movement is David Duke’s My Awakening: A Path to Racial Un- 
derstanding (Mandeville, La.: Free Speech Press, 1998), in which 
Duke offered a serious argument on race, a heated condemnation 
of the Jews, and his own autobiography. Duke’s favorite statement 
on the racial history of the United States is Humphrey Ireland’s 
The Dispossessed Majority (Cape Canaveral, Fla.: Howard Allen, 
1972), published under the pen name Wilmot Robertson. The 
Southern Poverty Law Center’s Intell(gence Report (Montgomery, 
Ala. ) periodically publishes lists of white supremacist and patriot 
organizations and in its winter 1998 issue gives their Internet ad- 
dresses. 
The Ku Klux Klan: An Encyclopedia, edited by Milton and 
Judy Ann Newton (New York: Garland Publishing, 1991) is a 
highly usehl reference work covering more than a hundred years 
of the Ku Klux Klan. The Anti-Defamation League’s latest compi- 
lation, Danger Extremism: The Major Vehicles and Voices on Ameri- 
ca’s Far-R&ht Fringe (New York: Anti-Defamation League, 1996), 
187


--- PAGE 197 ---
188 Essay on Sources 
and Jeffrey Kaplan’s excellent Encyclopedia of White Power (Walnut 
Creek, Calif.: AltaMira Press, 2000) serve the same function for the 
last quarter of the twentieth century. The best general account of 
the “fifth-era” extremists on the Right up to 1990 is James Ridge- 
way, Blood in the Face: The Ku Klux Klan, Aryan Nations, Nazi 
Skinheads, and the Rise of a New White Culture (New York: Thun- 
der Mouth Press, 1990). Allen Trelease’s White Terror: The Ku 
Klux Klan and Southern Reconstruction (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1971) is a magisterial history of the Reconstruction Klan. 
The standard history of the lirst four eras of the Nan is David Chal- 
mers, Hooded Americanism: The History of the Ku Klux KLan 
(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1987). 
When the Klan or other supremacist or patriot organizations 
or individuals make news, it can be traced through the New Tork 
Times Index and stories. Newsmagazine stories in Time and News- 
week and in the Saturday Evening Post and Look and other accounts 
and commentary can be traced through the Reader’s Guide to Peri- 
odical Literature. Facts on File is useful, and for anything involving 
Congress, the Congressional Quarterly Almanac is outstanding. 
The Southern Regional Council’s New South, succeeded by South- 
ern Changes and the American Friends Service Committee, pro- 
vides useful reports on southern violence. 
Although they do not find anything favorable to say about it, 
the Anti-Defamation League, the Southern Poverty Law Center, 
the Center for Democratic Renewal, and, since 1994, the Center 
for New Community monitor extremism on the Right and are the 
prime source of reliable published information. Founded in 1913, 
the Anti-Defamation League, with headquarters in New York City 
and offices around the country, defends the rights of Jews and 
other minorities and regularly publishes books, in-depth studies, 
and reports on hate groups. The Southern Poverty Law Center 
(SPLC) was founded in 1971 and operates out of Montgomery, 
Alabama. In addition to investigation and litigation and providing 
“teaching tolerance” materials to schools and intelligence to police 
forces, the SPLC’s IntelL&ence Report, now published quarterly, is 
the most extensive source of public information on right-wing ex- 
tremism. The Center for Democratic Renewal in Atlanta, Georgia, 
grew out of the Anti-Klan Network founded by the Southern


--- PAGE 198 ---
Essay on Sources 189 
Christian Leadership Conference after the 1979 killings in Greens- 
boro, North Carolina. The Center for New Community (CNC), in 
Oak Park, Illinois, is a faith-based organization that makes reports, 
holds conferences, and helps Midwest communities organize 
against hate groups. The SPLC’s special report “The Ku Klux 
Klan: A History of Racism and Violence’’ (3rd ed., 1988) and the 
CNC’s “The Far-Right in the Midwest” (1999) are good starting 
points. 
For the civil rights era, Numan Bartley’s The New South, 1945- 
1980 (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1995), in the 
History of the South series, is a reliable overview. New Tor& Times 
man Howell Raines’s My Soul Is Rested: The Story of the Civil R@ts 
Movement in the Deep South (New York: Penguin, 1977) is an ex- 
cellent oral history collection, although the selections are too brief. 
William Rogers, Robert Ward, Leah Atkins, and Wayne Flynt’s Al- 
abama: The History of a Deep South State (Tuscaloosa: University 
of Alabama Press, 1994) is the best of the state histories. Pulitzer 
Prize-winning historians Taylor Branch’s Parting the Waters: 
America in the King Years, 1954-1963 (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1988) and Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years, 
1963-65 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998) and David Gar- 
row’s Bearing the Cross, Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference (New York: Murrow, 1986) are 
marvels of research and oral history, as is Dan Carter’s political bi- 
ography of George Wallace, The Politics of Rage: George Wallace, 
the Origins of the New Conservatism, and the Transformation of 
American Politics (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 
1995). David Halberstam’s The Children (New York: Random 
House, 1998) is the insightful biography of the Nashville contin- 
gent who were at the heart of the Student Nonviolent Coordinat- 
ing Committee. 
The struggles in most of the Deep South states have their out- 
standing historians. In Alabama, it is Glen Eskew, But for Bir- 
mingham (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997). 
The stories of Klan victims are told in Mary Stanton’s From Selma 
to Sorrow: The Life and Death of Viola Liuzzo (Athens: University 
of Georgia Press, 1998) and Frank Sikora’s Until Justice Rolls 
Down: The Birmingham Church Bombing Case (Tuscaloosa:


--- PAGE 199 ---
190 Essay on Sources 
University of Alabama Press, 199 1 ). Diane McWhorter’s Pulitzer 
Prize-winning Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama: The Cli- 
mactic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2001) is the story of a New York journalist who went 
home to Birmingham to investigate the connection between her 
class and family and the Klan. David Garrow offers an incisive re- 
view of the literature on Birmingham in “Many Birminghams: Tak- 
ing Segregationists Seriously,” Southern Changes 23, no. 2 (sum- 
mer 2001): 26-32. For Florida, it is David Colburn, Racial 
Change and Community Crisis: St. Augustine Florida, 1877-1 980 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1985). For Mississippi, it 
is Seth Cagin and Philip Dray, We Are Not Afraid: The Mississippi 
Murders of Goodman, Schwerner, and Chaney and the Civil Rights 
Campaign for Mississippi (New York: Macmillan, 1988); John Ditt- 
mer, Local People: The Strumle for Civil Rights in Mississippi (Ur- 
bana: University of Illinois Press, 1944); and Jack Nelson, Terror 
in the Night: The Klan’s Campaign against theJews (New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1970). The essay on Mississippi White Knight 
Sam Bowers in Charles Marsh, God’s Long Summer: Stories of Faith 
and Civil Rights (Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 
1997), is an exception to the lack of treatment of Klan leaders. 
Adam Fairclough’s Race and Democracy: The Civil Rights Strumle 
in Louisiana, 1915-1 972 (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 
1995), tells the Louisiana story. Clive Webb’s Fight against Fear: 
Southern Jms and Black Civil Rights (Athens: University of Geor- 
gia Press, ZOOl), impressive in its broad coverage, tells of how, de- 
spite a general self-protective silence, the activities of a minority of 
women and rabbis tagged the Jews as a threat to white solidarity 
without winning the appreciation of the black nationalists. 
The role of the federal government is treated in Michal Belk- 
nap’s outstanding Federal Law and Southern Order: Racial Vio- 
lence and Constitutional Conflict in the Post-Brown South (Athens: 
University of Georgia Press, 1987); in Jack Bass, Taming the Storm: 
The L$e and Times of Judge Frank M. Johnson, Jr., and the South’s 
F$bt over Civil Rights (New York: Doubleday, 1993); and, not fa- 
vorably, in Kenneth O’Reilly, “Racial Matters”: The FBI’s Secret 
File on Black America, 1960-1972 (New York: Free Press, 1989), 
and Victor Navasky, Kennedy Justice (New York: Atheneum,


--- PAGE 200 ---
Essay on Sources 191 
1971). To almost everyone’s surprise, the House Un-American Ac- 
tivities Committee conducted a serious and informative investiga- 
tion, “Activities of Ku Klux Klan Organizations in the United 
States,” Hearings, Report, Contempt Citations, Bills, 1965-1967. 
The U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Activities 
(1975) Hearings on the FBI (Vol. 5) and its Final Report deal criti- 
cally with the federal government. 
For the “fourth era” of the Hans in the 1970s and 1980s, 
Elizabeth Wheaton’s Codename Greenkill: The 1979 Greensboro 
Killings (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1987) tries to 
straighten out what happened in the streets of Greensboro. Patsy 
Sims’s The Klan (New York: Stein and Day, 1978) documents the 
author’s travels across the Klan world and sets down what they said 
and what they were doing. David Duke tells his own story in My 
Awakenin.: A Path to Racial Understandin. (Mandeville, La.: 
Free Speech Press, 1998), and a group of anti-Duke activists and 
intellectuals subject his life to critical commentary in The Emer- 
gence of David Duke and the Politics of Race, edited by Douglas 
Rose (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992). 
Anti-Klan investigator, litigator, and educator Morris Dees tells his 
story in A Season for Justice: The Life and Times of Civil Rights 
Lawyer Morris Dees (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1991). 
The profile of ordinary Klansmen must, for the most part, be 
compiled from news accounts of Klan rallies and arrests. The most 
extensive information on Klan leadership is the Hearings and Re- 
port of the House Un-American Activities Committee (1965- 
1967). Patsy Sims’s The Klan contains information for the 1970s, 
and sociologists Betty Dobratz and Stephanie Shanks-Meile pro- 
vide a treasure house of fifth-era interview material and sociological 
analysis in “White Power, White Pride!” The White Separatist Move- 
ment in the United States (New York: Twayne, 1997). 
In an understudied field, sociologist Kathleen Blee is the prime 
student of women in right-wing extremist movements. Her life- 
history analyses, based on a decade of interviewing, were published 
mainly in feminist journals. Drawing them together in Inside Orga- 
nized Racism: Women in the Hate Movement (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 2002), she does not find women’s agendas 
comparable to those in her study of the 1920s Klan in Women of


--- PAGE 201 ---
192 Essay on Sources 
the Klan: Racism and Gender in the 1920s (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1991). Rather, women in contemporary racist 
movements, of which they constitute as much as a quarter of new 
recruits, play subordinate roles in male-dominated organizations. 
Procreating White Supremacy: Women and the Far Right, prepared 
by the Center for Democratic Renewal (April 1996), reprints a 
broad range of articles, including white supremacist viewpoints. 
The Southern Poverty Law Center’s Intellgence Report (summer 
1999) contains articles about women’s roles on the radical Right 
and a list of women’s websites. 
The underpinnings of the fifth era are studied by the contribu- 
tors to Anti-Semitism in American History, edited by David 
Gerber (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1986), and by John 
Higham, Send These to Me: Jews and Other Imm&rants in Urban 
America (New York: Atheneum, 1975). American Jewish History 
(December 1986) offers a retrospective on Higham’s work and in- 
fluence. David Bennett’s The Party of Fear: From Nativist Move- 
ments to the New Rght in American History (Chapel Hill: Univer- 
sity of North Carolina Press, 1988) rejects an antialien explanation 
for the end-of-the-century developments. Precursors are to be 
found in Leo Ribuffo’s The Old Christian Right: The Protestant 
Far R&htfi.om the Depression to the Cold War (Philadelphia: Tem- 
ple University Press, 1983); Glen Jeansonne’s Gerald L. K. Smith: 
Minister of Hate (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 
1988); Alan Brinkley’s Voices of Protest: Huey Long, Father Cough- 
lin, and the Great Depression (New York: Knopf, 1982); and Philip 
Jenkins’s “Home-Grown Terror,” American Heritage 46, no. 5 
(September 1955): 38-46. Neil Baldwin’s Henry Ford and the 
Jews: The Mass Production of Hate (New York: Public Affairs, 2001) 
roots Ford’s anti-Semitism in the messages learned in childhood 
from the McGufey Reader and other negative images in the gen- 
eral culture. Ford was a mechanical genius, but a simple view of a 
corrupt people behind an international banking conspiracy satisfied 
Ford’s social vision. What he believed he never gave up or ques- 
tioned. He signed, without reading, the disavowal of prejudice 
written for him, leaving his heirs and the Ford Motor Car Com- 
pany to clean up the damage to its name. The collected articles 
from Henry Ford’s Dearborn Independent in William J. Cameron’s


--- PAGE 202 ---
Essay on Sources 193 
The International Jew: The World’s Foremost Problem (Dearborn, 
Mich., 1920) has never been out of print. 
George Johnson’s Architects of Fear: Conspiracy Theories and 
Paranoia in American Politics (Los Angeles: Jeremy P. Thacher, 
1983) is a valuable source about 300 years of conspiracy monger- 
ing, beginning with alarm over the “Illuminati,” “Rosicrucians,” 
and “Freemasonry.” Robert Goldberg’s Enemies Within: The Cul- 
ture of Conspiracy in Modern America (New Haven, Conn.: Yale 
University Press, 2001) shows how deep a role conspiracy plays in 
our culture and tells the story of the past half century, ranging 
across the culture from UFOs and the murder of President Ken- 
nedy to the coming of the anti-Christ. His notes include lists of 
films, media programs, and websites. For an explanation of the role 
of “prophecy,” read Paul Boyer’s When Time Shall Be No More: 
Prophecy Belief in Modern American Culture (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1992). Leonard Zeskind’s The “Chris- 
tian Identity” Movement: A Theological Justi$cation for Racist and 
Anti-Semitic Violence (Atlanta: Center for Democratic Renewal, 
1986) and Michael Barkun’s Relig-ion and the Racist Right: The 
&&ins of the Christian Identity Movement (Chapel Hill: Univer- 
sity of North Carolina Press, 1997) are the best introductions to 
Christian Identity, and Raphael Ezekiel’s The Racist Mind: Por- 
traits of American Neo-Nazis and Klansmen (New York: Viking, 
1995) is the best introduction to the people who lead the move- 
ment. 
The organized forces of violence are informatively profiled by 
James Corcoran, Bitter Harvest: The Birth of Paramilitary Terror- 
ism in the Heartland (New York: Viking, 1990); James Coates, 
Armed and DanJerous: The Rise of the Survivalist Right (New 
York: Hill & Wang, 1987); Kevin Flynn and Gary Gerhardt, The 
Silent Brotherhood: Inside America’s Racist Underyound (New 
York: Free Press, 1989); James Aho, The Politics of Righteousness: 
Idaho’s Christian Patriotism (Seattle: University of Washington 
Press, 1990); and Morris Dees and Steve Fiffer, Hate on Trial: The 
Case against America’s Most Dangerous Neo-Nazi (New York: Vil- 
lard, 1993). Excellent early writings on the militia movement are 
Morris Dees with James Corcoran, Gathering Storm: America’s Mi- 
litia Threat (New York: HarperCollins, 1996), and Kenneth Stern,


--- PAGE 203 ---
194 Essay on Sources 
A Force upon the Plain: The American Militia Movement and the 
Politics of Hate (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996). As indicated 
earlier here, the prime sources for the unfolding history of the ex- 
tremist Right are the publications of the Anti-Defamation League 
(ADL), the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), the Center for 
Democratic Renewal (CDR), and the Center for New Community 
(CNC). Attempting to place it all in a larger context are Gary 
Wills’s “The New Revolutionaries,” New York Review of Books 42, 
no. 13 (August 1995): 50-55, and, in an international context, 
Encounters with the Contemporary Radical Right, edited by Peter 
Merkl and Leonard Weinberg (Boulder: University of Colorado 
Press, 1993), and Martin Lee’s The Beast Reawakens: Fascism’s Re- 
surgence f.om Hitler’s Spymasters to Today’s Neo-Nazi Groups and 
Right- Win, Extremists (New York: Routledge, 1997). George 
Fredrickson, Racism: A Short History (Princeton, N. J.: Princeton 
University Press, 2002), places anti-Semitism and white supremacy 
in a larger historical perspective.


--- PAGE 204 ---
Acknowledgments 
Rather than using notes, I have sought to incorporate the sources 
of insight and interpretation within the text and to use the biblio- 
graphic essay as a guide for interested readers. In addition, I am 
indebted to many people, notably Fletcher Baldwin, Henry and 
Jean Chalmers, Richard Cohen, Edward Crowther, John Dittmer, 
Joe Feagin, Michael Gannon, Laura Langlie, Meredith Morris- 
Babb, Marian Price, Mark Potok, Penny Weaver, Randall Williams, 
Laurie Wood, Anne Wyatt-Brown, Robert Zieger, and Graphics, 
Circa, and the Library of the University of Florida. 
Some of the material in Backfire: How the Ku Klux Klan 
Helped the Civil Rights Movement has been previously published as 
chapters 46-52 in my Hooded Americanism: The History of the Ku 
Klux Klan (3rd ed., 1989), pages 343-423. Copyright 1981, 
Duke University Press. All rights reserved. Reproduced with 
author permission. With editing and addition, this includes the 
Klan after the school desegregation decision (chapter 2), the Klan’s 
bombing campaign (chapter 3), St. Augustine and Georgia in the 
summer of 1963 (chapter 6), Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist 
Church bombing (chapter 12), the 1970s Klan (chapter 13), the 
Greensboro affair (chapter 14), and more limited use in the 
accounts of the 1960 presidential election (chapter 4), David Duke 
(chapter 15), and violence in Mississippi (chapter 7) and Selma, 
Alabama (chapter 8). 
195


--- PAGE 205 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 206 ---
Index 
Abernathy, Ralph, 32 
Aho, James, 177 
Ainsworthy, Kathy, 83,95,174 
Alabama, 6-8,12-13,16-17,22- 
26,27-37,29,40,101-5,109, 
111-13, 137-44, 161. See also 
Anniston (Alabama); Birmingham 
(Alabama); Dees, Morris; Selma 
(Alabama); Sixteenth Street Bap- 
tist Church 
South State, 23 
Alabama: The History of a Deep 
America in the King Years, 50 
American Civil Liberties Union 
Anniston (Alabama), 28-30,33,69, 
Anti-Defamation League (ADL), 
anti-Semitism, 8-9,19-20,43,81- 
(ACLU), 64,140 
94 
108,146,187-88 
86,126-29,131,135,142,149, 
164-66,170-77,181-82,185, 
190-93. See also Duke, David 
Aryan Nations, 139,142-43,146, 
185-86. See also anti-Semitism; 
Butler, Richard 
152,163,166-67,174-78,181, 
Atlanta (Georgia), 5,16, 131 
Baxley, William, 101-4,158-59 
Beam, Louis, 143,151,167-68, 
179 
Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther 
Kang, Jr., and the Southern Chris- 
tian Leadership Conference, 67 
Beckwith, Byron De La, 56,85-88, 
Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The 
Making of the Second Ku Klux 
Klan, 154-55 
Belknap, Michal, 68,77 
Berg, Alan, 143,167 
Bergman, Walter, 100 
Berry, Jeff, 152-53 
Birmingham (Alabama), 7, 16,28, 
Bitter Harvest: The Birth of Paramil- 
93,95,157-58 
31-37,101-5,160-61 
itary Terrorism in the Heartland, 
165 
Black, Don, 15 1 
Blanton, Tommy, 19,158-60 
Blee, Kathleen, 153-54, 191-92 
Bogalusa (Louisiana), 52 
bombing, 15-19,35,37,39,56-58, 
68-70,8 1-86,90-9 1,94,97, 
101-5,122,144,158-60,181 
boundaries, 148-49 
197


--- PAGE 207 ---
198 Index 
Bowers, Sam Holloway, 48, 53-56, 
58,65,78-81,90-91,93,157- 
58,161-62 
Brady gun control law, 180 
Branch, Taylor, 50 
Branch Davidians, 179 
British Israelism, 173,175 
Brown v. Topeka (1954), 5, 73 
Bryant, Farris, 45 
Buchanan, Patrick, 134,183-85 
Bucklew, William Henry, 90-91 
Buckley, William F., 185 
Burns, Haydon, 12, 17 
business communities, 34-35,89- 
Butler, Richard, 139,143,168-70, 
90,94 
174-77,185-86 
Cagin, Seth, 51 
Cameron, William, 173 
Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Ala- 
bama: The Climactic Battle of the 
Civil R$ts Revolution, 160 
Carter, Asa (“Ace”), 6-8, 11, 20, 
Carter, Dan, 25-26 
Carter, Hodding, 11, 57 
Carto, Willis, 24, 131, 176, 182. See 
also Duke, David; Spotli& 
Center for Constitutional Rights, 
147 
Center for Democratic Renewal, 188 
Center for New Community, 169, 
Chambliss, Robert M., 18-19, 37, 
Chaney, James. See Schwerner, Mi- 
Chattanooga (Tennessee), 11-12, 
24-25 
189 
70,101-4,158 
chael (“Mickey”) 
16-17,146-48 
Cherry, Bobby Frank, 18-19, 
The Children, 47 
Christian Identity, 54,83,127, 
158-60 
158-60,166,169,173-75, 
177-8 1 
Chung, Connie, 158 
Church, Frank, 99 
Church of the Creator, 139, 175 
Citizens’ Councils, 7, 126-27 
Chaney, James. See Schwerner, Mi- 
Clark, Jim, 62,64 
Clinton (Tennessee), 8-9,15 
Codename Greenkill, 123 
Colburn, David, 89-90 
Cole, James W. (“Catfish”), 9-1 1 
Collins, Addie Mae, 37, 101-2, 
104-5,148. See also Blanton, 
Tommy; Chambliss, Robert M.; 
Cherry, Bobby Frank; Sixteenth 
Street Baptist Church 
chael (“Mickey”) 
Columbine High School, 179 
Communist Workers Party (CWP), 
Community Relations Service, 110 
Congress of Racial Equaltiy 
117-23,149 
(CORE), 28-30,48,70. See also 
freedom riding 
34,37,62 
Connor, Eugene (“Bull”), 28,31, 
conspiracy, 18-20,41-43, 51, 54, 
180-82,184. See also anti-Semi- 
tism 
127,168-69,170-72,175-76, 
Corcoran, James, 165 
Cottonreader, R B., 111-13 
COUNTERINTELPRO. See Fed- 
Cox, Harold, 52,79-80,91 
Crommelin, John, 8-9,22 
eral Bureau of Investigation (FBI)


--- PAGE 208 ---
Index 199 
CSA (“the Covenent, the Sword, 
and the Arm of the Lord”), 166, 
168 
Dahmer, Ellie, 157 
Dahmer, Vernon, 47,56,65,80-81, 
Daniels, Jonathan, 65 
Davidson, Meyer, 84 
Davidson, Robert Lee (“Wild Bill”), 
Deacons for Defense and Justice, 52 
Dearborn Independent, 171-72. See 
Decatur (Alabama), 109-13,140 
Dee, Henry, 68 
Dees, Morris, 33,112, 137-44, 
98,157 
13 
also Ford, Henry 
147-48, 155, 180, 183, 186. See 
also Southern Poverty Law Center 
(SPLC) 
DeLaughter, Bobby, 157 
Dirkson, Everett, 65 
Dittmer, John, 54, 58 
Doar, John, 56,69,74,77-79 
Donald, Beulah Mae, 148 
Donald, Michael, 138,147-48,157 
Dray, Philip, 51 
Duke, David, 107,125-35,151-52, 
Dulles, Allen, 50 
155,175,184,186-87 
Eastland, James, 82,91 
Eastview Klavern 13,18, 100 
The Education of Little Tree, 25 
Edwards, Edwin, 133-34 
Edwards, Eldon, 5, 7, 12-14, 17 
Ellison, James, 168-69 
Emmerich, Oliver, 58,90. See also 
Esolen, Gary, 133 
Estes Park “rendezvous,” 179 
McComb (Mississippi) 
Evers, Charles, 95 
Evers, Medgar, 36,47,68,95, 
Evers, Myrlie, 157 
Ezekiel, Raphael, 145 
156-57 
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI), 19,39,45-46,49-51,59, 
64,68-72,80-85,94,97-102 
federalism, 72 
Federal Law and Southern Order: 
Racial Violence and Constitu- 
tional Conjlict in the Post-Brown 
South, 68, 77 
Fields, Ed, 169. See also National 
States Rights Party (NSRP) 
Fifteenth Amendment (1870), 72 
“fifth-era” leadership, 163-64, 176 
Florida, 11-12,16-17,21-22,40. 
See also St. Augustine (Florida) 
Flowers, Richmond, 64 
Flynt, Wayne, 23, 37 
Folsom, James (“Big Jim”), 23-24 
Ford, Henry, 171-72,192 
Foster, Mike, 134 
freedom riding, 28-34,70,100 
Fourteenth Amendment (1868), 
fourteen-word slogan, 166 
“fourth era” revival, 108-14 
Ft. Smith conspiracy trial, 168-69 
72-73 
Gale, William Potter, 173, 176, 182 
Garrow, David, 67,190 
Gatherin8 Storm: America’s Militia 
Georgia, 5-6, 12-14,16-17,40, 
Gitlow v. Nera York (1923), 73 
nreat, 180 
45-46


--- PAGE 209 ---
200 Index 
Goodman, Andrew. See Schwerner, 
Michael (“Mickey”) 
Goodrich Tire Company, 23 
Green, Melissa Fay, 82 
Green, Samuel, 5 
Greensboro (North Carolina), 1 15- 
Griffin, Virgil, 119 
Guggenheim, Charles, 141 
23,149-50 
Halberstam, David, 47,88 
Hanes, Arthur, 64 
Hanes, Arthur, Jr., 103 
Hayling, Robert, 41-42,67 
Hays, Bennie Jack, 147-48 
Hays, Brooks, 52 
Hays, Henry Francis, 147-48,157 
heartland, 165-66 
Hefher, “Red,” 57 
Hemingway (South Carolina), 94 
Hendrix, Bill, 1 1,2 1 
Higham, John, 164,192 
Hines, Tommy Lee, 11 1 
Hitler, Adolf, 20, 126, 170, 172, 
175-76, 179, 181, 185. See also 
Duke, David; Nazis 
Holland, Dave, 151 
Hoover, J. Edgar. See Federal Bureau 
Horn, Alvin, 13,28,32 
House Un-American Activities 
of Investigation (FBI) 
Committee (HUAC), 92-95, 
Housing, Protection and Anti-riot 
Law (1968), 75,94,123,128 
Howell, Susan, 135 
145-46,150,155 
informers, 71, 84,99-101, 151, 
Intelligence Report, 183, 188 
179. See also Rowe, Gary Thomas 
The International Jim, 172. See also 
Ford, Henry 
Jackson, Jesse, 117 
Jackson, Jimmy Lee, 65 
Jackson (Mississippi), 50, 81-82,87 
Jacksonville (Florida), 12, 16,42 
Jacoway, Elizabeth, 89-90 
Jensen, Arthur, 127 
Jews, 81-86, 181-82, 190. See also 
an ti -Semi tism 
John Birch Society, 41, 176 
Johnson, Frank, Jr., 32-33,63 
Johnson, Lyndon B., 40,49,74-75, 
Johnson, Nelson, 117 
Johnson, Paul, 57,59,69,82,89, 
Johnston, J. Bennett, 132 
Jones, Doug, 158 
Jubilee, 172, 181 
juries, 17,41,46,51,64-65,68- 
61,88,92-94 
91,92 
69,77-81,91-92,102-4,122- 
23,157-60,186 
Justice Department, 32,39,49,65, 
70-74,77,102,109-10 
Kahl, Gordon, 165,168 
Kasper, Frederick John, 8-9,22 
Katzenbach, Nicholas, 88 
Kennedy, John, 22,31,35-36,39- 
Kennedy, Robert, 32-33,39 
Kennedy, Stetson, 71 
Kiker, Douglas, 25 
Killen, Edgar Ray, 48,91 
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 32, 34,42, 
King, Wayne, 119,129-30 
Klansmen, 5-14,93-94,146, 
40,94 
44,61-62,67,70,101,116 
149-52


--- PAGE 210 ---
Index 201 
Klanswomen, 153-56 
Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy Act 
(1870), 51 
Lafayette, Bernard, 36,61 
LaHaye, Tim, 182 
Lane, David, 166 
Lane, Katja, 166 
Laurel (Mississippi), 56, 90-91 
leaderless resistance, 179 
leadership, Man, 5-14, 150-53; 
white supremacist, 176-77 
Lewis, John, 31,35 
Lin, Maya, 137 
Line of Fire, 138 
Lingo, Al, 24-25,62,70 
Liuzzo, Viola, 28,51,63-65,69, 
71,77-78,88,92,95,99,100, 
103,113,148-49,161 
Local People: The StruMle for Civil 
Long, Huey, 132 
Louisiana, 52,126-35 
Louisiana Coalition Against Nazism 
and Racism, 133 
Lowrey, Joseph, 121 
Lynch, Connie, 41,43,45, 54,174 
R$m in Mississippi, 54 
MacLean, Nancy, 154-55 
Malcolm X, 155-56 
Mann, Floyd, 24, 30,32 
Manucy, Holsted ( “Hoss”), 42,45 
Marshall, Burke, 39, 50,77 
Mathews, Robert, 143,167-68, 
McCall, Willis, 161 
McComb (Mississippi), 54, 57-58, 
McDaniel, E. L., 58,92 
McGill, Ralph, 98 
177-78 
69,90 
McNair, Denise. See Collins, Addie 
McVeigh, Timothy, 144 
McWhorter, Diane, 160 
media, 128-30,132-33,152,184 
Meredith, Don, 100 
Meredith, James, 33,67 
Meridian (Mississippi), 47, 8 1-85 
Meriwether, Charles, 22-23 
Metzger, Tom, 138-39,143,151- 
Miles, Robert, 95, 163, 168 
militia, 143-44,166,176,179-81 
millennium, 182 
Miller, Glenn, 143,151-52,168-69 
Mississippi, 33-34,40,47-59, 55, 
Mae 
52,155,169,175 
61,65,67-74,78-95,109-12, 
149-52,156-57,174 
Montgomery (Alabama), 17, 32, 
Montgomery Advertiser, 142-43 
Moore, Charles, 68 
Moore, William, 68 
Moses, Robert, 47, 57 
Moyers, Bill, 88 
137 
Nash, Diane, 31,33 
National Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Colored People 
(NAACP), 36,42,47,56,68,91 
National Association for the Ad- 
vancement of White People 
(NAAWP). See Duke, David 
national government response, 31- 
34, 39-40, 69,94, 183. See also 
Doar, John; Johnson, Lyndon; 
Justice Department; Kennedy, 
John 
National Organization for European 
American Rights (NOFEAR). See 
Duke, David


--- PAGE 211 ---
202 Index 
National States Rights Party 
(NSRP), 18,19,20 
Nazis, American Nazi Movement, 
National Alliance, National So- 
cialists, neo-Nazis, 19-20, 119- 
23,126,128-30,132,145,149, 
151,170,172,176-78,181-82, 
185. See also Hitler, Adolf; Pierce, 
William; The Turner Diaries 
Nelson, Jack, 82-86, 159 
Neshoba County (Mississippi), 48- 
Nixon, Richard, 21-22,24-25 
North Carolina, 6,9-11,16-17, 
115-23. See also Greensboro 
(North Carolina) 
49,67,167 
Nussbaum, Perry, 82 
Original Knights of the Ku Klux 
Klan, 52-53 
Parchman Prison, 34,85-86 
Parks, Rosa, 156 
Patriot Movement. See militia 
Patterson, John, 22-24,31-32,89 
Peabody, Mrs. Malcolm, 43 
Peck, James, 100 
Penn, Lemuel, 45-46,51,63,68- 
Peters, Pete, 166,179 
Pierce, William, 166, 170, 182-83. 
See also Nazis; The Turner Diaries 
Politics of Rage: George Wallace, the 
Origins of the New Conservatism, 
and the Transformation of Ameri- 
can Politics, 25-26 
Politics of Rbhteousness: Idaho’s 
Christian Patriotism, 177 
Populist Party. See Carto, Willis; 
Duke, David 
Potok, Mark, 183 
69,71,73-74,78,95,148-49 
Powell, Lawrence, 133 
Price, Cecil, 48,73-74,78-80 
prophecy, 182 
protection, 61,68,72-75 
Protocols of the Learned Elders of 
Zion, 171-73. See also anti-Semi- 
tism 
Public Accommodation Act (1964), 
Putnam, Carleton, 127 
36,73,88-90,94 
Race and Reason, 127 
The Racist Mind: Portraits of Ameri- 
can Neo-Nazis and Klansmen, 
145 
Raines, Howell, 22 
Reagan, Ronald, 167,182 
Reeb, James, 65 
Revelation, 174 
Ribuffo, Leo, 172 
Robb, Thom, 151-52,155,169 
Robinson, Alfred (“Skip”), 110 
Robinson, Carole. See Collins, Addie 
Rosenthal, A. M., 127-28 
Rothschild, Jacob, 82 
Rowe, Gary Thomas, 19,31,64, 
Ruby Ridge, 179 
Mae 
70-71,77,99-103,149 
Schwerner, Michael (“Mickey”), 
47-51,54, 59,67,70,73-74, 
78-81,95,157 
Scoggins, Robert, 95 
Screws v. U.S., 74 
Selma (Alabama), 61-65 
Shelton, Robert M. (“Bobby”), 13, 
14,19-20,22-23,28,31-32,35, 
53-54,58,80,92-93,95,98, 
125,138,147-48,151,155,161 
Shuttlesworth, Fred, 18-19,28,31


--- PAGE 212 ---
Index 203 
Siegenthaler, John, 32-33 
Silver, Jim, 87 
Simmons, William J., 53 
Simpson, Bryan, 43-45 
sit-ins, 116-17 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, 18, 
skinheads, 177 
Smith, Gerald L. K., 20,126,172- 
Smith, Wesley, 54, 173-74,177, 
Snell, Richard Wayne, 168 
South Carolina, 9, 17,94 
Southern Businessmen and Segrega- 
tion, 89-90 
Southern Christian Leadership Con- 
ference (SCLC), 34-35,42,70, 
121 
(SPLC), 13744,187-89. See 
Dees, Morns 
Sovereignty Commission (Missis- 
sippi), 87 
37,70,101-5,139,148,158-60 
73,177,182 
182 
Southern Poverty Law Center 
Spotlight, 131, 160, 181-82 
St. Augustine (Florida), 41-44,90 
Stern, Carl, 99 
Stoner, Jesse B. (J. B.), 6,18,43,45, 
Student Nonviolent Coordinating 
93,104,174 
Committee (SNCC), 34, 36,47, 
62,70 
Sullivan, L. B., 32 
supremacist music, 18 1-82 
Supreme Court, U.S., 72-75 
Swift, Wesley J., 83, 174 
symbolic role, 155-56 
Talmadge, Eugene, 69 
Tarrants, Thomas Albert, III,83-86, 
95,174 
temple bombings, 82-85 
The Temple Bombing, 82 
Tennessee, 8-9, 15-17,146-48 
“10 percent solution,’’ 170 
Terror in the Night: The Klan’s Cam- 
paign against the Jms, 82-86 
Thompson, Jerry, 71 
The Turner Diaries, 166-67, 170, 
177,181-83 
United Hans of America. See Shel- 
ton, Robert M. (Bobby) 
US. v. Guest (1966), 73-74 
U.S. v. Price (1966), 73-74 
Venable, James, 6, 107, 109 
Voting Rights Act (1965), 65,69, 
72-73,88,94 
Wallace, George Corley, 7-8,22-26, 
Waller, William, 157 
We Are Not Afraid: The Story of 
32-33,35,37,89,101 
Goodman, Scherner, and Chaney 
and the Civil Rights Campaign 
for Mississippi, 5 1 
Weaver, Randy, 160,179 
Weltner, Charles, 93 
Wesley, Cynthia. See Collins, Addie 
Wheaton, Elizabeth, 123 
White Aryan Resistance (WAR). See 
White Knights of Mississippi. See 
White Patriot Party, 142 
“white power,” 11 3-14 
Wilkins, Collie Leroy, 64-65,77,79 
Wilkinson, Bill, 109-14, 125-26, 
Williams, T. Harry, 128 
Mae 
Metzger, Tom 
Bowers, Sam Holloway 
130,152-52


--- PAGE 213 ---
204 Index 
Willis, Edwin, 93 
Winrod, Gerald B., 172 146,175 
Women of the Klan: Racism and 
Gender in the 1920s, 153-34, 
World Church of the Creator, 139, 
Young, Andrew, 116 
Zionist Occupation Government 
191-92 
Workers Viewpoint Organization 
(WVO). See Communist Workers 
party (CW) (ZOG). See The Turner Diaries


--- PAGE 214 ---
About the Author 
David Chalmers is the author of Hooded Americanism: The His- 
toy of the Ku Klux Klan as well as And the Crooked Places Made 
Straig-ht: The Stru.1e for Social Change in the 1960s. He went to 
jail with Martin Luther King Jr. in St. Augustine, Florida; was an 
expert witness in a Ku Klux Klan trial in federal court in Chatta- 
nooga; and was a consultant to President Lyndon Johnson’s Na- 
tional Violence Commission. He has been Fulbright or Exchange 
Professor at the Universities of Sri Lanka, Tokyo, the Philippines, 
Tel-Aviv, and Genova. He is Distinguished Service Professor of 
History, Emeritus, at the University of Florida. 
205


--- PAGE 215 ---
This Page Intentionally Left Blank


--- PAGE 216 ---
Art Credits 
Page 14: United Hans of America Imperial Wizard Robert SheI- 
ton. 0 Southern Poverty Law Center. 
Page 30: Burning “freedom riders” bus, Anniston, Alabama, May 
14,1961. 0 Bettman/CORBIS. 
Page 49: Neshoba County Deputy Sheriff Cecil Price (left) and 
Sheriff Homer Rainey (right). 1964. 0 Stock Photo (Black Star). 
Page 5 1 : FBI “Missing” poster. 
Page 98: Postcard messages sent anonymously to the Ku Klux 
Klansmen by the FBI in the 1960s. Made available by the Freedom 
of Information Act. 
Page 13 1 : David Duke editorial cartoon. Fort Lauderdale Star- 
Sentinel, December 17, 1978. The dyspeptic Klansman in the 
lower right is Bill Wilkinson, Duke’s lieutenant, rival, and succes- 
sor. 0 Marcia Staimer/Artinforms. 
Page 138: Detail of the Civil Rights Memorial fountain at the 
Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Alabama. 0 Penny 
Weaver, SPLC. 
Page 156: KIan wife and mother, Davie, Florida. Stan Badz. 
Page 161: The KIan repeats King’s Selma-to-Montgomery march. 
U.S. Community Relations Service 1979. 
207

