=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Decolonising-the-Mind-The-Politics-of-Language-in-African-Literature-1981-Ngugi-Wa-Thiongo.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 123
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:45:15.915806
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
i 
1Waitinc for the Rain 
Charles Mungoshi 
2 Coming of the Dry Season 
Charles Mungoshi 
3 Up in Arms 
Chenjerai Hove 
4 House of Hunger 
Dambudzo Marechera 
S Baltlefront Namibia 
John ya-Otto 
6 Umzenzi Kakhalelwa 
Lenah Mazibuko 
7 Runako Munjodzi 
N.M. Mutasa 
8 Bandiet: Seven Years in 
a South African Prison 
Hugh Lewin 
9 Petals of Blood 
Ngugi wa Thiong’o 
10 No Easy Walk to Freedom 
Nelson Mandela 
11 Down Second Avenue 
Ezekiel Mphahlele 
12 Tell Freedom 
JPeter Abrahams 
13 The Trial of Dedan Kimathi 
Ngugi wa Thiong’o and 
Micere Mugo 
14 Devil on the Cross 
Ngugi wa Thiong’o 
15 The Non-Believer’s Journey 
Stanley Nyamfukudza 
16 Kunyarara Hakusi Kutaura? 
Charles Mungoshi 
17 The Identity Card 
J.M. Adiaffi 
18 Mayombe 
Pepetela 
19 A Grain of Wheat 
Ngugi wa Thiong’o 
20 God’s Bits of Wood 
Sembene Ousmane 
21 Shadows on the Horizon 
Stephen Mpofu 
22 Zvairwadza Vasara 
Gonzo H. Musengc/i 
23 A Storm is Brewing 
Krislina Rungano 
24 Maru 
-JBessie Head 
25 The Grass is Singinn 
Doris Lessing 
26 So Long a Letter 
Manama Ba 
27 Unwinding Threads 
ed. Charlotte Brunei 
28 Tsanga Yembeu 
Ngugi wa Thiong’o 
29 On the Road Again 
Freedom Nyamubaya 
30 I Win Marry When I Want 
Ngugi wa Thiong’o 
and Ngugi wa Mini 
31 Tenderness of Blood 
Mandia Langa 
32 The Lion and The Jewel 
Wole Soyinka 
33 A Wife for My Son 
Ail Ghalern 
34 And Night Fell 
Molefe Pheto 
35 We killed Mangy-Dog 
Luis Bernardo Honwana 
 
 
 
 
I Will Wail by Bertha Msoia and 
Kulongwa kwaDedan Kimathi by 
Ngugi \va Thiong’o and Micere 
Mugo are also published by ZPH. 
The River Between by Ngugi wa 
Thiong’o, Things Fall Apart by 
Chinua Achebe and No Longer at 
Ease by Chinua Achebe are 
published by Zimbabwe 
Educational Books and are 
available through ZPH. 
ZPH WRITERS SERIES


--- PAGE 2 ---
ii


--- PAGE 3 ---
iii 
Decolonising the Mind


--- PAGE 4 ---
iv 
Dedication 
 
 
This book is greatefully dedicated to all those who write in African languages, 
and to all those who over the years have maintained the dignity of the 
literature, culture, philosophy, and other treasures carried by African 
languages.


--- PAGE 5 ---
v 
Ngugi 
wa Thiong’o 
 
Decolonising the Mind 
The Politics  
of Language  
in African Literature  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ZIMBABWE PUBLISHING HOUSE


--- PAGE 6 ---
vi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zimbabwe Publishing House (Pvt.) Ltd. 
P.O. Box 350 
Harare, Zimbabwe 
 
Ngugi wa Thiong’o 1981 
 
First published 1987 by ZPH. 
Reprinted 1994 
 
ISBN 0 949225 38 X 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission 
of the publishers. 
 
Printed in Zimbabwe at 14 Austin Road, Workington, Harare


--- PAGE 7 ---
vii 
Contents 
 
 
Acknowledgements  vi 
Preface  vii 
A Statement  xi 
Introduction : Towards the Universal  
Language of Struggle 1 
1. The Language of African Literature  4 
2. The Language of African Theatre  34 
3. The Language of African Fiction  63 
4. The Quest for Relevance  87 
Index


--- PAGE 8 ---
viii 
Acknowledgements 
 
"The Language of African Literature' has a long history. Part of it was 
originally g iven as a paper at a conference organised by Trie Writers 
Association of Kenya in December 1981 on the theme 'Writing for our 
Children'. A slightly altered version of the original paper was also given at a 
conference on Language and African Literature at t he University of Calabar, 
Nigeria in 1982. The same version - again slightly altered - was tabled at the 
Zimbabwe International Book Fair in 1983 and subsequently published in an 
African Writers Association (AWA) newsletter in the same year. The present is 
an expanded version and goes very much beyond the scope of the one 
preceding it. An abridged version of this paper was first read at a university 
seminar at the Bayreuth University in July 1984. The same, only slightly 
changed to suit the occasion, was read as the opening speech at the Conference 
on New Writing from Africa, at the Commonwealth Institute in London in 
December 1984. The paper, slightly abridged, was first published in New Left 
Review no. 150 in 1985. 
"The Language of African Theatre' was als o read at the University of 
Zimbabwe in August 1984 under the auspices of the Literature Department and 
the Zimbabwe Foundation for Education with Production. 
'The Language of African Fiction' has also been read in Harare, Zimbabwe 
under the auspices of the Institute of Development Studies in August 1984 and 
at the Institute of Commonwealth Studies, University of London, in February 
1985.


--- PAGE 9 ---
ix 
Preface 
 
I was glad to be asked to give the 1984 Robb lectures in honour of Sir Douglas 
Robb, former Chancellor of Auckland University and one of New Zealand's 
most distinguished surgeons. Universities today, particularly in Africa, have 
become the modern patrons for the artist. Most African-writers are products of 
universities: indeed a good number of them still combine academic posts and 
writing. Also, a writer and a surgeon have something in common - a passion 
for truth. Prescription of the correct cure is dependent on a rigorous analysis of 
the reality. Writers are surgeons of the heart and souls of a community. And 
finally the lectures would never have been written, at, least not in the year 
1984, without the invitation from Auckland University. 
I want to thank the Chancellor, Dr Lindo Ferguson, the Vice -Chancellor, 
Dr Colin Maiden, the Registrar, Mr Warwick Nicholl and their staff for both 
the invitation and the warm reception. Professor Michael Neil and Mr 
Sebastion Black were meticulous and helpful in all the arrangements. They, 
together with Professor Terry Sturm and the staff of the English Department, 
made me feel at home. Thanks also to Wanjiku Kiarii and Martyn Sanderson 
for their friendship and constant attention during the visit. and for readily 
participating in the lectures as actors with only short notice; to Professor Albert 
Wendt, the Samoan novelist, and his wife Jenny, who laid on a big reception 
for us at their home at the University of South Pacific, Fiji, and took time to 
drive us around Suva; to  Pat Hohepa who arranged a very, moving Maori 
welcome; and to all the Maori people inside and outside the University who 
welcomed us in their houses or places of work. A sante sana! 
I felt particularly touched by the welcome I received from the Maori 
people and it will long live in my memory. There is a lot to learn from the 
culture of Maori people, a culture which has such vitality, strength and beauty: 
the vitality, strength and beauty of resistance. I was happy therefore that my 
lectures on The Politics of Language in African


--- PAGE 10 ---
x 
Literature'  coincided  with  Maori  language week. Long live the language and 
the struggling culture of the Maori people! 
Apart from the stimulus of the New Zealand invitation, the lectures owed a 
lot to the time I spent at the Ba yreuth University in West Germany as a Guest 
Professor attached to the Department of English and Comparative Literature 
from 15 May to 15 July 1984. I want to thank Professor H. Ruppert, co -
ordinator of the special research project on identity in Africa, and the German 
Research Council for the invitation; and Professor Richard Taylor and the 
entire staff of the English department for their warm reception. I would like to 
single out Dr Reinhard Sander (who arranged the visit), Dr Rhonda Cobham, 
Dr Eakhard Br eitinger, Dr Jurgen Martini and Margit Wermter, for making 
their time available and for providing me with a cosy and stimulating 
intellectual atmosphere for work. To Dr Bachir Diagne from Senegal, with 
whom I shared the house at St Johannes village, I feel  a special indebtedness 
for all the sessions on mathematical logic, Louis Althusier, Michael Pecheux, 
Pierre Macherey, Ferdinand de Saussure, Leopold Sedar Senghor, Wolof, 
African philosophy and much more. He also did translations of some passages 
from French into English. 
The fact that these lectures were ready in time for delivery owed a lot to 
Eva Lanno. Although the first lecture was written and the general framework 
of the rest worked out in Bayreuth, the actual composition and writing of the 
other three and the typing of all four was done in New Zealand. Eva typed 
them, the last two as I was writing them, amidst working out the travel plans 
and appoint ments and rushing to the libraries and bookshops for urgently 
needed references. 
And finally these le ctures would not have been possible without the 
inspiring patriotic friendship of all my Kenyan compatriots abroad, particularly 
those in Britain, Denmark, Sweden and Zimbabwe; and to all the friends of 
Kenyan people's struggles for democratic and human ri ghts. I don't mention 
their names here for reasons that lie outside this book. But the strength to write 
the lectures and other books I have written since 1982 under the harsh 
conditions of my present existence has come from them. 
Over the years I have come to realise more and more that work, any work, 
even literary creative work, is not the result of an individual genius but the 
result of a collective effort. There are so many inputs in the actual formation of 
an image, an idea, a line of argument and even  sometimes the formal 
arrangement. The very words we use are


--- PAGE 11 ---
xi 
a  product   of  a  collective   history. So, too, is   the  present work. 
I owe a lot to the people who have contributed to the great debate on the 
language of African literature, in particular to the late David Diop of Senegal, 
and to Obi Wali of Nigeria who made the historic intervention in 1964. There 
are many others. African linguists for instance have been more progressive in 
their outlook on the language issue than their counterparts in creative literature. 
For instance, a lot of good work on Kenyan and African languages has been 
done at the Department of Linguistics and African languages at the University 
of Nairobi. Professor Abdulaziz and Dr Karega Miitahi have done pioneering 
work in many areas of Kenyan languages. They both acknowledge the reality 
of there being three languages for each child in Kenya, a reality which many 
patriotic and democratic Kenyans would now argue should be translated into 
social and official policy. Kiswahili would be the all -Kenya national and 
official language; the other nationality languages would have their rightful 
places in the schools; and English would remain Kenya people's first language 
of international communication. But in these lectures I am not dealing so much 
with the language policies as with the language practice of African writers. I 
should here point out and reiterate that there are many writers all over Africa 
who over the years, over the centuries, have written and continue to write in 
African languages. 
My thinking has been decisively shaped and changed more than I can ever 
express on paper by the collective work and debates of the staff and students of 
the Literature Department, University of Nairobi, particularly in the period 
from 1971 to 1977. I have always remembered with fondness all the staff and 
the students and the, secretaries and all the other workers with whom I had the 
privilege to interact during those momentous years. Professor Micere Mugo 
had a capacity of firing my imaginatio n in different directions and I looked 
forward, particularly in the years from 1974 to 1976, to our almost daily 
morning sessions of discussions and review of events in the corridors of the 
Literature Department, sessions which resulted in the joint author ship of The 
Trial of Dedan Kimathi, itself an act of literary and political intervention. 
The 1974 Nairobi conference on the teaching of African literature in 
schools was an important landmark in my growth. I owe a lot to all the teachers 
and all the participants for I gained insights from the often heated proceedings. 
The conference itself owed much to the indefatigable efforts of S. Akivaga and 
Eddah Gachukia who ably and


--- PAGE 12 ---
xii 
admirably held it together. To Wasambo Were, the first Kenyan inspector of 
drama and literature in the Ministry of Education, and to all the teachers and 
the staff of literature departments at Nairobi and at Kenyatta University 
College who have continued the debate on African literature in schools, I offer 
these essays as what would have been my contribution had I been on the scene. 
If the Literature Department at Nairobi was influential in my thinking on 
language and literature, it was Kamiriithu that was decisive in my actual break 
with my past praxis, in the area of fiction and theat re. I am grateful to all the 
women and men of Kamiriithu with whom I worked at Kamiriithu Community 
Education and Cultural Centre, and in particular to Ngugi wa Mirii, S. Somji, 
Kimani Gecau and Kabiru Kinyanjui. 
Inevitably, essays of this nature may carry  a holier -than-thou attitude or 
tone. I would like to make it clear that I am writing as much about myself as 
about anybody else. The present predicaments of Africa are often not a matter 
of personal choice: they arise from an historical situation. Their s olutions are 
not so much a matter of personal decision as that of a fundamental social 
transformation of the structures of our societies starting with a real break with 
imperialism and its internal ruling allies. Imperialism and its comprador 
alliances in Africa can never never develop the continent. 
If in these essays I criticise the Afro -European (or Euroafrican) choice of 
our linguistic praxis, it is not to take away from the talent and the genius of 
those who have written in English, French or Portuguese. On the contrary I am 
lamenting a neo-colonial situation which has meant the European bourgeoisie 
once again stealing our talents and geniuses as they have stolen our economies. 
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries Europe stole art treasures from 
Africa to decorate their houses and museums; in the twentieth century Europe 
is stealing the treasures of the mind to enrich their languages and cultures. 
Africa needs back its economy, its politics, its culture, its languages and all its 
patriotic writers. 
To end with Shabaan Robert: Titi la mama litamu lingawa la mbwa, 
lingine halishi tamu... Watu wasio na lugha ya asili, kadiri walivyo wastaarabu, 
cheo chao ni cha pili dunia - dunia la cheo.


--- PAGE 13 ---
xiii 
A Statement 
 
In 1977 I published Petals of Blood and said farewell to the English language 
as a vehicle of my writing of plays, novels and short stories. All my subsequent 
creative writing has been written directly in Gikuyu language: my novels 
Caitaani Mutharabaini an d Matigari Ma Njiruiingi, my plays Ngaahika 
Ndeenda (written with Ngugi wa Mirii) and Maitu Njugira, and my chidrens' 
books, Njamba Nene na Mbaathi i Mathagu, Bathitoora ya Njamba Nene and 
Njamba Nene na Cibu King'ang'i. 
However, I continued writing explanatory prose in English. Thus Detained: 
A Writer's Prison Diary, Writers in Politics and Barrel of a Pen were all written 
in English 
This book, Decolonising the~7Hind, is my farewell to English as a vehicle 
for any of my writings. From now on it is Gikuyu and Kiswahili all the way. 
However, I hope that through the age old medium of translation I shall be 
able to continue dialogue with all.


--- PAGE 14 ---
xiv


--- PAGE 15 ---
1 
Introduction 
 
This book is a summary of some of the issues in which I have been 
passionately involved for the last twenty years of my practice in fiction, 
theatre, criticism and in teaching literature. For those who have read my books 
Homecoming, Writers in Politics, Barrel of a Pen and even Detained: A 
Writer's Prison Diary there may be a feeling of deja vu. Such a reaction will 
not be far from the truth. But the lectures on which this book is based have 
given me the chance to pull together in a connected and coherent form the 
main issues on the language question in literature which I have touched on here 
and there in my previous works and interviews. I hope though that the work 
has gained from the insights I have received from the reactions - friendly and 
hostile - of other people to the issues over the same years. This book is part of 
a continuing debate all over the continent about the destiny of Africa. 
The study of the African realities has for too long been seen in terms of 
tribes. Whatever happens in Kenya, Uganda, Malawi is because of Tribe A 
versus Tribe B. Whatever erupts in Zaire, Nigeria, Liberia, Zambia is because 
of the traditional enmity between Tribe D and Tribe C. A variation of the same 
stock interpretation is Moslem versus Christian or Catholic versus Protestant 
where a people does not easily fall into `tribes'. Even literature is someti mes 
evaluated in terms of the `tribal' origins of the authors or the `tribal' origins and 
composition of the characters in a given novel or play. This misleading stock 
interpretation of the African realities has been popularised by the western 
media which likes to deflect people from seeing that imperialism is still the 
root cause of many problems in Africa. unfor tunately some African 
intellectuals have fallen victims - a few incurably so -to that scheme and they 
are unable to see the divide -and-rule colon ial origins of explaining any 
differences of intellectual outlook or any political clashes in terms of the ethnic 
origins of the actors. No man or woman can choose their biological nationality. 
The conflicts between peoples cannot be explained in terms of that which is 
fixed (the invariables). Otherwise the problems between any two peoples


--- PAGE 16 ---
2 
would always be the same at all times and places; and further, there would 
never be any solution to social conflicts except through a change in that which 
is permanently fixed, for example through genetic or biological transformation 
of the actors. 
My approach will be different. I shall look at the African realities as they 
are affected by the great struggle between the two mutually opposed forces in 
Africa today: an imperialist tradition on one hand, and a resistance tradition on 
the other. The imperialist tradition in Africa is today maintained by the 
international bourgeoisie using the multinational and of course the flag-waving 
native ruling classes. The economic and  political dependence of this African 
neo-colonial bourgeoisie is reflected in its culture of apemanship and parrotry 
enforced on a restive population through police boots; barbed wire, a gowned 
clergy and judiciary; their ideas are spread by a corpus of state intellectuals, the 
academic and journalistic laureates of the neo -colonial establishment. The 
resistance tradition is being carried out by the working people (the peasantry 
and the proletariat) aided by patriotic students, intellectuals (academic and 
non-academic), soldiers and other progressive elements of the petty middle 
class. This resistance is reflected in their patriotic defence of the . 
peasant/worker roots of national cultures, their defence of the democratic 
struggle in all the nationalities inhabiting the same territory. Any blow against 
imperialism, no matter the ethnic and regional origins of the blow, is a victory, 
for all anti-imperialistic elements in all the nationalities. The sum total of all 
these blows no matter what their weight, size, scale, location in time and space 
makes the national heritage. 
For these patriotic defenders of the fighting cultures of African people, 
imperialism is not a slogan. It is real, it is palpable in content and form and in 
its methods and effects. Imperialism is the rule of consolidated finance capital 
and since 1884 this monopolistic parasitic capital has affected and continues to 
affect the lives even of the peasants in the remotest corners of our countries. If 
you are in doubt, just count how many Afric an countries have now been 
mortgaged to IMF - the new International Ministry of Finance as Julius 
Nyerere once called it. Who pays for the mortgage? Every single producer of 
real wealth (usevalue) in the country so mortgaged, which means every single 
worker and peasant. Imperialism is total: it has economic, political, military, 
cultural and psychological consequences for the people of the world today. It 
could even lead to holocaust. 
The freedom for western finance capital and for the vast transnational 
monopolies under its umbrella to continue stealing from the


--- PAGE 17 ---
3 
countries and people of Latin America, Africa, Asia and Polynesia is today, 
protected by conventional and nuclear weapons: Imperialism, led by the USA, 
presents the struggling peoples of the earth  and all those calling for peace, 
democracy and socialism with the Ultimatum: accept theft or death. 
The oppressed and the exploited of the earth maintain their defiance: 
liberty from theft. But the biggest weapon wielded and actually daily unleashed 
by imperialism against that collective defiance is the cultural bomb. The effect 
of a cultural bomb is to annihilate a people's belief in their names, in their 
languages, in their environment, in their heritage of struggle, in their unity, in 
their capacities and ultimately in themselves. It makes them see their past as 
one wasteland of non -achievement and it makes them want to distance 
themselves from that wasteland. It makes them want to identify with that which 
is furthest removed  from themselves; for instance, with other peoples' 
languages rather than their own. It makes them identify with that which is 
decadent and reactionary, all 'those forces which would stop their own springs 
of life. It even plants serious doubts about the m oral rightness of struggle. 
Possibilities of triumph or victory are seen as remote, ridiculous dreams. The 
intended results are despair, despondency and a collective death-wish. Amidst 
this wasteland which it has created, imperialism presents itself as the cure and 
demands that the dependant sing hymns of praise with the constant refrain: 
`Theft is holy'. Indeed, this refrain sums up the new creed of the neo -colonial 
bourgeoisie in many `independent' African states. 
The classes fighting against imperialism even in its neo-colonial stage and 
form, have to confront this threat with the higher and more creative culture of 
resolute struggle. These classes have to wield even more firmly the weapons of 
the struggle contained in their cultures. They have to speak the united language 
of struggle contained in each of their languages. They must discover their 
various tongues to sing the song: `A people united can never be defeated'. 
The theme of this book is simple. It -is taken from a poem by the Guyanese 
poet Martin Carter in which he sees ordinary men and women hungering and 
living in rooms without lights; all those men and women in South Africa, 
Namibia, Kenya, Zaire, Ivory Coast, El Salvador, Chile, Philippines, South 
Korea, Indonesia, Grenada, Fanon's `Wretched of  the Earth', who have 
declared loud and clear that they do not sleep to dream, `but dream to change 
the world'. 
I hope that some of the issues in this book will find echoes in your hearts.


--- PAGE 18 ---
4 
The Language  
of African Literature 
 
I The language of African li terature cannot be discussed meaningfully outside 
the context of those social forces which have made it, both an issue demanding 
our attention and a problem calling for a resolution. 
On the one hand is imperialism in its colonial and neo -colonial phases 
continuously press-ganging the African hand to the plough to turn the soil over, 
and putting blinkers on him to make him view the path ahead only as 
determined for him by the master armed with the bible and the sword. In other 
words, imperialism continues to control the economy, politics, and cultures of 
Africa. But on the other, and pitted against it, are the ceaseless struggles of 
African people to liberate their economy, politics and culture from that 
Euro-American-based stranglehold to usher a new era of true communal 
self-regulation and self-determination. It is an ever-continuing struggle to seize 
back their creative initiative in history through a real control of all the means of 
communal self-definition in time and space. The choice of language and the  
use to which language is put is central to a people's definition of themselves in 
relation to their natural and social environment, indeed in relation to the entire 
universe. Hence language has always been at the heart of the two contending 
social forces in the Africa of the twentieth century. 
The contention started a hundred years ago when in 1884 the capitalist 
powers of Europe sat in Berlin and carved an entire continent with a 
multiplicity of peoples, cultures, and languages into different colonies. It seems 
it is the fate of Africa to have her destiny always decided around conference 
tables in the metropolises of the western world: her submergence from 
self-governing communities into colonies was decided in Berlin; her more 
recent transition into neoco lonies along the same boundaries was negotiated 
around the same tables in London, Paris, Brussels and Lisbon. The 
Berlin-drawn  
1


--- PAGE 19 ---
5 
division under which Africa is still living was obviously economic and 
political, despite the claims of bible -wielding diplomat s, but it was also 
cultural. Berlin in 1884 saw, the division of Africa into the different languages 
of the European powers. African countries, as colonies and even today as  
neo-colonies, came to be defined and to define themselves in terms of the 
languages of Europe: English -speaking, French -speaking or 
Portuguese-speaking African countries.(1) 
Unfortunately writers who should have been mapping paths out of that 
linguistic encirclement of their continent also came to be defined and to define 
themselves in terms of the languages of imperialist imposition. Even at their 
most radical and pro -African, position in their sentiments and articulation of 
problems they still took it as axiomatic that the renaissance of African cultures 
lay in the languages of Europe. 
I should know! 
 
II 
In 1962 I was invited to that historic meeting of African writers at Makerere 
University College, Kampala, Uganda. The list of participants contained most 
of the names which have now become the subject of scholarly dissertations in 
universities all over the world. The title? `A Conference of African Writers of 
English Expression'. (2) 
I was then a student of English at Makerere, an overseas college of the 
University of London. The main attraction for me was the certain possibility of 
meeting Chinua Achebe. I had with me a rough, typescript of a novel in 
progress, Weep Not, Child, and I wanted him to read it. In the previous year, 
1961, I had completed The River Between, my first-ever attempt at a novel, and 
Entered it for a writing compe tition organised by the East African Literature 
Bureau. I was keeping in step with the tradition of Peter Abrahams with his 
output of novels and autobiographies from Path of Thunder to Tell Freedom 
and followed by Chinua Achebe with his publication of Things Fall Apart in 
1959. Or there were their counterparts in French colonies, the generation of 
War Senghor and David Diop included in the 1947!48 Paris edition of 
Anthologie de la nouvelle poesie negre et malgache de langue francaise. They 
all wrote in European languages as was the case with all the participants in that 
momentous encounter on Makerere hill in Kampala in 1962.


--- PAGE 20 ---
6 
The title, ‘ A Conference of African Writers of English Expression', 
automatically excluded those who wrote in African languages. Now on looking 
back from the self-questioning heights of 1986, I can see this contained absurd 
anomalies. I, a student, could qualify for t he meeting on the basis of only two 
published short stories, `The Fig Tree (Mùgumo)' in a student journal, 
Penpoint, and 'The Return' in a new journal; Transition. But neither Shabaan 
Robert, then the greatest living East African poet with several works of poetry, 
and prose to his credit in Kiswahili, nor Chief Fagunwa, the great Nigerian 
writer with several published titles in Yoruba, could possibly qualify. 
The discussions on the novel, the short story, poetry, and drama were 
based on extracts from works in English and hence they excluded the main 
body of work in Swahili, 'Zulu, Yoruba, Arabic, Amharic and other African 
languages. Yet, despite this exclusion of writers and literature in African 
languages, no sooner were the introductory preliminaries over than this 
Conference of `African Writers of English Expression' sat down to the first 
item on the agenda: `What is African Literature?' 
The debate which followed was animated: Was it literature about Africa or 
about the African experience? Was it literatur e written by Africans? What 
about a non African who wrote about Africa: did his work qualify as' African 
literature? What if an African set his work irk Greenland: did that qualify as 
African literature? Or were African languages the criteria? OK: what abo ut 
Arabic, was it not foreign to Africa? What about French and English, which 
had become African, languages? What if 'an European wrote about Europe in 
an African language? If ... if … if ... this or that, except the issue: the 
domination of our languages and cultures by those of imperialist Europe: in 
any case there was no Fagunwa or Shabaan Robert or any writer in African 
languages to bring the conference down from the realms of evasive 
abstractions. The question was never seriously asked: did what we wro te 
qualify as African literature? The whole area of literature and audience, and 
hence of language as a determinant of both the national and class audience, did 
not really figure: the debate was more about the subject matter and the racial 
origins and geographical habitation station of the writer. 
English, like French and Portuguese, was assumed to be the natural 
language of literary and ,even political mediation between African. people in 
the same nation and between nations in Africa and other continents. In some 
instances these European languages were seen as having a capacity to unite 
African peoples against divisive tendencies


--- PAGE 21 ---
7 
inherent in the multiplicity of African languages within the same geographic 
state. Thus, Ezekiel Mphahlele Aster could write, in a letter to Transition 
number 11, that English and French have become the common language with 
which to present a nationalist front against white oppressors, and even ‘where 
the whiteman has already retreated, as in the independent states, these two 
languages are still a unifying force’. (3) In the literary sphere -they were often 
seen as coming to save African languages -against themselves. Writing a 
foreword to. Birago Diop's book Contes d'Amadou Koumba Sedar Senghor 
commends him for, using French to res cue the spirit and style of old African 
fables and tales. `However while rendering them into French he renews them 
with an art which, while. it respects the genius of the French language, that 
language of gentleness and honesty, preserves at the same time all the - virtues 
of the negro-African languages.' (4) English, French and Portuguese had come 
to our rescue and we accepted the unsolicited gift with gratitude. Thus in 1964, 
Chinua Achebe, in a speech entitled `The African Writer and the English 
Language, said: 
Is it right that a man should abandon his mother tongue for someone else's? 
It looks like a dreadful betrayal and produces-:a guilty feeling. But for me 
there is no other choice. I have been given the. language and I intend to use 
it. (5) 
See the p aradox: the possibility, of using mother -tongues provokes a tone of 
levity in phrases like ‘a dreadful betrayal’ and ‘a guilty feeling’; but that of 
foreign languages produces a categorical, positive embrace, what Achebe 
himself, ten years later, was to de scribe as this `fatalistic logic of the. 
unassailable position of English in our literature: (6) 
The fact is, that. all of us who opted for European languages –  the 
conference participants and- the generation that followed them, accepted that 
fatalistic logic to a greater or lesser degree. We were guided by it and the only 
question which preoccupied us was how. Best to make the borrowed tongues 
carry the weight of our African experience by, for instance, making them 
‘prey’ on African proverbs and other pec uliarities of African speech and 
folklore. For this task, Achebe (Things Fall Apart; Arrow of God), Amos 
Tutuola (The Palmwine Drinkard; My fife in the Bush of Ghosts), and Gabriel 
Okara (The Voice) were often held as providing the three alternative models . 
The lengths to which we were prepared to go in our mission of enriching 
foreign languages by injecting Senghorian ‘black blood’ into their rusty joints, 
is best exemplified by Gabriel Okara in an article reprinted in


--- PAGE 22 ---
8 
Transition:  
As a writer who believe s in the utilization of African ideas, African 
philosophy and African folklore and imagery to the fullest extent possible, 
I am of the opinion. the only way to use them effectively is to translate 
them almost- literally from the African language native to the writer into 
whatever European language he is using as medium of expression. I have 
endeavoured in my words to keep as close as possible to the vernacular 
expressions. For, from a word, a group of words, a sentence and even a 
name in any African languag e, one pan glean the social norms, attitudes 
and values of a people. 
In order to capture the vivid imaged of .African speech, I had, to 
eschew the habit of expressing my thoughts first in English. It was difficult 
at first, but T had -to learn I had to study. each Ijaw expression I used and 
to discover the probable situation in which it was used in order to bring out 
the nearest, meaning in English. I found it a fascinating exercise. (7) 
 
Why, we may ask, should an African writer, or any ,writer, become so 
obsessed- by taking from his. mother --tongue, to enrich other tongues? Why 
should he see it as his particular mission? We never -asked ourselves: how can 
we enrich our languages? How can we `prey', on the rich humanist and 
democratic heritage in the strugg les of other peoples in other times and other 
places to enrich our own? Why not, have Balzac, Tolstoy, Sholokov, Brecht, 
Lu Hsun, Pablo Neruda, H. C. Anderson, Kim Chi. Ha, Marx, Lenin, Albert 
Einstein, Galileo, Aeschylus, Aristotle and Plato in - African l anguages?' And 
why not create literary monuments in our own languages? Why-in other words 
should Okara not sweat it out to create in Ijaw, which he acknowledges to have 
depths of philosophy and a wide range of ideas and experiences? What was our 
responsibility to the struggles of African peoples? No, these questions were not 
asked. What seemed to worry us more was this: after all the literary gymnastics 
of preying on our languages to add life and vigour to English and other foreign 
languages, would the result be accepted as good English or good French? Will 
the owner of the language criticise our usage?-Here we were more assertive of 
our rights! Chinua Achebe wrote: 
 
I feel that the English language will be able to carry the weight of my 
African experience. But it will have to be a new English, still in full 
communion with its ancestral home but altered to suit new African 
surroundings. (8)


--- PAGE 23 ---
9 
Gabriel Okara's position on this was representative of our generation: 
Some may regard this way of writing English as a desecration of the 
language: This is of course not true. Living languages grow like living 
things, arid English is far from a dead language. There are American, West 
Indian, Australian, Canadian and New Zealand versions of English. All of 
them add life and vigour to the language while reflecting their own 
respective cultures. Why shouldn't there be a Nigerian or West African 
English which .we can use to express our own ideas, thinking and 
philosophy in. our own way? (9) 
 
How did we arrive at this acceptance of `the fatalistic logic of the 
unassailable position of English in our literature', in our culture and in our, 
politics? What was the route from the. Berlin of 1884 via the Makerere of 1962 
to what is stil l the prevailing and dominant logic a hundred years -later? How 
did we; as African writers; come to be so feeble towards. the claims of -our 
languages on us and so aggressive in our claims on other languages, 
particularly the languages . of our colonization? 
Berlin of 1884 was effected through the sword and the bullet. But the night 
of the sword and the .bullet was followed by the morning of the chalk and 'the 
blackboard. The physical violence of the battlefield was followed by the 
psychological violence of the' classroom. But where the former -was visibly 
brutal, the latter was visibly gentle, a process best described in Cheikh 
Hamidou Kane's novel Ambiguous Adventure where he talks of the methods of 
the colonial phase of imperialism as consisting of knowing how to kill with 
efficiency and to heal with the same art. 
 
On the Black Continent, one began to understand that their real power 
resided not at all in the cannons of the first morning but in what followed 
the cannons. Therefore behind the cannons was the new school. The new 
school had the nature of both the cannon and the magnet.. From the cannon 
it took the .efficiency of a fighting weapon. But better than the cann on it 
made the conquest permanent. The cannon forces the body and the school 
fascinates the soul. (10) 
 
In my view language was the most important vehicle through which that power 
fascinated and held the soul prisoner.. The bullet was the means of the physical 
subjugation. Language was the means of the spiritual subjugation. Let me 
illustrate this by drawing upon experiences in my own education, particularly 
in language and literature.


--- PAGE 24 ---
10 
III I was born into a large peasant family: father, four wives and about  
twenty-eight children. I also belonged, as we all did in those days, to a wider 
extended family and to the community as a whole. 
We spoke Gikuyu as we worked in the fields. We spoke Gikuyu in ,and 
outside the home. I can vividly recall those evenings of storytelling around the 
fireside. It was mostly the grown -ups telling the children but everybody was 
interested and involved. We children would re-tell the stories the following day 
to other children who worked in the fields picking the pyrethrum flowers, 
tea-leaves or coffee beans of our European and African landlords. 
The stories, with mostly animals as the main characters, were all told in 
Gikuyu. Hare, being small, weak but full of innovative wit arid cunning, was 
our hero. We identified with him as he struggled against the brutes of prey like 
lion, leopard, hyena. His victories were our victories and we learnt that the 
apparently weak can outwit the strong. We followed -the animals in their 
struggle against hostile nature drought, rain, sun, wind - a confrontation often 
forcing them to search for forms of co -operation. But we were also interested 
in their struggles amongst themselves, and particularly between the beasts and 
the victims of prey. These twin struggles, against nature and other animals, 
reflected real-life struggles in the human world. 
Not that vie neglected stories with human beings as the main _ characters. 
There were two types of characters in such human -centred narratives: the 
species of truly human beings with qualities of courage, kindne ss, mercy, 
hatred of evil, concern for others; and a man -eat-man two -mouthed species 
with qualities of greed, selfishness, individualism and hatred of what was good 
for the larger co-operative community. Co-operation as the ultimate good in a 
community was a constant theme. It could unite human beings with animals 
against ogres and beasts of prey, as in the story of how dove, after being fed 
With castoroil seeds, was sent to fetch a smith working far away, from home 
and whose pregnant wife was being threate ned by these man -eating 
two-mouthed ogres. 
There were good and bad story -tellers. A good one could tell the same 
story over and over again, and it would always be, fresh to us, the listeners. He 
or she could tell a story told by someone else and make it mo re alive and 
dramatic. The differences really were in the use of words and images and the 
inflexion of voices to effect different tones.


--- PAGE 25 ---
11 
'We therefore learnt to value words for their meaning and nuances. 
Language was -not a mere string of words. It had a su ggestive power well 
beyond the immediate and lexical meaning. Our appreciation of the suggestive 
magical power of language was reinforced by the games we played with words 
through riddles, proverbs, transpositions of syllables, or through nonsensical 
but musically arranged words. (11) So we learnt the music of our language on 
top of the content. The language, through images and symbols, gave us a view 
of the world, but it had a beauty of its own. The home and the field were then 
our pre-primary school but w hat is important, for this discussion, is that the 
language of our evening teach -ins, and the language of our immediate and 
wider community, and the language of our work in- the fields were one. 
And then I went to school, a colonial school, and this harmony was broken. 
The language of my education was no longer the language of my culture. I first 
went to Kamaandura, missionary run, and then to. another called Maanguuu 
run by nationalists grouped around the Gikuyu Independent and Karinga 
Schools Association. Our language of education was still Gikuyu The very first 
time I was ever given an ovation for my writing was over a composition in 
Gikuyu. So for my first four years there, was still harmony between the 
language of my formal education and that of the Limuru peasant community. 
It was after the declaration of a state of emergency over Kenya in 1952 that 
all the schools run by patriotic nationalists were taken over by the colonial 
regime and were placed under District Education Boards chaired by 
Englishmen. English became the language of my formal education: In Kenya, 
English. became more than a language: it was the language, and all the others 
had to bow before it in deference. 
Thus one of the most humiliating experiences was to be caught speaking 
Gikuyu in the vicinity of the school. The culprit was given, corporal 
punishment - three to five strokes of the cane on bare buttocks - or was made to 
carry a metal plate around the neck with inscriptions such as I AM STUPID or I 
AM A DONKEY. Sometimes the culprits were fined money they could hardly 
afford. And how did the teachers catch the culprits? A button was initially 
given to one pupil who was supposed to hand it over to whoever was caught 
speaking his mother tongue. Whoever had the button at the end of the da y 
would sing who had given it to him and the ensuing process would bring out all 
the culprits of the day. Thus children were turned into witchhunters and in the 
process were being taught the lucrative - value of being a traitor to one's 
immediate community.


--- PAGE 26 ---
12 
The attitude to English was the exact opposite: any achievement in spoken 
or written English was highly rewarded; prizes, prestige, applause; the ticket to 
higher realms. English became the measure of intelligence and ability in the 
arts, the sciences, an d all the other branches of learning. English became the 
main determinant of a child's progress- up the ladder of formal education. 
As you may know, the colonial system of -education in addition to its 
apartheid racial demarcation had the structure of a pyramid: a broad primary 
base, a narrowing secondary twiddle, and an even narrower university apex, 
Selections from primary into secondary were through an examination, in my 
.time called Kenya African Preliminary Examination, in which one had to pass 
six subjects ranging from Maths to Nature Study and Kiswahih. All the papers 
were written in English. Nobody could pass .the exam who failed the English 
language paper no matter how brilliantly he had done  in the other subjects. I 
remember one boy in my class of 1954 who had distinctions in all subjects 
except English, which he had failed. He was made to fail the entire exam. He 
went on to become a turn boy in a bus -company. I who had- only passes but a 
credit in English got a place at the Alliance High School, one of the most elitist 
institutions for Africans in colonial Kenya. The requirements for a place at the 
University, Makerere University College, were broadly the same: nobody 
could go on to wear the undergraduate red gown, no matter how brilliantly &y 
had performed in all the other subjects unless they had a credit - not even a 
simple pass! - in English. Thus the most coveted place in the pyramid and in 
the system was only -available to the holder of  an English language -credit 
card. English was the official vehicle and the magic formula to colonial 
elitedom. 
Literary education was now determined by the dominant language while - 
also reinforcing that dominance. Orature (oral literature), in Kenyan languages 
stopped. In primary school I now read simplified Dickens and Stevenson 
alongside Rider Haggard.Jim Hawkins, Oliver Twist, Tom Brown - not Hare, 
Leopard and Lion - were now my daily companions in the world of 
imagination. In secondary school, Scott and G. B. Shaw vied with more Rider 
Haggard, John Buchan, Alan Paton, Captain W. E. Johns. At Makerere I read 
English: from. Chaucer to T. S. Eliot with a touch of Graham Greene. 
Thus language and literature were taking us further and further from 
ourselves to other selves, from our world to other worlds.  
What was the colonial system doing to us Kenyan children? What were the 
consequences of, on the one hand, this systematic suppression


--- PAGE 27 ---
13 
of our languages and the literature they carried, and on the other the elevation 
of English and the literature, it carried? To answer those questions, let me first 
examine the relationship of language to human experience, human culture, and 
the human perception of reality. 
 
IV Language, any language, has a dual character: it  is both a means of . 
communication and a carrier of culture. Take English. It is spoken in Britain 
and in Sweden and Denmark. But for Swedish and Danish people English is 
only. a means of communication with non-Scandinavians. It is not a carrier of 
their culture. For the British, and particularly the English, it is-additionally, and 
inseparably from its use as a tool of. communication, a carrier of their culture 
and history. Or take Swahili in East and Central Africa. It is widely used as a 
means of communication across many nationalities. But it is not the carrier of a 
culture and history of many of those nationalities. However in parts of Kenya 
and Tanzania, and particularly in Zanzibar, Swahili is inseparably both a means 
of communication .and a carrier. of the culture of those people to whom it is a 
mother-tongue: 
Language as communication has three aspects of elements. There is first 
what Karl Marx once called the language of real life, (12) the element basic to 
the whole notion of language, its origins and development: that is, the relations 
people enter into with one: another in the labour process, the links they 
necessarily establish among themselves in the act of a people,, a community of 
human beings, producing wealth or means of life like food, clothing, houses. A 
human community really starts its historical being as a community of 
co-operation in production through the division of labour; the simplest is 
between man \woman and child within a household; the more complex 
divisions are between branches  of production such as those who, are sole 
hunters, sole gatherers of fruits or sole workers in metal. Then there are the 
most complex divisions such as those in modern factories -where a single 
product, say a shirt or a shoe, is the result of many, hands and minds. 
Production is co-operation, is communication, is language, is expression of a 
relation between human beings and it is specifically human: 
The second aspect of language as communication is speech and it imitates 
the language of real life, that is communication in production


--- PAGE 28 ---
14 
The verbal signposts both reflect and aid communication or the relations 
established between human beings in the production of their means of life. 
Language as a system of verbal signposts makes that production possible. The 
spoken word is to relations between human beings what the hand is to the 
relations between human beings and nature. The hand through tools mediates 
between human beings and nature and forms the language of real life: spoken 
words mediate between human beings and form the language of speech. 
The third aspect is the written signs. The written word imitates the spoken. 
Where the first two aspects o£ language as communication through the hand 
and the spoken word historically evolved more or less simultaneously, the 
written aspect is -a much later historical development. Writing is 
representation. of sounds with visual symbols, from the simplest knot among 
shepherds to tell the number in a herd or the hieroglyphics among the Agikuyu 
gicaandi singers and poets of K enya, to the most complicated and different 
letter and picture writing systems of the world today. 
In most societies the written and the spoken languages are the same, in that 
they represent each other: what is on paper can be read to another person and 
be received as that language which the recipient hasgrown up speaking. In such 
a society there is broad harmony for a child between the three aspects of 
language as communication. His interaction with nature and with other men is 
expressed in written and spo ken symbol's or signs which are both a result of 
that double interaction and a reflection of it. The association of the child's 
sensibility is with the language of his experience of life. 
But there is more to it: communication between human beings is also  the 
basis and process of evolving culture. In doing similar kinds of things and 
actions over and over again under similar circumstances, similar even in their 
mutability, certain patterns, moves, rhythms, habits, attitudes, experiences and 
knowledge emerge. Those experiences are handed over to the next generation 
and become the inherited basis for their further actions on nature and on 
themselves. There is a gradual accumulation of values which in time become 
almost self  evident truths governing their co nception of what is right and 
wrong, good and bad, beautiful and ugly, courageous and cowardly, generous 
and mean in their internal and external relations. Over a time chic becomes a 
way of life distinguishable from other ways of life. They develop a distinctive 
culture and history. Culture embodies those moral, ethical and aesthetic 
values,. the set of spiritual eyeglasses, through which they come to view 
themselves and their place in the


--- PAGE 29 ---
15 
universe. Values are the basis of a people's identity, their sense of particularity 
as members of the human race. All this is carried by language. Language as 
culture is the collective memory bank of a people's experience in history. 
Culture is almost indistinguishable froth the language that makes possible its 
genesis g rowth banking, articulation and indeed its transmission from one 
generation to the next. 
Language as culture also has three important aspects. Culture is a product 
of the history which it in turn reflects. Culture in other words is a product and a 
reflection of human beings communicating with one another in the very 
struggle to create wealth and to control it. But culture does not merely reflect 
that history, or rather it does so by actually forming images or pictures of the 
world of nature and nurture. Thus the second aspect of language as culture is as 
an image -forming agent in the mind of a child. Our whole conception of 
ourselves as a people, individually and collectively, is based on those pictures 
and images which may or may not correctly correspond to the actual reality of 
the struggles with nature and nurture which produced them in the first place. 
But our capacity to confront the world creatively is dependent on how those 
images correspond or not to that reality, how they distort or clarify the reali ty 
of our struggles. Language as culture is thus mediating between me and my 
own self; between my own self and other selves; between me and nature. 
Language is mediating in my very being. And this brings us to the third aspect 
of language as culture. Culture transmits or imparts those images of the world 
and reality through the spoken and the written language, that is through a 
specific language. In other words, the capacity to speak, the capacity to order 
sounds in a manner that makes for mutual comprehens ion between human 
beings is universal. This is the universality of language, a quality specific to 
human beings: It corresponds to the universality of the struggle against nature 
and that between human beings. But the particularity of the sounds, the words, 
the word order into phrases and sentences, and the specific manner, or laws, of 
their ordering is what distinguishes one language from another. Thus a specific 
culture is not transmitted through language in its universality but in its 
particularity as the language of a specific community with a specific history: 
Written literature and orature are the main means by which a particular 
language transmits the images of the world contained in the culture it carries. 
Language as communication and as culture are then products of each other. 
Communication creates culture: culture is a means of


--- PAGE 30 ---
16 
communication. Language carries culture, and culture carries, particularly 
through orature and literature; the entire body of values by which we come to 
perceive ourselves and our place in the world. How people perceive themselves 
affects how they look at their culture, at their politics and at the -social 
production of wealth, at their entire . relationship to nature and to other beings. 
Language is thus inseparable from ourselves as a community of human beings 
with a specific form and character, a specific history, a specific relationship to 
the world. 
 
V So what was the colonialist imposition of a foreign language doing to us 
children? 
The real aim of colonialism was to control the people's wealth: what they 
produced, how they produced it, and how it was distributed; to control, in other 
words, the entire realm of the language of real life. Colonialism imposed its 
control of the social p roduction of wealth through military conquest and 
subsequent political dictatorship. But its most important area of domination 
was the mental universe of the colonised, the control, through culture, of how 
people perceived .themselves and their relationshi p-to the world. Economic 
and political control can, never be complete or effective without mental 
control. To control a people's culture is to control their tools of self -definition 
in relationship to others. 
For colonialism this involved two aspects of th e same process: the 
destruction or. the deliberate undervaluing of a people's culture, their art, 
dances, religions, history, geography, education, orature and literature, and the 
conscious elevation of the language of the coloniser. The domination of a 
people's language by the languages of the colonising nations was crucial to the 
domination of the mental universe of the colonised. 
Take language as communication. Imposing a foreign language, and 
suppressing the native languages as spoken and written, were already breaking 
the harmony previously existing between the African child and the three 
aspects of language. Since the new language as a means of 4 communication 
was a product of and was reflecting the ‘real language of life’ elsewhere, it 
could never as spoken or written properly reflect or imitate the real life of that 
community. This may in part explain why technology always appears to us as 
slightly external, their product and


--- PAGE 31 ---
17 
not ours. The word `missile' used to hold an alien, far-away sound until 
I recently learnt its equivalent in Gikuyu, ngurukuhi, and it made the 
apprehend 1t differently. Learning, for a colonial child, became a cerebral 
activity and not an emotional felt experience. 
But since the new, imposed languages could never completely bre ak the 
native languages as spoken, their most effective area of domination was the 
third aspect of language as communication, the written. The Aanguage of an 
African child's formal education was foreign. The language of. the books he 
read was foreign. The language of his conceptualisation was foreign. Thought, 
in him, took the visible form of a foreign language. So the written language of 
a child's upbringing in the school (even his spoken language within the school 
compound) became divorced from his spoken  language at home. There was 
often not the slightest relationship between the child's written world, which 
was also the language of his schooling, and the world of his immediate 
environment in the family and the community. For a colonial child, the 
harmony existing between the three aspects of language as communication was 
irrevocably broken. This resulted in the disassociation of the sensibility of that 
child from his natural and social environment, what we might call colonial 
alienation. The alienation be came reinforced in the teaching of history, 
geography, music, where bourgeois Europe -was always the centre of the 
universe. 
This disassociation, divorce, or alienation from the immediate environment 
becomes clearer when you look at colonial language as a carrier of culture. 
Since culture is a product of the history of a people which it in turn 
reflects, the child was now being exposed exclusively to a culture that was a 
product of a world external to himself. He was being made to stand outside 
himself to l ook at himself: Catching Them Young is the title of a book on 
racism, class, sex, and politics in children's literature by Bob Dixon. `Catching 
them young' as an aim was even more true of a colonial child. The images, of 
this world and his place in it implanted in a child take years to eradicate, if they 
ever can be. 
Since culture does not just reflect the world in images but actually, through 
those very images, conditions a child to see that world in a  certain way, the 
colonial child was made to see the world and where he ` stands in it as seen and 
defined by or reflected in the culture of the language of imposition. 
And since those images are mostly passed on through orature and literature 
it meant the child would now only see the world as seen in the literature of his 
language of adoption. From the point of view of


--- PAGE 32 ---
18 
alienation, that is of seeing oneself from outside oneself as if one was P another 
self, it does not matter that the imported literature carried the great humanist 
tradition of the best in Sh akespeare, Goethe, Balzac, Tolstoy, Gorky, Brecht, 
Sholokhov, Dickens. The location of this great mirror of imagination was 
necessarily Europe and its history and culture and the rest of the universe was 
seen from that centre. 
But obviously it was worse when the colonial child was exposed to images 
of his world as mirrored is the written languages of his coloniser. Where his 
own native languages were associated in his impressionable mind with low - 
status, humiliation, corporal punish ment, slow-footed intelligence and ability 
or downright stupidity, non-intelligibility and barbarism, this was reinforced by 
the world he met in the works of such geniuses of, racism as a Rider Haggard 
or a Nicholas Monsarrat; not to mention the pronouncement of some of the 
giants of western intellectual and political establishment, such as Hume (‘... the 
negro is naturally inferior to the whites…’),(13) Thomas Jefferson (`. . . the 
blacks . . . are inferior to the whites on the endowments of both body and 
mind.. .’),(14) or Hegel with his Africa comparable to a land of childhood still 
enveloped in the dark mantle of the night as far as the development of 
self-conscious history was concerned. Hegel's statement that there was nothing 
harmonious with humanity to be found in the Afri can character is 
representative of the racist images of Africans and Africa such a colonial child 
was bound to encounter in the literature of the colonial languages. (15) The 
results could be disastrous.  ` 
In her paper read to the conference on the teaching of African literature in 
schools held in Nairobi in 1973, entitled `Written Literature and Black 
Images',(16) the Kenyan writer and scholar Professor Micere Mugo related 
how a reading of the description of Gagool as an old African woman in Rider 
Haggard's King Solomon's Mines had for a long time made her feel mortal 
terror whenever she encountered old African women. In his autobiography 
This Life Sydney Poitier describes how, as a result of the literature he had read 
he had come to associate Africa with snakes. So on arrival in Africa and being 
put up in. a modern hotel in a modern city, he could not sleep because he kept 
on looking for snakes everywhere, even' under the bed. These two have been 
able to pinpoint the origins of their fears. Bur for most ot hers the negative 
image becomes internalised and it affects their cultural and even political 
choices in ordinary living. 
Thus Leopold Sedar Senghor has said very -clearly that although the 
colonial language had been forced upon him, if he had been given the


--- PAGE 33 ---
19 
choice he would still have opted for French. He becomes lyrical in his 
subservience to French: 
 
We express ourselves in French since French has a universal vocation and 
since our message is also addressed to French people and others. In our 
languages [i.e. African languages] the halo that surrounds the words is by 
nature merely that of sap and blood; French words send out thousands of 
rays like diamonds. (17) 
 
Senghor has now been rewarded by being anointed to an honoured place in the 
French Academy - t hat institution for safe-guarding the purity of the French 
language. 
In Malawi, Banda has erected his own monument by way of an institution, 
The Kamuzu Academy, designed to aid the brightest pupils of Malawi in their 
mastery of English. 
 
It is a grammar school designed to produce boys and girls who will be sent 
to universities like Harvard, Chicago, Oxford, Cambridge and Edinburgh 
and be able to compete on equal terms with others elsewhere. 
The President has instructed that Latin should occupy a central place in 
the curriculum. All teachers must have had at least some Latin in their 
academic background. Dr Banda has often said that no one can fully master 
English without knowledge of languages such as Latin and French . . . (18) 
 
For good measure no Malawian  is allowed to teach at the academy none is 
good enough - and all the teaching staff -has beep recruited from Britain. A 
Malawian might lower the standards, or rather, the purity of the English 
language. Can you get a more telling example of hatred of what is national, and 
a servile worship of what is foreign even though dead? 
In history books and popular commentaries on Africa, too much has been 
made of the supposed differences in the policies of the various colonial powers, 
the British indirect rule (or the pragmatism of the British in ;their lack of a 
cultural programme!) and the French and Portuguese conscious programme of 
cultural assimilation. These are a matte r of detail, and emphasis. The final 
effect was the same: Senghor's embrace of French as this language with a 
universal vocation is not so different from Chinua Achebe's gratitude in 1964 
to English- `those of us who have inherited the English language may not be in 
a position to appreciate the value of the inheritance'. (19) The assumptions 
behind the practice of those of us who have abandoned our mother-tongues and


--- PAGE 34 ---
20 
adopted European ones as the creative vehicles of our imagination, are not 
different either. ' 
Thus the 1962 conference of `African Writers of Englishexpression' was 
only recognising, with approval and pride of course, what through all the 'years 
of selective education and rigorous tutelage, we had already  been led to 
accept: thee 'fatalistic l ogic of the unassailable position of English in our 
literature': The logic was embodied deep in imperialism; and it was 
imperialism and its effects that we did not. examine at Makerere. It is the final 
triumph of a system of domination when the dominated start singing its virtues. 
 
VI The twenty, years that- followed 'the Makerere conference' gave the. world a 
unique literature - novels;' stories, - poems, plays written by Africans in 
European languages - which soon consolidated itself into a tradition with 
companion studies and a scholarly industry. 
Right from its conception it was .the literature of the petty  bourgeoisie 
born of the colonial schools and universities. It could not be otherwise, given 
the linguistic medium of its message. Its rise and develo pment reflected the 
gradual accession of this class to political and even economic dominance. But 
the petty-bourgeoisie in Africa was a large class with different strands in it. It 
ranged from that section which looked forward to a permanent alliance with 
imperialism in which it played the role of an intermediary between the 
bourgeoisie of the western metropolis and the people of the colonies - the 
section which in nay book Detained: A Writer's Prison Diary I have described 
as the comprador bourgeoisie - to that section which saw the future in terms of 
a vigorous independent national economy - in African capitalism or in' some 
kind of socialism; what - I shall here call the nationalistic. or patriotic 
bourgeoisie. This. literature by Africans in European lang uages was 
specifically that of .the. nationalistic bourgeoisie in its creators, its thematic 
concerns and its consumption. (20) 
Internationally the literature helped this class, which in politics, business, 
and education, was assuming leadership of the countries newly emergent from 
colonialism, or of those struggling to so emerge, to explain Africa to the world: 
Africa had a past and a culture of dignity and human complexity.


--- PAGE 35 ---
21 
Internally the literature, gave this class a cohesive' tradition and a common 
literary frame of references, which it otherwise lacked with its uneasy roots in 
the culture of the peasantry and in the culture of the metropolitan bourgeoisie. 
The literature added confidence to the class: the petty -bourgeoisie now had a 
past, a culture an d a literature with which to confront the racist bigotry. of. 
Europe. This confidence -manifested in the tone of the writing,. its sharp 
critique of European bourgeois civilisation,. its implications,. particularly in its 
negritude mould, that Africa had something new to give to the world - reflects 
the political ascendancy of the patriotic nationalistic section of the 
petty-bourgeoisie before and immediately after independence. 
So initially this literature - in the post -war world of national democratic 
revolutionary and anti-colonial liberation in China and India, armed uprisings 
in Kenya and Algeria, the independence of Ghana and Nigeria with others 
impending-was part of that- great anticolonial and anti-imperialist upheaval in 
Asia; Africa, Latin America  and Caribbean islands. It was inspired by the 
general political awakening; it drew its stamina and even form from the 
peasantry: their proverbs, fables, stories; riddles, and wise sayings. It .was shot 
through and through with optimism., But later, when t he comprador section 
assumed political ascendancy and strengthened rather than weakened the 
economic links with imperialism in what was clearly a neo -colonial 
arrangement, this literature became more and more critical, cynical, 
disillusioned, bitter and denunciatory in" tone. It was almost unani mous in its 
portrayal, with varying degrees of detail, emphasis, and clarity of vision, of the 
post-independence betrayal of hope. But to whom was it directing its list of 
mistakes made, crimes and wrongscommitted, complaints unheeded, or its call 
for a change of moral direction? The imperialist bourgeoisie? The 
petty-bourgeoisie in power? The military,- itself part and parcel of that class? It 
sought another audience, principally the peasantry and the working class  or 
what was generally conceived as the people. The search for new audience and 
new. directions was. reflected in the quest for simpler forms, in the adoption of 
amore direct tone, and often in a direct call for action. It was also reflected in 
the content . Instead of seeing Africa as one undifferentiated mass of 
historically wronged blackness, it now attempted some sort of class analysis 
and evaluation of neo -colonial societies. But this search was still within the 
confines of the languages of Europe whose  use it now defended with less 
vigour and confidence. So its quest was hampered by the very language choice, 
and in its. movement toward the people, it could only go up to that section of 
the


--- PAGE 36 ---
22 
petty-bourgeoisie - the students, teachers, secretaries for instance still in closest 
touch with the people. It settled there, marking time, caged within the linguistic 
fence of its colonial inheritance. 
Its greatest weakness still lay where it has always been, in. the audience 
-the petty-bourgeoisie readership automatically assumed by the very choice of 
language. Because of its indeterminate economic position between the many 
contending classes, the petty-bourgeoisie develops a vacillating psychological 
make-up. Like a chameleon it takes on the colour of the main class with which 
it is in the closest touch and sympathy. It can be swept to activity by the masses 
at a tune of revolutionary tide; or be driven to silence, fear, cynicism, 
withdrawal into self -contemplation, existential anguish, or to 
collaboration-with the powers -that-be at times of reactionary tides. In African 
this class his always oscillated between the imperialist bourgeoisie and its 
comprador neo-colonial ruling elements on the one hand, and the peasantry and 
the working class (the masses) on, the othe r. This very lack of identity in its 
social and psychological make-up as a class, was reflected in the very literature 
it produced: the crisis of identity was assumed in that very preoccupation with 
definition at the Makerere conference. In literature as in politics it spoke as if 
its identity or the crisis of its own identity was that of society as a whole. The 
literature it produced in European languages was given the identity of African 
literature as if there had never been literature in African language s. Yet by 
avoiding a real confrontation with the language issue, it was clearly wearing 
false robes of identity: it was a pretender to the throne of the mainstream of 
African literature. The practitioner of what janheinz Jahn called neo -African 
literature tried to get out of the dilemma by over -insisting that European 
languages were really African languages or by trying to Africanise English or 
French usage while making sure it was still recognisable as English or French 
or Portuguese. 
In the process. this literature created, falsely -and even absurdly, an 
English-speaking (or French --or Portuguese) African peasantry and working 
class, a clear negation or falsification of the historical process and reality. This 
European-language-speaking peasantry and worki ng class,, existing only in 
novels and dramas, was at times invested with the vacillating mentality, the 
evasive self-contemplation, the existential anguished human condition, or the 
man-torn-between-two-worldsfacedness of the petty-bourgeoisie. 
In fact, if it had been left entirely to this class, African languages would 
have ceased to exist with independence.!


--- PAGE 37 ---
23 
VII But African languages refused to die. They would not simply go the way of 
Latin to become the fossils for linguistic archaeology to dig up, cla ssify, and 
argue about the international conferences. 
These languages, these national heritages of Africa, were -kept .alive by 
the peasantry. The peasantry saw no contradiction between speaking their own 
mother-tongues and belonging to a larger national o r continental geography. 
They saw no necessary antagonistic contradiction between belonging to their 
immediate nationality, to their multinational state along the Berlin -drawn 
boundaries, and to Africa as a whole. These people happily spoke Wolof, 
Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo, Arabic, Amharic, Kiswahili, Gikuyu Luo, Luhya, Shona, 
Ndebele, Kimbundu, Zulu or Lingala without this fact tearing the multinational 
states apart. During the anti -colonial struggle they showed an unlimited 
capacity to unite around whatever lead er or party best and most consistently 
articulated an anti-imperialist position. If anything it was the petty-bourgeoisie, 
particularly the compradors, with their French and English and Portuguese, 
with their petty rivalries, their ethnic chauvinism, which  encouraged these 
vertical divisions to the point of war at times. No, the peasantry had no 
complexes about their languages and the cultures they carried! 
In fact when the peasantry and the working class were compelled by 
necessity or history to adopt the language of the master, they Africanised it 
without any of the respect for its ancestry shown by Senghor and Achebe, so 
totally as to have created new African languages, like Krio in-.Sierra Leone or 
Pidgin in Nigeria, that owed their identities to the syn tax and rhythms of 
.African languages. All these languages were kept alive in the daily speech, in 
the ceremonies, in political struggles, above all in the rich store of orature 
-proverbs,, stories, poems, and riddles. 
The peasantry and the urban working c lass threw up singers. These sang 
the old songs or composed new ones incorporating the new experiences in 
industries and urban life and in working -class struggle and organisations. 
These singers pushed the languages to new limits, renewing and reinvigorating 
them by coining new words and new expressions, and in generally expanding 
their capacity to incorporate new happenings in Africa and the world. 
The peasantry and the working class threw up their own writers, or 
attracted to their ranks and concern intellectuals from among the


--- PAGE 38 ---
24 
petty-bourgeoisie, who all wrote in African languages. It .is these writers like 
Heruy Wild! Sellassie, Germacaw Takla Hawaryat, Shabaan Robert, Abdullatif 
Abdalla, Ebrahim Hussein, Euphrase Kezilahabi, B. H. Vilakazi, Okot p'Bitek, 
A. C. Jordan, P. Mboya, D. O. Fagunwa, Mazisi Kunene and many others 
rightly celebrated in Albert Gerard's pioneering survey of literature in African 
languages from the tenth century to the present, called African Language 
Literatures (1981), who have given our languages a written literature. Thus the 
immortality of our languages in print has been ensured despite the internal and 
external pressures for their extinction. In Kenya I would like to single out 
Gakaara wa Wanjau, who was jailed by the British for the ten years between 
1952 and 1962 because of his writing in Gikuyu. His book; Mwandiki wa Mau 
Mau Ithaamarioini, a diary he secretly kept while in political detention, was 
published by Heinemann Kenya and won the 1984 Noma Award It is a 
powerful work, extending the range of the Gikuyu language prose, and it is a 
crowning achievement to the work he started in 1946. He has worked in 
poverty, in the hardships of prison, in post -independence isolation when the 
English language held sway in Kenya's schools from nursery to University and 
in every walk of the national printed world, but he never broke his faith in the 
possibilities of Kenya's national languages: His inspiration came from the mass 
anti-colonial movement of Kenyan people, particularly the milit ant wing 
grouped around Mau Mau or the Kenya Land and Freedom Army, which i4 
1952 ushered in the era of modern guerrilla warfare in Africa. He is the clearest 
example of those writers thrown up by the. mass political movements of an 
awakened peasantry and working class. 
And finally from among the European -language=speaking African 
.petty-bourgeoisie, there emerged a few who refused to join the 'chorus of 
those who had accepted the `fatalistic logic' of the position of European 
languages in our literary being. It was one of these, Obi Wali, who pulled the 
carpet from under the literary feet of those who gathered at Makerere in 1962 
by declaring in an article published in Transition (10, September 1963,), `that 
the whole uncritical acceptance of English and Fr ench as the inevitable 
medium for educated African writing is misdirected, and has no chance of 
advancing African literature and. culture', and that until African writers 
accepted that any true African literature must be written in African languages, 
they would merely be pursuing a .dead end.


--- PAGE 39 ---
25 
What we would like future conferences on African literature to devote time 
to, is the all-important problem of African writing in African languages, and all 
its implications for the development of a truly African sensibility. 
Obi Wali had his predecessors. Indeed people like David Diop of Senegal 
had put the case against this use of colonial languages even more strongly. 
The African creator, deprived of the use o£ his language and cut off from 
his people, might turn out to be only the representative of a literary trend (and 
that not necessarily the least gratuitous) of the conquering nation. His works, 
having become a perfect illustration of the assimilationist pol icy through 
imagination and style, will doubtless rouse the warm applause of a certain 
group of critics. In fact, these praises will go mostly to colonialism which, 
when it can no longer keep its subjects in slavery, transforms them into docile 
intellectuals patterned after Western literary fashions which besides, is another 
more subtle form of bastardization. (22) 
David Diop quite correctly saw that the use of English and French was a 
matter of temporary historical necessity. 
Surely in 'an Africa freed from oppression it will not occur to any writer to 
express, otherwise than in his rediscovered language, his feelings and the 
feelings of his people. (23) 
The importance of Obi Wah's intervention was in tone and timing: it was 
published soon after the 1962 Ma kerere conference of African writers of 
English expression; it was polemical and aggressive, poured ridicule and scorn 
on -the choice of English and French, while being unapologetic in its call for 
the use of African languages. .Not surprisingly it was met  with hostility and 
then silence. But twenty years of uninterrupted dominance of literature in 
European languages, the reactionary turn that political and economic events in 
Africa have taken, and the search for a revolutionary break with the 
neocolonial status -quo, all compel soul-searching among writers, raising once 
again the entire question of the language of African literature.


--- PAGE 40 ---
26 
VIII The question is this: we as African writers have always complained about the 
neo-colonial economic and political relat ionship to Euro America. Right. But 
by our continuing to write in foreign languages, paying homage to them, are 
we not on the cultural level continuing that neo -colonial slavish and cringing 
spirit? What is the difference between a politician who says Afri ca cannot do 
without imperialism and the writer who says Africa cannot do without 
European languages? 
While we were busy haranguing the -ruling circles in a language which 
automatically excluded the participation of the peasantry and the working class 
in the debate, imperialist culture and African reactionary forces had a field day: 
.the Christian bible is available in unlimited quantities in even the tiniest 
African language. The comprador ruling cliques are also quite happy to have 
the peasantry and the wo rking class all to themselves: distortions, dictatorial 
directives, decrees, museum-type fossils paraded as African culture, feudalistic 
ideologies, superstitions, lies, all these backward elements and more are 
communicated to the African masses in their o wn languages without any 
challenges from those with alternative visions of tomorrow who have 
deliberately cocooned themselves in English, French, and Portuguese. It is 
ironic that the most reactionary African politician, the one who believes in 
selling Africa to Europe, is often a master of African languages; that the most 
zealous of European missionaries who believed in rescuing Africa from itself, 
-even from the paganism of its languages, were nevertheless masters of African 
languages, which they often re duced to writing. The European missionary 
believed too much in his mission of conquest not to communicate it in the 
languages most readily available to the people: the African writer believes toe 
much in `African literature' to write it in those ethnic, di visive and 
underdeveloped languages of the peasantry! 
The added irony is that what they have produced, despite any claims m to 
the contrary, is not African literature. The editors of the Pelican Guides to 
English literature in their latest volume were righ t to include a discussion of 
this literature as . part of twentieth-century English literature, just as the French 
Academy was right to honour Senghor for his genuine and talented 
contribution to French literature and language. What we have created is another 
hybrid tradition, a tradition . in transition, a minority tradition that can only be 
termed as Afro European


--- PAGE 41 ---
27 
literature; that is, the literature written by Africans in European languages. (24) 
It has produced many writers and works of genuine talent:  Chinua Achebe, 
Wole Soyinka, Ayi Kwei Armah, Sembene Ousmane, Agostino Neto, Sedar 
Senghor and many others. Who can deny their talent? The light in the products 
of their fertile imaginations has certainly illuminated important aspects of the 
African being in its continuous struggle against the political and economic 
consequences of Berlin and after. However we cannot have our cake and eat it! 
Their work belongs to an Afro -European literary tradition which is likely to 
last for as long as Africa is under this rule of European capital in a neo-colonial 
set-up. So Afro -European literature. can be defined as literature written by 
Africans in European languages in the era of imperialism. 
But some are coming round to the inescapable conclusion articulated by 
Obi Wali with such polemical vigour twenty years ago: African literature can 
only be written in African languages, that is, the languages of the African 
peasantry and working class, the major alliance of classes in each of our 
nationalities and the agency for the coming inevitable revolutionary break with 
neo-colonialism. 
 
IX I started writing in Gikuyu language in 1977 after seventeen years of 
involvement in Afro-European literature, in 'my case Afro-English literature. It 
was then that I collaborated with Ngu gi wa Mirii in the drafting of the 
playscript, Ngaahika Ndeenda (the English translation was 1 Will Marry When 
1 Want). I have since published a novel in Gikuyu Caitaani Mutharabaini 
(English translation: Devil on the Cross) and completed a musical drama, 
Maitu Njugira, (English translation: Mother Sing for Me); three books for 
children, Njamba Nene na Mbaathi i Mathagu, Bathitoora ya Njamba Nene, 
Njamba Nene na Cibu K -zng'ang'i, as well as another novel manuscript: 
Matigari Ma Njiruungi: Wherever I have gone, particularly in Europe, I have 
been confronted with the question: why are you .now writing in Gikuyu? Why 
do you nova write in an African language?' In some academic quarters I have 
been confronted with the rebuke, `Why have you abandoned us?' It was almost. 
as if, in .choosing to write in Gikuyu, I was doing something abnormal. But 
Gikuyu is my mother tongue! The very fact that what common sense dictates in 
the literary practice


--- PAGE 42 ---
28 
of other cultures is being questioned in an African writer is a measure of how 
far imperialism has distorted the view of African realities. It has turned reality 
upside down: the abnormal is viewed as normal and the normal is viewed as 
abnormal. Africa actually enriches Europe: but Africa is made to believe that 
needs Europe to rescue it from poverty. Africa's natural and human resources 
continue to develop Europe and America: but Africa is made to feel grateful 
for aid from the same quarters that still sit on the back of the continent: Africa 
even produces intellectuals who -now rationalise this upside -down way of 
looking at Africa. 
I believe that my writing in Gikuyu language, a Kenyan language, an 
African language, is part and parcel of the anti-imperialist struggles of Kenyan 
and African peoples. In schools and universities our. Kenyan languages - that 
is the languages of the many nationalities which make up Kenya - were 
associated with negative qualities -of backwardness, underdevelopment, 
humiliation and punishment: We who event through that school system were 
meant to graduate with a hatred of the people and the culture and the values of 
the language of our daily humiliation and punishment. I do not want to see 
Kenyan children growing up in that imperialist-imposed tradition of contempt 
for the tools of communication develop ed by their communities and their 
history. I want them to transcend colonial alienation. 
Colonial alienation takes two interhnked forms: an active (or passive) 
distancing of oneself from the reality around; and an active (or passive) 
identification with .that which is most external to one's environment. It starts 
with a deliberate disassociation of the language of conceptualisation, of 
thinking, of formal education; of mental development, from the language of 
daily interaction is the home and in the communi ty. It is like separating the 
mind from the body so that they are occupying two unrelated linguistic spheres 
in the same person. On a larger social scale it is like producing a society of 
bodiless heads and headless bodies. 
So I would like to contribute to wards the restoration of the harmony 
between all the aspects and divisions of language so as to restore the Kenyan 
child to his environment, understand it fully so as to be in a position to change 
it for his collective good. I would like to see Kenya peopl es' mother-tongues 
(out national -languages !) carry a literature reflecting. not - only the rhythms 
of a child's spoken expression, but also his struggle with nature and his social 
nature. With that harmony between himself, his language and his environment 
as his starting point, he can learn other languages and even enjoy the positive


--- PAGE 43 ---
29 
humanistic, democratic and revolutionary elements in other people's literatures 
and cultures without any complexes about his own language, his own self, his 
environment. Th e all -Kenya, national language (i.e. Kiswahili); the other 
national languages (i.e. the languages of the nationalities like Luo, Gikuyu, 
Maasai, Luhya, Kallenjin, Kamba, Mijikenda, Somali, Galla, Turkana, 
Arabicspeaking -people, etc.); other African langua ges like Hausa, Wolof, 
Yoruba, Ibo, Zulu, Nyanja, Lingala, Kimbundu; and foreign languages - that is 
foreign to Africa - like English, French, German, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, 
Portuguese, Spanish will. fall into their proper perspective in the lives of 
Kenyan children. 
Chinua Achebe once decried the tendency of African intellectuals to 
escape into abstract universalism in the words that apply even more to the issue 
of the language of African literature: 
Africa has had such a fate in the world that the ve ry adjective African can 
call up hideous fears of rejection. Better then to cut all the links with this 
homeland, this liability, and become in one giant leap the universal man. 
Indeed I understand this anxiety. But running away from oneself seems to 
me a very inadequate way of dealing with an anxiety [italics mine]. And if 
writers should opt for such escapism, who is to meet the challenge?(25) 
 
Who indeed? 
We African writers are bound by our calling to do for our languages what 
Spencer, Milton and Shakespeare did for English; what Pushkin and Tolstoy 
did for Russian; indeed what all writers in world history have done for their 
languages by meeting the challenge of creating a literature in them, which 
process later opens the languages for philosophy, science, technology and all 
the other areas of human creative endeavours. 
But writing in our languages per se - although a necessary first step in the 
correct direction - will not itself bring about the renaissance in African cultures 
if that literature does not. carry the content of our people's anti -imperialist 
struggles to liberate their productive forces from foreign control; the content of 
the need for unity among the workers and ,peasants of all the nationalities in 
their struggle to control the wealth, they produce and to free it from internal 
and external parasites. , 
In other words writers in African languages' should reconnect themselves 
to the revolutionary traditions of an organised peasantry and working class in 
Africa in their struggle to defeat imperialism and


--- PAGE 44 ---
30 
create a higher system of democracy and socialism in alliance with all the other 
peoples of the world. Unity in that struggle would ensure unity in our 
multi-lingual diversity. It would alto reveal the real links that bind the people 
of Africa to the peoples of Asia, South America, Europe, Australia and New 
Zealand, Canada and- the U.S.A. 
But it is precisely when writers open out African languages to the real links 
in the struggles of peasants and workers that they will  meet their biggest 
challenge. For to the comprador -ruling regimes, their real enemy is an 
awakened peasantry and working class. A writer who tries to communicate the 
message of .revolutionary unity and hope in the languages of the people 
becomes a subvers ive character. It is then that writing in African languages 
becomes a subversive or treasonable offence with such a writer facing 
possibilities of prison, exile or -even death. For him there are no `national' 
accolades, no- new year honours, only abuse and slander and innumerable lies 
from the mouths of the armed power - of a ruling minority - ruling, that is, on 
behalf of U.S. -led imperialism - and who see in democracy a real threat. A 
democratic participation of the people in the shaping of their own lives or in 
discussing their own lives in languages that allow for mutual comprehension is 
seen as being dangerous to the good government of a country and its 
institutions. African languages addressing themselves to the lives of the people 
become the enemy of a neo-colonial state. 
 
Notes 
 
1. `European languages became so important to the Africans that they defined their own identities partly 
by reference to those languages, Africans began to describe each other in terms of being either 
Francophone or English -speaking Africans. The continent itself was thought of in terms of 
French-speaking states, English-speaking states and Arabic-speaking states.'  
Ali A'. Mazrui, Africa's International Relations, London: 1977, p. 92. 
Arabic does not quite fall into that category. Instead of Arabic -speaking states as an example, 
Mazrui should have put Portuguese-speaking states. Arabic is now an African language unless we want 
to write off all the indigenous populations, of North Africa, Egypt, Sudan as not being Africans. 
And as usual with Mazrui his often apt and insightful descriptions, observations, and comparisons of 
the contemporary African realities as affected by Europe are, unfortunately, often tinged with approval 
or a sense of irreversible inevitability. 
2. The conference was organized by the anti-Communist Paris-based but Americaninspired and financed 
Society for Cultural Freedom which was later discovered actually to have been financed by CIA. It 
shows how certain directions in our cultural, political, and economic choices can be masterminded 
from the metropolitan centres of imperialism. 
3. This is an argument often espoused by colonial spokesmen. Compare Mphahleles comment with that of 
Geoffrey Moorhouse in Manchester Guardian Weekly,


--- PAGE 45 ---
31 
15 July 1964, as quoted by Ali A. Mazrui and Michael Tidy in their work Nationalism and New States 
in Africa, London: 1984. 
'On both sides of Africa, moreover, in Ghana and Nigeria, in Uganda and in Kenya, the spread of 
education has led to an increased demand for English at primary level. The remarkable thing is that 
English has not been rejected as a symbol of Colonialism; it has rather been adopted as a politically 
neutral language beyondthe reproaches of tribalism. It is also a more attractive Proposition in Africa 
than in either India or Malaysia because comparatively few Africans are completely literate in the 
vernacular tongues and even in the languages of oral communication, Hausa and Swahili, which are 
spoken by millions, and only read and written by thousands.' (My italics) 
Is Moorehouse telling us that the Enshis politically neutral via -a-via Africa's confrontation with 
nee-colonies? I~telling us that by 194 there were more Africans literate in European languages than in 
African languages? That Africans could not, even if that was the cast, be literate in their own national 
languages or in the regional languages? Really is Mr Moorehouse tongue-tying the, African? 
4. The English title is Tales of Amadou Koumba, published by Oxford University Press. The translation 
of this particular passage from the Presence Africaine, Paris edition of the book was done for me by Dr 
Bachir Diagne in Bayreuth., ' 
5. The pape is now in. Achebe's collection of essays Morning Yet on Creation Day, London: 1975. 
6. In the introduction to Morning Yet on Creation Day Achebe obviously takes a slightly more critical 
stance from his 1964 position. The phrase is apt for a whole generation of Cs African writers. . 
7. Transition No. 10, September 1%3, reprinted from Dialogue, Paris. 
8. Chinua Achebe `The African Writer and the English Language', in Morning Yet on Creation Day. 
9. Gabriel Okara, Transition No. 10, September 1%3. 
10. Cheikh Hamidou Kane L ,venture A mbigui. (English translation: Ambiguous Adventure). This page 
was translated for me by Bathir Diagne. 
11. Example from a tongue twister: 'Kaana lea Nikoora koona koora koora: na ko koora koona kaana lea 
Nikoora koora koora.' I'm indebted to Wangui wa Goro for this example. 'Nichola's child saw a baby 
frog and ran away: and when the baby frog saw Nichola's child it also ran away.' A Giyuku s child has 
to get the cornet tone and length of vowel and pauses to get it right. Otherwise it becomes a jumble of 
k's and r's and na's 
12. `The production of ideas, of conceptions, of consciousness, is at flirt directly interwoven with the 
material activity and the material intercourse of melt, the language of real life. Conceiving, thinking, 
tote mental intercourse of men, appear at this stage as the dire, efflux of their material behaviour. The 
same applies to mental production as expressed in the language of politics, laws, morality, religion, 
metaphysics, etc., of a people. Men are the producers of char conceptions, ideas etc. - real, active men, 
as they are conditioned by a definite development of their productive forces and of the intercourse 
corresponding to these, up to its furthest form.' Marx and Engels, German Ideology, the first part 
published under the title, Feuerbach: Opposition of the Materialist and Idealist Outlooks, London: 
1973, p. 8. 
13. Quoted in Eric Williams A History of the People of Trinidad and Tobago, London 1964, p. 32. 
14. Eric Williams, ibid., p. 31. 
15. In references to Africa in the introduction to his lectures. in The Philosophy of History, Hegel gives 
historical, philoso rational expression and legitimacy to every conceivable European racist myth about 
Africa. Africa is even denied her own geography where it does not correspond to the myth. Thus Egypt 
is not part of


--- PAGE 46 ---
32 
Africa; and North Africa is part of Europe. Africa proper is the especial home of ravenous beasts, 
snakes of all kinds. The African is not part of humanity. Only slavery to Europe can raise him, possibly, 
to the lower ranks of humanity. Slavery is good for the. African. `Slavery is in and for itself injustice, 
for the essence of humanity is freedom; but for this man must be matured. The gradual abolition of 
slavery is therefore wiser and more equitable than its sudden removal.' ( Hegel The Philosophy of 
History, Dover edition, New York: 1956, pp. 91 -9.) Hegel clearly reveals himself as the 
nineteenth-century Hitler of the intellect. 
16. The paper is now in Akivaga and Gachukiah's The Teaching of African Literature in Schools, published 
by Kenya Literature Bureau. 
17. Senghor, Introduction to his poems, `1~ thiopiques, le 24 Septembre 1954', in answering the question: 
`Pourquoi, des lore, ecrivez-vous en Francais?' Here is the whole passage in French. See how lyrical 
Senghor becomes as he talks of his encounter with French language and French literature. 
 
Mais on me posers la question: `Pourquoi, des lore, eerivez -vous en francais?' parce que nous 
sommes des metis culturels, puree - ue, si nous sentons en negres, nous nous exprimons e n 
francais, puree que le francais est one langue a vocation universelle, que notre message s'adresse 
suss: aux Francais de France et aux autres hommes, puce que le ye est une langue rat gentillesse 
et d'honnetete'. Qui a do que c'etait one fatigue prise et atone d'ingenieurs et de diplomates? Bien 
sur, moi aussi, je l,ai dit un jour, pour les besoins ;dc ma these. On me le pardonnera. Car je sais 
ses ressources pour I'avoir goute, mache, enseigne, et qu'il est la langue des dieux. Ecoutez done 
Corneille, Lautreamont, Rimbaud, Peguy et Claudel. Ecountez le grand Hugo. Le francais, cc 
sont les grandes orgues qui se pretent a loos les timbres, 3 loos les effects, des douceurs les plus 
soaves aux fulgurances de l'orage. IL est, tout 3 tour tit en mime temps, flute, hautbois, trompette, 
tamtam et meme canon. Et puffs It! fry. noun a fait don de ses mots -absuaits - si rues daps nos 
langues maternelles -, ou lea larmes se font pierres precieuses. Chez nous, les mots sont 
naturellement nimbes d'un halo de save et de sang; fes mots du francais rayonnent de mine faux, 
comma des diamants. Des fusees qui eclairent notre nuit. 
 
See also Senghor's reply to a question on language in an itttw by Armand Guiber and published in 
Presence Africaine 1962 under the rifle, Leopold War Senghor:  
 
I1 est vrai qua le francais nest pas ma langue maternelle. Jai commence de I'apprendre a sept 
ans; par des mots comma `confitures' et `cbocolat'. Ajourd' je pense naturellement en francais et je 
comprend le francais - faut -il en avoir honte? Mieux qu'aucune sutra langue. C'est dire qua le 
francais nest plus pour moi un `vehicule etranger' mail la forme d'expression naturelle de ma 
pensee. 
Ce qui m'est etrange duns le francais c'est peut-etre son style: 
Son architecture classique. Je suis naturellement porte a gonfler d'image son cadre etroit, sans 
la poussee de la chaleur emotionelle. 
 
18. Zimbabwe Herald August 1981. 
19. Chinua Achebe `The African Writer and the English Language'. in Morning Yet on Creation Day p. 59. 
20. Most of the writers were from Universities. The readership was mainly the product of schools and. 
colleges. As for the underlying theme of much of that literature, Achebe's statement in his paper, `,The 
Novelist as a Teacher', is instructive: 
`If I were God I would regard as the very worst our acceptance - for whatever reason - of racial 
inferiority. It is too late in the day to get worked up about it or to


--- PAGE 47 ---
33 
blame others, much as they may deserve such blame and condemnation. What we need to do is to look 
back and try and find out where we went wrong, where the rain began to beat us. 
'Here then is an adequate revolution for me to espouse - to help my society regain belief in itself and 
put away the complexes of the years of denigration and \ self -abasement.' Morning Yet on Creation 
Day, p. 44. 
Since the peasant and the worker had never really had any doubts about their Africanness, the 
reference could only have been to the 'educated' or the pet bourgeois African. In fact if one sub titutes 
the words 'the petty-bourgeois' for the word 'our' and 'the. petty -bourgeoi's class' for 'my society' the 
statement is apt, accurate, and describes well the assumed audience. Of course, an ideological 
revolution in this class would affect the whole society. 
22. David Diop'Contribution to the Debate on National Poetry', Presence Africaine 6, 1956. 
23. David Diop, idid. 
24. The term 'Afro-European Literature' may seem to put too much weight on the Europeaaness of the 
literature. Euro-African literature? Probably, the English, Fren ch, and Portuguese components would 
then be 'Anglo -African literature', 'Franco -African literature' or 'Luso -African literature'. What is 
important is that this minority literature forms a distinct tradition that needs a different term to 
distinguish it from ALiterature, instead of usurping the title African Literature as is the current practice 
in literary scholarship. There have even been arrogant claims by some literary. scholars who talk as if 
the literature written in European languages is necessarily closer to the Africanness of its inspiration 
than similar works in African languages, the languages of the majority. So thorbughly has the minority 
'Afro-European Literature' (Euro-African literature?) usurped the name 'African literature' in the current 
scholarship that literature by Africans in African languages is the one that needs qualification Albert 
Gerard's otherwise timely book is titled African Language Literatures ' 
25. Chinua Achebe `Africa and her Writers' in Morning Yet on Creation Day, p. 27.


--- PAGE 48 ---
34 
 The, Language of African 
Theatre  
I Early one morning in 1976, a woman from Kamiriithu village tame to my 
house and she went. straight to the point: `We hear you have a lot of education 
and that you write books. Why don't you and others of your kind give some of 
that education to the village? We don't want the whole amount; just a`little of 
it, and a little of your time.' Th ere was a youth centre in the village, she went 
on, and it was falling apart. It needed, group effort to bring it back to life. 
Would I be willing to help? I said I would think about it. In those days, I was 
the chairman of the Literature Department at the  University of Nairobi but I 
lived near Kamiriithu Limuru, about thirty or so kilometres from -the capital 
city. I used to drive to Nairobi and back daily except on Sundays. So Sunday 
was the best day to catch me at home. She came the second, the third and the 
fourth consecutive Sundays with the same request couched in virtually the 
same words. That was how I came to join others in what later was to be called 
Kamiriithu Community Education and Cultural Centre. 
 
II Kamiriithu is one of several villages its Li muru originally set up in the fifties 
by the British colonial administration as a way of cutting off the links between 
the people and the guerrillas of the Kenya Land and Freedom Army, otherwise 
known' as Mau Mau. Even after independence in 1963 the villages remained as 
reservoirs of cheap labour. By 1975 Kamiriithu alone had grown into a 
population of ten thousand. The workers who live in Kamiriithu, either as 
rent-paying tenants or as owners, fall into three broad categories. Firstly there 
are those who  
2


--- PAGE 49 ---
35 
work at Bata, the multinational shoe -making factory, at the Nile Investments 
Plastic Pipes and Goods factory, at the small salt processing plants, at the 
timber and maize mills and at the motor and bicycle repairing garages - all part 
of a growing indust rial proletariat. Then there are those employed in hotels, 
shops, petrol stations, transport buses and matatus, with donkey -pulled 
carriages 'and human-powered pushcarts - commercial and domestic workers. 
The third category are part of the agricultural proletariat; those who are mainly 
employed in the huge tea and coffee plantations and farms previously owned 
by the British colonial settlers but which. now belong to a few wealthy 
Kenyans and multinationals like Lonrho, but also those who are employed as 
seasonal labour on farms of all sizes, 
But the peasants are the majority. They include `rich' peasants who employ 
more than family labour; middle peasants who depend solely on family labour; 
poor peasants who work on their own strips of land but also hire out  their 
labour; and numerous landless peasants who rent land and hire out themselves. 
There are of course the many unemployed, plus part -time and full -time 
prostitutes and petty criminals. The other distinct type of dwellers in 
Kamiriithu  are teachers, sec retaries, petty administrative officials, owners of 
small bars and shops, self -employed craftsmen, carpenters, musicians, market 
traders, and the occasional businessman - that is, the petty bourgeoisie. Most of 
the rich landlords, merchants, and top officials in companies or administration, 
and a large section of the land-owning peasantry, live outside the village. (1) 
I mention these different classes because nearly all of them were . 
represented among the participants at Kam iriithu  Community Education an d 
Culture Centre. For instance, the committee running the centre was made up of 
peasants, workers, a schoolteacher and a businessman. Those of us from the, 
University included Kimani, Gecau, Kabiru Kinyanjui and Ng ugi  wa M irii  
who later became the co -ordinating director of all our activities. But the 
peasants and the workers, including the unemployed, were the real backbone of 
the centre which started functioning in 1976. 
I have talked about the origins, the aims, and the development of the centre 
in my b ooks, Detained: A Writer's Prison Diary and Barrel of a Pen: 
Resistance to Repression in Neo -colonial Kenya, and in various other 
publications. A great deal has also been written about it in newspapers, 
journals and research papers. But what is important, for our discussion on the 
language of African theatre, is that all the activities of the centre were to be 
linked - they would arise out of each


--- PAGE 50 ---
36 
other - while each being a self -contained programme. Thus theatre, as the 
central focus of our cultural progr amme, was going to provide follow -up 
material and activities for the new literates from the adult literacy programme, 
while at the same time providing the basis for polytechnic type activities in the 
material culture programme. 
But why theatre in the villa ge? Were we introducing something totally 
alien to the community as the Provincial Commissioner was later to claim? 
 
III Drama has origins in human struggles with nature and with others. In 
pre-colonial Kenya, the peasants in the various nationalities clea red forests, 
planted crops, tended them to ripeness and harvest - out of the one seed buried 
in the ground, came many seeds. Out of death life sprouted, and this through 
the mediation of the human hand and the tools it held. So there were rites to 
bless the magic power of tools. There were other mysteries: of cows and goats 
and other animals and birds mating - like human- beings -and out came life that 
helped sustain human life. So fertility rites and ceremonies to celebrate life 
oozing from the earth, or from between the thighs of humans and animals. 
Human life itself was a mystery: birth, growing up and death, but through 
many stages. So there were rituals and ceremonies to celebrate and mark birth, 
circumcision or initiation into the different stages of growth and responsibility, 
marriages and the burial of the dead. 
But see the cruelty of nature: there were droughts and floods, threatening 
devastation and death. The community shall build wells  and walls. But the 
gods need propitiation. More rituals. More ceremonies. The spirits and the 
gods were of course invisible but they could be represented by masks worn by 
humans. Nature, through works and ceremony, could be turned into a friend. 
But see t he cruelty of human beings. Enemies come to take away a 
community's wealth in goats and cattle. So there were battles to be fought to 
claim back one's own. -Bless the spears. Bless the warriors. Bless those who 
defend the community from its enemies without. Victorious warriors returned 
to ritual and ceremony. In song and dance they acted out the battle scenes for 
those who were not there and for the warriors to relive the glory, drinking in 
the communal admiration and gratitude. There were also enemies withi n: 
evildoers;


--- PAGE 51 ---
37 
thieves, idlers; there were stories - often with a chorus - to point the fate of 
those threatening the communal good. 
Some of the drama could take days, weeks, or months. Among the 
Agikuyu of Kenya, for instance, there was the Ituika ceremo ny held every - 
twenty-five years or so that marked the handing over of power from one 
generation to anther. According to Kenyatta in his book Faring Mount Kenya, 
the Ituika was celebrated by feasting, dancing and singing over a six -months 
period. The laws and regulations of the new government were embodied in the 
words, phrases and rhythmic movements of the new songs and dances.(2) How 
Ituika came to be was always re-enacted in a dramatic procession. Central to all 
these varieties of dramatic expression were songs, dance and occasional mime! 
Drama in pre-colonial Kenya was not, then, an isolated event: it was part 
and parcel of the rhythm of daily and seasonal life of the community. It was 
an-activity among- other activities, often drawing its energy from th ose tether 
activities. It was also entertainment an ,the sense of involved enjoyment; it was 
moral instruction; and it was also a strict matter of life and death and 
communal survival. This drama was not performed in special buildings set 
aside for the pur pose. It could take place anywhere - wherever there was an 
`empty space', to borrow the phrase from Peter Brook. `The empty space', 
among the people, was part of. that tradition. (3) 
 
IV It was the British. colonialism which destroyed that tradition. The missionaries 
.in their proselytising zeal saw many of these traditions as works of the devil. 
They had to be fought before the bible could hold sway in the hearts of the 
natives. The colonial administration also collaborated. Any gathering of the 
natives needed a licence: colonialism feared its own biblical saying that where 
two or three gathered, God would hear their cry. Why should they allow God 
above, or the', God within the natives to hear the cry of the people? Many of 
these ceremonies were banned: Likeable Ituika, in 1925. But the-ban reached 
massive proportions from 1952 to 1962 during the Mau Mau struggle: when 
more than five people were deemed to constitute a public gathering and needed 
a licence. Both the missionaries and the colonial administration used the school 
system to destroy the concept of the


--- PAGE 52 ---
38 
`empty space' among the people by trying to capture and -confine it in 
government-supervised urban community halls, schoolhalls, church buildings,, 
and in actual theatre buildings with the proscenium s tage. Between 1952 and 
1962 `the empty space' was even confined behind barbed' wire in' prisons and 
detention camps where the political detainees and prisoners were encouraged to 
produce slavishly pro-colonial and anti-eau Mau propaganda plays. 
The social halls encouraged the concert, a kind of playlet with, simple plots 
often depicting the naive peasant who comes to the big, town and is completely 
perplexed by the complexities of modern rife, the stupid peasant who goes to 
speak to telephone wires asking -them to send money to his relatives and 
leaving the bundle of notes under the. telephone pole; and of course the long 
arm of the law that catches criminals and hence restores peace in the town. The 
school and church hall produced religious theatre with the story of the prodigal 
son and the Nativity being among the most popular themes. But the school also 
produced plays in English; in Alliance High School which I attended 
Shakespeare, like the Speech Day, was an annual event. Between 1955 and 
1958 1 saw As You Like It; Henry IV Part One, King Lear and Midsummer 
Nights Dream roughly in that order. In the fifties through, the British Council 
and a government-appointed colony-wide drama and music officer, the school 
drama was systematized into an annual Schools D rama Festival. The many 
European-controlled theatre buildings erected in the major towns - Mombasa; 
Nairobi, Nakuru, Kisumu, Kitale, Eldoret - between 1948 and 1952 specialised 
in West End comedies and sugary musicals with occasional Shakespeare and  
George Bernard Shaw. The two most famous were t -Tie Donovan Maule 
Theatre in Nairobi, a fully fledged professional theatre and the Kenya National 
Theatre, 'a colonial government establishment, projected as a future 
multi-racial cultural centre. Independence in 1963 did not change the theatre 
status quo; the `empty space' was still confined in similar places. West End 
musicals like Annie Get Your Gun, Boeing Boeing, Jesus Christ Superstar, 
Desperate Flours and Alice-in Wonderland continued to hold sway, with the 
expatriate community dominating the profess-. ional, the semi-professional and 
amateur theatre. There was, also an Asian language theatre tradition but this 
was largely confined to Kenyan-Asian community social halls and schools. 
The colonial regime also enc ouraged radio. drama with the African as a 
clown. If the African could be. made to laugh at his own stupidity and 
simplicity he might forget this business of Mau Mau, Freedom, and all that. 
The drama of the mindless


--- PAGE 53 ---
39 
clown was grouped around- Kipanga and a few other African comedians. 
With independqnce more and more graduates joined schools and 
universities and there was a gradual -revolt although it was still largely 
confined to the four walls of the school, the social hall,, the university 
premises, and also to the boundaries of the English language. The revolt of ti s 
African petty-bourgeoisie in the area of theatre had roots in the fifties with 
Alliance High School, Thika, Mang'u,. Kagumo and  other prominent schools 
producing a counter -Shakespeare and G. B. Shaw tradition with - their own 
scripts in Kiswahili. At Alliance High School there were Nakupenda Lakini by 
Henry Kuria (who was also organizer of the Kiambu Music Festival) (1954); 
Maisha ni Nini by Kimani Nyoike (1955); Nimelogwa nisiwe na mpenzi by 
Gerishon Ngugi (1956); Atakiwa na Polisi by B. M. Kurutu (1957) which all 
ended with performances at Menengai Social Hall in Nakuru, the heartland of 
settlerdom. 
But the revolts of - the sixties and - the early seventies had a more 
nationalistic flavour. Kenyan playwrights (like Francis Imbuga, Kenneth 
Watene, Kibwana and Micere Mugo) arid Kenyan directors (like Seth Adagala, 
Tirus Gathwe, Waigwa Wachiira, and. David Mulwa) emerged with a growing 
circle of actors. around Voice -of Kenya radio and television , the Kenya 
National Theatre, and the University. Prominent African playwrights and 
directors from other countries like John Ruganda and Joe de, Graft, at -the 
University reinforced their Kenyan counterparts. Amateur theatre companies 
emerged, some flaring. only for a day; but a few like `The University Players' 
and the Mumbi wa Maina's ‘Tamaduni Players’ existed for a longer period. 
Tamaduni Players were the most consistent in terms of the regularity of their 
productions, their continuous search for relev ance, and their high 
professionalism.   
The revolt took many forms: one was the sheer African pettybourgeois 
assertion in the very fact of writing and directing and performing plays. It also 
took the form of a more- and more nationalistic patriotic and anti-neocolonial,- 
anti-imperialist content in the plays, this trend perhaps best exemplified in 
Micere Mugo's and Ngugi  wa Thiong'o's The Trial of Dedan Kimathi which 
was performed by the Kenya Festal 77 Drama Group. It also took the form of a 
more sharpened criticism of the internal order as in Francis Imbuga's Betrayal 
in the City performed by the same group in Nairobi .and Lagos. 
But the biggest revolt was over the control o£ the Kenyan National 
Theatre, set up in the fifties and wholly dominated by British directors


--- PAGE 54 ---
40 
and British amateur groups. It remained the preserve of the British expatriate 
community even after-Kenya had her own national anthem and national flag in 
1963: It was run by a wholly expatriate governing council with the British 
Council retaining a representative many years after Independence. There was 
an outcry over this dominance, from the Kenyan petty-bourgeoisie centred on 
the University and supported by a few patriotic journalists who called for the 
Kenyanization of the directorship and council. A statement by the staff of the 
Literature Department in 1970 denounced the Kenya Cultural Centre as a 
service station for foreign interests, a statement which was also a cultural 
reflection of the growing dissatisfaction with the economic and p olitical 
dominance of imperialist interests in the country as a whole. There was a call 
for more days and weeks allowed for African theatre The heated debates 
climaxed 3n racial violence in 1976 when one expatriate white lady had her 
nose bloodied by a bla ck actor after she had called him a black ,bastard. The 
police came but in the identification parade she could not make out one African 
face-from another. Seth Adagala, the director of the Kenya Festac 77 Drama 
Group, and I were later summoned to the C.I.D. headquarters after complaints 
by the leaders of the European Amateur Groups that we were interfering with 
the success of their theatrical enterprises, a complaint which was manifestly 
untrue. But the struggle also took the form of a debate about the whol e 
question, concept and constitution of a National Theatre. Was it just a 
building? Was it the location? Was it the kind of plays presented there? Or was 
it simply the skin-colour of 'the director and the administration staff? 
Some groups opted for other p remises. The University Theatre, basically 
an education lecture hall with a stage, wide but not deep, on the same level as 
the first row of the auditorium, saw a wide range of experimental productions, 
particularly .in the second half of- the seventies. Education Theatre II, as it was 
officially called, becae an alternative to the government-owned but foreign-run 
Kenya national Theatre and Cultural Centre. Tamadum and other groups staged 
one innovative play after another under the guidance of the indefatiga ble 
Mumbi wa Maina and other directors. 
The running of the Schools Drama Festival, previously in the hands o_ 
expatriate staff in the Ministry of Education, now came under the directorship 
of the first Kenyan African Drama and Literature officer Mr Wasambo Were. 
Over the years the Festival, which now included a separate but parallel one for 
the Teachers Training Colleges, had become more and more nationalistic in 
content as more and more


--- PAGE 55 ---
41 
graduates from the University of Nairobi joined the staff of the various schools 
and brought a new attitude to drama. Under the new officer, the Festival took a 
radical departure from the past., The. Festival would move from its annual 
location at the Kenya National Theatre to a venue in Kakamega, way out in the 
countryside. Thereafter it would rotate in the provinces with the winning 
finalist plays touring, the country. The language of the plays changed with the 
English language being edged out by Kiswahili as the main medium of 
theatrical expression. 
The University of Nairobi Literature Department started its own Free 
TravellingTheatre: The students toured urban and rural community centres and 
schools to acclaim by thousands. Other traveling mini -theatre groups were 
formed in other schools and college s. The accent from the early to 
mid-seventies was on theatre to the people. 
On looking back now, it is clear that Kenyan theatre in the early seventies 
was trying to break away from the imperialist colonial, tradition whose 
symbols were the European -dominated Kenya National Theatre (albeit aided 
by the ruling regime), the Donovan Maule Theatre in Nairobi and other similar 
centres in the major towns. 
Its main handicap was still its petty -bourgeois base in the schools and 
University Colleges, from where came the majority of its actors, directors and-
plays. Above all it was limited by the very imperialist tradition from which- it, 
was trying to break away. English. was still accepted as the main, medium of 
revolt and affirmation. Original scripts, even the most  radical, were often 
written from the standpoints of the petty -bourgeoisie. And theatre was still 
confined within walls. Where it tried to break away from the confines of closed 
walls and curtains of a formal theatre building into rural and urban community 
halls, the assumption was still that theatre was to be taken to the people: People 
were to be given a taste of the treasures of the theatre. People had no traditions 
of theatre. The assumption that people were to be given theatre was of course 
in keeping with the government fiction that people were there to be given 
development particularly if they behaved themselves. 
But it was imperialism that had stopped the free development of the 
national tradition's of theatre rooted in the ritual and ceremonial prac tices of 
the peasantry. The real language of African theatre could only be found among 
the people- the peasantry in particular - in their life, history and struggles.


--- PAGE 56 ---
42 
V Kamiriithu then was not an aberration, but an attempt at reconnection with the 
broken roots of African civilization and -its traditions of theatre. In its very 
location in a village within the kind of social classes described above, 
Kamiriithu  vas the answer to the question of the real substance of a national 
theatre. Theatre is not a buil ding. People make theatre. Their life is the very 
stuff of drama. Indeed Kamiriithu  reconnected itself to the national tradition of 
the empty space, of language, of content and of form. 
Necessity forced the issue. 
For instance, there was an actual empty s pace at Kam iriithu . The four 
acres reserved for the Youth Centre had at that time, in 1977, only a 
falling-apart mud -walled barrack of four rooms which we used for adult 
literacy. The rest was grass. Nothing more. It was the peasants and workers 
from the village who built the stage: just a raised semicircular platform backed 
by a, semi-circular bamboo wall behind which was a small three-roomed house 
which served as the store and changing room. The stage and the auditorium - 
fixed long wooden seats arranged like stairs - were almost an extension of each 
other. It had no roof. It was an open air theatre with large empty spaces 
surrounding the stage and the auditorium. The .flow of actors and people 
between the auditorium and the stage, and -around the stage -and the entire 
auditorium was uninhibited: Behind the auditorium were some tall eucalyptus 
trees. Birds could watch performances from these or. from the top of the outer 
bamboo fence. And during one performance some actors, unrehearsed, had the 
idea of climbing up the trees and joining the singing from up there. They were 
performing not only to those seated before them, but to whoever could row see 
them and hear them - the entire village of 10,000 people was their audience. 
Necessity forced a commonsense solution to the issue of language. Ng ugi  
wa Mirii and I had been asked to script the initial outline of a play that later 
came to be called Ngaahika Ndeenda (I will marry when I want). The question 
was, what language were we going to use? 
Since 1960, when as a student I started to scribble words on paper, I had 
written all my novels and stories in English. Plays too. The Black Hermit meant 
for the celebration of Uganda's Independence was performed by Makerere 
Students Drama Society at the Uganda National Theat re in 1962. This Time 
Tomorrow, written in 1966, was


--- PAGE 57 ---
43 
about the eviction of workers from near the centre of Nairobi to keep the city 
clean. for tourists. In 1976' I had collaborated, with Micere Mugo in writing 
The Trial of Dedan Kimathi. In the preface to the published script we had 
written what amour, ted to a literary manifesto calling for a radical change din 
the attitude of African writers to fight with the people against imperialism and 
the class enemies of the people. We called for a revolutionary theatre facing the 
consequent challenge: how to truly depict the masses in the only historically 
correct perspective: positively, heroically and as the true makers of history.' 
We had gone on to define good theatre as that which was -on the side of the 
people,`that which, without masking mistakes and weaknesses gives people 
courage and urges them to higher resolves in their struggle for total liberation'. 
But. we never' asked ourselves how this revolutionary theatre was going to - 
urge people to higher resolves in a foreign language? Indeed in all three plays, 
The Black Hermit, This Time Tomorrow,. and The Trial of', Dedan Kimathi, 
there were very obvious contradictions though `these were more apparent on 
the stage than in the script. In the opening line of The Black Hermit the peasant 
mother is made to speak in a poetic language reminiscent in tone, of T. S. Eliot. 
The elders from a rural outpost come - to town for their son, the black hermit, 
and speak in impeccable English. So does Kimaathi , in The Trial of Dedan 
Kimathi even when addressing his guerrilla army or the peasants and workers 
in court. Admittedly it is understood that the characters are speaking an African 
language. But this is only an illusion since they are conceived in English  and 
they speak directly in English. There are other contradictions too: these 
characters speak English but when it comes to ,singing they quite happily and 
naturally fall back into their languages. So they do know African languages! 
The illusion that in s peaking English they were really" speaking. an African 
language is broken. The realism in theatre collides with the historical reality it 
is trying to reflect. It is only petty-bourgeois characters those who have been to 
schools and universities - who norm ally and quite freely mix English with 
African languages in the same sentence or speech. (4) w 
The use of English as my literary medium of expression, particularly in 
theatre and the novel, had always disturbed me.In a student's interview in Lees 
in 1967 and in my, book Homecoming (1-969) I came back to the question.. 
But I kept


--- PAGE 58 ---
44 
on hedging the issue. - The .possibility of using an African language stayed -
only in the realm of possibility until I came to Kamiriithu. 
It was Kamiriithu  which forced me to turn to Gikuyu and hence into what 
for me has amounted to `an epistemological break' with my past; particularly' 
in the area of theatre. The question of audience settled the problem of language 
choice;- and the language - choice settled the question of audience. But our use 
of Gikuyu . had other consequences in relation to other theatre issues: content 
for instance; actors, auditioning and rehearsals, performances and reception; 
theatre as a language. 
Ngaahika Ndeenda depicts the proletarisation of -the peasan try in a 
neo-colonial society. Concretely it shows the way the Kiguunda family, a poor 
peasant family, who hake to supplement their subsistence on their one and a 
half acres with the sale of their labour, is .finally deprived of even the 
one-and-a-half acr es by - a multi -national consortium of Japanese and 
EuroAmerican industrialists and bankers aided by the native comprador 
landlords and businessmen. 
The land question is basic to an understanding of Kenya's history - and 
contemporary politics, as indeed it  is of twentieth century history wherever 
people have had their land taken away by conquest, unequal treaties or by the 
genocide of part of the population. The Mau Mau militant organization which 
spearheaded the armed struggle for Kenya's independence was officially called 
the Kenya Land and Freedom Army-The play, Ngaahika Ndeenda, in part drew 
very heavily, on the history of the struggle for land and freedom; particularly 
the year 1952, when the Kimaathi -led armed struggle started and the British 
colonial regimes suspended all civil liberties by imposing a state of emergency; 
and 1963, when KANU under Kenyatta successfully negotiated for the right to 
fly a national flag, and to sing a national anthem and to call people to vote for a 
national assembly within  every five years. The play shoved how that 
independence, for which thousands of Kenyans died, had been hijacked. In 
other words, it showed the transition of Kenya from a colony with the British 
interests being dominant, to a neo -colony with the doors open  to wider 
-imperialist interests from Japan to America. But the, play also depicted the 
contemporary social conditions particularly for workers in multi -national 
factories and plantations.


--- PAGE 59 ---
45 
Now many of the workers, and peasants in Kam iriithu had participated in 
the struggle for land and freedom either in the passive wing or in the active 
guerrilla wing. Many had been in, the forests and the mountains, many in -the 
colonial detention camps and prisons; while some had of course collaborated 
with the British e nemy. Many had seen their houses burnt; their daughters 
raped by the British; their lands taken away; their relatives killed. Indeed 
Kamiriithu itself was a product of that history of heroic struggle against 
colonialism and of the sub sequent monumental betrayal into neo -colonialism. 
The play was celebrating that history while showing the unity and continuity of 
that struggle. Here the choice of language was crucial. There was now no 
barrier between the content of their history and the linguistic medium of its 
expression. Because the play was written in a language they could understand 
the people could participate in all the subsequent discussions on the script. 
They discussed its content, its language and even the form. The pro cess, 
particularly for Ng ugi  wa M irii , Kimani Gecau, and myself was one of 
continuous learning. Learning of out history. Learning of what obtains in 
factories. Learning of what gores on in farms and plantations. Learning our 
language, for the peasants were essentially the, guardians  of the language 
through years of use. And learning anew the elements of form of the African 
Theatre. 
What are these elements of form? 
First was song and dance. Song and dance as we have seen, are  central to 
nearly all the rituals celebrating rain, birth, the second birth, circumcision, 
marriage, funerals or to all ordinary ceremonies. Even daily speech among 
peasants is interspersed with song. It can be a line or two, a verse, or a whole 
song. What's important is that song and dance are not just decorations; they are 
an integral part of that conversation, that drinking session, that ritual, that 
ceremony. In Ngaahika Ndeenda. We too tried to incorporate song and dance, 
as part of the structure and movement of the actors. The song arises from what 
has gone before and it leads to what follows. The song and the dance become a 
continuation of the conversation and of the action. Let me illustrate by quoting 
a long sequence whose action and movement in ti me is dependent on a series 
of songs and dances.


--- PAGE 60 ---
46 
The play opens with Kiguunda and his wife, Wangeci, making preparations 
to receive Kioi and his wife Jezebel. K iguunda  and Wangeci are a peasant 
family: Kioi and Jezebel are a rich landlord family with clo se connections in 
high church, banks and industry. Kiguunda  works for Kioi. But it is the very 
first time that the Kiois have visited the K iguunda s and naturally K iguunda  
and Wangeci try to puzzle out the reasons for this visit. Why should the 
landlord want to pay them a visit? Then suddenly it occurs to Wangeci -that 
maybe the Kiois are coming to discuss the possibilities of a marriage between 
Gathoni, Kiguunda 's daughter, and John Muhuuni, Kioi's son. Muhuuni has 
been dating Gathoni. The idea is so farfetched that Kigunnda can only exclaim: 
 
KIGUUNDA:   
You women! 
You are always thinking of weddings! 
WANGECI: 
Why not? 
These are different times from ours. 
These days they sing that love knows no fear. 
In any case, can't you see 
Your daughter is very beautiful? 
She looks exactly the way I used to look - a perfect beauty! 
KIGUUNDA: [stopping dusting up the tyre sandals] 
You? A perfect beauty? 
WANGECI: 
Yes. Me. 
KIGUUNDA: 
Don't you know that it was only that I felt pity for you? 
WANGECI: 
You, who used to waylay me everywhere all . the time? 
In the morning, 
In the evening, 
As I came home from the river, 
As I came home from the market, 
Or as I came back home from work in the settlers farms? 
Can't you remember how you used to plead with me, 
Saying you had never in your life seen a beauty like me? 
KIGUUNDA: [Going back in time] – 
That was long before the state of Emergency. 
Your heels used to shine bright,


--- PAGE 61 ---
47 
Your face shone like the clear moon at night, 
Your eyes like the stars in heaven. 
Your teeth, it seemed, were always washed. with milk. 
Your voice sounded like a precious instrument. 
Your breasts were full and pointed like the tip of the sharpest. 
thorn. 
As you walked it seemed as if they were whistling` beautiful tunes; 
WANGECI: [Also mesmerized by memories of their, past youth]-. 
In those days 
We used to dance in Keneenii forest. 
KIGUUNDA:  
A dance would cost only twenty-five cents. 
WANGECI:  
In those days there was not a single girl from Ndeiya up to 
Githiiga 
Who-did not die to dance with you. 
KIGUUNDA: 
You too would swing your skirt 
Till the guitar player was moved to breaking the strings. 
And the guitars used-to sound tune 
That silenced the entire forest,  
Making-even the trees listen... 
 
The sound of guitars and other instruments as if KIGUUNDA and 
WANGECI Can hear. them in the memory. KIGUUNDA and  
WANGECI start dancing. Then they are joined by the guitar players 
and players of other, instruments and DANCERS. They dance, 
KIGUUNDA and WANGECI among them. 
 
Nyaangwicu let's shake the skirt 
Nyaangwicu let's shake the skirt 
Sister shake it and make it yield its precious yields. 
Sister shake it and make it yield its precious yields. 
 
Nyaangwicu is danced on one leg 
Nyaangwicu is- danced on one leg  
The other is Merely for pleasing the body. 
The other is merely for pleasing the body. 
 
Wangeci the beautiful one.  
Wangeci the beautiful one  
With a body slim and straight like the eucalyptus.


--- PAGE 62 ---
48 
With a body slim and straight like the eucalyptus: 
 
Wangeci the little maiden  
Wangeci the little maiden  
When 1 see her I am unable to walk. 
When I see her l am unable to walk. 
 
Wangeci let's cultivate the fruit garden 
Wangeci let's cultivate the fruit garden 
This garden that belongs to Kiguunda wa Gathoni. 
This garden that belongs to Kiguunda wa Gathoni. 
 
Wanged, our mother, we now refuse  
Wangeci, our mother, we now refuse 
To be slaves in ,our home, 
To be slaves in our home. 
 
When this is over, WANGECI Says, ‘Oh my favourite was Mwom-boko 
And KIGUUNDA replies: ‘Oh in those slays we used to tear the right 
or left side of trouser legs from the knee downwards. Those were our 
bell bottoms with which we danced Mwomboko.' Now the guitar 
players and the accordion players start. The Mwomboko D ANCERS 
enter. KIGUUNDA and WANGECI lead them in the Mznomboko 
dance. Guitars, iron rings and the accordions are played with vigour 
and the dancers' feet add embellishments. 
 
The Mwomboko dance is not difficult, 
it's just two steps and a turn. 
I'll swing you so beautifully that,   
Your mother being in the fields,  
Your father in a  beer feast, 
You'll tell me where your father's purse is hidden. 
Take care of me 
I take care of you 
Problems can be settled in jokes. 
Limuru is my home 
Here I have, come to loaf-about 
Wangeh, my young lady 
Be the way you are 
And don't add frills 
To your present gait. 
Take care of me


--- PAGE 63 ---
49 
I take care of you 
Problems can be settled in jokes. 
This is your place. 
Famed for ripe –bananas 
I'll sing to you till you cry 
Or failing to cry  
You'll be so overcome with feelings 
That you'll take your life . 
Take care of me' 
I take care of you 
Problems can be settled-in jokes. 
1 brewed liquor for you  
And now you've turned against me! 
A cripple often turns against his benefactors 
Our son of Gathoni ,f 
Good fortune, unexpected, found Wads in the Field 
And she sat down to feast on it. 
Take care of me. 
1 take care of you . 
Problems can be settled in jokes. 
Have you taken one too many  
Or are you simply drunk 
I'll not say anything, 
Oh, Wangeci my little- fruit, 
Until seven years are over . . . 
 
The voices 'of men and the sound of guitars, accordions and ,other 
instruments end abruptly: The DANCERS leave the stage. 
KIGUUNDA and WANGECI remain frozen in the act of dancing 
KIGUUNDA shakes his head as if he is still engrossed in memories, of 
the past; They disengage dourly!  
 
KIGUUNDA:  
Oh, the seven years were not even over 
When we began, 
To sing new songs with new voices, 
Songs and voices demanding 
freedom for Kenya, our motherland. 
 
A procession enters the stage, singing  freedom.Songs.


--- PAGE 64 ---
50 
Freedom 
Freedom 
Freedom for Kenya our motherland  
 
A land of limitless joy  
A -land rich in green fields and forests . . . 
Kenya is an African' people’s  country. 
 
We do not mind being jailed 
We do not mind being exile 
For we shall never-never stop 
Agitating for and demanding back our lands  
For Kenya is an African people's country 
 
As the SINGERS leave the stage WANGECI takes  over the 
remembrance of things past, 
 
WANGECI:  
I myself . have always remembered' 
The Olengurueni women 
The ones driven from their lands around Nakuru 
To be exiled to Yatta, the land of black rocks:  
They passed through Limuru 
Caged with barbed wire in the backs of 'several lorries. 
But still they sang songs 
With words that pierced one's heart like a spear. 
The songs were sad, true,  
But the women were completely fearless 
For they had faith and were sure that, 
One day; this sail will be returned, to us. 
 
A procession of women SINGERS enters the stage dinging. 
 
Pray in Truth  
Beseech Him with Truth 
For he is the same Ngai within us. 
One woman died 
After being tortured. 
Because she refused to sell-out. 
 
Pray in Truth 
Beseech Him with Truth 
For he is the same Ngai within us.


--- PAGE 65 ---
51 
Great love I found there 
Among women -and-children  
A bean fell to the ground 
Abed it was shared among them. 
Pray in Truth 
Beseech Him with Truth  
For he is the same Ngai within us. 
 
The SINGERS leave the stage. 
 
KIGUUNDA: 
It was then 
That the state of Emergency was declared over Kenya. 
Our patriots; 
and women of 
Limuru and the whole country,  
Were arrested! 
The Emergency laws became very oppressive.  
Our homes were burnt down. 
We were jailed; 
We were taken to detention camps, 
Some of us were; crippled through beatings. 
Others were castrated.  
Our women-were raped with bottles. 
Our wives and daughters, raped before our eyes! 
[Moved by the bitter memories, KIGUUNDA pauses for a few 
seconds]  
But through Mau- Mau 
Led by Kimaathi and Matheenge, 
And through the organized unity of the masses 
We beat the whites 
And freedom came . . . 
We raised high our national flag. 
 
A jubilant procession of men, women and children enters the- 
stage singing songs and dances in praise of freedom. 
 
It is a flag of three colours 
Raise the f lag high 
Green is. for our earth 
Raise the flag high 
Red is for our blood 
Raise the flag high


--- PAGE 66 ---
52 
Black is for Africa 
Raise the flag high. 
[They change to a new song and dance] 
 
SOLOIST: 
Great our patriots fob ,me . . . 
Where did the whites come from? 
CHORUS: 
Where did the whites come from?, 
Where did the whites come from 
They came through Murang’a, 
And they spent a night at -Waiyaki’s home, 
If you want to know that. these foreigners were no good, 
Ask yourself 
Where is Waiyaki’s grave today? 
We must protect our patriots 
So they don’t meet Waiyaki’s fate. 
SOLOIST: 
Kimaathi’s patriots are brave 
Where did the whites come from? 
 
[They continue singing as they walk off the stage.] 
 
KIGUUNDA: 
How the times run! 
How many years have gone 
Since we got independence? 
Ten and over, 
Quite a good number of years!, 
And now look at me! 
[KIGUUNDA looks at himself, points to the title-deed and goes near 
it] 
One and a half acres of land in dry plains. . 
Our family land was given to homeguards. 
Today I am just a labourer 
On farms owned by Aham Kioi wa Kanoru. 
My trousers are-pure tatters. 
Look at you. 
See what the years of freedom in poverty 
Have done to you! 
Poverty has hauled down your former splendour. 
Poverty has dug trenches on your face, 
Your heels are now so many cracks,


--- PAGE 67 ---
53 
Your breasts have fallen,  
They have nowhere to hold. 
Now you look like an old basket  
That has lost all shape.\ 
WANGECI: 
Away with you, 
Haven’t you heard it said that 
A flower is robbed of the colours by the fruit it bears! 
[Changing the tone of voice] 
Stop this habit of thinking too much about the past 
Often losing your sleep over things that had better been forgotten. 
Think about today and tomorrow. 
Think about our home. 
Poverty has no permanent roots! 
Poverty is a sword for sharpening the digging sticks . . 
[Pauses, as if caught by a new thought] 
Tell me: 
What does Kioi and his family 
Want with us today?(5) 
 
As you have seen, the sequence begins with the ‘why’ of Kioi’s visit, goes 
through the entire history  of the armed struggle of the fifties including the 
achievement of a national flag, and co mes ‘back to the ‘why’ of Kioi’s 
intended visit. Indeed in Ngaahika Ndeenda the past. and the future are often 
recreated through song and dance and mime. 
Mime in fact is the. other most important element of form. The best 
example is Kiguunda’s intended chu rch wedding ceremony. That sequence 
starts with Kiguunda and Wangeci who are now admiring their wedding suits 
and robes having been persuaded to ‘mortgage their land to a bank to get the 
means to finance the renewal of their marriage in church as their Afr ican 
wedding is regarded by the Kiois as sinful and not valid. They try them on and 
with mime, music and dance go through the entire exercise climaxing in their 
cutting an imaginary five storied cake. 
That mime sequence is .also a good illustration of cere mony but one, in 
this case, emptied of its grandeur arid dignity. The christian ceremony is 
externally imposed and lacks the appropriate symbols rooted in the soil. It 
becomes a caricature of the national traditions of ceremony. This is contrasted 
with the Ngurario sequence where,


--- PAGE 68 ---
54 
through the Gitiiro opera, the dignity of a national ceremony is recreated. 
When it came to song, dance and ceremony, the peasants, who of course 
knew all about it, were particular about the accuracy of detail. Their approach 
was very serious. 
They were also particular about language which, of course, is another 
element of form. They were concerned that the various characters, depending 
on age and occupation, be given the appropriate language. ‘An old man cannot 
speak like that’ they would say. ‘If you, want him to have dignity, he has to use 
this or that kind of proverb.’ Levels of language and language -use and the 
nuances of words and phrases were discussed heatedly. 
But what gives any form its tautness and special character and shape is the 
content. This is even more true in drama. Drama is closer to the dialectics of 
life than poetry and the fiction. Life is movement arising from the inherent 
contradiction ,and unity of opposites. Man and woman meet in a united dance 
of opposites out of which comes a human life separate from the two that gave it 
birth but incorporating features of both in such a way that it is recognisable at a 
glance that so and so is really a product of so and so. The growth of that life 
depends on some cells dying and others being born. Social life itself arises out 
of the contradiction between man and nature. But man is part of nature. Karl 
Marx has said: He opposes himself to nature as one of her own forces, setting 
in motion arms, legs, head and hands, the natural forces of his body, in order to 
appropriate nature’s production to his own wants. By thus acting on the 
external nature and changing it, lie at the same time changes his own nature. 
(6) Drama encapsulates within itself this principle of the struggle of opposites 
which generates Rovement. There is in drama a movement from apparent 
harmony, a kind of rest, through conflict to a comic or tragic resolution of that 
conflict. We end with harmony at a different level, a kind of temporary rest, 
which- of co urse is the beginning of another movement. The balance of 
opposing ideas and social forces, of all the contending forces is important in 
shaping the form of drama and theatre. 
The participants were most particular about the representation of history, 
their history. And they were quick to point out and argue against any incorrect 
positioning and representation of the various forces - even the enemy forces - 
at work in the -struggle against imperialism. They would compare notes from 
their own actual experience, whether it was in making guns in the forests, in 
stealing arms from the British enemy, in carrying bullets through the enemy


--- PAGE 69 ---
55 
lines, or in the various strategies for survival. Land and freedom. Economic 
and political independence. Those were the aims of their struggle and they did 
not want Ngaahika Ndeenda to distort them. The one who made imitation guns 
for the play at Kamiriithu was the very person who used to make actual guns 
for the Mau Mau guerrillas in the fifties. The workers were keen that the details 
of the exploitation and the harsh conditions of life in the multinational factories 
be laid bare. I remember for instance how one group who worked in a 
particular department at the nearby Bata shoe factory sat down to work-out the 
process and quantity of their exploitation in order to explain it all to those of us 
who had never worked in a factory. Within a single day they would make shoes 
to the value of all the monthly wages for the entire work force of three 
thousand. So they worked for themselves for one day. For whom were they 
working for the other twenty -nine days? They calculated what of what they 
produced went for wear and tear of the machinery and for the repayment of 
initial capital, and because the company had been there since 1938 they 
assumed that the initial investment had been repaid a long time ago: To whom 
did the rest go? To the owners in Canada. What about entrepreneurial skills 
-the brainpower - which regulated the entire system though seated in offices in 
Nairobi or far -away in Can ada? What about the shareholder whose money 
made the entire system work? Ah, well. They had never seen that brainpower 
and !hat shareholder once lift a hammer to make a shoe. If they could make 
guns and set up armament factories in the harsh conditions of the forest and 
mountains without the brainpower and money-power of any shareholder from 
abroad, could they not run a shoemaking factory? The discussion would go on. 
Thus they were very clear about labour, their labour, being the creator of 
wealth. But what did that labour get every fortnight or every month? A mere 
pittance! And ,what’s more, people do die in those factories. Did you know 
that? People die, people have died. ‘Let’s count . . . so and so . . .!’ I remember 
one person who as evidence removed his shirt. His body was burned all over. 
‘Gases’, he said. ‘And what did I get as compensation? Dismissal: Laid off. 
Without even a watch for my faithfulness in service. 
The details of the struggle between capital and labour which are described 
in a long dramatic monologue by one of the worker characters, Gicaamba, were 
worked out in discussions. Central to Gicaamba’s monologue explaining to 
Kiguunda that workers are not necessarily better off than the peasants, that the 
worker and the peasant


--- PAGE 70 ---
56 
both suffer f rom the same system of imperialist capitalism, was the question 
assumed by the struggle between capital and labour in the twentieth century: 
To have factories and even big industries 
Is good, very good! 
It is a means of developing the country. 
The question is this: who owns the industries? 
Whose children gain from the industries? (7) 
The content of the play was asking many questions about the nature of 
Kenyan society and this generated ever more heated discussions on form and 
content during the entire period of the play’s evolution. Sometimes these 
involved not just the actual participants but the ever widening, circle of the 
audience. 
Auditions and rehearsals for instance were in the open. I must say .that this 
was initially forced on us by the empty space but it was also part of the 
growing conviction that a democratic participation even in the solution of 
artistic problems, however slow and chaotic it at times seemed, was producing 
results of a high artistic. order and was forging a communal sp irit in a 
community of artistic workers: PhDs from the university of Nairobi: PhDs 
from the university of the factory and the plantation: PhDs from Gorki’s 
‘university of the streets’ - each person’s worth was judged by the scale of each 
person’s contribution to the group effort. The open auditions and the rehearsals 
with everybody seeing all the elements that went into making a whole had the 
effect of demystifying the theatrical process:.. 
In the theatre that I was used to in school and colleges and in ama teur 
circles, the actors rehearsed more or less in secrecy and then sprung their 
finished perfection. on an unsuspecting audience who were of course surprised 
into envious admiration: oh, what perfection, what talent, what inspired gifts - I 
certainly could never do such a thing! Such a theatre is part of the general 
bourgeois education system which practices education as a process of 
weakening people, of making them feel they cannot do this or that - oh, it must 
take such brains! - In other words education  as a means of mystifying 
knowledge and hence reality. Education, far from giving people -the 
confidence in their ability and capacities to overcome obstacles or to become 
masters of the laws governing external nature as human beings, tends to make 
them feel their inadequacies, their weaknesses and their incapacities in the face 
of reality; and their inability to do anything about the conditions governing 
their lives. They become more and more


--- PAGE 71 ---
57 
alienated from themselves and from their natural and social en vironment. 
Education as a process of alienation produces a gallery of active stars and an 
undifferentiated mass of grateful admirers. The Olympian gods of the Greek 
mythology or the dashing knights of the middle ages are reborn in the 
-twentieth century as  superstar politicians, scientists, sportsmen, actors, the 
handsome doers or heroes, with the ordinary people watching passively, 
gratefully, admiringly. Kamiriithu was the opposite of this. The Kamiriithu 
practice was part of education as a process of dem ystifying knowledge and 
hence reality. People could see how the actors evolved from the time they 
could hardly move their legs or say their lines to a time when they could talk 
and move about the stage as if they were born talking those lines or moving on 
that stage. Some people in fact were recruited into the acting team after they 
had intervened to show how such and such a character should be portrayed. 
The audience applauded them into continuing doing the part: Perfection was 
thus shown to be a process, a historical social process, but it was -adnured no 
less. On the contrary they .identified with that-perfection even- more because it 
was a product of themselves their collective contribution. It was a heightening 
of themselves as a community. 
The research on the script of Ngaahika Ndeenda, the writing of the outline, 
the readings and the. discussions of the outline, the auditions and rehearsals 
and the construction-of the open-air theatre took in all about nine months -from 
January to September 1977. The r eadings; the discussions and the rehearsals 
were timed to keep in rhythm with the lives of the people. So these were set 
sometimes on Saturday afternoon but always on Sunday afternoons. Even 
Sunday afternoon was chosen so that Kamiriithu theatre would not interfere 
with church attendance in the mornings. 
The results of all this effort to evolve an authentic language of African 
theatre were obvious when the play opened to a paying audience on 2 October 
1977. Once again the performances were timed for Sunday afternoons. 
Evenings would have been too cold for everybody. Ngaahika Ndeenda was an 
immediate success with people coming from afar, even in hired buses and 
taxis, to see the show. Theatre became what it had always been: part of -a 
collective festival. Some people knew the lines almost as-well as the actors and 
their joy was in seeing the variations by the actors on different occasions - to 
different audiences. There was an identification with the characters. Some 
people called themselves by the names of the ir favourite peasant and worker 
characters like Kiguunda; Gicaamba; Wangeci; Gathoni.


--- PAGE 72 ---
58 
But they also used the names of such -characters as Kioi, Nditika, Ikuua, and 
Ndugire, to refer to those, in and outside the village, who had anti -people 
tendencies. Th e language of Ngaahika. Ndeenda was becoming part of the 
people’s daily vocabulary and frame of reference. There were some touching 
moments: I remember one Sunday when it rained and people rushed to the 
nearest shelters under the trees or under the roofs. When it stopped, and all the 
actors resumed, the auditorium was as full as before. The performance was 
interrupted about three times on that afternoon but the audience would not go 
away. The people’s identification with Kamiriithu was now complete. 
Later they were driven away, not by the rain, not by any natural disaster, 
but by the authoritarian measures of an anti -people regime. On 16 November 
1917 the Kenya government banned any further public performances of 
Ngaahika Ndeenda by the simple act of withdrawing the licence for any public 
‘gathering’ at the centre. I myself was arrested on 31 December 1977 and spent 
the whole of 1978 in a maximum security prison, detained without even the 
doubtful benefit-of a trial. They were attempting to stop the emergence  of an 
authentic language of Kenyan theatre. 
But that was not the end of Kamiriithu’s search for an authentic language 
of African theatre in form and content. 
In November 1981 they regrouped for another effort, the production of 
Maitu Njugira (Mother sing for me). Auditions were set for 7, 14 and 15 
November 1981, almost as if Kamiriithu was resuming the search from the 
very date and month it had been stopped. I have narrated the fate of this 
second. production in my book, Barrel of a Pen: Resistance to Rep ression in 
Neo-Colonial Kenya. Here I would like to simply point out that all the 
elements of theatre developed, in 1977 were employed and further extended. 
Maitu Njugira depicted the heroic struggle of Kenyan workers against he early 
phase of imperialist capitalist ‘primitive’ accumulation with confiscation of 
land, forced labour on the same stolen land and heavy taxation to finance its 
development into settler run plantations. 
Dance, mime, song were more dominant than words in telling this story of 
repression and resistance. The visual and the sound images carried the burden 
of the .narrative and the analysis. The medium of slides was also introduced to 
give authentic visual images of the period of the twenties and thirties. And at 
every stage in its evolution more people from many of the Kenyan nationalities 
were involved. Maitu Njugira (Mother sing for me), a drama in music, had 
more than eighty songs from more than eight nationalities in Kenya all


--- PAGE 73 ---
59 
depicting the joy, the sorrow, the gains, the losses, the unity, the divisions, and 
the march forward as well as the setbacks in Kenyan’people’s struggles. 
Kamiriithu was due to put on the musical drama at the Kenya National 
Theatre on 19 February 1982 after more- than ten weeks of strenuous work by 
what had now become an important alliance from all nationalities of workers, 
peasants and progressive teachers and students. By going to .perform at the 
Kenya National Theatre the alliance was going to make the point that an 
authentic language of African theatre, no m atter in what specific African 
tongue it found expression, would communicate to people of all the 
nationalities. It was also going to prove that this trend had the support of 
Kenyan people of all the nationalities. Where else to prove this than on the 
premises of the so -called Kenya National Theatre. It was booked to be the 
longest run ever even though it was during the off theatre season, at the 
beginning of the year after Christmas. 
The peasants and workers were about to bring national theatre to the 
capital city: But this was not  to be. This time the authorities would not even 
deign to give a licence, instructions were sent to the management to padlock 
the doors; and the police were sent to ensure public peace and public security. 
Our attempts to continue with open rehearsals at the University premises -the 
famous Theatre II - were again frustrated after about ten such ‘rehearsals’ seen 
by about 10,000 people! The University-authorities were instructed to padlock 
the doors of Theatre II. That was ®n Thursday 25 February 1982. On Thursday 
11 March 1982 the government outlawed Kamiriithu Community Education 
arid Cultural Centre and banned all theatre activities in. the entire area. An 
‘independent’ Kenyan government had followed in the footsteps of its colonial 
predecessors: it banned all the peasant and worker basis for genuine national 
traditions in theatre. But this time, the neo -colonial regime overreached itself. 
On 12 March 1982 three truckloads of armed policemen were sent to 
Kamiriithu Community Education and Cultural Centre and razed the open -air 
theatre to the ground. By so doing it ensured the immortality of the Kamiriithu 
experiments and search for peasant/worker-based language of African theatre. 
A collective theatre, or what Boal has called a ‘the atre of the oppressed’, 
was produced by a range of factors: a content with which people could identify 
carried in a form which they could recognise and identify; their participation in 
its evolution through the research stages, that is by the collection of  raw 
material like details of work conditions in farms and firms; the collection of old 
songs and dances like Muthirigu, Mucung’wa, and Mwomboko and opera 
forms like


--- PAGE 74 ---
60 
Gitiiro etc; their participation, through discussion on the scripts and therefore 
on the content and form; through the public auditions and rehearsals; and of 
course through the performances. The real language of African theatre is to be 
found in the struggles of the oppressed, for it is out of those struggles that a 
new Africa is being born.  The peasants and workers of Africa are making a 
tomorrow out of the present of toil and turmoil. The authentic language of 
African theatre :should reflect this even as it is given birth by that very toil and 
turmoil. Such a theatre will find response in t he hearts and lives of the 
participants; and even in the hearts of those living. outside the immediate 
environment of, its physical being and operation. 
A 70 year old participant, Njoki wa Nomura, was interviewed in The Daily 
Nation of Friday 22 January 1982: 
‘When the Kamiriithu Theatre group started’, Njoki said, ‘we old people 
found we could be useful by teaching the young some of the things they 
did not know. I felt I was doing something important to he nation by 
teaching the songs that we used in Ngaahika Ndeenda and that is why I 
-am involved in Maitu Njugira’. . . To Njoki the Ngaahika Ndeenda 
experience showed how history can be brought to the fore through drama 
so that ‘children may know what their past was like and so that they may 
help in the building of a healthy society. The new play, Maitu Njugira, is 
equally important because very few Kenyans today know what it meant to 
be colonized in the 1930’s which is what the play is about.(8) 
Similar sentiments were expressed by all the others interviewed in the 
same issue and by others interviewed in The Standard of Friday 29 January 
1982. Wanjiru wa Ngigi, a young secretary and mother of two summarised it 
all: 
During rehearsal so far, I have discovered so much I did not know about 
my own history. I can say with confidence that I know and I’m still 
learning - a great deal more about my’ own culture. Knowing more about 
my past has made me ore sensitive to my present situation and that of my 
future and the future of my children. (9) 
In its short period of physical existence Kamiriithu had an effect on that 
movement in Kenyan theatre described earlier in this chapter. There was the 
move towards the people and the gradual but growing confidence in p eople’s 
languages and their use in theatre. There was also the emergence of 
people-based- cultural festivals like the annual Vihiga Cultural Festival in 
western Kenya. They were not a copy of


--- PAGE 75 ---
61 
Kamiriithu but were inspired by a similar felt need for a renaissance of Kenyan 
culture which would be achieved by going to the roots of its being in the lives 
and languages of the people. The destruction of Kamiriithu was thus much 
more than a destruction of an open air theatre. In its search for an authentic 
language of African theatre, Kamiriithu had given palpable form to a vision of 
Kenya’s future a Kenya for Kenyans, a self -reliant Kenya for a self -reliant 
people, a vision embodying a communal ethos of democracy and 
independence. This vision was diametrically opposed to the subservience to the 
USA and western imperialist interests represented by the neo -colonial regime 
of both Kenyatta and Moi, which is now embodied in the slogan of Nyayoism 
which means ‘Follow in my footsteps’. 
There has been an interesting twis t to the Kamiriithu story. In February 
1984 President Moi made ‘a surprise visit’ to Kamiriithu and he shed tears at 
the poverty he saw around the centre: how can human beings live in such 
conditions? On ‘an impulse’, ‘an unrehearsed’ act of ‘personal’ generosity, he 
there and then gave a donation towards the building of a polytechnic where the 
open air theatre used to be. No mention of the Kamiriithu Community 
Education and Cultural Centre. But the people were not deceived. A 
polytechnic was what they were  hoping to build. They would welcome one 
built by the government for after all it was their money. But the regime has 
different hopes. By its wanton act of destruction of Kamiriithu Theatre in 1982, 
it had shown its anti -people neo-colonial colours arid it  had become further 
alienated from the people. Its intensified repression of Kenyans in 1982 - 
through detentions without trial or imprisonment on trumped -up charges, 
particularly of university lecturers and students - did not improve its image and 
its fur ther alienation from the people. It hopes that people can forget the 
alternative vision, even though unrealised, but embodied in the Kamiriithu 
experience. Kamiriithu must not be allowed to become a revolutionary shrine 
People have to be taught the virtues of subservience and gratitude to a gallery 
of stars. 
But can an idea be killed? Can you destroy a revolutionary shrine itself 
enshrined in the revolutionary spirit of a people? 
I was in Europe in June 1982 when I heard the news: Dr Kimani Gecau, 
chairman of the Literature Department and director of Ngaahika Ndeenda in 
1977 and co -director, with Waigwa Wachiira, of Maitu Njugira in 1981-82, 
had fled to Zimbabwe. Ngugi wa Mirii, a most dedicated and indefatigable 
worker for a people’s cause, and the coodinating director of , Kamiriithu


--- PAGE 76 ---
62 
Community Education and Cultural Centre also had to flee a few hours ahead 
of those with a warrant for his - arrest and possible detention. They have been 
helping to set up rural-based cultural centres and in 1983 produced The Trial of 
Dedan Kimathi in the Shona language. It was in the same months of June and 
July 1982 that, as I was about to return to Kenya, I received frantic messages 
from different directions: orders were out for my arrest and detention without 
trial on arrival at the Jomo Kenyatta Airport in Nairobi. Should I not delay my 
return? I did and I have been telling the Kamiriithu story wherever and 
whenever I have a chance. For on a personal level it has changed my life. 
It has led me to prison, yes; it got me banned from teaching at’ the 
University of Nairobi, yes; and it has now led me into exile. But as a writer it 
has also made me confront the whole question of the language of African . 
theatre- which then led me to confront the language’ of African fiction. 
 
 
Notes 
 
1 See also Ngugi wa Midi’ On Literary Content Working paper no. 340, IDS, Nairobi, April 1979. He 
places his discussion of the literary content at Kamiriithu Community Educational and Cultural Centre 
in a class analysis of the village community. 
2 Jomo Kenyatta Facing Mount Kenya, London 1938. 
3 I am indebted to Wasambo Were for the comparison between The Empty Spare of Peter Brook’s title, 
and the practice of African literature during a discussion I had with him on Theatre in Kenya in London 
1983. 
4 Compare also with Wole Soyinka’s The Lion and the jewel, the exchange between Lakunle, the school 
teacher who quotes abuses from the Shorter Oxford Dictionary and Sidi, the illiterate village woman 
who presumably speaks Yoruba. In what language is Lakunle speaking: Yoruba or English? What 
about Sidi? In the text they are both speaking English, of course. 
5 Ngugi and Ngugi I Will Marry When I Want, Nairobi and London 1982, pp. 21-9. 
6 Karl Marx Capital, Vol. I, Chap. VII, p. 177. 
7 Ngugi and Ngugi I Will Marry When 1 Want, Nairobi and London 1982, p. 39. 
8 Daily Nation 22 January 1982. 
9 The Standard 29 January 1982. The two features by The Daily Nation and The Standard carry many 
other comments and direct quotes from participants which give an insight into the popular base of 
theatre.


--- PAGE 77 ---
63 
The Language  
of African Fiction 
 
I One of my books Detained has the subtitle A Writer’s Prison Diary. Why a 
writer’s prison diary? Because the main theme was the process of writing a 
novel under prison conditions. Caitaani Mutharabaini (in English Devil on the 
Cross) was published by Heinemann in 1980 and it was the first novel of its 
kind in scope and size in the Gikuyu language. 
In discussing the language of African fiction I shall draw heavily on the 
experience of writing Caitaani Mutharabaini and I hope that in the process I 
shall demonstrate the wider issues and problems of the existence, the origins, 
the growth and the development of the African novel. 
At the time of my arrest at my home on 31 December 1977 I was, in 
addition to being an active participant in theatre at Kamiriithu  Community 
Educational and Cultural Centre, the Chairman of the Literature Department at 
the University of Nairobi and Associate Professor. I remember my last lecture. 
It was to my third year students. ‘Next year,’ I told them in parting, ‘I want to 
attempt a class analysis of Chinua Ache be’s fiction from Things Fall Apart up 
to Girls at War. I want in particular to trace the development of the messenger 
class from its inception as actual messengers, clerks, soldiers, policemen, 
catechists and road foremen in colonialism as seen in Things Fall Apart and 
Arrow of God, to their position as the educated ‘been -tos’ in No Longer at 
Ease; to their assumption and exercise of power in A Man of the People; to 
their plunging the nation into intraclass civil war in Girls at War. And before 
we meet to discuss all these problems, I urge you to read two books without 
which I believe it is impossible to understand what informs African writing, 
particularly novels written by Africans. They are Frantz Fanon The Wretched 
of the Earth, mostly the chapter titled ‘the pitfalls of national consciousness’ 
and V. I. Lenin’s Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. 
3


--- PAGE 78 ---
64 
Five days later -or exactly six ‘weeks after the banning of Ngaahika 
Ndeenda -I was in cell 16 at Kamiti Maximum Security Pris on as a political 
detainee answering to a mere number K6,77. Cell 16 would become for me 
what Virginia Woolf had called A Room of One’s Own and which she claimed 
was absolutely necessary for a writer. Mine was provided free by the Kenya 
government. 
 
II So, confined within the walls of that room of my own, I thought a great deal 
about my work in the Literature Department - had my students read Frantz 
Fanon and Lenin on colonialism and imperialism? - and of course about my 
participation at Kamiriithu Community Educational and Cultural Centre - had 
the participants continued with adult literacy? - and indeed about my entire 
situation as a caged writer. The whole point of a neo -colonial regime 
imprisoning a writer is, in addition to -punishing- him, to keep him away from 
the people, to cut off any and every contact and communication between him 
and the people. In my case the regime wanted to keep me away from the 
university and the village and if possible to break me. I had to-keep my sanity 
and the best way was to use the very conditions in prison to break that isolation 
and re-establish a .contact despite the bleak walls and the chained doors. My 
determination became sharpened when a very cruel prison superintendant 
warned me against any attempts at writing p oems - he obviously confused 
novels with poems. 
But why a novel? And why in Gikuyu language? 
 
III Not so long ago the novel, like - God, was declared dead, at least in its 
eighteenth and nineteenth century forms. There was even a movement in search 
of a nouveau roman but I am not sure whether there was also a parallel 
movement in search of a new God or, for that matter, whether the search was 
fruitful. What’s clear is that something answering to the name ‘novel’ has been 
showing significant signs of life somewhere in Africa and- Latin America. The 
death of the novel was not therefore one of my problems.


--- PAGE 79 ---
65 
Nevertheless the novel, at least in the form that reached us in Africa, is of 
bourgeois origins. It arose with the emergence of the European bourgeoisie 
into historical dominance through commerce and industry, with -the 
development of the. new technology of the printing press and hence 
commercial publishing and above all with the new. climate of thought that the 
world was knowable- through human experience. A t long last the world of 
Ptolemy was being replaced by the world of Copernicus and Galileo; the world 
of alchemy by that of chemistry; that of magic and divine wills by that of 
experience in nature and in human affairs. The Edmunds of the new world 
were ev erywhere challenging the King Lears of the old order. A world 
dominated by nature and its spiritual reflection in God’s kingdom both 
suspiciously possessing all the features of feudal hierarchies of nobles and 
menials was being replaced by the one dominate d by bourgeois man and his 
spiritual reflection in a God of profit and loss. Today the song is, let labour 
hold the reins; then the song was, let the bourgeois hold the reins: 
The Europe that came to Africa at the end of the nineteenth century had at 
its h ead the victorious bourgeois man, now transformed from a captain of 
industry in a free market system into a commander -in-chief of vast financial 
resources regulating huge industries and commercial monopolies and in search 
of new markets to conquer and to govern. 
The pre-colonial African world, on the other hand, with different stages of 
social development among the varied regions and peoples, was on the whole 
characterised by the low level of development of productive forces. Hence it 
was dominated by an incomprehensible and unpredictable nature, or rather by a 
nature to an extent only knowable through ritual, magic and divination. This 
nature, largely, unknowable and largely hostile, could be faced through a 
collective response .and a cohesive social order; it could be cruel in some of its 
practices, but also humane in its personal relations and its awareness of mutual 
accountability among its members. This world was reflected .in the literature it 
produced with its mixture of animal characters, of halfman -half-beast and of 
human beings all intermingling and interacting in a coexistence of mutual 
suspicion, hostility, and cunning but also occasional moments of co-operation. 
The social struggles were reflected in another type of literature, that of epic 
poetic narratives celebrating the heroic deeds of kings and exceptional men 
who had served the , community in times of war or disaster. The internal and 
external struggles of these societies and hence the development of their 
productive forces and progressive mastery over nature were hindered


--- PAGE 80 ---
66 
by European slavery which often disrupted settled. agriculture compelling 
mass migration and movements.’ But their natural development was more 
dramatically hindered and distorted by imperialism. It is true that imperialism - 
through its heritage .of a highly developing science and technology, its 
amassing of enormous productive forces through a reorganization of the labour 
of millions under eighteenth and nineteenth century mercantile and industrial 
capital - brought to Af rica. the possibilities of knowing and mastering that 
world of nature. But at the same time it denied the conquered races and peoples 
the means of knowing and mastering that world. On the contrary their lands 
were confiscated, their people often killed by a civilisation that had wiped out 
populations and civilisations in America, New Zealand and Australia. Thus the 
very means and basis of a progressive ordering of their own lives were taken 
away from them. The elaborate systems worked out to cope with natur e and 
with one another were often destroyed, leaving human beings at the mercy of a 
social order more cruel and more incomprehensible in its chaos, its illogicality 
and its contradictions than nature itself. 
For instance the reorganisation of labour under capitalistic agriculture and 
industry meant productivity and possibilities of wealth on a scale unknown 
before under feudal and communalistic systems. But the colonial system, 
through repressive racist ideologies, ensured the private appropriation of that 
wealth in a few hands, mostly white. Imperialism thus introduced mass poverty 
and cross regional underdevelopment. Capitalism introduced plenty and 
possibilities of the conquest of hunger: capitalism ensured poverty and mass 
starvation on a scale unknown b efore. Capitalism and the development of 
science and technology introduced the possibilities of the conquest of nature: 
capitalism by its uncontrolled use and exploitation of natural, resources 
ensured the virtual dominance of nature over man by way of dro ughts and 
desertification. Capitalism introduced a new medical science to conquer 
diseases: capitalism through its selection prescription of medical care, at least 
in the colonies, ensured a disease-ridden population who now lacked help from 
the herbalists  and psychiatrists whose practices had been condemned as 
devilry. 
There were other contradictions. Imperialism through the missionaries of 
its ideology introduced writing to many African languages: It was necessary 
that the biblical message of subservience, the administrative orders for labour 
and taxes and the military and police orders for killing recalcitrants, reached 
the native messengers as directly as possible. Rival imperialisms and the 
colonial practice of divide and rule


--- PAGE 81 ---
67 
introduced contradictory representations of the sound systems of the very same 
language, let alone of similar African languages within the same colonial 
boundary. For instance the Glknyn languages had two, rival orthographies 
developed by protestant and catholic missionaries. Bef ore this was rectified, 
-two -Giknyn speaking children could well have been in the position where 
they could not read each others letters or essays. Again imperialism introduced 
literacy, but often confined it to clerks, soldiers,. policemen, and the petty civil 
servants, the nascent messenger class about which I was going to talk to my 
students. Thus even on the eve of independence; the masses of African people 
could not read or write. 
Imperialist nations also introduced the printing press and the possibil ities 
of publishing for a wider audience. For instance in British colonised territories, 
particularly in East and Central Africa; literature bureaus were established with 
the commendable and enlightened policy of publishing in English and African 
languages. But imperialism tried to cowl content carried  by those languages. 
Publications were censored directly, through government licensing laws or in= 
directly through the editorial practices of those running the government and 
missionary .presses. African languages were still .meant to carry the message 
of the bible. Even the animal tales derived from orature, which were published 
by these presses in booklets, were often so carefully selected as to make them 
carry the moral message and implications revealing th e unerring finger of a 
white God in human affairs. 
Thus imperialist pretences to free the African from superstition, ignorance 
and awe of nature often resulted in deepening his ignorance,, increasing his 
superstitions and multiplying his awe of the new whi pand-gun-wielding 
master. An African, particularly one who had gone through a colonial school, 
would more.-readily relate to the bible with its fantastic explanation of the 
origins of the universe, its ‘divine’ revelations about the second coming and its 
horrifying pictures of hell and damnation for those sinning against imperialist 
order, than to the novel, with its careful analysis of motive in character and 
action, and its general assumption that the world in which we live can be 
understood or at least a nalysed through observations of patterns of behaviour 
of individuals or of the changing patterns of human relationships between 
groups and individuals. 
Amidst massive illiteracy, amidst the conflicting phonetic systems even 
within the same language, amidst  the new superstitions of the bible and the 
church, how can we talk meaningfully of the African


--- PAGE 82 ---
68 
novel? How could I contemplate the novel as a means of my reconnection with 
the people I left behind? My targeted audience - the people - were the two 
classes epresented by Kamiriithu. How could I take a form so specifically 
bourgeois in its origins, authorship and consumption, for such a reconnection 
with a populace ridden with the problems outlined above? . 
The social or even national basis of. the origins of an important discovery 
or any invention is not necessarily a determinant of the use to which it can be 
put by its inheritors. History is replete with examples of the opposite. 
Gunpowder was invented in China. It was effectively used by the European 
bourgeoisie in its spread and expansion to all the corners of the globe. 
Mathematical science was invented by the Arabs but it has been 
appropriated-by all the nations of the earth. The history of science and 
technology taken as a whole is a result of contributions from many nations and 
races in Africa, Asia, Europe, America and Australasia. The same is true of the 
history of the arts - music, dance, sculpture, paintings and literature. African 
music and art for instance have been appropriated  by the Europe and America 
of the twentieth century. What is true of the national and racial origins of a 
discovery is even more poignantly true of the class origins of discoveries. The 
most crucial discoveries and technical breakthroughs that have changed the 
face of the ni neteenth and twentieth centuries like the Spinning Jenny, the 
weaving loom, and the steam engine were all the products of the working 
class.. All the earlier crucial discoveries like the wheel for irrigation, or the 
windmill or water-mill, were the inventions of the peasantry. Again this is even 
more true of the arts. The most important breakthroughs in music, dance and 
literature have been borrowed from the peasantry. Even the games like football 
and athletics have come from ordinary people while all the o thers normally 
associated with the upper classes were refinements of those of the people. 
Nowhere is this more clear than in the area of languages. It is the peasantry and 
the working class who are changing language all the time in pronunciations, in 
forming new dialects, new words, new phrases and new expressions. In the 
hands of the peasantry and the working class, language is changing all the time, 
it is never at a standstill. The social history of the world before the advent of 
victorious socialism was the continued appropriation of the results and the 
genius of the labour of millions by the idle classes. Why should not the African 
peasantry and working class appropriate the novel?


--- PAGE 83 ---
69 
In any case the novel itself was an outgrowth from the earlier traditions of 
oral tales and of epic poetic narratives like those of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey 
or those of Liyongo in Swahili literature. These were certainly the artforms of 
the peasantry. The African novel as an extended narrative in written form had 
antecedents in African oral literature. The most essential element in the 
oral-tale as- in that of the novel is still the story, the element of what happens 
next. The artistry lies in the various devices for maintaining the story. 
Perhaps the crucial question is not t hat of the racial, national, and class 
origins of the novel; but that of its development arid the uses to which it is 
continually being put. 
 
IV The African novel and its development, since its inception early, this century, 
have been adversely affected by two factors. _ 
The printing press, the publishing houses and the educational context of the 
novel’s birth were controlled by the missionaries an d the colonial 
administration. The early practitioners of the African novel, particularly in 
South Africa, were products of missionary educational institutions and they 
were more likely to have been exposed to Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress and the 
King James  or Authorized version of the bible than to Tolstoy, Balzac or 
Dickens. Even when later novels were introduced in the school libraries, the 
selection was carefully. done so as not to expose the young minds to 
dangerous, undesirable and unacceptable moral a nd political influences., I 
remember one day at Alliance High School, the missionary headmaster using 
the morning assembly to lecture us on the beauty and the dignity of Alan 
Paton’s novel Cry the Beloved Country in which a subservient non -violent 
African christian Uncle Tom is the hero; and then later he accused Alan Paton 
of going astray in the next novel, Too late the Phalarope, by introducing sex 
sequences between whites and blacks in South Africa. The early African novel 
produced under such circumstances; took its themes and moral preoccupation 
from the bible: But such a novel was also the product of a deliberate policy of 
the government and mission -controlled presses. In Rhodesia the Literature - 
Bureau would not publish an African novel which had any b ut religious 
,themes and sociological themes which were free from politics. Retelling old 
fables and tales, yes. Reconstructions of precolonial


--- PAGE 84 ---
70 
magical and ritual practices; yes. Stories of characters who move from the 
darkness of the .pre-colonial past to the light of the christian present, yes. But 
any discussion of or any sign of dissatisfaction with colonialism. No! 
The second adverse factor was the rise of universities and colleges on the 
African soil at the beginning of the fifties. (A parallel move ment was the 
education of the same type of student in universities abroad.) Makerere 
University College in Uganda, Ibadan University College in Nigeria and the 
Ghana University College were all overseas colleges of the University, of 
London. They had fully-fledged departments of English: for the first time there 
was growing up a group of African students who were being exposed to more 
than the King James Bible and Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. They had studied 
the English novel from Richardson to James Joyce . They would also be 
familiar with, or at least be aware of, the American, the French and the Russian 
novel. They would also read European novelists - like Joseph Conrad and 
Joyce Cary or Alan Paton, some of whose books had Africa as their thematic 
subject. Many of these English departments also founded literary journals or 
student magazines -like Horn in Ibadan and Penpoint in Makerere, But these 
students turned to English as the vehicle of their fictional encounter with their 
Africa. The brilliant minds o f a Chinua Achebe, a Wole Soyinka or a Kofi 
Awoonor went not to. revitalise the African novel but to create a new tradition, 
that of the Afro-European novel., The novel (in English, French or Portuguese) 
found further encouragement through the multinational publishers who saw a 
new literary area for investment. The Afro -European novel is now almost 
inseparable from Heinemann’s African Writers Series with more than a 
hundred novels on its list. But publishers like Longman and homegrown 
varieties like the East African Publishing House also have impressive lists. 
Thus the African novel was further impoverished by the very means of its 
possible liberation: exposure of its would -be-practitioners to the secular 
tradition of the critical and socialist realism of th e European novel and the 
entry on the stage of commercial publishers who were outside the colonial. 
government and missionary control. 
I was part and parcel of that process, or rather one of its products. I went to 
Makerere University College in 1959 and read English. My earliest short story, 
‘Mugumo’ was first published in the department magazine, Penpoint, under the 
title, ‘The Fig Tree’. By 1969 I had completed my first novel manuscript which 
later became The River Between. By 1963 Weep Not, Child; my second novel 
manuscript, had


--- PAGE 85 ---
71 
been accepted by William Heinemann, London and it later became the seventh 
title in the African Writers Series. 1977, the year of my arrest and political 
detention, had seen the publication of my fourth novel in English, Petals of 
Blood. 
It was natural that, as I sat in Cell 16 at Kamiti Maximum Security Prison 
in 1978, I should have been thinking of the novel as the means of my defiance 
of the intended detention of my mind and imagination. Under the prison 
circumstances the nov el had other advantages. Theatre and film, the ideal 
means for breaking through the barriers of, illiteracy, involve more than one 
person and indeed a fixed location or premises, not to mention financial 
investment in the case of film. The novel, at least the writing of it, needs only 
pen and paper. Nevertheless, I had first to  resolve the question of language 
which was clearly inseparable from the question of to which tradition I would 
reconnect myself: that of the Afro-European Novel to which A Grain of Wheat 
Petals of Blood belonged or that of the African novel of which I had no 
previous experience.- No neutrality. I had to choose. 
But in a sense the choice had been settled for me by Kamiriithu  and by the 
very fact of my detention. I would attempt a novel in the very language which 
had been the basis of incarceration. I would reconnect myself not to the 
Afro-European novel of my previous practice but to the African novel of my 
new commitment. 
 
V The road to that decision had been long: As I have explaine d I grew 
upspeaking Gikuyu My first encounter with stories and oral narratives was 
through Gikuyu As a new literate in Gikuyu I avidly read the bible, particularly 
the stories in the Old Testament. I also read most of the booklets then available 
in Gikuyu language and published mostly by the missionary and government 
presses; for example Moohero Ma Tene, Mwendo N Ira na Iriiri, Kariuki na 
Muthoni or Miikarire ya Agikuyu were not novelettes or creative stories as such 
but thinly fictionalised descriptions of old customs, traditions, stages in the life 
of a Muugikuyu child or straight biblical narrative. They were full of moral 
lessons derived from the bible or from the old traditions. The most creative of 
those Kenyans then writing in Gikuyu was Gakaara wa Wanjau who had even 
established his own Gakaara Book Service for publishing and book 
distribution. He had an impressive list of


--- PAGE 86 ---
72 
novelettes, political essays, songs and poems and sheer agitational material, all 
urging people to higher resolves in their purs uit of land, freedom and the 
redemption of their culture. Unfortunately, all his books were banned and he 
himself arrested and detained for ten years from 1952 to 1962. But his books, 
like Riua Ritaanathua, O Kirima Ngaagua, Mageria Nomo Mahota, Ngwenda 
Uunjurage and Marebeta Ikumi ma wendo remained tantalising titles in my 
mind. I thereafter drifted to what was then available in Kiswahili. Again not 
much. But I read and re -read Hekaya Za Abunuwasi, being the stories and 
adventures of a trickster, Abunuwasi. 
The English language opened the door to a wide range of fiction and it was 
this that eventually led me .to the English Department . at Makerere in 1959. 
and hence to the kind of writing which climaxed in Petals of Blood which was 
published in July 1977. But I was becoming increasingly uneasy about the 
English language. After I had written A Grain of Wheat I underwent a crisis. -I 
knew whom I was writing about but whom was I writing for? The peasants 
whose struggles fed the novel would never read it. In an interview in 1967 with 
Union News, a student newspaper in Leeds University, .I said: `I have reached 
a point of crisis. I don't know whether it is worth any longer writing in 
English.’ The Obi Wali challenge of 1963 kept on pursuing me through, Leeds 
and after. In June 1969 while based at Makerere University as a Fellow in 
Creative Writing in the Department of English, I wrote a paper `Towards a 
National Culture' as par of the background material for the 1969 Unesco 
Conference on `Cultural Policy in Africa' held in Dakar, Senegal. The paper 
was later included in my book Homecoming and in it I was more emphatic 
about the language issue: 
Equally important for our cultural renaissance is the teaching and study of 
African languages. We have already seen what any colonial system does: 
impose its tongue on the subject races, and then downgrade the vernacular 
tongues. of the people. By so doing they make the acquisition of their 
tongue a status symbol; anyone who learns it begins to despise the peasant 
majority and their barbaric tongues By acquiring the thought-processes and 
values of his adopted tongue, he becomes alienated from the values of his 
mother tongue, or from the language of the masses. Language after all is a 
carrier of values fashioned by a people over a period of time. It seems to 
me that in a country where ninety per cent speak African languages, it is 
very unwise not to teach these in schools and colleges. We need to develop 
a national language, but not at the dire expense of the


--- PAGE 87 ---
73 
regional languages: In a socialist economic and political context, the 
development of ethnic languages would not be inimical to national unity 
and consciousness. It is only in a competitive capitalist set -up that the 
warring interests exploit ethnic and regional language differences to the 
detriment of the common cause of the peasantry and the workers. That a 
study of our own languages is important for a meaningful self -image is 
increasingly being realized …  
. . Increased study of African languages will inevitably make more 
Africans want to write in their mother tongues and thus open new avenues 
for our creative imagination? 
 
In 1977 the Kamiriithu   experience led me to give a public lecture at Kenyatta 
University College in whi ch I called upon Kenyan writers to return to their 
roots in the languages and cultures of all our nationalities. 
Still the question nagged. me. I had been able to cope with the problem of 
language in theatre. What about a novel? Would I be able to overcome  the 
problems? Kamiti Maximum Security Prison finally resolved the issue. In a 
challenge to the imprisoning authorities through The Detainees Review 
Tribunal and dated 2) June 1978 I concluded: 
 
Kenyan writers have no alternative but to return to the roots, return to 
the sources of their being in the rhythms of life and- speech and languages 
of the Kenyan masses if they are to rise to the great challenge of recreating, 
in their poems, plays and novels, the epic grandeur of that hisiory.. 
Instead of being suppressed and being sent to maximum security 
prisons and detention camps,. they should be accorded all the 
encouragement to write a literature that will be the pride of Kenya and the 
envy of the world. 3  
 
But by then I was already in. the middle of my first novel in Gikuyu language 
or rather I should say that I was deep in the problems of writing Caitaani 
Mutharabaini, in prison, in Cell 16. 
 
VI Paper and pen were the first problem. One could get a pen .if one said that one 
was writing an appeal or a confession to the authorities.


--- PAGE 88 ---
74 
One could even get two or three sheets or paper. But a whole pile for a 
novel? I resorted to toilet paper. Whenever I have said this people have laughed 
or looked at me with questions in their eyes. But there was  no mystery to 
writing on toilet paper. Toilet paper at Kamiti was meant to punish prisoners. 
So it was very coarse. But what was bad for the body was good for the pen. 
But there were other problems that had nothing to do with the fact that the 
room of one's own was Cell 16. Words for instance. Sentences. Paragraphs. In 
Four Quartets T. S. Eliot has made the apt observation on the slippery quality 
of words: 
 
Words strain, 
Crack and sometimes break, under the burden, 
Under the tension, slip, slide, perish, 
Decay with imprecision, will not stay in place, a 
Will not stay still. 
 
I found this even more true while writing Caitaani Mutharabaini Gikuyu 
language did not have a significant tradition of novel or fiction writing. 
Gakaara wa Wanjau had tried to create t he beginnings of sucha tradition. But 
his books had been banned in the fifties.. After independence he established a 
journal in the Gikuyu language called Gikuyu Na Mumbi. He ran a -fictional 
series on the adventures of Kt-wai wa Nduua. But it did 'not have the quality of 
his writings in the fifties which were still mostly out of print. I was also 
confronted with basic questions of tense, even those of the changing visual 
impression of words on paper. Words and tenses were even more slippery 
because of the unsatisfactory Gikuyu orthography. Gikuyu language had been 
reduced to writing by non-native speakers such as European missionaries and 
they could not always identify the various lengths of vowels. The distinction 
between the short and the long vowel is ve ry important in Gikuyu prose and 
poetry. But the prevailing orthography often left the reader to guess whether to 
prolong or shorten the vowel sound. This would be very tiring for an extended 
piece of prose. This lack of the means of making distinction between the long 
and short vowel sound assumed a previous knowledge of all the words on the 
part of the reader. I tried to solve the problem by using double vowels where I 
wanted to indicate the long vowel. But it took several pages before I could get 
used to it. And even then it was never finally satisfactory for what it called for 
was a new letter or a new marker for the long vowel. Gikuyu is also a tonal 
language but the prevailing orthography did not indicate tonal variations.


--- PAGE 89 ---
75 
So for all these reasons, I w ould write a paragraph in the evening sure of 
how it read, only later to find that it could be read in a different way which 
completely altered the meaning. I could only solve the problem by severely 
controlling the context of words in a sentence, and that  of sentences in a 
paragraph, and that of the paragraph within the entire situation of the 
occurrence of the action- in time and space. Yes, words did slip and slide under 
my own eyes. They would not stay in place. They would not stay still. And this 
was often a matter of great frustration. 
But the biggest problem then, and what I still think is the biggest problem 
facing the growth and the development of the African novel, is finding the 
appropriate `fiction language', that is with fiction itself taken as a form of 
language, with which to effectively communicate with one's targeted audience: 
that is, in my case, the people I left bell. 
There were two interrelated problems of `fiction language' vis -a-vis a 
writer's chosen audience: his relationship to the fo rm, to the genre itself; and 
his relationship to his material, that is to the reality before . him. How would he 
handle the form? How would he handle the material before him? 
The first question has to do with how the novel as a form has developed. 
Defoe is different from George Eliot, certainly from Balzac, Zola, Tolstoy and 
Dostoevsky. What about Joseph Conrad, James Joyce, and Faulkner with their 
handling of points of view, time, character and plot? The Afro-European novel 
itself had produced a whole range of approaches: from the linear plot 
development in Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart to Wole Soyinka's The 
Interpreters which almost dispenses with plot. Could I write for a n audience 
that had never read a novel in the same way as I would write for an audience 
that had read or was aware of James Joyce, Joseph Conrad, Wole Soyinka or 
Ayi Kwei Armah? 
In the Afro-European novel of my previous practice I had gone through 
different phases of `technical' growth. The River Between and Weep Not; Child 
have a linear plot. One action leads to the next along the normal sequence and 
divisions of time - seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, years. Event 
leads to event in a relay i n a field of continuous time. It is the biographical 
approach where the character/narrator follows the hero in time and space from 
his/her point of entry to that of exit, let's say from birth to death. The point of 
view is largely that .of the central` character. The one narrative voice is that of 
the omniscient narrator/author. But by the time Weep Not, Child came


--- PAGE 90 ---
76 
out in 1964 I was already dissatisfied with that approach. In the -works of 
Joseph Conrad, which I had studied as a special paper, I had seen how the 
author had used a variety of narrative voices at different times and places in the 
same novel with tantalising effect. With Conrad the same event could be 
looked at by the same person at different times and places; and each of these 
multiple voices  could shed new light on the event by supplying more 
information, more evidence, or by relating other episodes that preceded or 
followed the event under spotlight. Nostromo was my favourite. I still think it 
is, a great novel, but on the whole I found Conr ad's vision limited. His 
ambivalence towards imperialism - and it was imperialism that ,supplied him 
with the setting and subject -matter of his novels could never let him go,. 
beyond the balancing acts of liberal humanism. But the shifting points of view 
in time and -space; the multiplicity of narrative voices; the 
narrative-within-a-narration; the delayed information that helps the revision of 
a previous judgement so that only at the end with the full assemblage of 
evidence; information and points of view, can the reader make full judgement - 
these techniques had impressed me. 
George Lamming had also impressed me in his masterly handling of 
different narrative techniques within the same novel, particularly in In the 
Castle of My Skin. The omniscient, narrat or; drama; the diary; reportage; 
autobiography; third person narration and direct authorial intervention to . take 
the side of a character; all these are used by - Lamming in varying ways in his 
early novels Its the Castle of My Skin, The Emigrants, Of Age and Innocence, 
and Season of Adventure. Lamming's anti -imperialist consistency, his 
commitment to third world struggles, his clear base in peasant and worker, and 
the social political issues in his work, brought his world close to me and my ` 
experience of life in Kenya. 
My further acquaintance with Gogol, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Gorky, 
Sholokov, Balzac and Faulkner had shown me more possibilities for the novel 
in terms of thematic concerns and range of technique. 
Now my own observation of how people ordinarily narrated events to one 
another had also shown me that they quite happily - accepted interventions, 
digressions, narrative within a narrative and dramatic illustrations without 
losing the main narrative thread. The story within -a-story was part and parcel  
of the conversational norms of the peasantry. The linear/biographical unfolding 
of a story was more removed from actual -social practice than the narrative of 
Conrad and Lamming.


--- PAGE 91 ---
77 
The narrative form of A Grain of Wheat with its stories within stories in a 
series of flashbacks was a product of that reappraisal. The multiple narrative 
voices, apart from helping me in coping with flexible time and space, also 
helped me in moving-away from a single character navel.. In A Grain of Wheat 
all the main characters ar e of almost equal importance, and the people - the 
village people - in their motion in history, are the real hero of the novel. The 
present action of the novel takes place within four days before independence 
day in 1963. But within that there is constant movement in time and space from 
the present to the beginning of, the century and to other intermediate period. 
Petals of Blood had taken a stage further the techniques. of flashbacks, 
multiple narrative, voices, movement in time and space and parallel 
biographies and stories,. The technique allowed me to- move freely in time and 
space through the centuries and through all the important landmarks in Kenya's 
history from the early times and back to the twelve days duration of the present 
of the novel. 
But all this assumed a reader acquainted with the -convention of reading 
novels, and particularly the modern novel in European languages. Would 
similar techniques carry the kind of reader who had been to see Ngaahika 
Ndeenda (I will marry when I want) at Kamiriithu? And yet how would I return 
to the linear plot? I was, in other words, much more conscious of my new 
audience. Or maybe it -was a matter of languages. Would my use of Gikuyu 
language dictate a different kind of novel? 
Whatever the case, I wanted to go f or a simpler plot, a simpler or clearer, 
narrative line, a stronger story element (the element of what happens new!) 
without looking down upon or patronising the intended worker/peasant 
readership. 
I tried to solve the problem in three ways. I went for a f airly simple 
structure, that of a simple journey. Caitaani Mutharabaini (Devil on the Cross) 
rests on two main journeys over virtually the same ground. Wariinga -moves in 
a matatu taxi from the capital city Nairobi to Ilmorog, - a fictional rural 
outpost. Then Wariinga makes a second journey in a car from Nairobi to 
Ilmorog to Nakuru. A gap of two years separates the two journeys. There are a 
number 'of flashbacks. But they are all controlled by the time and space 
progression on the two layers of parallel j ourneys that suggest other journeys. 
The journey, the means of transport and the actual places mentioned in Nairobi 
and Nakuru would be familiar to many ordinary Kenyans. I . also borrowed 
heavily from forms of oral narrative, particularly the conversation al tone, the 
fable, proverbs, songs and the whole tradition


--- PAGE 92 ---
78 
of poetic self-praise or praise of others. I also incorporated a biblical element 
-the parable - because many literates would have read the bible. People would 
be familiar with these features and I hoped that these would help root the novel 
within a known tradition. 
Language; plot; realism of social and physical detail; features of oral 
narratives: all these were elements of form and I knew that form by itself, no 
matter how familiar and interesting, could never hold the attention of my new 
kind of reader for long. They have more important things to do than indulge in 
pretty rearrangements of familiar features of orature or of the urban and rural 
landscape. Content with which the people could identify or which would force 
them to take sides was necessary. Content is. ultimately the arbiter of form. A 
proper marriage of content and form would decide the reception accorded the 
novel. So the most important thing was to go for a subject matter, for a content, 
which had the weight and the complexity and the challenge of their everyday 
struggles. 
And this brought me to the next, problem: my relationship to my material, 
that is to the historical reality of 'a neo-colony. 
A writer's handling of reality is a ffected by his basic philosophic outlook 
on nature and society and his method of investigating that nature and society: 
whether for instance he perceives and therefore looks at a phenomenon in its 
interconnection or in its dislocation; in its rest or in its motion; in its mutability 
or immutability; in its being or in its becoming; and whether he sees any 
qualitative change in its motion from one state of being into another. A writer's 
handling of the material can also be affected by his material base in so ciety; 
that is his class position and standpoint: This, I hasten to add, does not 
necessarily produce good or bad writing, or rather a consciously held outlook 
does not necessarily make for bad or good writing for this ultimately depends 
on that undefinable quality of imagination, ' a writer's artistry, which is able to 
perceive what is universal - that is, applicable to the widest possible scale in 
time and space - in its minutest particularity as a felt experience. But it does 
,affect his approximation of  reality or rather his/ effectiveness in correctly, 
reflecting reality. 
But what happens when reality is stranger than fiction? How does a 
novelist capture and hold the interest of-the reader when the reality confronting 
the reader is stranger and more cap tivating than fiction? And yet this is what 
confronts a novelist in a neo -colony vis -a-vis the audience most adversely 
affected by that very reality of a neo-colony. 
Let me give a few concrete examples from recent history.


--- PAGE 93 ---
79 
 
VII July 1984: the President of the West German Federal Council, Franz Josef 
Strauss, makes an official visit to the independent republic of Togo in West 
Africa, at the invitation of President Eyadema. The occasion? To denounce the 
Berlin conference of 1884? To draw lessons from it to gu ide the relations 
between Western Europe and Africa into a new footing of complete economic; 
political and cultural equality? Oh no. This occasion is to celebrate the one 
hundredth anniversary of the unequal treaty imposed on King Mlapa III of 
Togo to esta blish the kingdom as a colony of the German Reich. President 
Eyadema even erects a statue of the German Imperial Eagle (or is it 
American?) to commemorate not the resistance to colonisation but the glory of 
colonisation. The Governor-General's residence. is rebuilt. And all this is to be 
paid for by Togolese peasants and workers. And so 1884, which is always 
remembered by millions of African people as the year of historic shame, the 
start of a century of continuous humiliation of Africa by the West, is bein g 
celebrated with pride by an African President. A West German newspaper 
columnist (see Nordbayerischer Kurier 6 July 1984) goes straight to the point: 
`it can be assumed that in Togo Strauss and his hosts will move on the same 
wavelength. And so it should  be. Here we Germans need not feel a guilty 
conscience because the time of our colonial rule was too short to leave behind 
traces other than nostalgic ones." Right. The time of the more recent German 
attempts at the colonisation of the other European natio ns was  even shorter. 
Does that maybe leave even greater - traces of nostalgia in the `we Germans' of 
the Markus Cleven's July commentary? The fault is not really the West 
German journalist's. After all there were no West German gunships at the coast 
to fo rce this grovelling act of collective self -abnegation on the Togolese 
Presidency. Only the Mark (aid) to help extract more Marks (profits) from the 
Togolese people. And President Eyadema is waiting for his share or 
commission. 
There are other absurdities. Mobuto of Zaire, in an act of supreme African 
authenticity, has ceded a whole territory many times the size of New Zealand 
to a West German rocker company. A group of African leaders recently begged 
France to send troops to Chad to protect French legitimate interests, threatened 
by `imperialist' Libya, Moi of Kenya has given military bases to U.S.A. 
without a debate in parliament, with Kenyans only later learning about the 
‘secret’ deal


--- PAGE 94 ---
80 
through a debate in U.S. Congress. One could quote qtr even more incr edible 
episodes, of the callous massacre of children, of the equally callous genocide 
oh part of a population and all by native leaders on behalf of imperialism. For 
the point is this: the Mobutus, the Mois and the Eyademas of the neocolonial 
world are not  being forced to capitulate to imperialism at the point of an 
American maxim gun. They themselves are of the same mind: they are actually 
begging for a recolonisation of their own countries with themselves as the 
neocolonial governors living in modern fort resses. They are happier as the 
neo-slave drivers of their own peoples; happier as - the neo -overseers of the 
U.S.-led economic haemorrhage of their own countries. 
How does a writer, a novelist, shock his readers by telling them. that these 
are neo-slaves w hen they themselves, the neo -slaves, are openly announcing 
the fact on the rooftops? How do you, your readers by pointing out that these 
are mass murderers, looters, robbers, thieves, when they, the perpetrators of 
these anti-people crimes, are nor even at tempting to hide the fact? When in 
some cases they are actually and proudly celebrating their massacre of 
children, and the theft and robbery of the nation? How do you satirise their 
utterances arid claims . when their own words beat all fictional exaggerations? 
(5) 
As I contemplated ,the neo -colonial reality of Kenyan I was confronted 
with the question of the fictional form of its depiction. But a writer; any writer, 
has only one recourse: himself, those images that often flit across the mind, 
those course reflections of the world around. The chemistry of imagination 
transforms the quantity of these different images, reflections, thoughts, 
pictures, sounds, feelings, sights, tastes, all the sense impressions, .into - a 
coalescence of a qualitatively different but unified image or sets of images of 
reality. 
In search of the image that would capture the reality of a neo -colony that 
was Kenya under both Kenyatta and Moi, I once again fell on the oral tradition. 
 
VIII For a long time I had been intrigued by the Faust theme, in literature. The 
theme reappears in several works of European literature: Marlowe's Faustus, 
Goethe's Faust, Thomas Marin's Dr Faustus and Bulgakov's Master and 
Margarita. But I always suspected. that the story of the good man who 
surrenders his soul to evil for immediate


--- PAGE 95 ---
81 
earthly gains of wealth, .intellect and power was universal and was rooted in 
the lores of the peasantry. Elements of it are to be found in many national 
traditions. - Owuor Anyumba, a colleague in the Department of Literature who 
had done immense= work on the oral literature of the different nationalities in 
Kenya, had told me instances of this in a number of stories involving sorcerers. 
Once in 1976 travelling to r western Kenya with Kavetsa Adagala, another 
colleague in the Department, I saw for the first time the human shaped rocks of 
Idakho. I had this strange sensation of suddenly coming across something I had 
been looking for and in returning to Limuru, I wrote more than a hundred 
pages of a novel. The working title? Devil or', the Cross-but in English. My 
work at Kamiriithu in 1977 made me lose all interest in the novel. In prison I 
tried to remember the story but I could not recall a single incident of what I had 
written. But those Idakho rocks remained in my mind. What legends about 
those human shaped rocks had the peasants built? The images of Idakho fused 
with images of thoseogres in Gikuyu orature. Marimu were supposed to 
possess two mot one in front and the other at the back. The one at the back was 
covered with long hair. They were cruel, very greedy, and they lived on the 
labour of humans. What about the latter day Marimus? Would the Marimu 
characters provide me with the image I sought? 
In my reading of  the work of the South Korean poet Kim Chi Ha I had 
seen, particularly in the Five Bandits and Groundless Rumours, how 
effectively he had exploited the oral forms and images to confront the South 
Korean neo -colonial realities. Satire is certainly one of the most effective 
weapons in oral traditions. 
And then one-day I got it Why not tell the story of men who had sold their 
souls and that of the nation to the foreign devil of, imperialism? Why not tell 
the story of evil that takes pride in evil? Why not tell the story of robbers who 
take pride in robbing the masses?  
That was how I came to write the novel Caitaani Mutharabaini in Gikuyu 
language. Caitaani Mutharabaini (Devil on the Cross) tells the story of 
Wariinga and six others who travel in a matatu taxi from Nairobi to Ilmorog. 
The passengers find that they have something in common. They all hav e 
invitations to a feast of thieves and robbers organized by the devil. At the heart 
of the feast is a competition to choose the seven cleverest thieves and robbers - 
that is those who have developed the art of robbing the people to the highest 
degree. The competitors have to stand in front of the others to tell their exploits


--- PAGE 96 ---
82 
and achievements. For instance there is the case of one robber who has become 
so wealthy through smuggling that he begins to resent his wealth. Why? 
Because though he has got all that quantity of money; he has one heart and one 
life like all the other humans including his victims. But the breakthrough in 
heart transplants gives him an idea. He has visions of a huge factory for 
manufacturing spare parts of the human body including extra penises so that a 
really rich man could buy immortality and leave death as the prerogative of the 
poor. But he makes a mistake in telling his wife about the vision. She is 
delighted at the possibility of the wives of the rich, being distinguished from 
the wives of the poor by their two mouths, two bellies, two or more hearts and 
two cunts: 
`When I heard her mention two female organs and say that she would be 
able to have two instead of one, I was horrified. I. told her quite frankly that I 
would not mind  her having two mouths, or two bellies, or multiples of any 
other organ of the body. But to have two . . . no, no! l told her to forget all that 
nonsense. Then she started arguing, and said that if that was to be the case, 
then I wasn't going to be allowed two cocks. I asked her bitterly: `Why do you 
want to have two? Tell me: what would you use two for?' She retorted: `Why 
do you want two? What would you use two for? If you have two, then I must 
have two. We must have equality of the sexes.' 
`By this time,  I was really very angry! I told her to take equalities to 
Europe or America. Here vie are Africans, and we must practise African 
culture. I struck her a blow on the face. She started crying. I struck her again. 
But just as I was about to strike her a thir d time, she surrendered. She said I 
could have three; or ten. She would be satisfied with just one. 
`People, think about that vision! Every rich man could have two mouths, 
two bellies, two cocks, two hearts - and hence two lives! Our money would 
buy us immortality! We would leave death to the poor! Ha!-ha! ha! 
`Bring me the crown. At long last, it has found its rightful owner!' 
 
IX The reception of a given work of art is part of the work itself; or rather, the 
reception (or consumption!) of the work completes the whole creative process 
involving that particular artistic object. So now I want


--- PAGE 97 ---
83 
to tell you briefly how the novel, Caitaani Mutharabaini was recieved. was read 
in families. A family would get together every evening and one of their literate 
members would read it for them. Workers would also gather in groups, 
particularly during the lunchbreak, and they would get one of them to read the 
book. It was read in buses; it was read in taxis; it was read in public bars. 
One amusing aspect of all this was t he development of `professional 
readers' but in bars. These were people who would read the book aloud to the 
other drinking but attentive customers. When the reader reached an interesting 
episode and he discovered that his glass was empty, he would put the  book 
down. `Give him another bottle of beer!' some of the listeners would shout to 
the proprietor. So our reader would resume and go on until his glass was 
empty. He would put the book down and the whole drama would be repeated, 
night after night, until the end of the novel. 
The process I'm describing is really, the appropriation of the novel into the 
oral tradition. Caitaani Mutharabaini (Devil on the Cross) was received into the 
age old tradition of storytelling around the fireside; and the tradition of group 
reception of art than enhances the aesthetic pleasure and provokes 
interpretation, comments and- discussions. Remnants of this - what used to be 
the norm, that is the group reception of art - are still to be found in theatre and, 
to a limited extent, in the cinema. , 
The distribution of the novel (and of the play Ngaahika Ndeenda which 
was published at the same time) was a challenge to the publishers. It soon 
became clear that the structure of bookshops, libraries and other information 
centres was geared to serve the urban English-educated sectors. The urban poor 
and the rural areas had really no access to luxuries in between hard covers. 
They are presumed to be illiterate - which they normally are - and poor - which 
they mostly are. How does one overcome the isolation imposed by poverty and 
illiteracy? Do these not severely limit the reception of, let's say,. a novel? All 
this is probably true: poverty and  illiteracy do severely limit access to 
knowledge and information. This is a structural problem and goes to the 
economic and political basis of accessibility of knowledge, information, 
literature. But after some time institutions are built around this unev en and 
unequal development. The lack of bookshops and library facilities in the rural 
areas where the majority live is a case in point. They are poor and illiterate; 
therefore they cannot buy or read books; therefore there is no need for 
bookshops or libraries. But because no bookshops or libraries are. available, 
people are denied the


--- PAGE 98 ---
84 
very means of knowledge and information which might help in their attempt to 
organise and break the circle of illiteracy. Rural schools are denied what is 
freely available to the wealthy sections of the urban centres. The habit of 
borrowing a book from a library or buying a book for reading for pleasure and 
for instruction outside the formal classroom is hardly developed. How do you 
sell novels to such areas? 
There was no real solution to the problem. The publishers often used their 
vans as a mobile bookshop. They experimented in various ways: like leaving 
several copies at some shops of stalls on a sale or return basis. But` some 
enthusiastic readers would buy the books from the publishers in bulks of five, 
ten or twenty and on their own initiative would take the copies to rural areas 
and plantations. There were some surprises. One such seller, Ngigi wa 
Wachiira, on returning to a plantation where a month before he had sold two or 
three- copies, was greeted with gifts. So out there there were such good books. 
Would he please keep on bringing new titles to them? They could always pool 
their resources and buy a few copies, and so Ngigi had become a hero for 
making Caitaani Mitharabaini, a novel, available to them! 
Despite the difficulties, the novel sold fairly well - certainly to the 
commercial satisfaction of the `daring' publisher. The publishers had initially 
printed only 5,000 copies, hoping to sell them over a period of thr ee to five 
years. In other words they would have been satisfied with an annual sale of 
over a thousand copies. But within a month of publication they had reprinted 
another 5,000 and within the same year they had to reprint 5,000 more. The 
novel came out in April 1980. By December 1980, they had had three printings 
bringing the total to 15,000 copies. Not even for a novel in English had they 
ever done so well in Kenyan in the same length of time. The publishers tell me 
now the novel has settled to an annual sale of about 1000 copies which 
compares favourably with their best -selling titles -in English or Kiswahili in 
Kenya. 
The novel has now been translated into English, Swedish, Norwegian and 
German. There are possibilities of Russian and Japanese editions. B ut more 
important has been the translation of the novel into Kiswahili under the title 
Shetani Msalabani, a direct communication between Gikuyu and Swahili 
languages. 
Indeed I see this kind of communication between African languages as 
forming the real. foundation of a genuinely African novel. A novel originally 
written in Ibo could find itself translated into Yoruba and vice versa. A novel 
written in Dholuo or Maasai could find itself translated into two or three or


--- PAGE 99 ---
85 
more Kenyan languages or into African languages outside Kenya. There would 
thus be a real dialogue between the literatures, languages and cultures of the 
different nationalities within any one country - forming the foundations of a 
.truly national literature and culture, a truly national sensibility! Within Africa 
as a whole there would be the foundation of a truly African sensibility in the 
written arts. This will also have the added effect of enhancing the art of 
translation which would be studied in schools and colleges (another career 
open to  graduates!) and this necessarily would mean more rigorous and 
committed study of African languages. Each thing will be feeding on every 
other thing, in a dialectical sense, to create a progressive movement in the 
African novel and literature. 
 
X The future of the African novel is then dependent on a willing writer, (ready to 
invest time and talent, in African languages); a willing translator (ready to 
invest time and talent in the art of translating from one African language into 
another); a willing publisher (ready to invest time and money) or a progressive 
state which would overhaul the current neo -colonial linguistic policies and 
tackle the national question in a democratic manner; and finally, and most 
important, a willing and widening readership. But of all these other factors, it is 
only the writer who is best placed to break through the vicious circle and create 
fiction in African languages. The writer of fiction can be and must be the, 
pathfinder. It has happened in history, in other countries such a s Russia and 
Finland. -Then the other factors will follow. When that day comes, when the 
African writer will naturally turn to African languages for his creative 
imagination, the African novel will truly come into its own, incorporating into 
itself all the  features developed in the different parts of Africa from the 
different cultures of African peoples as well as the best progressive features of 
the novel or fiction developed in Asia, Latin America, Europe, America, the 
World..   
It is therefore too early to make any conclusion about the character of the 
language of the African fiction and particularly the African novel. And here I 
am also talking of fiction as a language. But I am convinced that it will find its 
form and character through its reconnection with the mainstream of the 
struggles of African people against imperialism and its rooting itself in the rich 
oral traditions of


--- PAGE 100 ---
86 
the peasantry. In doing this it will play a most crucial role in Africa's general 
quest for relevance. 
 
Notes 
 
1. No human di saster, with the exception of the Flood (if that biblical legend a true) can equal in 
dimension of destructiveness the cataclysm that shook Africa: We are all familiar with the slave trade 
and the traumatic effect of this on the transplanted black but few of us realize what horrors were 
wrought on Africa itself. Vast populations were uprooted and displaced, whole generations 
disappeared,. European diseases descended like the plague, decimating both cattle and people, cities 
and towns were abandoned, family networks disintegrated; kingdoms crumbled, the- treads of cultural 
and historical continuity were so savagely torn asunder that henceforward one would have to think of 
two Africas: the one before and the one after the Holocaust.' Ivan Van Sertima, New Brunswick and 
London 1984, p. 8. 
2. Ngagi wa Thiong'o Homecoming, London 1972, pp. 16-17. 
3. Ngugi wa Thiong'o Detained: A Writer's Prison Diary, London 1981, p. 196. 
4. Markus Cleven Nordbayerischer Kurier 6 July 1984. 
5. The philosophy of President Moi of Kenya is called 'Nvayoism', i.e. follow my footsteps. Recently he 
has elaborated on that philosophy in words that beat the most inventive satiric genius when he 
demanded that all Kenyans must sing like parrots: 
 
`Ladies and Gentlemen, we Kenyans are happy apart from the fact that there is widespread drought. 
I would like to say, while here with you, that for progress to be realised there should be no debates in 
newspapers on this and that. What is required is for people to work in a proper manner . . . 
. . I call on all ministers, assistant ministers and every other person to sing like parrots. During 
Mzee Kenyarta's period I persistently sang the Kenyatta (tune), until people said: This fellow has 
nothing (to say) except to sing for Kenyatta. I say: I didn't have ideas of my own. Why was I to have 
my own ideas? I was in Kenyatta's shoes and therefore, I had to sing whatever Kenyatta wanted If I 
had sung another song, do, you think Kenyatta would have left me alone? Therefor e you ought to 
sing the song I sing. If I -put a full stop, you should also put a full stop. This is how this country will 
move forward. The day you become a big person, you will have the liberty to sing your own song 
and everybody will sing it . . .' An e xcerpt, from President Moi's speech on his return, from Addis 
-------Ababa on 13 September 1984  
 
What beats all satiric descriptions is that some University academics, some journalists, and of course 
most of the MPs and ministers have actually been echoing Moi's every word like parrots. They have 
nothing to say for their colleagues under false charges or detention without trial, but are voluble about 
anybody described by the neo-colonial regime as being-a `dissident'.


--- PAGE 101 ---
87 
The Quest  
for Relevance 
 
I So far I have talked about language in creative literature' generally and in 
theatre and fiction in particular. I should have gone on to talk about `The 
language of African poetry' but the same arguments apply even more 
poignantly in the area of poetry: Th e existence and the continuing growth of 
poetry iii African languages, clearly and unequivocally so in orature (oral 
literature), make it manifestly. absurd to talk of African - poetry in English, 
French or Portuguese. AfroEuropean poetry, yes; but not to b e confused with 
African poetry which is the poetry composed by Africans in African languages. 
For instance, written poetry in Swahili goes back to many centuries. While the 
poetic political compositions of the great anti -imperialist Somali fighter, 
Hassan, will be known by heart, by every. Somali -speaking herdsman, not a 
line by even the best of African poets in foreign languages will be known by 
any peasant anywhere in Africa. As for a discussion of. the other language of 
poetry - where poetry, like theatr e and fiction, is considered as a language in 
itself with its own structures of beats, metres, rhymes, half -rhymes, internal 
rhymes, lines and images - it calls for different resources including a 
knowledge of the particular African languages of its expres sion, which I 
cannot, at present, even pretend to possess. 
Instead, I shall attempt to sum up what we have so far been discussing by 
looking at what immediately underlies the politics of -language in African 
literature; that is the search for a liberating perspective within which to see 
ourselves clearly in relationship to ourselves and to other selves in the 
universe. I shall call this `a quest for relevance' and I want to look at it as far as 
it relates, not to just the writing of literature, but to the teaching of that 
literature in schools and universities and to the critical approaches. In other 
words, given that there is literature in Africa and in the world, in what order 
should  
4


--- PAGE 102 ---
88 
it be presented to the child and how? This involves two processes,: the choice 
of material and the attitude to, or interpretation of, that material. These two 
processes will themselves affect and be affected by the national and the class 
bases of the choice and the attitude to the material chosen. Finally the national 
and even the class bases of our choice and perspective will affect and be 
affected by the philosophic base from which -we look at reality, a matter over 
which there can never be any legislation. A lready as you can see we are 
entangled in a kind of vicious circle with everything affecting and being 
affected by everything else. But let me explain the question of base. 
How we see a thing even with our eyes is very much dependent on where 
we stand in relationship to it. For instance we are all in this lecture theatre. But 
what we see of the room and how much of it we see is dependent on where we 
are now sitting as we listen to this talk. For instance you all can see the wall 
behind me: and I can see the wall behind you. Some of you are seated in such 
places as physically allow you to see much more of this room than others. 
What is clear is that were we to leave this room and describe it, we would end 
up with as many descriptions of this room as there are people here tonight. Do 
you know the story of the seven blind men who went to see an elephant? They 
used to have so many conflicting speculations as to the physical make-up of an 
elephant. Now at last they had a chance to touch and feel it. But each touched a 
different part of the animal: leg, ear, tusk, tail, side, trunk, belly and so they 
went home even ;pore divided as to the physical nature, shape and size of an 
elephant. They obviously - stood in different positions or physical bases, in 
their exploration of the elephant. Now, the base need not be physical but could 
also be philosophical, class or national. , 
In this book I have pointed out that how we view ourselves, our 
environment even, is very much dependent on where we stand in relationship 
to imperialism in its colonial and neo -colonial stages; that if we are to do 
anything about our individual and collective being today, then we have to 
coldly and consciously look at - what imperialism has been doing to us and to 
our view of ourselves in the universe. Certainly the quest for relevance and for 
a correct perspective can only be understood and be meaningfully resolved 
within the context of the general struggle. against imperialism. 
It is not-always easy to see this in literature. But precisely because of that, I 
want to use the example of the struggle over what is to be taught, and in what 
order, with what attitudes or critical approaches, to illustrate the 
anti-imperialist context of the quest for relevance in


--- PAGE 103 ---
89 
Africa today. I want to start with a br ief description of what has been called 
‘the great Nairobi literature debate' an the teaching of literature in universities 
and schools. 
 
II The debate started innocuously when on 20 September 1968 the then head of 
the English - Department, Dr James Stewar t, presented proposals to the Arts 
Faculty Board on the development of the English Department. The proposals 
were in many ways' pertinent. But they were all preceded by two crucial 
sentences: 
 
The English department has had a long history at this college and has built 
up a strong syllabus which ;by its study of the historic continuity of -a 
single culture throughout the period of emergence of the modern west  
makes it an important companion to History and to Philosophy and 
Religious Studies. However, it is bound to become less British, more open 
to other writing in English (American, Caribbean, African, 
Commonwealth) and also to continental writing, for comparative 
purposes.[1] 
 
A month later on 24 October 1968 three African lecturers and researchers 
at the U niversity responded to Dr Stewart's proposals by calling for the 
abolition of the English Department as then constituted. They questioned the 
underlying assumption that the English tradition and the emergence of the 
modern west were the central root of Kenya's -and Africa's consciousness and 
cultural heritage. They rejected the underlying notion that Africa was an 
extension of the West. Then followed the crucial rejoinder: 
 
Here then; is our main question: if there is a need for a `study of the 
historic continuity of a single culture', why can't this be African? Why can't 
African literature be at the centre so that we can view other cultures in 
relationship to it?2 
 
Hell was let loose. For the rest of 1968 and spilling over into 1969 the 
debate raged on, eng ulfing the entire faculty and the university. Thus within 
four sentences the stage was set for what has become the most crucial debate 
on the politics of literature and culture even in Kenya of today. What was 
interesting was that the details of the debate  F were the same: all sides were


--- PAGE 104 ---
90 
agreed on the need to include African; European and other literatures. But what 
would be the centre? And what would be the periphery, so to speak? How 
would the centre relate to the periphery? Thus the question of the base of the 
take-off, the whole question of perspective and relevance, altered the weight 
and relationship of the various parts and details-to each other. 
In order to see. the, significance of the debate and why it raised so much 
temper we have to put it in a historical context of the rise of English studies in 
Africa, of the kind of. literature an African student was likely to encounter and 
of the role of culture in the imperialist domination of Africa. 
 
III English studies in schools and higher institutions of  learning became 
systematised after the Second World War with the setting up of the overseas 
extensions of the University of London in Uganda, Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra 
Leone, Kenya and Tanzania; and with very few variations they offered what 
also obtained in London. The syllabus of the English Department for instance 
meant a. study of the history of English literature from Shakespeare, Spencer 
and Milton to James Joyce and T. S. Eliot, I. A. Richards and the inevitable F. 
R. Leavis. Matthew Arnold's -quest for the sweetness and light of a hellenized 
English middle class; T. S. Eliot's high culture of an Anglo -Catholic feudal 
tradition, suspiciously close to the culture of the `high table' and to the racial 
doctrines of those born to rule; the Leavisite selecte d `Great Tradition of 
English Literature' and his insistence on the'moral significance of literature; 
these great three dominated our daily essays. How many seminars we spent on 
detecting this moral significance in every paragraph, in every word, even in 
Shakespeare's commas and fullstops? For some reason the two most 
outstanding critical minds that might have made my study of English Literature 
really meaningful even in a colonial setting - Arnold Kettle and Raymond 
Williams were. studied, if at all, only remotely and fleetingly even in the time 
from 1959 to 1964. But here I am not looking at which writer or critic was 
more suitable to our situation or even the difference in their world outlook: 
What was more important was that they all fell within English tradition except 
in the study of drama where names like those of Aeschylus, Sophocles and 
Aristotle or Ibsen, Chekhov, Strindberg and Synge would appear quaint and 
strange in their very


--- PAGE 105 ---
91 
unEnglishness. The centrality and the universality of the English tradition was 
summed up in, the title of an inaugural lecture by Professor Warner of 
Makerere, Shakespeare in Africa, in -which he grew almost ecstatic about the 
fact that, some of his students had been able to recognise some characters of 
Jane Austen's nove ls in their own African villages. So, English literature 
was'applicable to Africa too: the defence of English studies in an African 
situation was now complete. In schools the English language and English 
literature syllabuses were-:°.. tailored to prepare the lucky few for an English 
degree at university, So the syllabuses had the same pattern. Shakespeare, 
Milton, Words= worth, Shelley, Keats and Kipling were familiar names long 
before I knew I Mould,even, make it to Makerere.  
In my book, Writers in Politics - particularly in the essay `Literature and 
Society' -I have tried to sum up the kind of literature available to African 
children .in the classrooms and libraries for their school and -university 
education, by placing it into three broad categories. 
First was - the great humanist and democratic . tradition of Euro pean 
literature: Aeschylus, Sophocles, -Shakespeare, Balzac, Dickens, Dostoevsky, 
Tolstoy, Gorky and Rrecht to mention just a fear names. But their -literature, 
even at its mo st humane and universal, necessarily reflected the European 
experience of history: The world of its -settings and the world it evoked would 
be more familiar to a child brought up in the same landscape than to one 
brought up outside, no matter how the latter might try to see Jane  characters in 
the gossiping women of his rural African setting. This was not helped by a 
critical tradition that often presented these writers, Shakespeare included, as if 
they were mindless geniuses whose - only -consistent quality was a sense 
of.compassiou. These writers, who had the sharpest and most penetrating 
observations on the European bourgeois culture, were often taught as if their 
only concern was with the universal themes of love, fear, birth and death. 
Sometimes their greatness was presented as one more English gift to the world 
alongside. the bible and the needle: William Shakespeare and Jesus Christ had 
rought light to darkest Africa. There, was--a teacher in our school who used to 
say that Shakespeare and Jesus used ver y simple English, until someone, 
pointed out that Jesus spoke Hebrew. The `Great Tradition' of English 
literature was the great tradition of `literature'! 
Then there was the literature of liberal Europeans who often had Africa as 
the subject. of their imaginative explorations. The best example is Alan Paton's 
Cry the Beloved Country, Here an African eschewing violence, despite the 
racist violence around him, is the


--- PAGE 106 ---
92 
perfect hero. The. Reverend Stephen Kumalo is presented in such a way that all 
our sympathies are with him. He is the embodiment 'of the biblical man who 
offers the enemy the left cheek to strike, after the right cheek has already been 
bashed in by the same enemy. Kumalo is, the earlier literary version in an 
African setting of those Americans in the sixties who thought they could stop 
the Vietnam war by blowing bubbles and offering flowers to club and gun 
wielding policemen. Joyce Cary in Misterjobnson had gone a stage further in 
his liberalism. In this novel he offered an idiotic African as the  hero. Mister 
Johnson is the dancing, fun -loving African full of emotional vitality and the 
endearing human warmth of a child. In the novel he is condemned to,death. 
What was his dearest wish? To be shot dead by the European District Officer. 
The District Officer grants him that wish. Don't we do the same for our horses 
and cats? The point is that in the novel the reader is supposed to admire both 
the District Officer and Mister .Johnson: they have established a human contact 
- that of the rider and the hor se, the master and his servant. Karen Blixen's 
book Out of Africa falls within the same liberal mould: to her Africans are a 
special species of human beings endowed with a great spirituality and a 
mystical apprehension of reality or else with the instinct and vitality of 
animals, qualities which `we in Europe' have lost. 
The third category was the downright racist literature of writers like Rider 
Haggard, Elspeth Huxley, Robert Ruark, and Nicholas Monsarrat. In such a 
literature there were only two types of  .Africans: the good and the bad. The 
good African was the one who co -operated with the European coloniser; 
particularly the African who helped the European coloniser in the occupation 
and- subjugation of his own people and country. Such a character was 
portrayed as possessing qualities of strength, intelligence and beauty. But it 
was the strength and the intelligence and the beauty of a sell -out.. The bad 
African character was the one who offered resistance to the foreign conquest 
and occupation of his cou ntry. Such a character was portrayed as being ugly, 
weak, cowardly and scheming. The reader's sympathies are guided in such a 
way as to make- him identify with Africans collaborating with colonialism and 
to make him distance himself from those offering pol itical and military 
resistance to colonialism. One can s( e the same schema at work today in the 
portrayal of the various African regimes in the Western media. Those regimes, 
as in Kenya and Ivory Coast, which have virtually mortgaged the future of 
their c ountries to Euro -American imperialism, are portrayed as being 
pragmatic, realistic, stable, democratic and they are often shown as


--- PAGE 107 ---
93 
having achieved unparalleled economic growth for their countries. But other 
regimes like those of Nkrumah's Ghana or Nasser s Egypt which strove for a 
measure of national self-reliance are portrayed as being simplistic, unrealistic, 
doctrinaire, authoritarian and are often shown as having brought only economic 
chaos to their countries. Thus imaginative literature had created the necessary 
racist vocabulary and symbols long before the T.V. and the popular media had 
come to dominate the scene. 
 African children who encountered literature in colonial schools and 
universities were thus experiencing the world as defined and reflected  in the 
European experience of history. Their entire way of looking at the world, even 
the world of -the immediate environment, was Eurocentric. Europe was the 
centre of the universe. The earth moved around the European intellectual 
scholarly axis:- The images children encountered in literature were reinforced 
by their study of geography and history, anal science and technology where 
Europe was, once again, the centre. This in turn. fitted well with the cultural 
imperatives of British imperialism. In this bo ok I have in fact tried to show 
how the economic control of the African people was effected through politics 
and culture. Economic and political control of a people can never be complete 
without cultural control, and here literary scholarly practice, irrespective of any 
individual interpretation and handling of the practice; fitted well the aim and 
the logic of the system as a whole. After all, the universities and colleges set up 
in the colonies after the war were meant to produce a native elite which would 
later J help propup the Empire. The cool, level -headed servant of the Empire 
celebrated in Kipling's poem if the gentleman who could keep his head against 
the rising storms of resistance; the gentleman who would meet with triumph 
and disaster and treat t hose two imposters just the same; the gentleman who 
had not the slightest doubt about the rightness of colonialism despite the chorus 
of doubt around; this gentleman was now being given African robes in the, 
post-war schools and universities of an ageing imperialism. 
The structures of the literary studies evolved in the colonial schools and 
universities had continued well into independence era completely unaffected 
by any winds of cultural change. The irony of all this was that these 
departments were being run in countries where the oral tradition, the basis of 
all genres of written literature be it a poem, a play, or a story, was beating with 
life and energy, and yet they were unaffected by the surging creative storm all 
around them. The study of the historic continuity of a single culture throughout 
the period of


--- PAGE 108 ---
94 
emergence of the modern west was still the organising principle of literature 
teaching in schools and colleges. 
Seen against this background, the rejection of that principle in 1%8 was 
therefore more than-a rejection of a principle in a literary academic debate. It 
was questioning the underlying assumptions behind the entire system that we 
had inherited and had continued to run without basic questions about national 
perspective and relevance. The question is this: from what base do we look at 
the-world? 
 
IV Three lecturers, Owuor Anyumba, Taban Lo Liyong and myself; were 
emphatic in our rejection and affirmation: our statement said, 
We reject the primacy of English literature and cultures. The aim, in short, 
should be to orientate ourselves towards placing Kenya, East Africa, and 
then Africa in the centre. All other things are to be considered in their 
relevance to our situation and their contribution towards understanding 
ourselves . . . In suggest ing this we are not rejecting other streams, 
especially the western stream. We are only clearly mapping out the 
directions and perspectives the study of culture and literature will 
inevitably take in an African university. 
We proposed a -new organising principle which would mean a 'study of 
Kenyan and East African literature, African, literature, third world literature 
and literature from the rest. of the world. We concluded: 
We want to establish the centrality of Africa in the department. This, we 
have argued, is justifiable on various grounds, the most important one 
being that education is a means of knowledge about ourselves. Therefore, 
after we have examined ourselves, we radiate outwards and discover 
peoples and worlds around us. With Africa at the cent re -of things, not 
existing as an appendix or a satellite of other countries and literatures, 
things must be seen from the African perspective. (4) 
But our boldest call was for the placing, within the national perspective, 
of oral-literature (orature) at the centre of the syllabus: 
The oral tradition is rich and many-sided . . . the art did not end yesterday; 
it is a living tradition . . . familiarity with oral literature could suggest new 
structures and techniques; and could foster


--- PAGE 109 ---
95 
attitudes of mind characterized by the willingness to experiment with new 
forms . . . The study of the Oral Tradition would therefore supplement 
(not replace) courses in Modern African Literature. By discovering and 
proclaiming loyalty to indigenous values, the new literature would on-the 
one hand be set in the stream of history to which it belongs and so be 
better appreciated; and on the other be better able to embrace and 
assimilate other thoughts without losing its roots. (5) 
Orature has its roots in the  lives of the peasantry. It is primarily their 
compositions, their songs, their art, which forms the basis of the national and 
resistance culture during the colonial and neo -colonial times. We three 
lecturers were therefore calling for the centrality of pe asant and worker 
heritage in the study of literature and culture. 
The new organising principle was accepted after a long debate -which 
engulfed the entire University and which, at one time, also included all the 
participants at the. 1969 Nairobi .Conference  of English and Literature 
Departments of the Universities of East and Central Africa. African Orature; 
literature by Africans from the Continent, the Caribbean, and Afro -America; 
literature of `third' world peoples from Asia and Latin America; literature from 
the rest of the world including Europe and North America; roughly in that 
order of relevance, relationship and perspective, would form the basis of a new 
literature syllabus with English as the mediating language. The actual syllabus, 
resulting from the 1968-9 debate was necessarily a compromise. For instance 
East African poetry was to be taught in its European context: it was not until 
1973, when the majority of the staff in the department were Africans, that the 
syllabus was streamlined to reflect th e new perspectives without a qualifying 
apologia. 
The growth of the - Literature Department at the University of Nairobi, a 
department which has produced students who can, by starting from their 
environment, freely link the rural and urban experiences of K enyan and 
African literature to that of Garcia Marquez, Richard Wright, George 
Lamming, Balzac, Dickens, Shakespeare and Brecht is a far cry from those 
days in the fifties and sixties when they used to try and detect Jane Austen's 
characters in their villages.


--- PAGE 110 ---
96 
V Bur that was not the end of the Nairobi Literature Debate. (6) In September 
1974 a crucial conference on `The Teaching of African Literature in Kenyan 
Schools' was held at Nairobi School. The conference was jointly organised by 
the Department of Li terature, University of Nairobi and the Inspectorate of 
English in the Ministry of Education. It was attended by two hundred 
secondary school teachers of ' literature and English; the staff of the 
departments of literature and of the faculties of education , University of 
Nairobi and Kenyatta University College; delegates from departments of 
literatures of Dar es Salaam, Makerere and Malawi Universities; 
representatives of the Inspectorate of English, Ministry of Education and of-the 
Kenya Institute of Educa tion; observers from the Ministry. of Education in 
Tanzania and Uganda; representatives from the then East African Community; 
East Africa Examination Council; East Africa Literature Bureau; trade union 
delegates from the Kenya National Union of, Teachers ( KNUT); and four 
publishers: Jomo Kenyatta Foundation, East African Literature Bureau, East 
Africa Publishing House and Oxford University Press. As if to give it an even 
more truly international character, there were visiting delegates from the 
University of West Indies at Mona, Jamaica, the University of Ife, Nigeria and 
from Auckland University, New Zealand. This impressive gathering was the 
result of hard organisational efforts of the steering committee chaired by Eddah 
Gachukia and S. A. Akivaga. 
The con ference was clearly motivated by the same quest for relevance 
which earlier had led to the reconstitution of the Department of Literature. In 
the recommendations of a working committee elected by the conference, it is 
argued that: 
 
Prior to independence, education in Kenya was an instrument of colonial 
policy designed to educate the people of Kenya into acceptance of their 
role as the colonized. The education system at independence was therefore 
an inheritance of colonialism so that literature syllabuses were. centred on 
the study of an English literary tradition taught by English teachers. Such a 
situation meant that Kenyan children were alienated from their own 
experience [and] identity in an independent African country.(7) 
 
Addressing itself to questions of language and literature, a resolution passed at 
the end of the conference stated:


--- PAGE 111 ---
97 
The present language and literature syllabuses are inadequate and 
irrelevant to the needs of the country. They are so organised that a Kenyan 
child knows himself through London and New York. Both should therefore 
be completely overhauled at all levels of our education system and 
particularly in schools.(8) 
The- conference, which was charged with examining the role of literature 
in society and the nature of literature taught  in secondary schools and its 
relevance to Kenya's present day needs, called for the centrality of ,oral 
literature as a take -off base to comtemporary literature. They argued that a 
sound educational policy was one which enabled students to study the culture 
and the environment of their society first, then set it in relation to the culture 
and environment of other societies: `African literature, literature-of the African 
diaspora, and all other literatures of related experiences must be at the core of 
the syllabuses. (9) A working committee set up by the conference with Dougal 
Blackburn as Chairman and R. Gacheche as the Secretary came up with 
detailed recommendations on policy. and on syllabuses along the principles 
outlined in the conference resolution. Th e seventythree page document was 
titled: Teaching of Literature in Kenya Secondary Schools 
-Recommendations-of the Working Committee and was clearly the result of 
months of hard work and commitment. Looking at the document ten years 
later, one is struck; not so much by their critique of the existing syllabuses or 
by their detailed proposals for change - though both are impressive and still 
relevant to the similar debates and issues today - but by the consciousness that 
guided the critique and the proposals. 
The pan-African consciousness is strong. The authors see Africa as one 
and they reject the division of Africa into sub -Saharan (Black Africa; Real 
Africa) and Northern (Arabic; Foreign; Mediterranean Africa). They want a 
Kenyan child to be exposed to the literature from north, south, west and east 
Africa: 
The centuries old Arab civilization' has exerted tremendous in fluence on 
the literature of modern North Africa and also many parts of the continent. 
To date their influence has been denied by our educators and the literature 
of North Africa and the Arab world has largely been ignored.(10) 
The authors want to pursue the African connection to the four corners of the 
earth, so to speak, and they want Kenyan children to be exposed to those 
historical links of biology, culture and struggle, particularly in Afro-American 
and Caribbean literature:


--- PAGE 112 ---
98 
It is often asked, why study Caribbean and Afro-American literature? What 
is the connection between African and the West Indian and 
Afro-American? 
(a) We have the same bio-geographic roots: the people of the West Indies 
and Afro-America are Africans who , a few hundred years ago, were 
brutally uprooted from the-African continent.  
(b) We have shared the same past of humiliation and exploitation under 
slavery, and colonialism: we have also shared the glorious past of 
struggle, and fight against the same force.  
(c) Equally important we have the same aspirations for the total liberation 
of all the black people, in the world. 
Their literature, like our literature embodies all the above aspects of our 
struggle for a cultural identity. 
Apart from that, African peoples of the Diaspora have contributed 
much to Africa's cultural and political growth. Blyden, C. L. R. James, 
George Padmore, W. E. Dubois, Marcus Garvey and many others were part 
and parcel-of Africa's struggle for independence. The literary movements 
from the West Indies and from Afro -America have creatively interacted 
with those in Africa. Aime Cesaire, Frantz Fanon, Claude McKay, 
Langston Hughes, Leon Damas, Rene Depestre, Paul Robeson - all these 
giants of .culture and the arts have positively contributed to the growth of 
African Literature. 
Most of these comments would apply equally well to the literature of 
the third world especially that of Asia and Latin America. (11) 
Africa; African connections; third world; indeed, the authors of the report 
are very conscious of the internationalist setting and context of the national 
experience. Like the university Literature Department, which was conscious of 
the immense value of world literature, they too refused to substitute national 
chauvinism for the Brit ish colonial chauvinism of the existing syllabuses. A 
Kenyan child would be exposed to world literature and the democratic tradition 
in world literature. 
In accordance with the principle of teaching beginning with the students' 
immediate environment and moving out towards the world, the teaching of 
non-African literature in schools should aim to introduce the Kenyan 
student to the world context of the black experience. Such study should 
therefore include European and American literature, with their historic al 
and present influences on


--- PAGE 113 ---
99 
the societies and literatures of black. peoples, and a study of literature from 
other parts of the third world such as Latin America and Asia. Criteria for 
selection should attempt to balance: literary excellence, social rele vance, 
and narrative interest. The aim is to instil in the student a critical love of 
literature, which will both encourage its pursuit in later years and ensure 
that such a pursuit is engaged in fruitfully . . . Given the nature of Kenyan 
society, we reco mmend that attention be paid to literature expressing,the 
experience of a changing society, and that it be ensured that the variety of 
experience of different classes in society be covered. (12) 
Their recommendations for-the teaching of world literature co me face to face 
with the issue of language; and they have authors which include Tolstoy, 
Gogol, Gorky, Dostoevsky (Russian); Zola, Balzac, Flaubert (French); Ibsen 
(Norwegian); Faulkner, Arthur Miller, Upton Sinclair, Hemingway 
(American); Dickens, Shakespeare, Conrad, Yeats, Synge (British and Irish); 
Mann and Brecht (German). They see the necessity or inevitability of 
continued use of English, but they strongly call for Swahili to be made 
compulsory in all schools but particularly for those students of En glish and 
literature and drama: 
 
A clear programme of Swahili literature be introduced and be made 
compulsory in schools.  
Every language has its -own social and cultural basis, and these are 
instrumental in the formation of mental processes and value judge ments. 
Whereas it is accepted that we use English and will continue to do so for a 
long time to come, the strength and depth of our cultural grounding will 
ultimately depend on our ability to invoke the idiom of African Culture in 
a language that is closer to, it. Swahili has a major and an increasing role to 
play in Kenya, and needs to be given greater emphasis than it has, hitherto. 
been accorded. 
An immediate step that should be taken to fulfill -this aim is that 
adequate numbers of Swahili teachers should be trained.(13) 
All in all, the report is shot through and through with a consciousness that 
literature is a powerful instrument in evolving the cultural ethos of a people. 
They see literature as part of the whole ideological mechanism for integrating a 
people into the values of a dominant class, race,. nor nation. Imperialism,_ 
particularly during colonialism, provides the best example of how literature as 
an element of culture was used in the domination of Africa. The report notes:


--- PAGE 114 ---
100 
That Africa as a cont inent has been a victim of forces of colonial 
exploitation, oppression and human degradation. In the field of culture she 
was taught to look on Europe as her teacher and the centre of man's 
civilization, and herself as the pupil. In this event Western culture became 
the centre of Africa's process of learning, and Africa was relegated to the 
background. Africa uncritically imbibed values that were alien and had no 
immediate relevance to her people. Thus was the richness of Africa's 
cultural heritage degraded, and her people labelled as primitive and savage. 
The colonizer's values were placed in the limelight, and in the process, 
evolved a new African who denied his original image, and exhibited a 
considerable lackof confidence in his creative potential. (14) 
The writers are therefore shocked that syllabuses designed to meet the needs of 
colonialism should continue well into the independence era. 
It was noted with shock and concern that even ten years after 
Independence, in practically every school in the republic our students were 
still being subjected to alien cultural values which are meaningless 
especially to our present needs. Almost all books used in our schools are 
written by foreign authors; out of 57 texts of drama studied at EAACE 
level in our schools between .1968 and 1972 only one was African. It 
became obvious that very little is being done in schools to expose our 
students to their cultural and physical environment. (15) 
They are therefore conscious of the fact that an actual literature syllabus, no  
matter how far reaching in its scope and composition of texts and authors, is 
limited unless literature is seen and taught as an ideological component of the 
continuing national liberation process. In one of their conclusions they write: 
Three major principles that emerged from the conference have guided the 
discussions of the working committee and the preparation of this final 
report. 
(i) A people's culture is an essential component in def fining and 
revealing their world outlook. Through it, mental processes can  be 
conditioned, as was the case with the formal education provided by the 
colonial governments in Africa. . 
(ii) A sound educational policy is one which enables students to study the 
culture and environment of their own society first,then in rela tion to 
the culture and environment of other societies.


--- PAGE 115 ---
101 
(iii) For the education offered today to be positive and to have creative 
potential for Kenya's future it must be seen as an essential part of the 
continuing national liberation process (16) 
The hell let loose by the conference and by its subsequent 
recommendations was almost a repeat of. the 1968-9 University-based debate. 
But now the debate became national. Some newspapers opened their pages to 
the literature debate revealing in the process a wide range of views on the issue 
from extreme hostility to passionate commitment. Believe it or not, in the early 
seventies academics and teachers could hold such a debate and assert the 
primacy of the Kenyan people and their experience of the history of  struggle 
without fear' of being labelled Marxist, Communist or radical and being hauled 
into prisons and detention camps. Even so the proposals and the model syllabus 
worked out to reflect the new perspective of Kenya, East Africa, Africa, Third 
World and the rest of the world, were not readily accepted by the Ministry of 
Education. They became the subject of a continuing debate and struggle in the 
educational corridors of power. The proposals were strengthened and argued 
about in yet other follow -up conferences and in 1981 were still a matter of 
controversy. In 1982 a syllabus like that of the Literature Department was 
labelled by soiree political elements as Marxist. Kenya -centrism or - 
Afrocentrism -vas now equated with Marxism. 
I am not sure if today th e proposals have been accepted or not. I think 
some elements, like- the oral literature components, have been introduced in 
the school literature curriculum. But I' expect the controversy, continues. For 
the quest for relevance and the entire literature debate was not really about the 
admissibility of this or that text, this or that author, though it often expressed 
itself as such. It was really about the direction, the teaching of literature, as 
well as of history, politics, and all the other arts and soci al sciences, ought to 
take in Africa today. The debate, in other words, - was about the inherited 
colonial education system and the consciousness it necessarily inculcated in the 
African mind. What directions should an education system take in an Africa 
wishing to break with neo-colonialism? What should be the philosophy guiding 
it? How does it want the `New Africans' to view themselves and their universe? 
From what base: Afrocentric or Eurocentric? What then are the materials they 
should be exposed to: and in what order and perspective? Who should be 
interpreting that material to them: an African or non-African? If African, what 
kind of African? One who has internalized the colonial


--- PAGE 116 ---
102 
world outlook or one attempting to break free from the inherited slave 
consciousness? And what were the implications of such an education system 
for the political and economic set up or status quo? In, a neocolonialist context, 
would such an education system be possible? Would it not in fact come into 
conflict with political and economic neo-colonialism? 
Whether recommendations in the quest for relevance are successful or not 
ultimately depends on the entire government policy towards culture, education 
and language, and on where and how it stands in the anti-imperialist process in 
Africa today. 
Whatever the destiny of the 1974 proposals on literature in schools, the 
values, assumptions and the attitudes underlying the entire `Nairobi Literature 
Debate' are today at the heart of the contending social forces in Kenya, in 
Africa and in the third world and they all boil down to the question of 
relevance, in philosophical class and national terms. 
 
VI At the level of the national base for relevance, two conflicting lines have 
emerged in Kenyan intellectual circles and particularly in the interpretation of 
history, politics and economic development. 
One line identifies with the imperialist heritage, colonial and neocolonial, 
and it sees in imperialism the motive . force of Kenya's development. The more 
rapidly Kenya loses her identity in the West and leaves her fate in imperialist 
interests, the faster will be her development and her movement to the 
modernity of the twentieth century. This line is particularly clear in the 
interpretation of history where a corpus of state intellectuals has emerged who 
now openly write manuals in praise of colonialism. These state intellectuals 
scoff at the heroic and patriotic struggles of Kenyan people - of all the 
nationalities to free Kenya from the stranglehold of imperialistic capitalism. 
For them the tradition of collaboration with British imperialism is what brought 
about independence and not the resistance tradition of Waiyaki, Koitalel, Me 
Katilili, Markin Singh and Gama Pinto, a tradition carried to new heights by 
Dedan Kimathi and the Kenya Land and Freedom Army (Mau Mau). For these 
state intellectuals imperialist Europe is the beginning of Kenya's history and 
progress. Imperialism created Kenya. Therefore, for these intellectuals,


--- PAGE 117 ---
103 
the neo-colonial state is the model instrument for Africa's rapid development. 
The other line identifies with the tradition of resistance in all the 
nationalities. It sees in the activities and actions of ordinary men and women of 
Kenya, the basis of Kenya's history and progress. The line, best exemplified by 
the Kenyan intellectuals now in jails, detention camps or in exile - these are 
clearly not state functionaries insists that Kenya and the needs of Kenya come 
first. For them, the national perspective in econom y (even capitalism if the 
national capital and enterprise were dominant), politics and culture is of 
paramount importance. To get the correct national perspective, democracy 
-where a whole range of opinions, views and voices ran .freely be raised - is an 
absolute minimum. For them the starting point is a democratic Kenya - the 
Kenya of peasants and workers of all the nationalities with their heritage of 
languages, cultures, glorious histories of struggle, vast natural and human' 
resources. From this starting point they can radiate outwards to link with the 
heritage and struggles of other. peoples in Africa, the third world peoples, 
Europe and the Americas; with the struggles of the people the world over, the 
vast democratic and socialistic forces daily infli cting mortal blows to 
imperialist capitalism. A study of African literature, culture and history, 
starting from a national base, would therefore be linked with progressive and 
democratic trends in world literature, culture and history. For them the quest 
for relevance is not a call for isolationism but a recognition that national 
liberation is the basis of an internationalism of all the democratic and social 
struggles ,for human equality, justice, peace and progress. For them, the 
neo-colonial state is the negation of Africa's progress and development. The 
defeat of imperialism and neo-colonialism and hence the liberation of natural 
and human resources acrd the entire productive forces of the nation, would be 
the beginning of Africa's real progress and development. The national, viewed 
from the needs and activities of the majority - peasant and workers -is the 
necessary base for a take -off into the world of the twentieth and twenty -first 
centuries, the international democratic and socialist community of tomorrow. 
The Nairobi Literature Debate and the enormous reactions it generated for 
and against reflected the fierce struggle of the two lines in Kenya today. In 
answering the question - are the sources of our inspiration- foreign or national? 
- the proposed 'changes implied an unequivocal rejection of the imperialist and 
foreign and an affirmation of the democratic and national. For the first time 
since Independence


--- PAGE 118 ---
104 
in 1963, the defenders of imperialist and neo-colonial culture were put, on the 
defensive:. 
 
VII While the Nairobi Literature Debate has clearly been able to isolate the 
national democratic basis of relevance, it has not always been as successful in 
isolating the philosophic and class bases of relevance - although they are 
implied. 
The philosophic and the class bases of relevance are even more crucial 
when it comes to the area of critical approaches and interpretations. For the 
critic, whether teacher, lecturer, interpreter or analyst, is a product of a class 
society. Each child by birth, family or parents' occupation is brought up in a 
given class. By education children are brought up in the culture, values and 
world outlook of the dominant class which may or may not be the same as the 
class of their birth and family. By choice they may opt for one or the. other 
side in the .class struggles of their day. Therefore their interpretation of 
literature and culture and history will be influenced by their philosophical 
standpoint, or intellectual base, and their conscious or unconscious class 
sympathies. 
First the philosophical base. Is a person's standpoint that of idealist or 
materialist? Is their mode of thinking and reasoning dialectical or 
metaphysical? Does the critic see values, ideas and the spiritual as superior to 
material reality? Does the critic  see reality as static for all time or reality as 
changing all the time? Does the critic see things, processes, phenomena as 
linked or as separate mutually exclusive entities? Since literature, like religion 
and other areas of culture, is a reflection of t he world of nature and human 
community, the outlook of a critic in real life will profoundly affect their 
interpretation of the reflected reality. 
This is even more true of class sympathies and identification. 
A critic who in real life is suspicious of people fighting for liberation will 
suspect characters who, though only is a novel, are fighting for liberation. A 
critic who in real life is impatient with all the talk about classes, class struggle, 
resistance to imperialism, racism and struggles against ra cism, of reactionary 
versus revolutionary violence; will be equally impatient when he or she finds 
the same themes dominant in a work of art. In criticism, as in creative writing, 
there is an ideological


--- PAGE 119 ---
105 
struggle. A critic's world outlook, his or her cla ss sympathies and values will 
affect evaluations of Chinua Achebe, Sembene Ousmane -, Brecht, Balzac, 
Shakespeare, Lu Hsun, Garcia Marquez or Alex La Guma. 
The quest for relevance calls for more than choice of material. The attitude 
to the material is also important. Of course, over this, there can never be any 
legislation. But it is crucial to be alert to the class ideological assumptions 
behind choices; utterances and evaluations. The choice of what is relevant and 
the evaluation of a quality is conditione d by the national, class and 
philosophical base. These factors underlay the .controversy attending the whole 
quest for relevance in the teaching of literature in Kenyan schools - and 
universities. 
 
VIII For the Nairobi Literature Debate and the quest for re levance were basically 
challenges as to where people stand in the big social issues of the world today. 
In the era of imperialism where do we really stand? In a society built on a 
structure of inequality, where coo we stand? Can we remain neutral, cocooned 
in our libraries and scholarly disciplines, muttering to ourselves: I am only a 
surgeon; I am a scientist; I am an economist; or I am simply a critic, a teacher, 
a lecturer? As Brecht says in a poem addressed to the students, of the `Workers' 
and Peasants' Faculty:' 
Your science will be valueless,  
you'll find And learning will be sterile, if inviting '  
Unless you pledge your intellect to fighting  
Against all enemies of mankind.(17) 
Or his poem addressed to Danish working-class actors: 
And that is where you  
The workers' actors, as you learn and teach  
Can play your part creatively in all the struggles  
Of men of your time, thereby  
Helping, with your seriousness of study and the cheerfulness of knowledge  
To turn the struggles into common experience and  
justice into a passion. (18)


--- PAGE 120 ---
106 
When one day the simple men and women of all our countries will, as 
foreseen in the poem addressed to apolitical intellectuals by the late 
Guatemalan poet Otto Rene Castillo, rise and ask us what we did when our 
nations dried out slowly, `like a sweet fire, small and alone,' yes when they will 
ask us- 
What did you do when the poor 
Suffered, when tenderness 
and life 
burned out in them? (19) 
- we; who teach literature, history, the arts, culture; religions, should be able to 
answer proudly, like the Brechtian intellectual, we helped turn the struggles 
into the spheres of common knowledge and, above all, justice into a passion. 
 
IX The Nairobi Literature Debate is a continuing debate. It is there in East, West, 
South and North Africa. It is there in the Caribbean. It is there in Asia and 
Latin America. The relevance of literature. The relevance of art. The relevance 
of culture. What literature, 'what art, what culture, what values? For whom, for 
what? The debate, even for Kenyans, has not for instance settled the issue of 
multi-national languages in the same country. English is still the linguistic 
medium of the debate; and of the temporary solut ions of the 1968-9 and 1914 
conferences. The language question cannot be solved outside the larger arena 
of economics and politics, or outside the answer to the question of what society 
we want. 
But the search for new directions in language, literature, th eatre, poetry, 
fiction' and scholarly studies in Africa is part -and parcel of the overall 
struggles of African people against imperialism in its neocolonial stage. It is 
part of that struggle for that world. in which my health is not dependent on 
another's leprosy; my cleanliness not on another's maggot-ridden body; and my 
humanity not on the buried humanity of others. 
A hundred and fifty years ago, that is forty years before the Berlin 
Conference, a German visionary saw how money taken from the worker and 
the poor had come to dominate human relations:


--- PAGE 121 ---
107 
It transforms fidelity into infidelity, love into hate, hate into love, virtue 
into vice, vice into virtue, servant into master, idiocy into intelligence, and 
intelligence into idiocy . . . He who can buy br avery is brave though he be a 
coward. (20) 
He foresaw a new world based on a relationship, not of stolen property, but 
of human qualities calling forth even more human qualities in all of us: 
Assume man to be man and his relationship to be a human one: the n you 
can exchange love for only love, trust for trust, etc. If you want to enjoy 
art, you must be an artistically cultivated person; if you want to exercise 
influence over, other people, you must be a person with a stimulating and 
encouraging effect on other people. Every one of your relations to man and 
to nature must be a specific expression, corresponding to the object of your 
will, of your real individual life. If you love without evoking love in return 
- that is, . if your loving as loving does not pr oduce reciprocal love; if 
through a living expression of yourself 'as a loving person you do not make 
yourself a beloved one, then your love is impotent - a misfortune. (21) 
That was not a German Pope in the Vatican but Karl Marx in the British 
Museum library. And it was he who threw another challenge to all scholars, all 
philosophers, all the men and women of letters, all those who in their different 
disciplines are trying to explain the world. Hitherto, he wrote: 
The philosophers have only interpreted the  
the world in various ways; the point,  
however is to change it. (22) 
Change it? This sentiment is in keeping with the vision of all The Wretched of 
the Earth' in Africa, Asia and Latin America who are struggling for a new 
economic, political and cultural order free from imperialism in its colonial or in 
its more subtle but more vicious neocolonial form. It is the sentiment of all the 
democratic and socialistic forces for change in the world today, forces once 
addressed by Brecht in the poem, `Speech to Danish Working Class Actors on 
the Art of Observation': 
Today everywhere, from the hundred-storeyed cities  
Over the seas, cross-ploughed by teeming liners 
To the loneliest villages, the word has spread  
That mankind's fate-is man aloe. Therefore


--- PAGE 122 ---
108 
We now ask you, the actors 
Of our time - a time of overthrow and of boundless mastery 
Of all nature, even men's own - at last  
To change yourselves and show us mankind's world  
As it really is: made by men and open to alteration.(23) 
This is what this book on the politics of language in African literature has 
really been about: national, democratic and human liberation. The call for the 
rediscovery and the resumption of our language is a call for a regenerative 
reconnection with the millions of revolutionary tongues in Africa and the world 
over demanding liberation. It is a call for the. rediscovery of the real language 
of humankind: the language of struggle. It is the universal language underlying 
all speech and words of our history. Struggle. Struggle makes history. Struggle 
makes us. In struggle is our history, our language and our being. That struggle 
begins wherever we are; in whatever we do: then we become part of those 
millions whom Martin Carter once saw sleeping not to dream but dreaming to 
change the world. 
 
Notes 
 
1 Ngugi wa Thiong'o Homecoming, London l%9, p. 145. 
2 ibid., p. 146. 
3 ibid., p. 146. 
4 ibid., p. 150. 
5 ibid., p. 148. 
6 The debate and the conferences that followed have also been the subject of scholarly dissertations - see 
for instance, Anne Wahnsley Literature in Kenyan Education -Problems and Choices in Author as 
Producer Strategy, M.A. dissertation, Sussex Unversity. 
7 Recommendations of the Working Committee, p. 7. 
8 ibid., p. 8. 
9 ibid., p. 8. 
10 ibid., p. 59. 
11 ibid., pp. 61-2. 
12 ibid., pp. 70-1. 
13 ibid " p. 21, 
14 ibid., p. 7. 
15 ibid., .pp. 7-8.  
16 ibid., pp. 19-20. 
17 Brecht Collected Poems, Methuen Edition, p. 450. `To the Students of Workers' and Peasants Faculty' 
ll. 5-8. 
18 ibid., p. 238. `Speech to Danish Working-Class Actors on the Art of Observation', ll. 160-6. 
19 The whole poem is in, Robert Marquez, ed. Latin American Revolutionary Poetry,. New York and 
London 1974. 
20 Karl Marx, 1844 Economic and Philosophic Manuscript.


--- PAGE 123 ---
109 
21 ibid. 
22 Karl Marx Tbeses an Feuerbach No. XI.  
23 Brecht Collected Poems, Methuen Edition, p. 234, Il. 35-43.

