=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Del Jones~Culture Bandits II.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 26
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:58:11.408153
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
2
CULTURE BANDITS II
(THE ANNIHILATION OF AFRIKAN IMAGES)
Copyright 1993 by Del Jones
Produced by Del Jones Communications Unlimited
All rights reserved, printed in the United States
Cover Design by: Del Jones
Cover Layout by: Elimisha Jalawi
Cover Art & All Art Work by: Brother Luke
Research by Del and Robin Jones of the Hikeka Research Unit
and “The Eye of the Storm Newspaper.”
Copy Editor: Pat Jacobs
There is a difference between a “war correspondent” and a reporter,
a journalist, an author. A war correspondent goes into the eye of the
storm and views all 360 degrees of our struggle. A war correspondent
is not a hired gun or a propagandist for white supremacy. Nor is he or
she a wordsmith for the great white lie, negro foolishness, or a wishful
thinker. A war correspondent is an Afrikan freedom fighter who has
chosen the foxhole of truth and pumps the truth to his people, indeed
the world, at all cost. It is not a gig that is assigned but an accepted
righteous duty. No applause is sought, no thanks necessary, it is a
task though critical, that offers just one reward...Victory!
ISBN 0-9639995-7-5


--- PAGE 3 ---
3
DEDICATION
In the name of Kwame Nkrumah brothers
I dedicate this work to you. My people, in
his name this is dedicated to you. In the
name of Marcus Garvey I send this humble
offering to you. Dedan Kimathi and Brother
Malcolm in their behalf it is all for you. In
the name of Nzinga, my sisters, I dedicate
these truths to you. In the name of Ida B.
Wells this song I sing to you. In the names
of the raped and murdered, yes this offering
is for you. In the names of Ellen my beloved
mother and Robin my super queen, it is all
for you. And in the names of Hector
Peterson and Emmett Till, this my children
travels from my heart to you...Ah, in the
name of ChancellerWilliams, my elders this
is for you. Take it all, why don’t cha?
Brother Del Jones W.C.
(From the Belly of the Beast 1994)


--- PAGE 4 ---
4
“THE GREAT WHITE LIE”
By: Robin Jones
We
have been beholden to
a venomous fabrication
of
our embellished lives
that has started with
those
little unscrupulous lies
that
drip  dry  droppings
of seeded untruths
while planting
those
in between lies
lined and covered
with a stale stench
of muck and manure
leaving open
the cracks and crevices
for
those oppressive lies
that we
keep slipping and sliding in
while
continuing to fertilize
all other lies
that create
the great white lie
that strong ascending lie
that
consciously rises itself above
the lowly field
from which it sprang
leaping high


--- PAGE 5 ---
5
into the mouths of fevered mountains
bursting
its malevolent manifestation
into an explosion
of
bubbling hot lava
on a meandrous path
saturating its infernal roots
by slowly and skillfully
penetrating and piercing
burning and blistering
the souls of Black folk
killing our kindred spirits
as we lay
buried beneath its blanket
of boiling devastation
amidst
the hidden identity of
its bottomless base
that already powerful lie
that
has muscled its way
into the center core
of our condensed celestrial region
causing
clouds shaped like mushrooms
to materialize
into a deformed seething steam
of angry vapors
spawning
hot acidic rains
descending
pure hellish pain
while
scalding and searing
singeing and scorching
the souls of Black folks


--- PAGE 6 ---
6
eliminating the true essence of our existence
as we
continuously disappear
into its whirlpool
and are
immersed in the turbulent clutches
of its eternal deception
And
as it beckons to you
to lay your mind
gently upon its lore
remember
its only purpose
is
to perpetrate the growth of itself
while
stripping you of your solidity
bleaching the bareness of your being
and
dissolving you into its damnation
for
it truly fears
that those among us
who have escaped its wrath
and
are free from its falseness
will one day
filter the fertility of veracity
unleasing
unspoken tremors of truth
steadily
freeing its prisoners
from their bondage
and
releasing those unknowing
of The Great White Lie!


--- PAGE 7 ---
7
...SINCERE INTENT...
This work is designed to end the
development of people like W.
Wilson Goode, Colin Powell, Ralph
Bunche, Joseph Mubutu, Jonas
Savimbi, Roy Ennis, Carl T. Rowan,
Tom Adams, Eric Williams, Gene
Roberts, Anwar Sadat, Sammy Davis,
Jr., Eugenia Charles, and  Thomas
Hayer, among us. It is designed to
decrease the possibility of
collaborators infiltrating our just
struggle for liberation and the
unification of our people under
revolutionary Pan-Afrikanism!
THE WAR CORRESPONDENT ‘94


--- PAGE 8 ---
8
INTRODUCTION
In Culture Bandits V ol. 1 we journeyed into the white supremacists
rape of our musical culture. We also explained how they have to
subvert our culture to continue to subjugate us. I also, explained that
these interruptions damage our progress, confuse our direction and
destroy our mental and social equilibrium.
They have an excellent understanding of our culture and how it
impacts on our attempts to rebuild our Afrikan minds. Even after
their enslavement and terrorism created a mental mutant called
“Nigger,” we have always battled back to achieve our natural status
as the original man...the Afrikan.
It is a race against time, it is, and we must collect ourselves and put
our consciousness at the foundation of our efforts to fend off the
genocidal programs of our enemies. Culture is the mother’s milk of
this growth, this development, and this re-birth of our strong race.
That makes culture a critical war zone where the life and death struggle
of our race will be played out. In this corner armed with economic
and political power which includes:
a. Print (the colonization of scholarship)
b. Radio (electronic propaganda)
c. Television (image enslavement)
d. Movies (revisionist historical distortions & image
    manufacturing)
e. Satellite communication (global information control)
f. Educational institutions (Negro creating factories)
g. Military terrorism (domestic big stickism)
h. Employment coercion (neo-slavery)
i. Prisons (concentration camps for male youth ‘n adults)
j. Police culture (the pig is your friend propaganda)
k. Hunger (homelessness and food stamp life line)


--- PAGE 9 ---
9
Facing all of this “and In this corner” is the champion, the Afrikan:
bloody, beaten, raped and terrorized. Historically, more than a
survivor, a proud veteran with a Pan-Afrikan knockout punch he
refuses to use.
We are armed with only a minority of Afrikan centered brothers ‘n
sisters and we are disorganized and disjointed. Our biggest weapon
is the will to be free, yet we carry the repressed hatred of our
tormentors so deep in our bosoms, we can’t reach the needed
adrenaline producing documentation of why we hate them. And we
do hate them, even if only a few will admit their powerless hatred.
The common dominator is not truth and justice, it is sheer power...
political, military and global economic power that can only be
delivered, to us, through Pan-Afrikanism.
The total liberation and unification of Afrika and Afrikan people
globally is the only solution to international white supremacy. One
global configuration against another will be the final comedown... it
is unavoidable.
“Culture Bandits II: The Annihilation of Afrikan Images” is designed
to clarify the mass media’s role in developing in us a political
backwardness, internal and external image assassination, an artificial
affection for our enemies and a self-hatred of our own race, as these
white supremacist tools drown our aspiration in a foul fiction designed
to continue our victimization and final destruction.
This is the first book that requires a VCR to travel through it
thoroughly as we cut through the readers’ resistance to the damning
truth about our relationship with our captors. I intend to leave doubters
no where to run and no where to hide as I strike down the white lies
that traps our tomorrows in its filthy bowels.
The Black Holocaust Final Phase: Clinton and Pacification is now in
effect and his Negro allies are lined up to serve in the death of the
Afrikan race. The need to understand “Culture Bandits V ol. I,” “The
Black Holocaust: Global Genocide” and “Culture Bandits II:
Annihilation of Afrikan Images” is ever present.


--- PAGE 10 ---
10
Lack of understanding of our Afrikan reality will leave us defenseless
as the Afrikan Holocaust continues unchecked and misunderstood.
Pan-Afrikanism vs. Global White Supremacy, these two
configurations are headed for the Final Comedown... It is unavoidable.
We must nourish our minds and aim all our energies at the liquidation
of our enemies’ power bases for good. This is not the time for half
stepping, punkish liberalism, or fear... Our battle cry should be... “Race
First!”


--- PAGE 11 ---
11


--- PAGE 12 ---
12
RADIO (MUSIC ‘N TALK ‘N REVOLUTION)
In dealing with Black imagery and stereotyping, it is interesting to
note, you must deal with radio before film and television. Because
the ground work for what the other two media do was established by
audio broadcasting.
In fact, I believe the audio images were even more pronounced
because the expertise of the propagandist was challenged more. To
slap the resistance of Afrikan people down, the audio assholes had to
deliver tighter scripts, more pronounced stereotyped language and
deeper racist rantings.
The development of radio was a boom to global white supremacy. It
was more than a method of communication or an entertainment toy.
It became an excellent propaganda tool; One that would advance the
exportation of their decadent culture, and at the same time they could
misrepresent themselves to the world.
Faking a projected higher form of civilization, religious superiority,
and the self-proclaimed “white man’s burden,” they hid the
viciousness and anti-human instrument of imperialism from view.
They stereotyped people of color and their culture, thus excusing
themselves for their excesses. They sold the notion that the worst of
white society was better than the best of any other. In short, their
print propaganda got a pitiful partner as the lying machine spit
nonsense onto the world.
Also, locked into entertainment radio broadcasts were their backwards
cultural, moral, and religious ideas that crippled the listeners and
poisoned their minds for under-development. In addition, their racist
one sided news broadcasts delivered the white supremacist perspective
as the norm.
All of these components trapped our people’s consciousness in a vice
of ignorance and sent their energies and aspirations off into the wrong


--- PAGE 13 ---
13
direction. We went tramping off after an integrated reality, even though
all the evidence shouted loudly that someday we would have to rumble
these people to cool them out.
The death blow to our intellectual development was delivered by
their educational institutions which legitimatized the lie.
Radio allowed them to zero in on our musical culture as the filthy
“Culture Bandits” decided that they could not let us use our culture
as a liberating tool. They understood that controlling the musical
component of our culture was of life and death importance. Further,
they thought it would deliver pleasure to them and they also knew it
would be extremely profitable. They were right. It’s called cultural
imperialism, it was executed with ruthlessness and demonic glee.
Earlier, they segregated the music hoping our music wouldn’t
influence their tired sounds, but their people were slipping uptown
and across the tracks to take Afrikan musical baths. From the blues,
to gospel, and through jazz their music rotted in this Black sunshine.
In the forties and early fifties they use to sell our music under the
counter, in plain wrappers like bootlegged culture coming from the
heavens, but illegal because of its potency.
In different locations across this country, Black music was played on
the radio at certain times in a block of Black sound. Finally, the
development of radio stations that played Black oriented music sprang
up. None owned by Black people. Still it pushed into the corners of
Babylon, our culture began to bleed into the simple-minded vulture
like mainstream. The real thing, the original people’s products were
alive, organic, reeking with reality, not some malt shop vanilla
porridge of the rhythmless ones.
Radio communications was a great advancement in western society,
it also has always been a deadly weapon against people of color. It
gave this society socialization consistency and a broad reach.
Everyone could now be reached as the propaganda climbed on
polluted winds.


--- PAGE 14 ---
14
Connecting the dots, the white supremacist culture now rode on the
shameless currents reaching villages, hamlets, mountains and into
the deep forest planting hatred deeper into their own social fabric.
Programming beamed from slimy studios of racist stupidity as the
information diet of the people was now in the firm grip of the “mind
managers.” Corporate ownership and sponsorship blew open
untouched markets for exploitation.
Dallas Smyte calls the mass media “The Consciousness Industry.”
They now had the tool to attack and identify new markets, propagate
old racist ideas, and perpetuate the socially backward system of
capitalism.
Smyte, the Canadian media critic, also defines the mass media’s role
correctly when he proclaims that they “deliver audiences to
advertisers.” I will add from an Afrikan perspective, that the mass
media in general and radio in particular also brainwashes its
consumers, perpetuates stereotypes, assassinates Black peoples’
culture, misrepresents issues, manages, and dominates the information
we digest.
Historically, white culture was the only product shipped through the
air into our living spaces. At the same time, it reinforced racial
oppression, Afrikan lynchings, forced segregation, economic and
academic terrorism.
We must always remember the largest Afrikan movement developed
was by the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA). The
modern communication weapon of the enemy was radio and it could
not stop the formation of the UNIA. It could only snip at their Black
heels and counter attack from pitiful vestibules of hate.
On the other hand, Marcus Garvey the UNIA leader, did not have the
advantage of radio. He fought them off with his journalistic skills,
oral dynamics and with a generation of brothers and sisters who were
ready to rumble. They were ready for a positive program, a


--- PAGE 15 ---
15
revolutionary program, a program that was both the salvation and
the weapon.
The will of a people to be free will always override whatever
mechanism is put in the way of their righteous goal. History teaches
us that technology is annoying, but it can be dealt with if the mental
chains of slavery are broken.
This is not to under estimate the technology of the enemy but to put
it in its proper perspective. They hurt the UNIA with their anti-Afrikan
and anti-UNIA propaganda. Had it not been for their vicious attack
on the unconscious minds of the masses, millions more would have
joined the legions of Black folk who were on the move.
In any case, Garvey was kicking ass and only with cowardly
infiltration, governmental frame-ups, economic revenge and traitorous
opportunism was victory stolen from us. And yes, it was the radio
and print media that preached the lies, that justified governmental
oppression and covered up truth with the drippy sores of white lies
and the scabby terror of cowardly lynchings.
The role of radio hasn’t changed, only now many Black radio
personalities have joined the lynch mob. Radio for revolutionary
purposes doesn’t exist. There are individuals who contribute to our
informational diet in a positive way, but they are few and far between.
Among them are charlatans hiding under the cover of nationalism,
but they are mere buffers for white supremacy.
We must understand that most are audio Ebony/Jet Magazine like
reactionary fluff. Packaged illusions dripping with misrepresented
reality designed to tunnel our dreams and aspiration under white
supremacy’s faggity diseased ass.
Like Ebony/Jet, Black Enterprise and Essence Magazine, they
participate in camouflaging our collective misery as they front
legitimacy. They are the bridge for the Culture Bandits, they flop
down in the mud and allow the enemy to travel across their backs to
steal our culture and misrepresent reality.


--- PAGE 16 ---
16
In that position the collaborators can only get screwed, a lesson they
will learn before the year 2,000. Yeah, these broadcasters must control
the people’s thoughts and information, they must perpetuate a false
leadership, misrepresent issues and deliver us to the enemy naked
and afraid.
The new key in every city now is Talk Radio, which is more their
vehicle then ours. Daily the most reactionary garbage is kicked out
to a frustrated people who are attempting to become informed. Most
of the time the host is a manager and legitimatizer of middle class
values that are not only unrealistic but a close kin to white supremacy
and culture.
We must realize that information is the key ingredient to progress as
we struggle to develop the strategy and tactics to dismantle their evil
hold on our vision.
There are three levels of information presently:
First: There is the great white lie that attacks from white media
strongholds with a demonic energy that is slapped into our
consciousness as the real shit, the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth. On this level the lie is dressed up in
suits and ties, gowns and phony made up smiles tumbling out
of the communication caves of the damned.
Thus, the legitimatizing agents of society’s truth, “political
correctness” and healthy lies work from golden arches across
Black aspirations. Spinning from the centers of hell they
manufacture, hide, destroy, and work the color out of the truth.
Holding it hostage, they damage all who hear their tales. They
fracture our direction, they embellish the lie and assassinate
any who dare counter their shameless falsehoods.
Information delivery is not their gig, they sell perspective,
culture, and a multitude of misery destined to travel into our
reality replacing it with a Disney fantasy that we will never


--- PAGE 17 ---
17
survive. Local, regional and national professional liars that
are so good at their craft that they fool themselves into
believing they are not the snow demons from the land of the
mutated misfits. Their works circle the globe and imprison it
as their military moves in for the slaughter.
That first tier of lies has become the world’s truth and almost every
educational system, communication system, religious group and
political/economic configuration must deal with their shitty lies.
They beam their falsehoods across the galaxies and amongst the stars,
they bounce them off satellites and into our brains while articulating
in every language. The message? White supremacy is the only game
in town, whites are Gods and the rest of the world (people of color)
aint shit, never done shit and will never be shit! Their code word is
democracy. Nigerian musician Fela Anikulapo Kuti breaks the word
down and says what they really mean is “dem-are-crazy” or
demonstration of craze.
The second level is a tricky one:
This level includes campus radio, alternative radio, and so-
called Black Talk Radio. On this level those who slipped
through the trap of stage one land here thinking their
consciousness is safe as they nestle under the mostly useless
conversations of confusion. 95% of the endless chatter is more
confusing than the focused racist information slipping out of
the slimy mouths of our enemies. Aint no joke!
Those who are growing toward free thought escape to this
level. However, they soon find this is not a sanctuary because
it is the same garbage packaged in loonie liberalism and rolled
toward the people like a green hot dog. You know, red dye #2
creates the illusion that the meat is less than foul. But we
know it will kill whether it is red or green. In fact, if you
escape the rotten meat the red dye will deliver a deadly
cancerous blow.


--- PAGE 18 ---
18
Some alternative stations are the only place you can find
liberating information. Alternative views and news are
propagated, however much of it is snowed under mounds of
interest group banter that turns off many listeners.
Black talk shows are usually soap boxes for traitorous
politicians, backward entertainers, and assorted religious sell
outs. They also serve as an open microphone for the
community; giving the impression that a village meeting is
taking place when in fact its a controlled situation faking free
speech just to cool us out.
For example, establishment types like Mary Mason in
Philadelphia openly cried for racist former Police Chief and
Mayor Frank Rizzo on the air after he was snatched from this
earth from under a toilet where his racist ass fell and died.
Nobody said nothing! He was an enemy, who had sent many
of us packing off to the prisons of just-us. In addition, many
were blown off the face of the earth by his goons in blue. He
was a barbarian who fronted official terrorism and was proud
of it. She is the kind of person who raps to our people daily
via talk radio. Mason is not a dinosaur, she is reproducing
herself in young ambitious Negroes who want to continue
the circus.
Consequently, life enhancing and life saving information is
still absent from our people. Colored Flunkies, Negro fossils
and some house Niggers control the talk, thus nothing is
accomplished. If anything, they reinforce the white lie.
Confusion is the enemy of revolution and this is the strong
suit of Black Talk. It confuses, alters and manages information
to keep the people wandering and cooled out. In this mixture
across this country, a few positive Black communicators
operate in their respective foxholes. We must multiply their
numbers. In addition, we must expose the clowns, charlatans
and agents of white supremacy.


--- PAGE 19 ---
19
The third level is the clear cut minority and exists only as a product
of the overall struggle:
It’s the struggling media of the progressive sub-culture, it is
under wraps, pushed away from the masses. It is fragmented,
disjointed, trying to breathe free air, trying to serve, trying to
strike back at the other two carnivorous levels. However, weak
it is, weak it has always been.
An example of the resilience is Black Liberation Radio (BLR)
in Springfield, Illinois, which is a small station that serves
the public housing projects there. Even though it is a one watt
station, the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) has
attempted to move on it several times. Run by Mbanna
Kantako and his posse, he is a young blind man committed to
informing his people. More small underground stations are
popping up across the nation. Brother Mbanna has been aiding
in this growth. He educates those who are interested in this
economical and effective weapon against the great white lie.
Those stations that are community stations and alternative
stations have been a reservoir of information. However, most
community folks are unaware of where they are on the dial
and what they offer. In addition, the onslaught of anti-Afrikan
propaganda and the white supremacist education systems have
damaged the appetite of the people for anything but
entertainment junk food.
More importantly, the alternative stations, some campus radio
stations and independent revolutionary stations like BLR are
training grounds for the type of War Correspondents we will
have to develop to make progress in communications.
Meanwhile, at some established stations there is also a rumble.
These are mostly individuals that hold enough check to survive
at stations as an oddity, an aside, that the station can glean
some legitimacy from. Even though most of them have lines


--- PAGE 20 ---
20
they will not cross, they will not deal with subjects that will
upset powerful people or white power configurations such
as: so-called Jews, secret orders and their Black flunkies.
Yet, these areas are where many progressive thinkers, activists,
researchers, and authors can expose the people to information
that goes ignored everywhere else. However, there is little or
no coordination between progressive forces. Here is where
we must develop, this is where the struggle lies, we must
create ways of getting unmolested information to our people.
MUSICAL IMAGES
When we discuss the “Annihilation of Afrikan Images” most will
think of photos, movies, television and video. However, we must
realize that some of the crisp images we latch on to come through the
music we listen to. That is why so much energy and trickyology is
used to control the musical images that dance in our heads.
Young people are the first victims. Their sexual values are not adopted
from family systems any longer, but from the top twenty songs
pumped out by sexist backward recording artists. These songs are
brought to you by folk, Black or white, who don’t even consider
what is good for Afrikan people. It is a profit industry, simply put,
any other illusion will only confuse.
Those who want to slip past the hundreds of others who record and
release records weekly must please white folks’ stereotypical image
of Afrikan sexuality. It is a racket, a corrupt business run by master
Culture Bandits!
That is the easiest way to get a record deal, that is the easiest way to
get on the radio and that is the easiest way to get print coverage. Sex
sells because that is all that is allowed to sell. It is the rule that all our
young would-be artists know, it is a rule the Dance Hall artists know
in the teeming ghettos of Jamaica. The ticket out is to sing about
being “Extra Naked,”  like Shabba Ranks or about “Murder She


--- PAGE 21 ---
21
Wrote” or maybe something about being some kind of “Mack
Daddy.”
Why even unisexed Michael Jackson, who plays meek and mild and
soft spoken when he is not performing, grabs his crotch, grinds his
butt and comes off with machoism to be included in his rhythms.
Program directors and radio consultants and others control the sounds
we listen to and they are directly responsible for what we hear. A
classic example is Hip Hop artists Naughty by Nature, who I feel are
one of the most talented groups to appear in sometime. However,
their hit tune “OPP” was the rage, but the tune was so sexually
backward and childishly negative that you had to try to suppress its
notions that help manufacture negative behavior in the heads of our
youth.
The point is, the vamp was so down that any decent rhyme would
have caught on and delivered a hit. Their talent blew through on a
master rap called Ghetto Bastard (also called Everything is Gonna
Be Alright), which held more truth and attitude then ten thousand
sociology studies, ten million social worker reports and a bagful of
parole officer lies. This master piece didn’t get the attention it deserved
but it was pure Black art.
It alerted me to the fact that many of our youth have the talent to
make dynamic contributions to our understanding of their reality.
Yet, we all know the big money is in the sexploitation music that is
cheap and artless. We also know, that our young people are exploited.
After they are used to project what our enemies need to perpetuate,
the great white lie, they usually end up penniless and abandoned.
Even if they are enriched, to sell your people for a dollar is treason.
Yeah, I understand some of us don’t know any better. Consequently,
its time we pull their coats, and if they continue to function with the
genocidal programs of the enemy, they must be exposed and their
careers destroyed. Our culture belongs to the collective and not to
individual clowns and clownettes.


--- PAGE 22 ---
22
Queen Latifah who discovered Naughty By Nature knows better.
However, the money meant more to her than honor, dignity and
service. Therefore, I was not surprised when she took off the crowns
she was wearing and shifted to mini-skirted immaturity.
It is important to state, it is our fault as the adults, that the young folk
don’t know the time. When they go wrong we won’t step to them and
drop the vibe to keep them positive. Our lives are at stake and the
bastardizing of our culture, the watering down of our thing and the
death of our way will lead to the destruction of this mighty race....the
original race, the Afrikan Race!
Again radio and music rides with us in our cars, accompanies our
children while they’re doing their homework, pump out of our boom
boxes while we’re walking and plug directly into our ears as we
attempt to escape our environment and the hellos from friendly faces.
The crying love tunes, sexploitation songs, infidelity moanings,
harmonizing sexual begging drifts into our consciousness daily.
Creating a sexually backward people who can not maintain a decent
relationship without it crumbling in egos delivered by macho men
notions and soap opera queen ideas. Ya see, mass media produced
morons are created out of Afrikan people like clowns outta Mr. &
Mrs. Potato Head.
This is not to say music for fun and music for romance don’t have its
place, but it is to say that 99% of the music we hear don’t deal with
the real deal. That is of course, the struggle for our liberation against
those who are committing genocide against our people globally.
Manufactured foolishness can only create manufactured fools. Our
culture has taken a beating and one dimensional musical products
dominate the air time and our people’s reality. As of now, our music
is compartmentalized like Afrika, carved up by the same people who
are depopulating the earth of people of color. Most are down with
“OPP”, and few are down with liberation.


--- PAGE 23 ---
23
In our heads the music helps to draw images for us. Women, develop
a stereotype image of men and men buy into the projected illusions
of our women. And we function on these externally developed images
as if they are real. Our values are scarred, because many of us want
to be into what the majority is into and the image of what the majority
is dealing with most times Is misrepresented.
If you don’t think our teenage boys and girls don’t get hot listing to
sexual moaning and groaning, you’ve been old too long. If you don’t
think Black adults don’t get dozens of sexual reminders a day, while
they are being influenced to slip out on their mate, you are really
functioning on a Sesame Street level.
I wonder do we critically review the things that affect our lives or are
we pushed along by other people’s hypes, public relations and mis-
information. If we did check things out deeper, I’m sure we would
organize to clean up the musical diet fed to us by radio. In addition,
we would protect those who are loyal to us and punish those who
damage our positive thrust for freedom.
In Culture Bandits V ol.1, I praised Public Enemy. I still feel that the
work done by that group and Boogie Down Productions (under the
direction of KRS-ONE) will go down in history as a dynamic use of
culture to uplift the consciousness of our people.
They should be respected for what they achieved in bringing
nationalism to the front and exalting Malcolm X as the revolutionary
icon needed to help our people outta this “Dope Jam.” Any historian
who over looks their contribution has no idea what has transpired.
They deserve credit, they earned it.
However, the update is not positive. Several developments have
decreased their impact and sent their contributions in reverse:
1. After an interview with Public Enemy’s Minister of
Information, Professor Griff, a small-time reporter captured
what he thought was career building quotes. Griff spoke on


--- PAGE 24 ---
24
the so-called Jews with the reporter as an aside. The reporter
pumped the story up and soon there was an attack on Griff by
the powerful Zionists.
What happened next caught the community by surprise. Public
Enemy, who used a lot of revolutionary theatre in their act,
twirling uzis, high stepping military precision, and martial
arts demonstrates, backed down. More importantly, after the
artificial controversy continued leader Chuck D laid these
lines “I got so much trouble on my mind, refuse to lose, here’s
your ticket, let the drummer get wicked.” And just like that
Griff was gone, set-a drift as the so-called Jews dogged his
trail. There is a difference between revolutionary theatre and
the real deal. Griff is strong and back recording and making
videos, that is a brother we need to support because of his
loyalty to the race and principled stance against our enemies.
2. The dismissal of Professor Griff made many wonder was
Public Enemy for real? They had earned the love of the people,
were they now back peddling? Yes, they were! Next, they
recorded with a nasty looking white rock group called Anthrax.
They even toured with them, which meant that Black youth
had to be exposed to Anthrax as a reward for their loyalty to
P.E.
3. The final diss hurt most of all when members of the Bomb
Squad, P.E.’s production team, recorded and promoted a group
call “Young Black Teenagers.” The problem was that the group
was white with one pale member wearing dreadlocks down
his face. Tell me, how do you get from a leadership position
in the Black struggie to the role of a bridge for the filthy
Culture Bandits and their carnivorous children? ...Money?
Obviously, we should support Professor Griff and turn away from
Public Enemy until they return to the party. They may never return if
they continue to work as a tool of white supremacy. This criticism is
with affection, because we love all of our people. They are young


--- PAGE 25 ---
25
and have a track record that has been helpful. However, it seems that
once they became manipulated to attempt to destroy their Homeboy,
Professor Griff, they have been tumbling down-hill ever since. Yeah,
rolling down-hill with pockets full.
Meanwhile KRS-ONE has a good mind and has also been an
important player in the political and culture development of some of
our young people. But again, not understanding “Race First,” he has
integrated his shit. The impact is gone. Malcolm X taught us that “If
you take Black coffee and lighten it up with white cream, what kept
you awake will now lull you to sleep.”
At the end of his excellent live video KRS-ONE told the world he
was leader of the revolution in Japanese. Look, revolution is not a
word to play with as Public Enemy witnessed. Our young people can
be daring, they can be fearless and they also can be silly and
reactionary. We must keep the lines of communication open and help
them back on the right track. Malcolm said, “if you knew the definition
of revolution, you’d crawl back into the alley and get outta the way,
you wouldn’t use that word.”
Well white folk know what the real definition is and they come at us
hard core. It is necessary for the youth to work with established
brothers and sisters in the community to drive the race forward. No,
not the so-called national establishment flunkies like Carl Rowan,
Jesse Jackson, Colin Powell, Vernon Jordan, Roy Innis, Wilson
Goode, Coretta Scott King, assorted religious types and other tools
of white supremacy.
I’m talking about the brothers and sisters who work for the people
everyday and whose names are not promoted in the media. We all
need to come together and work to solve the problems of our people.
Revolution is not child’s play, but our only hope.
Outta Georgia, Arrested Development came kicking “rural rap.” This
earthiness worked as they rap/sang about things important to us. With
Baba (father) in the middle of the group, healthy ancestor worship,


--- PAGE 26 ---
26
an Afrikan cultural base and spirituality, they forced their way into
our lives.
Their musical offering “Revolution” was the highlight of the Malcolm
X movie. Let us hope they remain loyal to our people and their
struggles. I caution them from our historical experiences, that poor
whites are as dangerous and more deadly than their brothers. Please
do not take our love and throw it back in our faces for money as
others have done. Let us all collectively manufacture the environment
for the struggle we have ahead of us.
The enemy will come at you with money, opportunity, ego tripping
exposure and coercion to misdirect your youthful energy. Stay loyal
to us, all we have for you is love and a positive position in our
illustrious history. Peter Tosh sang “live clean let your works be seen,
stand firm or you gonna fever.”
Listen, I can hear the echoes of our enemies laughter bouncing off
the insides of their empty heads. Let them relax and miss the gathering
storm. Let us keep moving and growing at the pace that we are now
and one day [soon] they will lean their heads back to cackle and lose
them.
We must organize our information to produce consciousness in our
people. We must research and find out how to establish our own radio
counter-attack.
Cost effective methods of radio communications are critical, let us
put together radio co-operatives to establish what we need. Also, it is
critical to learn and then teach our people how to use shortwave radios
to round out our global information diet. News from around the world
is managed to keep us unaware, backward and apathetic toward our
people globally.
Students of communications must rally around the community,
provide expertise and creativity to our problem. How can we measure
the global effectiveness of the Black Holocaust without a
communication arsenal to strike back!

