=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: devilinthegrove-130812180033-phpapp01.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 1647
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:00:03.669145
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
DEVIL IN THE
GROVE
Thurgood Marshall, the
Groveland Boys,
and the Dawn of a New
America
GILBERT KING


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
Dedication
For Lorna, Maddie, and
Liv
and in memory of
Matthew P. (Matty)
Boylan


--- PAGE 5 ---
Contents
Cover
Title Page
Dedication
 
PROLOGUE
CHAPTER 1: MINK SLIDE
CHAPTER 2: SUGAR HILL
CHAPTER 3: GET TO
PUSHIN’
CHAPTER 4: NIGGER IN A
PIT
CHAPTER 5: TROUBLE


--- PAGE 6 ---
FIXIN’ TO START
CHAPTER 6: A LITTLE
BOLITA
CHAPTER 7: WIPE THIS
PLACE CLEAN
CHAPTER 8: A
CHRISTMAS CARD
CHAPTER 9: DON’T
SHOOT, WHITE MAN
CHAPTER 10: QUITE A
HOSE WIELDER
CHAPTER 11: BAD EGG
CHAPTER 12: ATOM
SMASHER


--- PAGE 7 ---
CHAPTER 13: IN ANY
FIGHT SOME FALL
CHAPTER 14: THIS IS A
RAPE CASE
CHAPTER 15: YOU HAVE
PISSED IN MY WHISKEY
CHAPTER 16: IT’S A
FUNNY THING
CHAPTER 17: NO MAN
ALIVE OR TO BE BORN
CHAPTER 18: ALL OVER
THE PLACE, LIKE RATS
CHAPTER 19: PRIVATE
PARTS


--- PAGE 8 ---
CHAPTER 20: A GENIUS
HERE BEFORE US
CHAPTER 21: THE
COLORED WAY
CHAPTER 22: A PLACE IN
THE SUN
EPILOGUE
A NOTE ON SOURCES
SELECTED
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 
About the Author


--- PAGE 9 ---
Also by Gilbert King
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher
NOTES


--- PAGE 10 ---
Prologue
Flag outside the NAACP offices at 69
Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
(
Library of


--- PAGE 11 ---
Congress, Prints & Photographs
Division, Visual Materials from the
NAACP Records
)
 
A
LL HIS LIFE,
 it seemed, he’d been staring
out the windows of trains rumbling toward
the unknown. Again, he was seated in the
Jim Crow coach, hitched directly behind
the engines, where the heavy heat bore the
smell of diesel. Still, the lawyer sat proud
in his smart double-breasted suit, a freshly
pressed handkerchief dancing out of his
pocket, as the haunting Southern landscape
of cypress swamps, cotton fields, and
whitewashed, tin-roofed shanties


--- PAGE 12 ---
flickered by. Traveling alone, he hunched
his six-foot, two-inch frame over case
files; a cigarette dangling from his lips, he
scribbled some notes on a yellow legal
pad. He would rewrite the draft before he
typed it up later; he worked meticulously.
A federal clerk once told him that with
just one look at the smudges or erasures
on a lawyer’s pleading he’d know if it
was written by a white man or a Negro. It
was a remark Thurgood Marshall never
forgot. In cases like his there was too
much at stake for him to be filing any
“nigger briefs.”
The trains he rode bore grand names
like the Orange Blossom Special, the
Silver Meteor, and the Champion, and
their rhythms ran in Marshall’s Baltimore


--- PAGE 13 ---
blood. Both his father, Willie, and his
uncle, Fearless, had been porters on the
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, and to help
pay for college, young Thurgood himself
had worked as a waiter in a B&O dining
car. The railroads were for him and his
family a source of pride, and status, but on
trips like these, when he was riding alone,
they also summoned in Marshall an old
sadness. His wife, Buster, unable to bear
the children he had longed for, had one
year for his birthday given him the electric
train set she had hoped someday to present
to her husband and their son. With the
train, and with an engineer’s hat perched
atop his head, Marshall entertained the
boys in their Harlem apartment building
instead.


--- PAGE 14 ---
By the mid-1940s, Marshall, the
grandson of a mixed-race slave named
Thorney Good Marshall, was engineering
the greatest social transformation in
America since the Reconstruction era. He
had already devoted more than a decade
of his career to overcoming the “inherent
defects” of a Constitution that had
allowed, by law, social injustices against
blacks, who had been denied not only the
right to vote but also equal rights and
opportunities in education, housing, and
employment. With his far-reaching
triumphs in landmark cases he argued
before the U.S. Supreme Court, Thurgood
Marshall would indeed redefine justice in
a multiracial nation and become, as one
civil rights pioneer described him, the


--- PAGE 15 ---
Founding Father of the New America.
Before achieving those victories,
however, Marshall fought countless
battles for human rights in stifling
antebellum courthouses where white
supremacy ruled. Neither judges nor juries
in the Jim Crow South had much interest
in Marshall’s nuanced constitutional
arguments. To Marshall, the
representation of powerless blacks falsely
accused of capital crimes became his
opportunity to prove that equality in
courtrooms was every bit as vital to the
American model of democracy as was the
fight for equality in classrooms and in
voting booths.
On Marshall’s journeys, when the moon
lit the passing landscapes of the South, he


--- PAGE 16 ---
customarily drank bourbon, and he
enjoyed the company of the night porters
—they’d joke and talk together in
segregated cars atop suitcases and the
occasional casket. Or, sitting in the coach
car, Marshall would drift in and out of
sleep to the lullaby of the locomotive, its
plaintive cry announcing every crossing as
it rolled onward, southward, closer and
closer to benighted towns billeting hostile
prosecutors, malicious police, and the Ku
Klux Klan. In the rhythm of the rails came
the whipping of the wind as again the
dream descended on him, and in the wind
the massive black flag unfurled outside the
offices of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), and as a pall fell over


--- PAGE 17 ---
Manhattan’s Fifth Avenue, he read again
the message, in stark white letters on the
flag’s flapping black field: “A Man Was
Lynched Yesterday.”
The photographs were always
horrifying: shirtless black victims, their
bodies bloodied, eyes bulging from their
sockets. Of all the lynching photos
Marshall had seen, though, it was the
image of Rubin Stacy strung up by his
neck on a Florida pine tree that haunted
him most when he traveled at night into the
South. It wasn’t the indentation of the rope
that had cut into the flesh below the dead
man’s chin, or even the bullet holes
riddling his body, that caused Marshall,
drenched now in sweat, to stir in his
sleep. It was the virtually angelic faces of


--- PAGE 18 ---
the white children, all of them dressed in
their Sunday clothes, as they posed,
grinning and smiling, in a semicircle
around Rubin Stacy’s dangling corpse. In
that horrid indifference to human suffering
lay the legacy of yet another generation of
white children, who, in turn, would
without conscience prolong the agony of
an entire other race. “I could see my dead
body lying in some place where they let
white kids out of Sunday School to come
and look at me, and rejoice,” Marshall
said of the dream.
Seventeen-year-old Norma Lee Padgett
had that look—chin held high, lips pursed
—when in her best dress she slowly rose
from the witness box to identify for the
jury the three Groveland, Florida, boys


--- PAGE 19 ---
whom she had accused of rape. Like the
“sworn truth” of the fictitious Mayella
Ewell, the white teenage accuser in
Harper Lee’s 
To Kill a Mockingbird
,
Norma Lee’s dramatic testimony against
the Groveland Boys tore a county apart.
Her pale index finger extended, it dipped
from boy to boy as she spoke out each
name, like a young schoolteacher counting
heads in class, and her breathy cadence
sent a chill through the courtroom.
“ . . . the nigger Shepherd . . . the
nigger Irvin . . . the nigger Greenlee . . .”
And like Harper Lee’s heroic lawyer,
Atticus Finch, Thurgood Marshall found
himself at the center of a firestorm. It
would bring the National Guard to Lake
County, Florida, where mob violence


--- PAGE 20 ---
drove hundreds of blacks from their lives
in Groveland, and in the aftermath it
would prompt four sensational murders of
innocents, among them a prominent
NAACP executive. Despite the fact that
Marshall brought the Groveland case
before the U.S. Supreme Court, it is barely
mentioned in civil rights history, law
texts, or the many biographies of
Thurgood Marshall. Nonetheless, there is
not a Supreme Court justice who served
with Marshall or a lawyer who clerked
for him that did not hear his renditions,
always colorfully told, of the Groveland
story. The case was key to Marshall’s
perception of himself as a crusader for
civil rights, as a 
lawyer
, willing to stand
up to racist judges and prosecutors,


--- PAGE 21 ---
murderous law enforcement officials, and
the Klan in order to save the lives of
young men falsely accused of capital
crimes—even if it killed him. And
Groveland nearly did.
By the fall of 1951, Marshall had
already filed and had begun trying in
lower courts what would become his most
famous case, 
Brown v. Board of
Education
, when he was again riding the
rails toward Groveland. It was on such a
journey to the South that one of Marshall’s
colleagues noticed the “battle fatigue”
setting in on the lawyer. “You know,”
Marshall said to him, “sometimes I get
awfully tired of trying to save the white
man’s soul.” Battling personal demons as
well as the devils who brought bullets,


--- PAGE 22 ---
dynamite, and nitroglycerin into the
Groveland fray, the lawyer saw death all
around him in central Florida. So intense
did the violence in Groveland become that
on one of Marshall’s visits, J. Edgar
Hoover insisted that FBI agents provide
the NAACP attorney with around-the-
clock protection. Usually, though,
Marshall negotiated Florida alone, despite
the number of death threats he daily
received.
A fellow NAACP lawyer thought of
Marshall as a “suicidal crusader,”
because he involved himself in such
explosive criminal cases in the South at an
exceptionally crucial time in the history of
the blacks’ struggle for equal opportunity.
Suicidal or not, Marshall was


--- PAGE 23 ---
unquestionably irreplaceable in the
mission of the burgeoning civil rights
movement. And Marshall’s colleague too
got swept up in the enthusiasm and
commitment. “Thurgood says he needs
me,” the NAACP associate told his wife.
“If he needs me, I’m going. If I get killed, I
get killed. But I gotta be on that train. . . .”
Marshall would later say, “There is
very little truth in the old refrain that one
cannot legislate equality. Laws not only
provide concrete benefits, they can even
change the hearts of men—some men,
anyhow—for good or evil.” Thurgood
Marshall might never have spoken those
words if he hadn’t defended the
Groveland Boys. The case made a lasting
impact on both him and the NAACP’s


--- PAGE 24 ---
Legal Defense Fund. It also became the
impetus behind the NAACP’s capital
punishment program, which eventually led
to the Supreme Court ruling that capital
punishment was unconstitutional as well
as to the Court’s later decision to
invalidate the death penalty for rape.
The victories came only after many train
rides to towns where no hotels or
restaurants accommodated people of
Marshall’s race. Local blacks would
welcome him, though, with hospitality and
tears of gratitude. They’d clean their
houses spotless for his stays. He’d join his
hosts at their dinner tables and tell them
stories from his travels that brought
laughter to the night. He’d eat their modest
offerings of salt pork and poke salad with


--- PAGE 25 ---
such aplomb you’d think he was dining on
his favorite she-crab soup over drinks
with friends back in Harlem. The women
would have lunches packed and delivered
to him at court each day. Broken-down
cars would get “glued together” to taxi
him back and forth. Later in the day, word
would spread: “Men are needed to sit up
all night with a sick friend.” You’d hear it
whispered everywhere. They’d all know
what it meant. They were lining up armed
guards to keep Marshall safe from night-
riding Klansmen while he slept.
Alice Stovall, Marshall’s secretary at
the NAACP, recalled the effect Marshall
had on blacks when he showed up at
courthouses in small Southern towns.
“They came in their jalopy cars and their


--- PAGE 26 ---
overalls,” she recounted. “All they wanted
to do—if they could—was just touch him,
just touch him, 
Lawyer Marshall
, as if he
were a god. These poor people who had
come miles to be there.”
Southern juries might be stacked against
blacks, and the judges might be biased, but
Thurgood Marshall was demonstrating in
case after case that their word was not the
last, that in the U.S. Supreme Court the
injustice in their decisions and verdicts
could be reversed. He was “a lawyer that
a white man would listen to” and a black
man could trust. No wonder that across the
South, in their darkest, most demoralizing
hours, when falsely accused men sat in
jails, when women and children stood
before the ashy ruins of mob-torched


--- PAGE 27 ---
homes, the spirits of black citizens would
be lifted with two words whispered in
defiance and hope:
“Thurgood’s coming.”


--- PAGE 28 ---
CHAPTER 1: MINK
SLIDE
Interior of the Morton Funeral Home,
Columbia, Tennessee, showing vandalism of
the race riots in February 1946. (
Library of
Congress, Prints & Photographs Division,
Visual Materials from the NAACP Records
)


--- PAGE 29 ---
November 18, 1946
I
F THAT SON
 of a bitch contradicts me
again, I’m going to wrap a chair around
his goddamned head.”
One acquittal after another had left
Tennessee district attorney general Paul F.
Bumpus shaking his head in frustration
over the NAACP lawyers, and now
Thurgood Marshall was hoping to free the
last of the twenty-five blacks accused of
rioting and attempted murder of police in
Columbia, Tennessee. The sun had been
down for hours, and the start of a cool,
dark night had settled over the poolrooms,
barbershops, and soda fountains on East
Eighth Street in the area known as the


--- PAGE 30 ---
Bottom, the rickety, black side of
Columbia, where, nine months earlier, the
terror had begun. Just blocks away, on the
news that a verdict had been reached, the
lawyers were settling back into their
chairs, fretfully waiting for the twelve
white men on the jury to return to the
Maury County courtroom. They’d been
deliberating for little more than an hour,
but the lead counsel for the defense,
Thurgood Marshall, looked over his
shoulder and knew immediately that
something wasn’t right. Throughout the
proceedings of the Columbia Race Riot
trials, the “spit-spangled” courtrooms had
been packed with tobacco-chewing
Tennesseans who had come to see justice
meted out. But the overall-clad spectators


--- PAGE 31 ---
were equally intrigued by Marshall and
his fellow NAACP lawyers: by the
strange sight of “those niggers up there
wearing coats and talking back to the
judge just like they were white men.”
Marshall was struck by the eeriness of
the quiet, nearly deserted courtroom. The
prosecution’s table had been aflutter with
the activity of lawyers and assistants
throughout the trial, but none of them had
returned for the verdict. Only the smooth-
talking Bumpus had come back. All
summer long he’d carried himself with the
confidence that his Negro lawyer
opponents were no match for him
intellectually. But by relentlessly attacking
the state’s case in a cool, methodical
manner, Marshall and his associates had


--- PAGE 32 ---
worn Bumpus down, and had already won
acquittals for twenty-three of the black
men on trial. The verdicts were stunning,
and because the national press had defined
the riots as “the first major racial
confrontation following World War II,”
Bumpus was no longer facing the prospect
of humiliation just in his home county. The
nation was watching and he had begun to
unravel in the courtroom, becoming more
frustrated, sarcastic, and mean-spirited as
the trial progressed.
“Lose your head, lose your case,” was
the phrase Marshall’s mentor, Charles
Hamilton Houston, had drilled into him in
law school. Marshall could tell that his
adversary, seated alone at the
prosecutor’s table, was in the foulest of


--- PAGE 33 ---
moods as he was forced to contemplate
the political ramifications of the
unthinkable: his failure to win a single
conviction against black lawyers
defending black men accused of the
attempted murder of white police in
Maury County, Tennessee.
The shock from the summer’s not-guilty
verdicts had worn off by November, and
Marshall sensed that the white people of
Columbia were becoming angrier and
more resentful of the fact that this
Northern Negro was still in town, making
a mockery of the Tennessee courts. He’d
watched patiently as Bumpus stacked the
deck in his own favor by excusing every
potential black jury member in the Maury
County pool (there were just three)


--- PAGE 34 ---
through peremptory challenges that did not
require him to show cause for dismissal.
And Marshall had paid close attention to
the desperation in Bumpus’s closing
statement to the jury, when the prosecutor
warned them that if they did not convict,
“law enforcement would break down and
wives of jurymen would die at the hands
of Negro assassins.” None of it surprised
Marshall. He was used to, and even
welcomed, such tactics from his
opponents because they often helped to
establish solid grounds for appeals. But
Marshall also noticed that the atmosphere
around the Columbia courthouse was
growing more volatile.
A political cartoonist for the 
Pittsburgh
Courier
 now doing public relations work


--- PAGE 35 ---
for the NAACP had been poking around
the courthouse and had come to believe
that the telephone wires were tapped and
that the defense lawyers were in danger.
Learning this, Marshall refused to discuss
any case details or sleeping arrangements
over the phones, and the PR representative
reported back to Walter White, the
executive secretary of the NAACP, that
“the situation in the Columbia Court
House is so grave that anything may
happen at any time.” White issued a
memorandum to NAACP attorneys,
demanding “no telephone calls be put
through to Columbia or even to Nashville
[where Marshall was staying] unless and
until Thurgood says that it is safe to do
so.” White noted that “we are dealing with


--- PAGE 36 ---
a very desperate crowd” and want nothing
to “jeopardize the lives of anyone,
particularly persons as close and as
important to us as Thurgood and his three
associates.” White even contacted the U.S.
attorney general’s office and warned that
if anything happened to Marshall while he
was in Tennessee, it would “create a
nation-wide situation of no mean
proportions.”
Marshall’s associates didn’t need
Walter White to warn them of any danger
they might be in. They were local
Tennessee lawyers who had investigated
enough lynchings in these parts to know
that the death threats they received from
the citizens of Columbia were to be taken
seriously. Sitting to one side of Marshall


--- PAGE 37 ---
at the table was a forty-seven-year-old
poker-playing highbrow with a faint
Caribbean accent named Zephaniah
Alexander Looby, who came to Tennessee
by way of the British West Indies. At
fourteen years of age and living in
Dominica, Looby found work as a cabin
boy aboard a whaling ship, and two years
later, in 1914, “broke and bedraggled,” he
jumped ship in New Bedford,
Massachusetts, with the dream of
becoming a lawyer. He eventually
received his degree from Columbia Law
School in New York and taught economics
at Fisk University in Nashville until the
call of civil rights law beckoned and
Marshall put him on the Columbia case.
To Marshall’s left was the lone white


--- PAGE 38 ---
attorney on the case, the young, hotheaded
Maurice Weaver, who reveled in the
danger of standing up to white authority
and racism; on more than one occasion
throughout the Columbia Race Riot trials
he had nearly come to blows with
prosecutors. Marshall and Looby enjoyed
having Weaver around, in part because the
two black attorneys were inherently polite
and gracious in court whereas Weaver
was something of a lightning rod for white
anger. Whenever prosecutors or witnesses
referred to a black as “that nigger,”
Weaver loudly interrupted with
objections, insisting that the person be
referred to as “Mr. or Mrs.” for the
record. Bumpus seethed.
Weaver also endeared himself to


--- PAGE 39 ---
Marshall because the Tennessee lawyer
liked to drink, though at one point during
the trial, his provocative nature had
become not only distracting but dangerous,
and Marshall was forced to intervene.
Weaver’s teenage and very pregnant wife,
Virginia, decided that she’d like to see her
husband at work and asked to ride along
with Looby’s associates and black
reporters. Locals were speechless when
the pregnant white girl hopped out of a car
packed with Negroes and marched straight
into court. Marshall, observing the
commotion, pulled her aside and told her
to take a Greyhound bus to court next time.
“You almost started another lynching here
in the courthouse,” he warned.
As the jury of twelve began filing back


--- PAGE 40 ---
into the courtroom, Looby and Weaver
searched their tired, sullen faces for a hint
of the verdict. Marshall was on edge; he
remembered how colleagues and friends
had urged him not to return to Columbia.
Over that “terrible summer of 1946,” he’d
been running a constant fever while
working in courtrooms that had no
bathrooms or drinking fountains for
blacks. The long hours, relentless travel,
and Tennessee heat were taking their toll,
but Marshall would not slow down. By
July the lawyer’s body had finally wilted.
Mid-case, he succumbed to exhaustion and
a debilitating pneumonic virus that led to a
long stint in a Harlem hospital, followed
by weeks of doctor-ordered bed rest.
Still, from his bed, and against everyone’s


--- PAGE 41 ---
wishes, Marshall continued to lead late-
night telephone strategy sessions with
Looby and Weaver until he could no
longer stay away—and no one was going
to stop him from boarding a train to
Nashville. “The Columbia case,” he said,
“is too important to mess up. And I, for
one . . . am determined that it will not be
messed up.”
M
ARSHALL WAS IN
 New York on
February 26, 1946, when a desperate call
from Tennessee came into the NAACP
offices, describing a full-blown race riot
in Columbia. An emergency meeting was
called and Marshall learned that the
trouble began the previous morning when


--- PAGE 42 ---
a black woman, Mrs. Gladys Stephenson,
went into a Columbia appliance store with
her nineteen-year-old son, James, to
complain about being overcharged for
shoddy repairs to a radio. After loudly
proclaiming that she’d take the radio
elsewhere, Gladys exited the store with
her son. But twenty-eight-year-old radio
repair apprentice Billy Fleming did not
appreciate the threatening look he got from
James on the way out.
“What you stop back there for, boy, to
get your teeth knocked out?” Fleming
asked, before racing over and punching
James in the back of the head.
James’s boyish looks were deceiving.
A welterweight on the U.S. Navy boxing
team, he barely flinched and countered


--- PAGE 43 ---
with several punches to Fleming’s face,
sending him crashing through a plate-glass
window at the front of the store.
Bleeding profusely from his leg, the
army vet came up fighting, and other
whites joined the melee, shouting, “Kill
the bastards! Kill every one of them!” One
man went after Gladys, slapping and
kicking her to the ground and blacking her
eye. A few minutes later police arrived
and carted mother and son off to jail. After
pleading guilty to public fighting and
agreeing to pay a fine of fifty dollars each,
the two were about to be released when
Billy Fleming’s father convinced officials
to charge both Gladys and James with the
attempted murder of his son; the two were
held by police in separate cells. As the


--- PAGE 44 ---
news spread that James Stephenson had
gotten the better of Billy Fleming and sent
him wounded to the hospital, Maury
County became galvanized. A mob began
to gather around town and outside the jail,
and by late afternoon the sheriff was
hearing talk that a group of men were
planning to spring the “Stephenson niggers
out of the jail and hang them.”
Carloads of young, white workers from
the phosphate and hosiery mills in nearby
Culleoka (where the Flemings lived)
began arriving at the square, and more
volatile World War II veterans joined
them. Rumors that rope had been
purchased had reached the Bottom, and
Julius Blair, a seventy-six-year-old black
patriarch and owner of Blair’s Drug


--- PAGE 45 ---
Store, had heard enough. He’d seen
firsthand what white mobs in Columbia
were capable of in recent years, around
that courthouse down the block. He’d been
there when they’d taken one man out of
jail and lynched him back in ’27, and
more recently, there was young Cordie
Cheek. The community was still raw over
Cordie’s killing. The nineteen-year-old
had been falsely accused of assaulting the
twelve-year-old sister of a white boy he
had been fighting with. The boy paid his
sister a dollar to tell police that Cordie
had tried to rape her, but a grand jury
refused to indict and Cordie was released
and abducted that same day by county
officials, who took him to a cedar tree and
hanged him. Julius Blair was well aware


--- PAGE 46 ---
that it was Magistrate C. Hayes Denton’s
car that had driven Cordie to his death;
yet, undeterred, Blair marched into
Denton’s office and demanded that Gladys
and James Stephenson be released. “Let
us have them, Squire,” Blair told him.
“We are not going to have any more social
lynchings in Maury County.”
Blair managed to convince the sheriff to
release the Stephensons into his custody
and arranged for them to be dropped off at
his drugstore early that evening. By then,
though, blacks in the Bottom had gone past
being intimidated by the hooting and
honking of armed whites circling the area
in cars; they weren’t going to stand
passively by this time while another
Cordie Cheek lynching unfolded. More


--- PAGE 47 ---
than a hundred men, many of them war
veterans, took to the streets with guns of
their own, determined to fight back at the
first sight of a mob moving toward the
Bottom. Armed and angry, they told the
sheriff in no uncertain terms that they were
ready if whites came down to the Bottom.
“We fought for freedom overseas,” one
told him, “and we’ll fight for it here.”
True to his word and hoping to avoid
any more trouble, the sheriff released the
Stephensons that evening, and Blair
arranged for the two of them to be
whisked out of town, “blankets over their
heads” for their protection. “Uptown, they
are getting together for something,” Blair
told them.
The nearby white mobs meanwhile did


--- PAGE 48 ---
not disperse, and blacks in the Bottom
were growing more fearful as the night
progressed. Drinking beer and circling in
cars, whites fired randomly into “Mink
Slide,” as they derisively referred to the
Bottom. Blacks, drinking beer on rooftops,
were also firing in response and by bad
chance hit the cars of both a California
tourist and a black undertaker. When half
a dozen Columbia police eventually
moved into Mink Slide, a crowd of whites
followed behind. They were welcomed by
shouts of “Here they come!” and “Halt!”
and then, in the confusion, came a
command, “Fire!” and shots were
exploding from all directions. Four police
were struck with buckshot before they
retreated.


--- PAGE 49 ---
Reports of the skirmish roused whites
around town. Columbia’s former fire chief
headed toward Mink Slide with a half
gallon of gasoline and the intent to “burn
them out,” but he was shot in the leg by
Negro snipers as he stole down an alley.
With the arrival of state troopers and
highway patrol reinforcements, the whites
finally outnumbered the blacks and moved
into Mink Slide, where they ransacked
businesses until dawn, fired machine guns
into stores, and rounded up everyone in
sight. “You black sons of bitches,” one
patrolman shouted, “you had your-alls’
way last night, but we are going to have
ours this morning.”
Just after 6 a.m., gunfire from the street
rained into Sol (son of Julius) Blair’s


--- PAGE 50 ---
barbershop. “Rooster Bill” Pillow and
“Papa” Lloyd Kennedy, hiding in the back,
saw armed officers coming and were said
to have fired a single shotgun blast before
they were overpowered and taken into
custody. They were stuffed with other
blacks from the Bottom into overcrowded
cells at the county jail and interrogated
without counsel for days. Two prisoners
were shot dead “trying to escape.”
Mary Morton had watched helplessly as
state patrolmen barged into her family’s
funeral home on East Eighth Street and
arrested her husband. From the street she
heard the sound of breaking glass and the
building being ransacked. A short time
later she saw the same officers, laughing
and joking, return to the street. Once they


--- PAGE 51 ---
were out of sight, Morton went inside to
discover the parlor furniture broken and
slashed, clothes torn to pieces, and the
entire interior doused with embalming
fluid. With horror, she laid eyes on a
defaced casket. Photographed soon after,
the image of that casket would be
published in newspapers across the
country and ultimately come to symbolize
the Columbia riot of 1946. Across its lid,
in large letters, “KKK” was crudely
scrawled in chalk.
Mary Morton tried to pick up the phone,
but patrolmen caught her, cursed her, and
threatened to throw the phone out on the
street. Police had declared war on the
black citizens of Columbia, and the
highway patrolmen, instead of trying to


--- PAGE 52 ---
bring order to the town, had joined in with
vigilante mobs. The Tennessee State
Guard had cordoned off the area, but they
did nothing to stop the destruction and
violence in Mink Slide. The Maury
County jail had become a deadly
destination for Mary Morton’s husband
and other leaders of the black community.
Officials would soon shut down telephone
service into and out of Mink Slide, but not
before Mary Morton managed to make her
call. After the police moved on, she
phoned a friend in Nashville. She
implored him to get word to the NAACP
immediately.
Nine hundred miles north, in New York,
a lanky lawyer in suspenders was called
into a meeting. He grabbed his coffee and


--- PAGE 53 ---
settled into a chair. He heard another all-
too-familiar story of violence and cruelty
in the South, and he knew that once again
order would be restored, as always, with
blacks’ “blood running in the gutters.” An
editorial in the 
Columbia Daily Herald
proclaimed that the “situation is in the
hands of the state troops and state police.
. . . The white people of the South . . . will
not tolerate any racial disturbances
without resenting it, which means
bloodshed. The Negro has not a chance of
gaining supremacy over a sovereign
people and the sooner the better element
of the Negro race realize this, the better
off the race will be.” In Marshall’s early
days at the NAACP, emergency meetings
would sometimes end with the unfurling of


--- PAGE 54 ---
the ill-omened black flag, alerting New
Yorkers that yet another man had been
lynched. The flag’s gloomy stain over the
city usually meant that Marshall would be
back on a train, alone, again riding toward
trouble.
And nine hundred miles south, in
Columbia, Tennessee, where the town’s
blacks were holed up in their homes and
jail cells, there rose whispers of relief:
the lawyer was coming.
T
HE TWELVE
 white
 men on the jury took
their seats in the box, and the foreman rose
to announce the verdict against Rooster
Bill Pillow for shooting and wounding a
state highway patrolman. The courtroom


--- PAGE 55 ---
was still.
“Not guilty.”
Marshall, Looby, and Weaver sat in
quiet shock. In the last acquittals, Weaver
had loudly slapped a defendant’s knee in
excitement and leapt from his chair to
shake hands with jurors who appeared to
be just as stunned as everyone else in the
courtroom. “This makes me proud to be an
American!” he’d shouted. Marshall
wanted no celebratory outbursts this time.
Papa Kennedy’s verdict was next.
Marshall was expecting Kennedy would
be going to jail, for unlike Pillow,
Kennedy had been surly and impudent
throughout the trial—at one point telling
Bumpus to “shut up” in open court. But the
jury rejected the charge of attempted


--- PAGE 56 ---
murder and convicted Kennedy on a lesser
count that enabled him to leave the
courthouse free on bail.
Marshall and his lawyers rose from
their seats, wanting nothing more than to
leave town quickly. Because of the
constant threats and concerns for his
safety, Marshall had been staying in
Nashville, almost fifty miles to the north,
and driving back and forth each day with
Looby and Weaver. Tagging along was
reporter Harry Raymond, who’d been
covering the trial for the 
Daily Worker
, a
New York newspaper published by the
Communist Party of the USA. He
described the moments after the verdict as
tense, and he expected “something serious,
something of a violent nature, to happen.”


--- PAGE 57 ---
On his way to telegraph the verdict to his
newspaper, Raymond noticed one
agitated, heavyset spectator rushing out the
doors and declaring that something must
be done about the failure of the jury to
convict.
Raymond knew the NAACP lawyers
had been threatened with lynching, and
had been told their bodies would “wind
up in Duck River,” which they had to
cross each day on the way to court. The
white reporters covering the trial pleaded
with Raymond to leave town with them,
but he had a feeling the story of the
Columbia Race Riot hadn’t ended with the
verdicts, and he chose to ride back to
Nashville with Marshall and the NAACP
lawyers.


--- PAGE 58 ---
With their heads down, the lawyers
humbly exited the courtroom. Gone was
Marshall’s usual swagger. There were no
pictures or proclamations on the
courthouse steps. Marshall walked
briskly. Looby tried to keep up with him
as best he could on his bad leg; he’d spent
months in a cast after being struck by an
automobile and was still limping
noticeably. Marshall waited impatiently
as the lawyers, with Raymond tagging
along, hopped into Looby’s car. They
drove a few blocks to Mink Slide, where
they picked up soft drinks and crackers at
Julius Blair’s drugstore—the epicenter of
the race riots nine months earlier. After
some congratulatory handshakes, Blair
urged them to get moving. Marshall,


--- PAGE 59 ---
though, wanted to do some private
celebrating.
Maury County was a dry county, but
Marshall had become acquainted with the
local bootlegger, so there would be just
one stop to make before they headed north
to Nashville. The sedan stole down a dirt
road at just about eight o’clock in the
evening. The bootlegger, however, had
disappointing news. “I just sold the last
two bottles to the judge!” he told
Marshall. The four men headed for
Nashville, empty-handed.
With Marshall at the wheel, Raymond
beside him, and Looby, in part because of
his bad leg, in the back with Weaver amid
piles of law books and case files, the four
men heaved a collective sigh of relief as


--- PAGE 60 ---
they headed out of Columbia. They had
seen the signs posted around town during
the trials:
NIGGER READ AND RUN. DON’T LET THE
SUN GO DOWN ON YOU HERE. IF YOU
CAN’T READ, RUN ANYHOW!
To Marshall, they recalled a message he
had received mid-trial from Walter White:
“Take care of yourself and keep your feet
in running order.”
The sedan had just crossed a bridge
over Duck River when they came upon a
car parked in the middle of the road.
Marshall honked the horn and waited, but
the car did not move, so he drove around
it and headed for Nashville. Inside the
sedan it was quiet; unspoken went the fear


--- PAGE 61 ---
that something was amiss. Then, piercing
the silence, the sound of a siren screamed
from behind.
“Thurgood,” Looby said. “That siren.
It’s a police car!”
“Is it following us?” Marshall asked.
“Yes. It’s coming after us fast.”
“You’d better stop the car, Thurgood,”
Weaver said.
Marshall turned his head and was
troubled to see three cars following them.
The first, carrying highway patrolmen,
roared past the sedan and forced Marshall
to jam on the brakes. Quickly, eight men,
some in police uniforms and some in
civilian clothes, converged on the sedan.
Marshall saw that a few of them had their
hands on their guns while others shone


--- PAGE 62 ---
flashlights on the men inside. Reporter
Harry Raymond kept his mouth shut, but he
knew this wasn’t a routine police stop.
The lawyers and Raymond were
ordered out of the car. They froze as one
cop approached.
“You men the lawyers for the National
Association for the Advancement of
Colored People?”
“Yes, I’m Thurgood Marshall. This is
Maurice Weaver and this gentleman is
Alexander Looby.”
The cop looked them over. “Drinking,
eh?”
“I beg your pardon,” Marshall replied.
“I said you’ve been drinking.
Celebrating the acquittal. Driving while
intoxicated.”


--- PAGE 63 ---
Weaver interjected that this stop was a
civil rights violation and, furthermore, it
was obvious none of them had been
drinking.
“Stay out of this, Weaver,” the cop said.
“You’re a white man and have no business
in this car anyway.”
The police then asserted their right to
search the car and Weaver demanded that
they produce a warrant. Using flashlights,
Marshall was able to read the “John Doe”
warrant signed by a deputy sheriff,
charging the lawyers with transporting
whiskey in violation of “county local
option law.”
“Look,” Marshall told Weaver. “Let’s
watch him. Don’t let him put any liquor in
there, ’cause this is a dry county.”


--- PAGE 64 ---
The police search of the car turned up
nothing, so they decided to search the
lawyers.
“You got a warrant to search us?”
Marshall asked.
“No,” the officer responded.
“Well, the answer is no,” Marshall
said.
The police let the lawyers return to their
vehicle, and this time Looby took the
wheel.
“You weren’t driving this car, were
you?” one cop asked Looby.
“I’m not answering your question,”
Looby replied.
The cop then looked to Marshall, who
said, “I’m not answering your question,
either.”


--- PAGE 65 ---
Confused about what to do next, the
police argued over who had been driving
the car when it was stopped. “That’s the
one! The tall yaller nigger!” one of them
insisted with certainty, and the officers
approached Marshall, who was asked to
show his license.
The cop took one look. “Get out,” he
said. “Put your hands up.”
Marshall was dumbfounded. “What is
it?” he asked.
“Drunken driving,” the officer
responded.
“Drunken driving? You know I’m not
intoxicated,” Marshall said. “I haven’t had
a drink in twenty-four hours!”
“Get in the car,” one of them said.
With guns drawn and flashlights glaring,


--- PAGE 66 ---
four men hustled Marshall into the
backseat of a nonofficial sedan.
“Keep driving,” they shouted back to
Looby and Weaver as they placed
Marshall under arrest. With Marshall
wedged into the backseat, the car sped
away, back toward Columbia. As they
picked up speed, the four law enforcement
agents were quiet and all business. They
drove into the darkness. Walter White had
warned Marshall, as had Looby and
Weaver, about these Tennessee men and
their “Master Race preachments.”
Marshall knew that the Ku Klux Klan in
Columbia was deeply entrenched in the
local police; he knew its members served
as sheriffs and magistrates. He had read
the NAACP reports. This wasn’t the Klan


--- PAGE 67 ---
of “cowardly hood,” rather, it “wears cap
and visor, and shining badge. . . . It is the
LAW. It arrests its stunned victims,
unlisted.”
Marshall had no idea where they were
going. For years his dark humor had
horrified young lawyers and assistants
when he would go into great detail about
what Southern police or the Klan did with
uppity Negroes in the woods. Now
Marshall was the uppity Negro, alone, and
he wasn’t in a joking mood. Looking out
the window of the sedan, he could see the
cedar trees as the headlights flashed
across them. It was under a cedar tree just
down the road that hundreds of
townspeople had gathered around young
Cordie Cheek in his last living moments.


--- PAGE 68 ---
They had watched and cheered as officials
pulled down Cordie’s pants and castrated
him before forcing him up a stepladder
and hanging him. Pistols were passed
around the crowd; they were fired until all
the bullets were gone.
The car began to slow. The lawmen
were quietly mumbling and pointing; then
the driver turned left down a dirt road,
toward “the famous Duck River.”
Marshall knew that nothing good ever
happened when police cars drove black
men down unpaved roads. He knew that
the bodies of blacks—the victims of
lynchings and random murders—had been
discovered along these riverbanks for
decades. And it was at the bottom of Duck
River that, during the trial, the NAACP


--- PAGE 69 ---
lawyers had been told their bodies would
end up.
The sedan was lumbering forward,
bouncing down the dirt road, when
Marshall caught his first glimpse of the
men waiting down by the river. The
headlights illuminated their stern faces.
The car slowed, then stopped. Suddenly
headlights appeared behind them. Had
word spread about the lynching of the
NAACP lawyer? Glimpsing the glare of
the lights behind them, one of the
policemen in Marshall’s car stormed out
of the sedan to confront the driver of the
second car. Marshall craned his neck to
see; he recognized the limp.
It was Looby!
Instead of driving to Nashville as the


--- PAGE 70 ---
police had ordered, Looby had spun a U-
turn and followed the police sedan. As
soon as it turned left off the main road, he
knew Marshall was in trouble. He’d been
teaching at Fisk University, just down the
block from where the Maury County
officials “arrested” Cordie Cheek, threw
him into a sedan, and drove him to these
same woods along Duck River. Well,
they’ll have to kill me, too, Looby thought.
He wasn’t going to leave Marshall to the
devices of murderous law enforcement
officers.
Once again the policemen ordered
Looby to leave the scene. Waiting to be
arrested, or worse, the slight, gimpy
lawyer stood his ground; he refused to
budge. He’d had these same police and


--- PAGE 71 ---
town officials on the witness stand, and
he’d wanted to question each one of them
about the lynching of Cordie Cheek so that
he could rightfully raise the issue of self-
defense during the trial, but the judge had
refused to allow it. Now Looby spoke his
mind: he wasn’t leaving without Marshall,
he said. Livid, the deputies and police
conferred to the side. Whatever the plan
had been, there were now too many
witnesses, and there was sure to be
another riot if things got out of hand with
the lawyers. The police returned to the car
and made a loop back up to the main road,
with Marshall’s eyes lingering on the
lynch party waiting by the river, while
Looby, the man Marshall called a Rock of
Gibraltar, followed close behind with


--- PAGE 72 ---
Weaver and Raymond. This time the
police drove Marshall back to the
courthouse in Columbia, where he was
pointed toward a magistrate’s office.
“You go over there,” one of the
policemen said. “We’ll be over.”
“No, you won’t. I’m going with you,”
Marshall replied, reminding the police
that they had placed him under arrest.
“You’re not going to shoot me in the back
while I’m ‘escaping.’ Let’s make this
legal.”
“Smart-ass nigger,” one said, and they
shuffled Marshall up to the second floor of
the courthouse, with Weaver trailing
behind to serve as Marshall’s lawyer.
Once there, they met Magistrate Jim
“Buck” Pogue, a small, bald man not more


--- PAGE 73 ---
than five feet tall.
“What’s up?” Pogue asked police.
“We got this nigger for drunken
driving,” one officer told him.
Weaver was fuming. He accused the
officers of being “frame-up artists” and
demanded that Pogue examine Marshall.
Pogue looked Marshall up and down.
“He doesn’t look drunk to me,” he
observed.
“I’m not drunk,” Marshall exclaimed.
“Boy, you want to take my test?” Pogue
asked.
Marshall paused and looked quizzically
at the magistrate. “Well, what’s your
test?”
“I’m a teetotaler,” Pogue said. “I’ve
never had a drink in my life. I can smell


--- PAGE 74 ---
liquor a mile off. You want to take a
chance?”
Marshall stepped forward. “Sure,” he
said, and leaning his tall, lanky frame
down to Pogue till his mouth was just an
inch from the magistrate’s nostrils,
Marshall blew so hard he “almost rocked
this man.”
Pogue took a deep whiff and exploded
at the police. “Hell, this man hasn’t had a
drink. What are you talking about?”
The arresting officers quickly filed out
of the office.
“What else is there?” Marshall asked.
Pogue told him that there was nothing
else and stated that those officers had
come to the wrong man if they wanted to
frame Marshall. He said he was the one


--- PAGE 75 ---
magistrate in Columbia who had refused
to sign warrants for the arrests of Negroes
during the February trouble, and then he
extended his hand to Marshall, saying,
“You’re free to go.”
Marshall quickly left the courthouse for
the second time that day. He noticed again
that the streets were deserted. This time,
however, he understood why.
“Everybody,” Marshall realized, “was
down at Duck River waiting for the
party.”
He and Weaver hurried over to the
Bottom, where Looby and Raymond were
waiting at Sol Blair’s barbershop. They
made sure Marshall was okay, but they
also suspected Marshall wasn’t out of
danger just yet. The officers, they figured,


--- PAGE 76 ---
had probably been hoping to bring
Marshall before Magistrate C. Hayes
Denton, who surely would have locked
Marshall up for the night. Then, in “the
pattern of all recent Maury County
lynchings,” it would only have been a
matter of storming the jail with some rope
and finishing the job.
Looby thought it likely the officers
might not yet be ready to give up on their
party. He came up with a plan of his own.
“Well, Thurgood,” he said, “we’ll put you
in another car.”
They decided to send a decoy driver out
with Looby’s car, which would head
toward Nashville, while Marshall and
Looby in a different car sneaked out of
town on back roads. Sure enough,


--- PAGE 77 ---
Marshall watched members of the mob
turn the corner and follow Looby’s car;
then he and Looby drove off in another
direction. He would later learn that
Looby’s car was indeed pulled over, and
when the pursuers discovered that
Marshall wasn’t in it, “they beat the driver
bad enough that he was in the hospital for
a week.”
In another car, Maurice Weaver made it
back to Nashville that evening along with
Harry Raymond, who immediately began
typing his story for the 
Daily Worker
. “I
am certain . . . a lynching was planned,”
he wrote. “Thurgood Marshall was the
intended victim.”
Walter White was convinced that had
Looby obeyed police orders and


--- PAGE 78 ---
continued driving to Nashville on that
November night in 1946, Marshall “would
never have been seen again.”
Safely back in Nashville and his heart
still pounding, Marshall made a late-night
phone call to U.S. Attorney General Tom
C. Clark to tell him what had happened.
“Drunken driving?” Clark asked.
“Yes.”
Clark paused. He had come to know
Marshall well since being appointed
attorney general in 1945 by President
Truman, and he had just one question for
the man who would one day replace him
on the U.S. Supreme Court.
“Well,” Clark asked, “were you
drunk?”
“No,” Marshall asserted, “but exactly


--- PAGE 79 ---
five minutes after I hang up this phone I’m
going to be drunk!”


--- PAGE 80 ---
CHAPTER 2: SUGAR
HILL
NAACP attorney Franklin Williams and
blinded World War II veteran Isaac Woodard
went on a nationwide speaking tour to raise
money and awareness of the brutality
Woodard suffered at the hands of law
enforcement agents in the South. (
Courtesy


--- PAGE 81 ---
of Schomburg Center for Research in
Black Culture, Franklin Williams Papers
)
N
IGGER BOY, WHAT
 are you doing here?”
Marshall had been standing under the
sweltering sun on the far end of the
platform. He had stomach pangs from
hunger and he tried to make himself look
small, but the white man had come straight
toward him, eyes cold and firm, the gun on
his hip in plain sight.
“Waiting for the train,” Marshall told
him.
The man eyed him up and down,
suspicious of the suit.
“There’s only one more train comes
through here,” the man told him, “and
that’s the four o’clock—you’d better be on


--- PAGE 82 ---
it because the sun is never going down on
a live nigger in this town.”
His appetite gone, Marshall’s eyes
followed the man as he turned away. “So I
wrapped my constitutional rights in
cellophane, tucked ’em in my hip pocket
. . . and caught the next train out of there,”
the lawyer recalled.
One trip bled into another, and he never
felt safe until he was riding the rails north
again: sitting with a glass of bourbon in
his hand, waiting for the porter to bring
him a good cut of meat. Outside the parlor
car window, the whitewashed shacks
eventually gave way to factories and
highways and row houses with white
marble steps . . . until he finally stepped
off the train in the entirely different world


--- PAGE 83 ---
of New York. Pennsylvania Station, with
its colossal pink granite columns and glass
and steel train sheds, was one of the
largest public spaces in the world, its
grandeur awing the millions of travelers
and commuters who daily passed through
it. “One entered the city like a god,”
architectural historian Vincent Scully
noted. Yet the anonymity of strolling
across the breathtaking ten-story vaulted
concourse like any other man wearing a
fedora and hauling his briefcase and
luggage suited Marshall just fine. Standing
out in a crowd on a train platform was
something Marshall was happy to leave
behind him in the South.
From Penn Station, Marshall hailed a
DeSoto Sky View taxi and headed up the


--- PAGE 84 ---
west side of Manhattan to his Harlem
apartment. Though the Great Depression
had put an end to the Harlem Renaissance,
the concentration of blacks in the fifty-by-
eight-block area created a dazzling energy
and culture that continued to thrive in
Harlem in the postwar 1940s; it was still
“the Negro capital of America.”
Uniformed black soldiers on leave from
World War II swarmed the uptown streets,
flocking to popular clubs like the Savoy
Ballroom at night and bars like the Brown
Bomber during the day. Past the Victoria
and Apollo theaters on 125th Street,
Marshall crossed over tracks laid on
cobblestone, where trolley cars
encouraged commuters to “Ride the
Surface Way.”


--- PAGE 85 ---
Thurgood and his wife, Buster, in their
twenties, childless, and already married
for seven years, had come to New York in
the fall of 1936. Like so many blacks who
had migrated from the South, the young
couple had come to Harlem, but not to
escape Jim Crow. Thurgood had been
offered a job with the NAACP, where
he’d share a Manhattan office with his
mentor, Charles Hamilton Houston. The
money wasn’t good. Houston himself was
living at the YMCA in Harlem, and he
pulled in nearly twice Thurgood’s two-
hundred-dollar salary each month. The
Marshalls had packed their bags in
Baltimore and headed north to stay with
Thurgood’s aunt Medi and uncle Boots
(Denmedia and Clarence Dodson) on


--- PAGE 86 ---
Lenox Avenue—in the heart of Harlem in
the waning moments of the Renaissance. It
was the place to be.
F
ATS WALLER PARKED
 on a piano bench
for the night in a Harlem flat, fedora
perched on his head and a flask within
easy reach. He popped and rolled his eyes
and wiggled his brows between verses as
the dancers—maids, elevator operators,
and other working-class blacks who lived
uptown—brushed against him, fighting for
space to unwind. Men were patted down
on entry, but Fats had to remind some of
them to behave, mid-song, until the words
were said so often they crept into his
lyrics: “Put that gun away!” Lights


--- PAGE 87 ---
dimmed with colored bulbs hung over the
dance floor, a space cleared of furniture
except for a table and chairs to
accommodate a five-hour poker game.
Bourbon and gin flowed. The floors
shook, and from the kitchen the sweet
smell of yardbirds (chicken) and grits
wafted in the air. All night long piercing
laughter and shouts rose above Fats’s
voice until the lights continued to dim and
he was singing and playing swing and
stride piano in darkness.
A lively young couple, Thurgood and
Buster reveled in the Harlem nightlife.
They had looked for a place of their own
but quickly realized they were going to
have to compromise. With a total
population more than double what it is


--- PAGE 88 ---
today, the buildings and tenements uptown
were overflowing with “roomers”:
residents who rented sleeping space in
apartments where living and dining rooms
were converted into bedrooms at night. To
help pay the rent, many tenants held rent
parties; they would simply throw up a sign
with the date and their address, and for a
dollar or so guests could gain entry.
We got yellow girls, we’ve got black and tan
Will you have a good time?—YEAH MAN!
The tradition of the rent party, which
thrived during the Harlem Renaissance,
continued into the forties out of economic
necessity. Because famous clubs like
Connie’s Inn and the Cotton Club did not
allow black customers, and Small’s


--- PAGE 89 ---
Paradise, though not segregated, had high
door fees that ensured mostly upscale
white audiences, much of the great live
music at the time was not accessible to
blacks. This spurred musicians like
Waller and Louis Armstrong to play at
rent parties—not just for the extra cash but
also for the joy of performing at lively
parties with enthusiastic black crowds.
After a few weeks with Marshall’s
relatives, the young couple found a place
of their own on 149th Street. It was small
and cramped, but they weren’t sharing it
with people twice their age, and with
Charlie Houston holed up at the YMCA,
neither Buster nor Thurgood was
complaining, even though money would be
tighter. To make ends meet, Buster


--- PAGE 90 ---
realized she’d have to contribute. Light-
skinned, with wavy hair and soft brown
eyes, she’d been a student at the
University of Pennsylvania when she met
Thurgood at a restaurant in Washington.
Marshall claimed it was love at first sight,
but eighteen-year-old Vivian Burey
disagreed, claiming that the Lincoln
University student and self-avowed
ladies’ man “was so busy arguing and
debating with everybody at the table that
[he] didn’t even give me a second
glance.” The daughter of a Philadelphia
caterer, Vivian had an ample chest that
had earned her the nickname Buster in her
teen years—a nickname that she
maintained throughout her life. She had
pluck and a radiant smile, and her


--- PAGE 91 ---
intelligence and outgoing personality
helped her to acclimate to New York as
easily as her husband did.
Soon after they arrived in New York,
Buster became involved with the Harlem
cooperative grocery markets that had been
sprouting up after the Great Depression to
develop black economic power. Her work
with the co-op helped lower the couple’s
food bills each week and added a few
extra dollars to their cash flow. Despite
the excitement and prestige that
Marshall’s work for the NAACP added to
both his and Buster’s lives, financially
they remained strapped. Still, the young
couple had to laugh as they looked
forward to better days and a bright future
together. In the midst of helping Charles


--- PAGE 92 ---
Houston prepare briefs for the NAACP’s
first test case on educational segregation
before the U.S. Supreme Court, Thurgood
and Buster found themselves delivering
groceries around Harlem and Washington
Heights for extra cash.
Soon Houston was lessening his
workload in New York and preparing to
return to Washington. Marshall was
proving himself more than competent and
hardworking, and Houston had no qualms
about handing more responsibilities to his
protégé. With Houston set to leave in July
1938, Marshall was about to be handed
control of the NAACP’s legal office. He’d
receive a $200 raise, so he’d now be
earning $2,600 per year. “How much is
that a week?” a frugal Buster wanted to


--- PAGE 93 ---
know.
In the days before Houston departed, he
and Marshall went for a walk outside the
office. The two could not have been more
different. Houston was serious and tightly
wound, whereas Marshall was folksy,
familiar, and always laughing. But they
shared a commitment to hard work and
thorough preparation, and Houston wanted
Marshall to know that he’d continue to
counsel and support his former student.
Houston warned Thurgood about the
difficulties of working under Walter
White, the executive secretary of the
NAACP. White wasn’t a lawyer, but he
liked to think he was at times, and he
didn’t shy away from voicing opinions on
legal strategies. White also had an ego,


--- PAGE 94 ---
and Houston wanted Marshall to know
that it would probably take some time
before he’d see a reasonable salary that
was worthy of the work he’d be doing.
“You know how much money you’re
making,” Houston said. Marshall just
nodded.
“And you can imagine how much money
I make. And I still say you have more
goddamn fun than I do.”
With that, Marshall let out one of his
hearty, high-pitched laughs. “Ain’t no
question about that!” he said.
Not long after Marshall’s promotion,
Buster realized that the tiny flat on 149th
Street wasn’t going to do for the couple
anymore—not with her husband’s
newfound social status. She began asking


--- PAGE 95 ---
around, talking to some of the other
NAACP wives, and before long she had
her sights set high on the bluff.
O
N THE WAY
 home from Penn Station
after another grueling trip south, Marshall
sat in the DeSoto, eyeing the wide
sidewalks in front of the Super Food
Markets and Harlem tenements with “To
Be Demolished” signs posted by the New
York City Housing Authority, as the taxi
approached Sugar Hill. In this renowned
neighborhood of Harlem, Marshall lived
alongside the successful artists,
intellectual elites, and wealthy blacks
who, pursuing their dream of the “Sweet
Life,” had gravitated there during the


--- PAGE 96 ---
Renaissance. If Harlem was the black
capital of America, Sugar Hill was its
cultural soul. It contained “perhaps the
most modern and beautiful residential
areas for Negroes in black America,” and
it was home to musicians like Duke
Ellington, Louis Armstrong, and Lena
Horne, the writer Ralph Ellison, and actor
Paul Robeson. At the heart of Sugar Hill
was 409 Edgecombe Avenue, a thirteen-
story neo-Georgian building on Coogan’s
Bluff that towered over the town houses
and tenements of Harlem. The poet
Langston Hughes spoke of “two Harlems,”
and he clearly had 409 Edgecombe in
mind when he wrote of those who “live on
that attractive rise of bluff . . . where the
plumbing really works and the ceilings are


--- PAGE 97 ---
high and airy.” Its residents included
Aaron Douglas, the Kansas-born,
Parisian-trained artist who became known
as the “father of black American art”; W.
E. B. DuBois, author and civil rights
activist; and Walter White, Marshall’s
boss. A 1947 issue of 
Ebony
 magazine
commented that the building attracted so
many black elites “that legend, only
slightly exaggerated, says bombing 409
would wipe out Negro leadership for the
next 20 years.”
One resident at 409 had leadership
skills that were disputed by no one, though
she was not whom DuBois had in mind
when he wrote of the exceptional
“talented tenth” who would save the
Negro race. Madame Stephanie St. Clair,


--- PAGE 98 ---
known to most as “Queenie,” was
purported to be the Numbers Queen of
Harlem and, at one point, the richest black
woman in America. In New York by way
of Martinique, Madame St. Clair—
abrasive, unsmiling, and tough as nails—
had managed to withstand the violent
efforts of Dutch Schultz and any other
mobsters who’d tried to horn in on her
gambling operations and territory.
The building had its share of society
parties hosted by Gladys and Walter
White—their thirteenth-floor apartment
was called “the White House of
Harlem”—and at times it fostered a
fraternity atmosphere. The Baltimore
couple fitted right in. At one of White’s
parties, Marshall couldn’t stop laughing as


--- PAGE 99 ---
he watched his new friend, world
heavyweight boxing champion Joe Louis,
chase the actress Tallulah Bankhead as
she ran screaming down the hallways of
409 with the fighter in close pursuit. For
the most part, however, and in stark
contrast to the life he lived away from
home, Thurgood Marshall’s life at 409
was a quiet one.
On weekends, the young Marshalls
attended upscale Harlem supper clubs like
Happy Rhone’s Paradise on 143rd Street
and Lenox, the “NAACP’s unofficial
after-hours headquarters,” where the
leaders of the burgeoning civil rights
movement during World War II held court
with black intellectuals, literati, and
entertainers. Richard Wright, author of


--- PAGE 100 ---
Native Son  and the 1941 winner of the
Spingarn Medal, the NAACP’s
prestigious award “for the highest
achievement of an American Negro,” was
another of Marshall’s “sassiety” Harlem
neighbors who moved in the same circle
at the time. Thurgood also socialized with
a friend from his college days at Lincoln
University, Langston Hughes, who had
come to New York years before and was
one of the leading voices of the Harlem
Renaissance. Like many intellectuals and
activists who joined the NAACP’s fight
for equal rights, both Wright and Hughes
were drawn to communism, and for
decades Marshall had to navigate the
complex relationship between communist
supporters in the Civil Rights Congress—


--- PAGE 101 ---
a communist front organization dedicated
to civil liberties—and J. Edgar Hoover’s
FBI, which, Marshall knew, could destroy
the NAACP with just a few well-timed
words during the Red Scare.
The Marshalls eventually settled on a
modest one-bedroom flat on the ninth floor
at 409 Edgecombe, where they mostly
socialized on weekends with a couple
they knew from their college days—eating
and drinking together late into the night,
and playing card games. (They called their
little group “the Pokenos,” after the card
game Po-Ke-No.) With Thurgood
traveling so frequently and often being
gone for long stretches, Buster kept herself
busy with social affairs and Urban League
activities in Harlem. In many ways they


--- PAGE 102 ---
were living a dream life—a young,
attractive, educated couple with a
desirable place to call home in the
greatest city on earth. In private, however,
the Marshalls were struggling with
disappointments. Buster had miscarried
again. Married for more than a decade,
she’d been unable to carry a baby to term,
and sadness was turning to frustration and
grief.
“Buster had a weak uterus,” said
Marshall’s secretary, Alice Stovall,
adding that Buster had become pregnant
“quite a few times because she said she
knew how much Thurgood wanted
children.” Everyone around them had
children, it seemed, and Buster’s sense of
self-worth had become wedded to her


--- PAGE 103 ---
fertility problems and the notion that she
was disappointing her husband. She was
unable to shake the sadness that enveloped
her.
Thurgood compartmentalized the pain
and occupied himself increasingly with
work and travel. On the rare mornings
when he was in New York, he’d ride the
elevator down to the white-tiled lobby,
where Nathan the doorman would hold
open the tall glass doors as Marshall
stepped onto Edgecombe Avenue. High on
Coogan’s Bluff, Marshall could look out
over the Harlem River to Yankee Stadium
on his way to work. More impressive,
though, was the view of the Polo Grounds,
where the New York Giants baseball team
played their home games. The stadium


--- PAGE 104 ---
hosted the first game of the 1946 Negro
World Series, in which the Kansas City
Monarchs beat the Newark Eagles, 2–1.
They did so without their former star,
Jackie Robinson, who had been signed by
the Brooklyn Dodgers before the season
and was lighting up the International
League with the Montreal Royals in
preparation for his 1947 debut, when he
would break baseball’s color line by
becoming the first black to play in
America’s major leagues. In that 1947
season, when Brooklyn Dodgers president
Branch Rickey wanted a black lawyer to
help put Robinson’s financial affairs in
order, he sent the rookie to Thurgood
Marshall.
Before heading downtown to the


--- PAGE 105 ---
NAACP offices, Marshall would stride
past Colonial Park and down Seventh
Avenue to the Hotel Theresa at 125th
Street, the “social capital of Negro
America.” On June 19, 1946, nearly a
quarter million people turned out for a
parade there on 125th Street to wish Joe
Louis luck in his rematch that evening with
Billy Conn at Yankee Stadium. Louis was
greeted all along 125th Street with music,
floats, honking horns, and large signs that
read, “Good Luck, Joe.” Before the fight,
Louis famously said of the lighter Conn,
“He can run, but he can’t hide,” and in the
eighth round, before the first television
audience to witness a world heavyweight
championship, Louis finally found Conn,
landing a vicious right-uppercut, left-hook


--- PAGE 106 ---
combination that sent the Pittsburgh fighter
onto his back for the ten count.
Ebony
 magazine kept an office at the
Hotel Theresa, Walter White did his
WLIB radio show there, and just across
the street from the hotel, the black
newspapers the
 Chicago Defender
 and the
Pittsburgh Courier
 had offices. Marshall
often met with reporters or addressed
women’s groups at the hotel. In Theresa’s
coffee shop he sometimes sat with Joe
Louis, ate mushroom omelets, and rubbed
shoulders with the likes of Bumpy
Johnson, the notorious bookmaker for
Madame St. Clair. But it was Marshall
who commanded the attention of the staff.
A waitress there remembered that “they
treated him like a movie star.” She


--- PAGE 107 ---
recalled, “He was so handsome in those
days.” The waitress recalled, too, how
Julia Scott, the manager of the coffee
shop, used to wait on Marshall “because
she was afraid we’d spill coffee on him or
cause some embarrassing accident
because we were so nervous in his
presence. ‘You girls stop staring at Mr.
Marshall,’ she’d say when he came in.”
Despite the difficulties at home,
Marshall was riding high in 1946. In May
the thirty-seven-year-old attorney became
the thirty-first Spingarn medalist, joining
the likes of Wright, Robeson, DuBois,
author and activist James Weldon
Johnson, and the American contralto
Marian Anderson as recipients of the
esteemed award. Next to Wright, Marshall


--- PAGE 108 ---
was the youngest person to receive the
Spingarn Medal, conferred in recognition
of his “distinguished service as a lawyer
before the Supreme Court of the United
States . . . particularly in the Texas
Primary Case which conceivably may
have more far reaching influence than any
other act in the ending of
disenfranchisement based upon race or
color in the country.” In this 1944 case,
Smith v. Allwright
, involving an all-white
primary, the U.S. Supreme Court justices
voted 8–1 in Marshall’s favor, ruling that
blacks “cannot be legally barred from
voting in the Texas Democratic
primaries.” One Spingarn Medal Award
Committee member noted that Marshall’s
work in the case “brought about the most


--- PAGE 109 ---
beneficial results for the Negro since
Emancipation.” Marshall was also cited
for his attack on the Jim Crow travel
system and unequal educational
opportunities as well as for his battle to
win for blacks “basic human rights and
justice in the courts.”
In May 1946 Walter White wrote a note
to Marshall, informing him that because
the company making the Spingarn Medal
would be unable to create a new die in
time for the June ceremony in Cincinnati,
the NAACP would instead be presenting
him with a replica gold-plated medal.
“Lest you think we are trying to pull a fast
one on you,” White went on to explain, the
company would be casting a solid gold
medal that Marshall would receive “as


--- PAGE 110 ---
soon as it is delivered.” Marshall returned
the note after writing a two-word
response: “Oh yeah.”
T
HURGOOD MARSHALL SMOKED
 three
packs of cigarettes a day.
By mid-June of 1946, however,
Marshall’s body was failing him. He was
drinking steadily and not getting much
sleep, and his constant travel to Columbia,
Tennessee, where temperatures soared
over a hundred degrees, had left him
exhausted, with no time for exercise—not
that he’d ever shown any interest in
exercise. Nor did his preferred diet of
fried food and red meat do him any favors.
He was laughing less, talking in muted


--- PAGE 111 ---
tones, and to friends and associates, he
was not himself. Sensing something might
be amiss with his health, Marshall
arranged NAACP staff participation in the
Blue Cross Hospitalization Plan, which,
he said, at “very reasonable rates” would
relieve employees of “that mental worry
of wondering where the money is coming
from to meet the bills.”
Two weeks later, more than seven
hundred delegates joined thousands of
members in Cincinnati for the NAACP’s
thirty-seventh annual conference, at which,
on the closing night, Marshall would
receive the Spingarn Medal. Onstage,
Marshall was seated beside Joe Louis and
Colonel Benjamin O. Davis, the famous
Tuskegee airman. Next to Louis, Marshall


--- PAGE 112 ---
looked gaunt and run-down in his dark
pinstripe suit and spectator shoes: a stark
contrast to the smiling, muscular fighter.
Still, Marshall managed to rise to the
occasion. Standing before his mentor,
Charles Hamilton Houston, he made it
clear that the medal was “an award
coming to one person in recognition of the
work of a large group of lawyers who
have always worked together in a spirit of
wholehearted co-operation and without
any hope of reward other than that of
seeing a job done.” After his acceptance
speech Marshall introduced the lawyers
he’d been working with on the Columbia
case, Z. Alexander Looby and Maurice
Weaver, as well as Mrs. Gladys
Stephenson, whose broken radio had


--- PAGE 113 ---
started the riots back in February. The
case had exhausted Marshall, and listening
to Mrs. Stephenson onstage as she told her
story reminded him of the oppressive heat
and stress he had been enduring. Indeed,
he’d just come from Columbia, where
he’d been “carrying around a fever
ranging from 103 to 104 degrees” over the
last week, and the fever had not abated in
Cincinnati. It was so bad, Marshall said,
that he “was only able to be out of bed
two or three hours a day.”
After the convention, when Marshall
returned to New York, he could not get out
of bed at all. Seeing his condition as
critical and even “grave,” Walter White
was worried. He wanted to avoid sending
Marshall to Harlem Hospital—a place, he


--- PAGE 114 ---
noted, that had earned such a reputation
for the “callous and inadequate treatment”
of black patients that it inspired a folk
saying: “When any member of your family
goes to Harlem Hospital, telephone the
undertaker.” White thus reached out to
some of his society friends and associates
in an attempt to have Marshall admitted to
Mount Sinai Hospital. It was not to be.
Citing red tape, overcrowded conditions,
and the inability to “build a room” for
Marshall on such short notice as the
excuses offered by the hospital, White
concluded that Marshall, in his hour of
need, was not admitted because of his
race.
So it was that Marshall found himself in
Ward 2D at Harlem Hospital, where the


--- PAGE 115 ---
doctors could not figure out the cause of
his illness. They first suspected a tumor,
or “cancer of the lung,” and White,
alarmed at the critical nature of
Marshall’s prognosis, notified the
NAACP’s board of directors that the
lawyer’s condition was “due solely to the
fact that he has worked himself almost to
death without any thought of self.”
Marshall had hoped to keep the news of
his admission to Harlem Hospital quiet,
but it wasn’t possible, especially when the
hallways began to buzz over the large
plant and cards that Marshall had received
from Eleanor Roosevelt. When Roosevelt
was First Lady, she had been drawn to the
cause of racial justice, and as a board
member and activist for the NAACP, she


--- PAGE 116 ---
had lobbied her husband on many race-
related issues from civil rights to the
Costigan-Wagner antilynching bill.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, for his part,
was less than enthralled with his wife’s
alliance with the NAACP, and the White
House attempted to maintain a distance
between the president and Eleanor’s
activism on behalf of blacks. Marshall
himself had felt the president’s chill when
Attorney General Francis Biddle phoned
FDR to discuss the NAACP’s
involvement in a race case in Virginia. At
Biddle’s instruction, Marshall picked up
an extension phone to listen in, only to
hear FDR exclaim, “I warned you not to
call me again about any of Eleanor’s
niggers. Call me one more time and you


--- PAGE 117 ---
are fired.” Marshall later recalled, “The
President only said ‘nigger’ once, but
once was enough for me.”
Eleanor Roosevelt nonetheless
continued her work with the NAACP
during and after the FDR administration.
Appalled by the riots in Columbia,
Tennessee, she worked closely with
Marshall to get a reluctant Justice
Department involved. A plant and cards
simply betokened her esteem and
admiration for a man at the front lines in
the country’s civil rights battle. Roosevelt,
however, wasn’t the only one who had
learned that Marshall had checked into
Harlem Hospital. Marshall’s wife, Buster,
was at home in Sugar Hill one day in July
when a Railway Express man showed up


--- PAGE 118 ---
at the apartment on Edgecombe Avenue
with a package from the men Marshall
was defending in the Tennessee riot case.
“You know,” the deliveryman told Buster,
“I’m from Tennessee, and from the smell I
know what’s in here, and I would sure
like to have some of it.” Inside the box
was a “twenty-pound, country-cured ham”
and a letter that read, “Dear lawyer . . .
The wives all wanted to send you flowers,
but we knew what you’d rather have.”
The doctors at Harlem Hospital
continued to run tests. Marshall, still
unable to get out of bed, did not show any
improvement. It had been determined that
Marshall did not have a tumor, and
eventually the doctors settled on a
diagnosis of a mysterious, pneumonia-like


--- PAGE 119 ---
virus—“Virus X,” as Marshall called it.
The diagnosis afforded the thirty-eight-
year-old little comfort. Just a few years
before, Fats Waller, whose exaggerated
facial expressions and mannerisms
Marshall often affected while telling a
story, had died of pneumonia on a train
down south shortly before his own fortieth
birthday. The doctors ordered that
Marshall be confined to bed for six weeks
without visitors, and if he then showed
any improvement, he would be allowed to
return to work, but “not more than three
hours a day every other day.” After a
month Marshall slowly began to regain
some of his strength. He was no longer
running a high fever, but his doctors
refused to allow him to return to work.


--- PAGE 120 ---
White visited him in mid-July and noted
that Marshall was “far from out of the
woods yet.” White also noticed that
Marshall’s spirits nonetheless seemed to
be rising, as he’d asked White to deliver a
message to the NAACP staff: “Give them
the bad news that I’ll live,” Marshall said.
By early August, Marshall’s doctor,
Louis T. Wright, the first black surgeon at
Harlem Hospital and himself a Spingarn
medalist in 1940, had “ordered” Marshall
to leave the country; Wright felt that the
lawyer would benefit from an extended
leave, preferably in a tropical climate,
where he could relax and recover. From
NAACP donors, White secured five
hundred dollars for Marshall’s medical
bills, and sent Thurgood and Buster to stay


--- PAGE 121 ---
with William H. Hastie, another fellow
Spingarn medalist and one of Marshall’s
former professors at Howard University
Law School. Hastie had just been
appointed the first black governor of the
U.S. Virgin Islands by President Truman.
Marshall rested for a week in the Virgin
Islands. For no longer than that could he
resist working on the proposed budget for
the NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund.
Against doctor’s orders, he was also on
the phone each night with Looby so that
they could discuss legal strategies and the
day’s proceedings in the Columbia Race
Riot case. He reported to White, however,
that he was “taking it more than easy” and
the only exercise he was getting was from
losing money at poker, which “is no effort


--- PAGE 122 ---
for me.”
By mid-August Marshall had nearly
recovered. Taking advantage of the
excellent climate, he and Buster visited
Cuba, Haiti, and Jamaica. “I will have a
difficult job to persuade Buster to leave,”
Marshall wrote to White. “I am not too
anxious to leave myself, but I understand
that my welcome is about worn out, so I
better leave before being run out.” He told
White not to pay attention to the
“deliberate falsehoods” that Hastie had
been spreading about Marshall’s “descent
upon the Virgins,” despite the fact that
White thought it would take a “month of
steady explanation” to answer Hastie’s
accusations.
Months would pass before Marshall


--- PAGE 123 ---
regained full strength, but he nevertheless
returned to Columbia, despite his doctor’s
warnings. In November he won in
Tennessee, but more important, he
survived not only a mysterious virus but
also a lynching party. Walter White, in his
autobiography 
A Man Called White
,
wrote, “It is doubtful whether any other
trial in the history of America was ever
conducted under more explosive
conditions.” But White wrote those words
in 1948, one year before Thurgood
Marshall became involved in his most
deadly and dramatic case ever. It would
far surpass the Columbia Race Riot trials
in its explosive conditions, and its
consequences would have an impact on
the NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund and its


--- PAGE 124 ---
staff for decades to come.


--- PAGE 125 ---
CHAPTER 3: GET TO
PUSHIN’


--- PAGE 126 ---
Willie Padgett rests his foot against his
1940 Ford sedan as he shares a laugh with
Deputy James Yates. (
Photo by Wallace
Kirkland/Time & Life Pictures/Getty
Images
)


--- PAGE 127 ---
N
ORMA LEE WORE
 a pink farm dress on
the worst night of her life.
Blond and seventeen years old, she
pushed the wedding ring back onto her
finger; tossed a compact, powder, and
perfume into her purse; and sauntered
outside her daddy’s house to where Willie
was waiting beside his run-down 1940
Ford. He opened the door for her and
Willie’s eyes went right to Norma’s bare
legs as she slid her thin body across the
tattered seat. With only one stop to make,
Willie pulled away from the Tyson
farmhouse as the Florida sun was setting,
and minutes later he idled the old Ford in
front of Frisz’s Bar and Grill, where he
ran inside and picked up a bottle of


--- PAGE 128 ---
whiskey for the big dance.
On July 15, 1949, the front pages of
newspapers across the country bannered
frightening news for Americans. President
Truman had called an emergency meeting
with “top Cabinet, military, atomic and
Congressional leaders” on a matter so
secret that none of the participants would
comment “for the good of the country.” As
it turned out, Russia, aided by spies who
worked on the Manhattan Project, was just
weeks from successfully testing its first
atom bomb, a near replica of the U.S. Fat
Man design, years earlier than analysts
had expected. The United States was
already in the throes of the Red Scare, and
Americans’ fears of atomic warfare and
the spread of communism intensified.


--- PAGE 129 ---
The same day another headline in the
papers announced that the celebrated stage
star and singer Paul Robeson had been a
member of the Communist Party for years,
and was “ambitious to become ‘the Black
Stalin’ ”—or so a former communist
testified at the House Un-American
Activities Committee hearings in
Washington, D.C. The witness stated
further that the Communist Party planned
to set up a black republic through an
armed revolt in the South, extending from
Maryland to Texas, and that Robeson had
been assigned “certain secret work that
was intercontinental.”
On that mid-July Friday, twenty-three-
year-old Willie Haven Padgett, his work
on the farm done for the week, was


--- PAGE 130 ---
blissfully unaware of the portents of
nuclear warfare or the creeping threat of
communism. He was looking forward to a
Friday night of drinking and dancing and
getting whatever else he might in the
backseat of his car before the sun came
up. Born and raised among the lower-
class whites of Tattnall County, Georgia,
Willie had moved with his family to Bay
Lake, Florida—a clannish stretch of truck
farmers who mostly lived off the land in
scattered wooden shacks a few miles
south of Groveland. He hadn’t made it
past grammar school, so he had already
put in years of hard work in the family’s
fertile Lake County soil when he met a
frail but comely girl up the road named
Norma Lee Tyson.


--- PAGE 131 ---
Still, Willie was nervous, despite the
fact that this was hardly their first date.
He’d met the Tyson girl the year before,
when she was just sixteen years old, and
he and Norma had married a few months
later. But things had been rocky from the
start, and the two had separated even
before their first anniversary. Norma’s
father, Coy Tyson, had had a lot to do with
that. He didn’t much care for the freckled,
bucktoothed kid who asked for his
daughter’s hand in marriage, and Coy
Tyson certainly didn’t like the fact that his
daughter was often left at home while
Willie caroused all night all over Lake
County. Rumors around town had it that
the short-tempered Willie got rough with
young Norma—that he slapped her around


--- PAGE 132 ---
at times—and Bay Lake locals knew Coy
Tyson wasn’t going to stand for behavior
like that. Willie realized he had to watch
his step with Norma these days, because
the Tysons were not to be messed with,
and tonight might be his last opportunity to
make things right with Norma Lee.
One thing working in Willie’s favor
was that Norma, despite her age, wasn’t
exactly an innocent farm girl—not even in
the eyes of her father. Her reputation
around town was “not good,” according to
one white woman who knew her, and “a
bad egg” is how another local described
her. For Norma had been seen “cavorting
with Negroes”—one sure way for a white
girl to tarnish her reputation—and this
may have been why Coy Tyson was


--- PAGE 133 ---
willing to give Willie another chance with
his daughter. The Padgetts and the Tysons
alike had thought the young couple would
benefit by a temporary separation; both
had some growing up to do.
By the summer of 1949, Norma was
living at her father’s house and Willie had
moved back onto his mother’s property
about a mile down the road from the
Tysons. The monotony of long hours on
the farm and the haunting daily reminder
that he had failed so early in his marriage
had Willie looking forward to the
weekend as a chance to patch things up
with his teenage bride. There was a dance
at the American Legion hall in Clermont,
about sixteen miles away, and if Willie
could get his jalopy of a car to run—and if


--- PAGE 134 ---
Coy Tyson would approve—he could
show Norma a good time out on the town.
For Norma, even if she and Willie were
having troubles, the idea of going out
dancing with him on a Friday night was
still preferable to another night at home
with her father. Why should Willie always
be out having a good time? Why should
she be always the one stuck at home?
After picking up a bottle of whiskey at
Frisz’s, the Padgetts arrived at the
American Legion hall in Clermont around
9:30 p.m. They found a table with
Willie’s sister and her husband, and
mixing with young farmers and war
veterans still in their twenties, the young
couple drank whiskey, danced, and
gabbed until 1 a.m. After a last dance, they


--- PAGE 135 ---
left the hall and headed for Willie’s old
Ford.
Willie tried to start the car, but the
engine wouldn’t turn over. According to
Norma’s later account, they had to “get it
pushed off” in order to leave the unpaved
parking lot. As they rolled down the road
into darkness, both of them roaring drunk,
Norma announced she was hungry, as she
hadn’t had anything to eat that night; so
they decided to drive to Burtoft’s Café, a
“dine-and-dance spot” in Okahumpka, to
grab a sandwich. With farmland and
pastures flickering by the car window,
they passed what was left in the bottle of
whiskey back and forth. They had traveled
some miles north toward Okahumpka
when it dawned on Willie that Burtoft’s


--- PAGE 136 ---
Café probably wouldn’t be open at this
hour. Norma decided they should turn
around; she was tired, she just wanted to
go home.
Willie slowed the car. The road was
deserted, and Willie’s hopes were empty.
Nothing magical was happening between
him and Norma—all they shared was
frustration and youthful impatience and
confusion. Maybe it would never work out
between them. What would they be, then?
Neighbors? Willie didn’t see himself ever
leaving Bay Lake, and Norma wasn’t
going anywhere, either. Seventeen years
old, thin, and pretty, but a prisoner in her
daddy’s house, sitting around all day and
night with her daddy whispering in her ear
that Willie Padgett’s no good. Another


--- PAGE 137 ---
man was sure to come along, come to
rescue her. Willie had seen the young
veterans practically leering at Norma
when he was dancing with her. No doubt
they were whispering, too, wondering
where things stood and how long it would
be before Norma was free of him. Well,
she was still Willie Padgett’s wife. At
least in name she was.
Good and drunk now, Willie took
another swig of whiskey before handing
the bottle to Norma. Then, slowing the
car, he made a right turn down a dirt
driveway, but he didn’t get far. He
struggled with the wheel to pull up beside
some mossy oaks, and stopped at a fence
gate. The Ford’s engine rattled the
dashboard. The headlights illuminated the


--- PAGE 138 ---
white, sandy road before them. Despite
the shining moon, it was undeniably dark
and uncomfortably quiet, with no signs of
cars coming from either direction. Norma
Lee, in her pink cotton dress, sat on the
front bench seat, her delicate body
pressed against the door, while she waited
for Willie, the boy she called “Haven” in
happier moments, to rest his hand on the
gearshift and turn the car back around so
that she could finally go home.
S
AMUEL SHEPHERD WAS
 having car
troubles of his own that night. He and his
friend Walter Irvin, both twenty-two-year-
old army veterans from the same outfit,
had started out the evening in his father’s


--- PAGE 139 ---
1937 Ford, but the car was not acting right
in Groveland. So Samuel drove them back
to the Shepherd house in Bay Lake around
9:30 p.m.; there he hoped to swap the old
Ford for his brother James’s Mercury.
James, who was married to Walter’s
sister, ultimately consented to the switch,
on the promise they’d have the car back
before James had to leave for work in the
morning. The two friends gassed up the
tank and headed east for a night out.
The town of Eatonville was only six
miles north of Orlando and thirty-five
miles east of the town that Samuel and
Walter called home. Yet it was worlds
away from Groveland. After the Civil
War, many black soldiers, not content to
be swept into the undesirable parts of a


--- PAGE 140 ---
town, chose to settle in one of dozens of
race colonies that had begun to spring up
across the nation. There blacks could live
a life that was virtually free of racial
friction. In 1887, Eatonville became the
first incorporated African-American
community in America. According to its
most famous resident, the writer Zora
Neale Hurston, who gained fame during
the Harlem Renaissance, Eatonville was
something of an oasis for blacks—“a pure
Negro town . . . where the only white
folks were those who passed through.”
She described it as “a city of five lakes,
three croquet courts, three hundred brown
skins, three hundred good swimmers,
plenty guavas, two schools, and no
jailhouse.” (In 1949, after traveling the


--- PAGE 141 ---
world and after decades in New York,
where she’d moved in the same Harlem
circles as Thurgood Marshall, Hurston
had returned home after being falsely
accused of molesting a ten-year-old boy.
The charges were ultimately dropped, but
the damage to Hurston’s reputation was
irreparable, and unable to make a living
with her pen, the talented, outspoken, and
now broke Eatonville resident was
working as a housemaid in Florida.)
For Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin,
a night out in Eatonville was a welcome
respite from the discriminating ways of
Jim Crow and the continual racial
harassment they’d endured while growing
up together in Lake County. On their
arrival in Eatonville, the two friends


--- PAGE 142 ---
swaggered into Club Eaton—a renowned
nightspot on the Chitlin’ Circuit where
well-known black musicians such as Duke
Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday,
and a young local boy named Ray Charles
performed during the segregation era.
Samuel and Walter ate a light supper,
drank a few beers, chatted with girls, and
played the jukebox. Then they decided to
see what was happening at Club 436 in
nearby Altamonte Springs. There the two
army buddies ordered a quart of beer.
After an hour or so, because Irvin had to
get up early to work with his father in the
orange groves under Florida’s unforgiving
summer sun, and as he wanted to get at
least a few hours of sleep, they finished
their beer and drove approximately forty


--- PAGE 143 ---
miles west, over a hot, flat land dotted
with wild orange trees and live oaks
swathed in Spanish moss.
It was long past midnight, and Samuel
and Walter were just a few miles north of
Groveland when they came upon a 1940
Ford by the side of the road. Samuel
slowed the Mercury, and as he passed the
car he saw a young white couple inside.
About fifty yards farther on, Samuel
stopped and turned the Mercury around.
Willie had emerged from the Ford and
was shouting something as Samuel and
Walter rolled up to his car. Shepherd
stuck his head out the window. “Need any
help?” he asked.
“Yes,” Willie answered. Shepherd put
the Mercury in park, Irvin got out, and


--- PAGE 144 ---
Willie explained that the car’s battery was
dead and that he needed a push to jump-
start the car. Norma, still inside the Ford,
interrupted the men’s discussion several
times, telling Willie to get in the car so
that they could get the engine started and
get home. “OK, in a minute,” Willie told
her.
Finally, Shepherd and Irvin went around
to the back of the Ford, and Willie hopped
in next to Norma. The two army veterans
leaned in and began pushing, to no avail.
One of the rear wheels was still lodged in
sand. Samuel and Walter stopped to rest.
“Get to pushin’,” Willie ordered them,
popping his head out the window. Samuel
didn’t like his tone.
Frustrated, impatient, Norma and Willie


--- PAGE 145 ---
got out of the car to find out why the two
black men had ceased their effort. Samuel
tried to explain that it was no use: The
battery was dead; they had given it a try
but the car wasn’t budging. They were
both sweating and breathing hard, and
Shepherd was annoyed. He had stopped to
help and didn’t appreciate being bossed
around by Padgett. To ease the tension,
Norma smiled at the two friends and
extended the whiskey bottle to Samuel. He
gratefully took a swig, then passed the
bottle to Walter, who handed it back to
Norma. Willie glared as his eyes
followed the bottle, and when Norma
extended it to him, he erupted. “Do you
think I’m gonna drink behind a nigger?”
Willie spat.


--- PAGE 146 ---
That was it for Samuel Shepherd. He’d
had enough; after going out of his way to
help this drunken cracker, Shepherd
wasn’t about to abide his insults. He
grabbed Willie by the shirt. Willie tried
fighting back, but, drunk and scrawny, he
was no match for Samuel. In just a few
seconds Willie was flat on his back, either
knocked out or passed out, in the ditch.
The two friends stood for a moment,
their eyes set on a motionless Willie
Padgett lying sprawled in the grass beside
a pasture fence. They hadn’t hurt him too
badly, and he’d had it coming, but this
was Lake County, and they could see the
picture. Cross a white man wrong in these
parts and you’re like to find your own
black self lying dead in a ditch. Norma


--- PAGE 147 ---
Lee Padgett, still clutching the near-empty
bottle of whiskey, steadied herself on the
sand and clay. Bathed in the bright
moonlight and the glow from the
Mercury’s headlights, she knew. She knew
nothing good would come of this. They all
knew.


--- PAGE 148 ---
CHAPTER 4: NIGGER
IN A PIT
Charles Hamilton Houston. (
Library of


--- PAGE 149 ---
Congress,  Prints & Photographs Division,
Visual Materials from the NAACP Records
)
H
ER NICKNAME WAS
 “Big East,” and, like
her friend Thurgood Marshall, she was a
force to be reckoned with. Nearly six feet
tall, exotic-looking, athletic, and graceful,
Evelyn Cunningham was a black reporter
and columnist with the 
Pittsburgh
Courier
, and was known around New
York for her “high heels, red hair, mink
coat and attitude.”
“When Evelyn Cunningham entered a
room, you knew it,” said Charles Rangel,
the congressman from New York,
longtime Harlem resident, and former
desk clerk at the Hotel Theresa.
Cunningham’s other nickname, “the


--- PAGE 150 ---
Lynching Editor,” stemmed from her days
as a stringer for the 
Courier
, when she
traveled through the South to cover the
same racial atrocities and trials that
claimed the attention of Marshall and the
NAACP. “I wanted to do hard news,”
Cunningham said, “and he [the 
Courier
editor] started worrying about me and I
said, ‘Well, I get killed somewhere it’s
not your fault. Can’t nobody sue you
’cause you weren’t even there. Chicken!’
” Like Marshall, Cunningham loved the
travel and the excitement of working for a
cause she believed in—civil rights. “I
think I did my best writing during that
period of danger,” she said. “Went to jail
a couple of times, I was threatened, I was
almost raped, all the bad things . . . really


--- PAGE 151 ---
bad.”
Cunningham claimed she conned her
editors into assigning her to the dangerous
stories she wanted to report. “I said, ‘You
know, they don’t lynch women. I got an
advantage being a woman. Everything
they’re doing, they’re doing to men.’ And
they bought that!”
Hard as Marshall and Cunningham
worked on the road, in New York they
found occasion to play. One night they
decided to visit an illegal after-hours club
that didn’t open until three in the morning.
It was filled with smoke, sultry bebop
music, and the “not particularly savory”
people that Marshall usually steered clear
of. But after a few drinks, the lawyer
loved being in the middle of it. With a


--- PAGE 152 ---
cigarette dangling from his lips and a
drink in his hand, Marshall was enjoying
himself, Cunningham recalled. They were
having a great, noisy time when, suddenly,
police descended on the club from all
directions. It was a raid. The music
stopped; people screamed and scattered.
Thinking quickly, Cunningham accosted a
cop she recognized, telling him, “You
can’t arrest this man. He is very, very
important, he’s with the NAACP, you’ve
got to let him go.” The officer permitted
Cunningham to lead Marshall through a
side door, out to the street. Big East was
trying her best to get him away from the
scene as fast as possible, but Marshall
apparently wasn’t ready for the night to
end. Cars rolled by, with horns honking,


--- PAGE 153 ---
as police jostled men into waiting
wagons. Espying his fellow club patrons
in handcuffs and custody, the boisterous,
slightly inebriated lawyer spun around in
his tracks and bellowed, “I would like to
defend these guys—these cops got no right
doing this!” Big East grabbed him by his
coat sleeve and dragged him away. “Time
to go home,” she said, convinced that
Marshall would have surely gotten himself
arrested. “He was a bit high,” she
recalled.
That he was out so late at night in New
York while living at 409 Edgecombe was
no surprise to friends, who observed that
Marshall’s relationship with his wife had
“become distant and lifeless.” Buster had
by now become accustomed to Marshall’s


--- PAGE 154 ---
constant travel and days, or weeks, away
from home. They had been married only a
few years in 1933 when Marshall was in
his final year at Howard University Law
School and his professor Charles
Hamilton Houston approached his prize
student with a proposition. Houston had
been asked by the NAACP to defend
George Crawford, a Virginia man accused
of murdering two white women, and
Houston invited Marshall to assist with
the case. It was an opportunity Marshall
could not pass up. He assisted Houston
more than diligently, working long hours
in the Howard law library. He also caught
the eye of Walter White, the executive
secretary of the NAACP, who observed a
“lanky, brash young senior law student”


--- PAGE 155 ---
who was always present. “Amazed at
[Marshall’s] assertiveness in challenging
positions taken by Charlie and the other
lawyers,” White recognized young
Thurgood’s “great value to the case in
doing everything he was asked, from
research on obscure legal opinions to
foraging for coffee and sandwiches.” The
opportunity not only to study under
Houston but also to work alongside the
legal giant was a life-changing event for
Marshall. Although they were unable to
win an acquittal for Crawford, they did
together prevent a death sentence. That in
itself was worth celebrating, for both men
knew that when blacks were charged with
killing whites in the South, a life sentence
was a victory. “You’ve won,” Marshall


--- PAGE 156 ---
later said, “because normally they were
hanging them.”
The following summer Houston had
another proposition for Marshall, who had
just graduated as valedictorian from
Howard University Law School. The
NAACP was sending Houston on a fact-
finding mission to study and document the
inequalities in schools for both black and
white children in the South, and Houston
wanted his young protégé to accompany
him. It was something Marshall had to talk
over with Buster first. They’d been living
together with Marshall’s parents in a
small house on Druid Hill Avenue in
Baltimore, patiently waiting for the day
when Marshall would graduate from law
school, hang a shingle, and start making a


--- PAGE 157 ---
name for himself. Buster had meanwhile
been selling bread in a Jewish bakery and
women’s hats in a clothing store, among
other jobs, to help make ends meet.
Complicating the decision was a
scholarship offer from Harvard Law
School for Marshall to study for an
advanced law degree. Marshall, however,
could not resist the opportunity to travel
with his mentor. He’d study for the
Maryland bar exam when he returned.
Having packed Houston’s six-cylinder
Graham-Paige with their luggage and bags
of fruit, the two men set off from
Washington, D.C., on a journey that took
them through the Carolinas, Georgia,
Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi.
Traveling not as lawyers but as journalists


--- PAGE 158 ---
and social scientists, they documented
public facilities and schools for blacks in
rural areas of the South that, to both men,
seemed to have been lost in time. With a
still camera as well as a rented, handheld
silent movie camera they compiled a
visual record of the poverty they
encountered. An endless string of
ramshackle schools on dusty roads, where
children sat on floors of tiny classrooms
with broken windows and potbellied
stoves, demonstrated indisputably that the
segregationist states were by no means
meeting the “separate but equal” standard
established by the U.S. Supreme Court in
the nocuous 
Plessy v. Ferguson
 decision
in 1896. “Motion pictures,” Houston
wrote, “humanize and dramatize the


--- PAGE 159 ---
discrimination which Negroes suffer much
more effectively than any corresponding
amount of speech could do. . . .”
Riding alongside Houston in the car,
Marshall smoked cigarettes and typed
observations on a well-worn Remington
portable that he balanced on his knees.
“Conditions,” Marshall wrote, “were
much worse than we heard they were”—
conditions like streets with human waste
running through poorly drained ditches,
because there was no plumbing in the
black parts of town. The trips—they made
two of them—had a profound impact on
Marshall. Not only had he now seen with
his own eyes the “evil results of
discrimination” that his mentor had tried
to describe to him in classrooms, but the


--- PAGE 160 ---
course of his life had been significantly
altered. Houston’s incessant credo took
hold of the impressionable young man: “A
lawyer’s either a social engineer or he’s a
parasite on society.”
Marshall went back to Maryland, where
he passed the bar, then struggled to find
paying clients at his own private practice
during the Depression. Most blacks in
Baltimore had little money, so Marshall
mostly practiced poverty law for the
lowest of fees. The more successful
blacks were reluctant to hire black
lawyers, as they thought their suits would
be better represented by white lawyers
who had relationships with opposing
counsel and judges. So it didn’t matter
how smart or how competent Marshall


--- PAGE 161 ---
was. His race alone prohibited him access
to the legal sphere where Baltimore’s
higher socioeconomic class conducted
business and forged relationships—a
sphere that even the least competent of
white lawyers could enjoy by virtue of
their skin color.
Charles Hamilton Houston had to ask
only once for the young lawyer to join him
in New York at the national headquarters
of the NAACP.
B
Y THE MID-1940S,
 the NAACP had
become overwhelmed with casework. For
years Thurgood Marshall and the
association had been planning an all-out
attack on segregation, one they hoped


--- PAGE 162 ---
would reverse the separate-but-equal
doctrine established by 
Plessy
. To get
there, the NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund
(LDF) had been filing numerous lawsuits
around the country to combat inequalities
in teachers’ pay, housing, transportation,
the armed forces, and higher education.
Despite the relocation of the NAACP to
more spacious offices in the Willkie
Memorial Building in midtown Manhattan,
a rash of recent hirings had left Thurgood
Marshall’s LDF short on space.
Since his arrival at the NAACP in
1938, Marshall had been forced to share
an office, first with his mentor, Charles
Hamilton Houston, and later with various
LDF counsel over the years. He was,
Marshall wrote in a 1947 memo to Walter


--- PAGE 163 ---
White, “the only executive who shared
offices.” That was after he’d been shuttled
into a small fourth-floor office in Freedom
House with two young females, attorney
Constance Baker and sociologist Annette
Peyser—the three of them shared the
single phone. Marshall told White
conditions had become unbearable; it was
impossible to concentrate with three
people in the same office working on
different types of cases, “answering the
telephone and/or dictating.” Marshall
was, he wrote, “at the end of my rope.”
Though sympathetic, White was not
especially disposed to accommodate the
less than punctilious Marshall. He had
already made it clear to Marshall that he
did not appreciate some patterns of


--- PAGE 164 ---
behavior in the LDF offices, most notably
an “overfamiliarity and casualness” and
the use of first names between executives
and secretaries or stenographers during
office hours that Marshall permitted. W.
E. B. DuBois, who had left the
organization in 1934, was nevertheless
around the office enough to observe
Marshall’s “unbuttoned office manners to
be outlandishly bad.” It was a charge the
lawyer could not deny. Victories were
celebrated, often on Friday afternoons,
when Marshall would pull a bottle of
whiskey from his desk drawer and
proceed to hold court. Imitating judges,
opposing counsel, or dim Uncle Tom
witnesses, he’d punctuate his tales from
the civil rights battlefront with one of his


--- PAGE 165 ---
famous deadpan grins or bawdy punch
lines. He relished racial humor, like the
story about the slave who stole a turkey
from his master, then ate the whole bird—
and just as the master was about to deliver
a whipping, the slave pleaded, “You
shouldn’t beat me, massuh. You got less
turkey, but you sure got more nigger.”
“He could tell some pretty off-color
jokes which would be, if they were told
by someone else, embarrassing,” recalled
Mildred Roxborough, who began a long
career with the NAACP as a secretary in
the early 1950s. “But you would find
yourself responding to them because of the
way in which he told them.”
In an office where the work was hard,
usually depressing, and often tragic,


--- PAGE 166 ---
Marshall was inclined to using
sophomoric or gallows humor to alleviate
tension. One associate recalled an
occasion when Marshall, in the course of
doing research, came across a story in a
nineteenth-century newspaper about a
black man who’d been doing railroad
construction in the Midwest and had fallen
into a ditch. The absurdity of the headline
gripped Marshall, who kept reading it
aloud from his desk, over and over, as if it
summed up the black man’s condition
then, and now: “Nigger in a Pit . . . Nigger
in a Pit . . . Nigger in a Pit . . .”
The letters from the South that arrived at
the NAACP offices often brought cries for
help or pleas for justice, and Marshall
commonly read them to his staff, even if


--- PAGE 167 ---
the LDF could not offer help. A letter, at
once touching and humorous, that he
received in May 1949 from Charles Jones
in Hog Wallow, Georgia, was typical:
Mr. Turgood.
I see by the Courer
 
[Pittsburgh
Courier]
 that you ar the No. 1 negro
of all Time, so I take my pen in han
as you must be the man I have been
lookin for all these yers.
You see Mr. Turgood I has great
trouble an goin to church don’t seem
to make it better. The Courer say
you has scared the white folks down
hear in the South and has them on
the run. Well, maybe so but you has
them runnin after me and I am ritin
to try to get you to make them run in


--- PAGE 168 ---
the other road away from me. They
is shootin and beating and
tarfeatherin all around here getten
closer to me all the time just las
week over in the next county and I
hop you will come quick because
these white folks down hear don’t
ack like they heard of Supreme court
or any court or anything. They is
runnin wild and we shure could use
the No. 1 negro of all time or
somebody to stop them from
mistreatin us.
You all is in Harlem an if the goin
get tough you can duck in the next
basement an nobody no wher you
has gon, but down here aint no place
to hide they just grabs you and yore


--- PAGE 169 ---
number is up or down. Please Mr.
Turgood if you are No 1 of all time
you can do it you are the one we ben
watin for since I was born please
help these white folks is mighty
mean and mighty close on my heels
yours for a little while anyway
Charles Jones X
PS Mr Turgood I rite this for
Charlie he cant read or rite but he
got real good sense. His wife Essie
Mae
Gloria Samuels was Marshall’s
secretary in 1949. She acknowledged the
use of first names at work as Walter White
had observed, as well as occasions of
laughter, but the fourth floor was not


--- PAGE 170 ---
typically so casual as the executive
secretary seemed to believe. The
workload was far too heavy to be
abandoned in laughter, and productivity
was no just cause for White’s worry.
“Mr. Marshall was very dedicated and
careful,” Samuels said. “He always wore
a suit and tie every day, and he was
surrounded by serious young lawyers
doing important work. We worked late
whenever we had to. Even Saturdays. That
was part of the job.” Mildred Roxborough
confirmed Samuels’s observations. “When
he was working, you didn’t joke,” she
said. “You didn’t waste time. You had an
assignment he gave you and he expected it
to be completed. It was inviolate that you
did that work and you produced and you


--- PAGE 171 ---
performed.”
Constance Baker, a black woman who
was in her last year at Columbia Law
School when she was hired by Marshall
as a law clerk in October 1945, thought
Marshall was ahead of his time in his
hiring practices. Baker, who married in
1946 and became Constance Baker
Motley, remembered Marshall’s “total
lack of formality” during her interview, in
which he mostly told stories about women
lawyers he had known and admired,
especially black women who had
mustered the courage to enter the white-
male-dominated legal profession. That
same year Marshall also hired a white
woman, Marian Wynn Perry, as an
associate counsel, no matter that in 1945,


--- PAGE 172 ---
as Motley noted, “nobody was hiring
women lawyers.” Marshall’s hiring
practices were not a conscious attempt to
achieve diversity on his staff: he just
didn’t think about it, said Motley, noting
that Marshall’s mother, Norma, who
taught at a segregated elementary school in
Baltimore, was one of the first black
women to graduate from Columbia
University’s prestigious Teachers
College. She pawned her engagement and
wedding rings to help fund Thurgood’s
law school education at Howard
University (his brother Aubrey went to
medical school). Marshall had nothing but
respect for serious women who were
committed to achievement. “His mother
was a professional,” Motley said. “So the


--- PAGE 173 ---
idea of a woman in a professional job, he
didn’t see anything wrong. In fact, there
were women in his class at law school.
He didn’t think anything strange of a
woman being a lawyer.”
Evelyn Cunningham, who later became
a noted Harlem columnist and feminist,
referred to her friend Thurgood Marshall
as one of the “first feminists.”
B
Y THE LATE
 1940s, Marshall was
logging some fifty thousand miles each
year as he swooped into cities and towns
across the South, usually alone. The
postwar years marked the beginning of a
more violent era in the American South,
and Marshall’s willingness to ride into a


--- PAGE 174 ---
hornet’s nest of racial conflict in pursuit
of his well-stated goal—to dismantle Jim
Crow—only cemented his growing legacy
as a crusader for justice. Marshall
relished his role as Mr. Civil Rights—it
suited his gregarious, larger-than-life
personality—and he was acutely aware
that when he stepped off the train, his only
sword was “a piece of paper called ‘The
Constitution.’ ” He had grown into a
celebrity, and wherever he went he was
treated like one. Men respected him and
wanted to drink with him and listen to his
stories; women simply fawned over him.
More and more frequently, after
conferences on the road, he did not return
home to Harlem, and Buster. To avoid
crisscrossing the country, Marshall found


--- PAGE 175 ---
it reasonable not to detour back to
Manhattan—“no sense in coming back to
New York,” as he wrote in a letter—and
his correspondence vaguely hinted at a
need for privacy. On most of his business
trips he stayed with friends or associates,
but on one occasion he wrote to West
Coast civil rights attorney Loren Miller,
stating, “I do not want to burden you and
Juanita again,” and asking for “a
suggestion as to a good place near Los
Angeles as to where one can go and rest
and hide.”
Daniel Ellis Byrd, the handsome and
extroverted former member of the Harlem
Globetrotters basketball team who went
on to become field secretary with the
NAACP in Louisiana, worked on several


--- PAGE 176 ---
desegregation suits with Marshall. The
two were close friends and Byrd liked to
tease Marshall about his predilection for
the ladies. Byrd once wrote to inform
Marshall that he had to rearrange the
lawyer’s itinerary, since he had scheduled
Marshall to give a speech on Mother’s
Day in New Orleans. Byrd wrote, “It has
been suggested, however, that since you
are not an authority on making a Mother’s
Day Address, that you would be much
more successful, and the occasion would
prove more pleasant for you, if you were
permitted to ‘undress’ someone’s fine
Mother, on Mother’s Day (smile).”
In New Orleans, Marshall usually
stayed at the home of A. P. Tureaud, a
Creole attorney who had also studied law


--- PAGE 177 ---
at Howard under Charles Hamilton
Houston. At one time the only black
attorney in Louisiana, Tureaud filed
countless equal pay and desegregation
lawsuits in parishes around the state on
behalf of the NAACP, and he spent
decades fighting nearly every one of them
in court. Tureaud lived in the Seventh
Ward, a largely Creole section of New
Orleans, and around the corner from his
home was one of Marshall’s favorite
restaurants, Dooky Chase’s, where he and
Tureaud often conducted business over
gumbo and fried chicken in the upstairs
meeting room. Otherwise they’d work, as
they were doing one evening when, in
Tureaud’s French Quarter office, Marshall
decided he needed a break and headed for


--- PAGE 178 ---
the bar downstairs to get a drink, although
he knew the bar was closed to blacks. It
was the kind of behavior that had earned
Marshall one of his nicknames, “Nogood.”
Tureaud and Byrd continued working and
as the hours passed without Marshall
reappearing, they began to worry. They
worried even more when they could not
find Marshall in the bar or anywhere else.
Disheartened, they returned to the office,
only to find Marshall sitting at the desk
going over briefs. The next day on the
stairway, Tureaud ran into the strapping
white owner of the bar, and his heart
jumped. “Say, where’s that big tall black
fellow that came into my place last night?”
Tureaud said that he didn’t know. “Well,”
the owner said, laughing. “If you see him


--- PAGE 179 ---
and he ain’t busy, ask him to stop by again
tonight. He sure had some funny stories.”
I
N FEBRUARY 1949,
 with the volume of
criminal cases coming through the
NAACP threatening to paralyze the LDF,
Marshall issued a memorandum that
established three rules to be applied “to
the types of criminal cases we accept . . .
(1) That there is injustice because of race
or color; (2) the man is innocent; (3) there
is a possibility of establishing a precedent
for the benefit of due process and equal
protection in general and the protection of
Negroes’ rights in particular.”
The memo also addressed a
“misunderstanding” that had arisen when


--- PAGE 180 ---
one of his LDF attorneys, Marian Wynn
Perry, argued against “limit[ing] ourselves
on the second point” and Marshall had to
remind her that the NAACP was not a
legal aid society. Although he
acknowledged that a defendant’s
innocence was a matter of judgment, he
also reasoned that “any experienced
lawyer reading the record in a case can
usually detect whether a man is obviously
guilty or whether he is apparently
innocent.” He further exhorted his staff to
“put no more credence in a convicted
defendant’s protestation of innocence than
we do a confession of guilt. Neither is
sufficient in itself for either point.” Perry
ultimately agreed that she would “obey
orders.”


--- PAGE 181 ---
Marshall’s core strategy for the LDF in
education, equal pay, or transportation
cases hinged upon the careful selection of
the plaintiffs, as the aim was to try their
cases in favorable courts in order to
establish precedents, usually through the
appeals process. So it was absolutely
imperative that the organization not be
embarrassed by any defense they mounted.
They could ill afford any mid-trial
setbacks or surprises. While Marshall
expected to lose criminal cases before
juries, he also expected the LDF’s cases
to firmly establish grounds for appeals on
record. The LDF would thus have strong
equal protection cases that it could appeal
to the higher courts. To Marshall, it was
therefore essential that his lawyers


--- PAGE 182 ---
strongly believe a potential client had
been wrongly accused. On occasion,
prisoners who’d escaped from chain
gangs in the South would show up at the
NAACP offices, and Marshall was
adamant about turning them away, lest the
organization be charged with “harboring
an escaped felon.” Sometimes a lawyer
would nonetheless listen to a convict’s
horrific story and attempt to persuade the
governor of the state from which the
prisoner had fled “not to sign extradition
papers.”
In the summer of 1949, Jack Greenberg,
a twenty-four-year-old Jewish kid with a
cherubic face and a buzz cut who had
recently been hired by Marshall as a staff
attorney for the LDF, sat at his desk


--- PAGE 183 ---
listening to a black woman’s shocking
tale: Her son had just been sentenced to
ten years in a Richmond, Virginia, prison
for stealing a bag of peanuts. The sentence
seemed exceedingly harsh to Greenberg,
who suspected that race had played a role.
Though he had grown up in an area of the
Bronx where “no blacks lived anywhere
nearby” and his family was not involved
in civil rights, his parents had instilled in
him “an abiding concern for those who are
disadvantaged.” Astounded by the
woman’s story, Greenberg marched into
Marshall’s office and urged his boss that
they take the case. Marshall was
nonplussed. He nodded at Greenberg, then
telephoned an attorney he knew in
Richmond and asked him to look into the


--- PAGE 184 ---
situation. A little while later Marshall
called Greenberg back into his office to
tell him that, as it turned out, the bag of
peanuts was “one of those enormous
burlap bags, the size of a flatbed truck.”
As Greenberg digested this new
information, Marshall added one more
detail. With “pursed lips and a raised
eyebrow,” Marshall noted that the
defendant had “hijacked the truck along
with it.”
I
N DECEMBER 1940,
 Eleanor Strubing, a
thirty-two-year-old housewife, socialite,
and former fashion model from
Greenwich, Connecticut, claimed that her
Negro butler and chauffeur, Joseph Spell,


--- PAGE 185 ---
had kidnapped her, written a ransom note,
tied her up, then raped her four times
before dragging her to a car and driving to
Kensico Reservoir in adjacent
Westchester County, New York, where
he’d thrown her off a bridge into the water
and then pelted her with rocks. The
newspaper coverage was predictably
sensational. The front page of the 
New
York Daily News
 featured a picture of
Strubing in a bathing suit adjacent to a
photo of Spell, arranged so that the
brooding butler appeared to be staring
straight at the vulnerable socialite. The
provocative story led to rumors that
“panic-stricken Westchester families were
firing their black servants.”
The then thirty-two-year-old Marshall


--- PAGE 186 ---
interviewed Spell in the Greenwich town
jail. He left convinced that the butler was
telling the truth when he claimed that
Strubing had not only consented to but
also initiated a sexual liaison one evening
when her husband was out of town. The
sexual encounter began in the living room,
until Strubing became worried that
someone might see them through the
window, at which point they retreated to
the garage. They proceeded to have sex in
the car, but “the sex stopped” as
Strubing’s fears of pregnancy loomed. The
two then did go for a drive, only again
Strubing panicked and ordered Spell to
stop the car. She then walked home by
herself. She did not report the alleged
crime to police for hours.


--- PAGE 187 ---
“He was supposed to have raped this
woman four times in one night,” Marshall
recalled. He recalled, too, the incredulity
at the LDF when the story hit the
newspapers: “All the secretaries, all of
’em, came and said, ‘Hey, defend that
man. We want to see it. Four times! Ha ha.
Ha ha. Four times in one night. Yeah,
bring him in here, let us see him.’ I told
’em, get out of my office.”
The case was important, Marshall said,
because winning Spell’s freedom would
strengthen the security of “thousands of
Negro domestics, chauffeurs, maids and
butlers throughout the country whose jobs
are jeopardized by this case.” After
presenting his findings to the NAACP,
Marshall announced that the organization


--- PAGE 188 ---
would defend Spell “to the limit of our
resources.”
Once the trial began it was revealed that
police had found neither the rope nor the
ransom note; nor had a Greenwich doctor
found any evidence of rape. Strubing
herself seemed out of sorts when
questioned on the stand, stating, “I’m sure
he raped me three times. But I can’t
remember now. On a stone floor—or
something. It’s so confused.” The facts of
the case were confused enough that the
prosecution offered a plea bargain.
Marshall, however, argued that Spell was
“not only innocent, but [in] a position
where everyone else knows he is
innocent.” With a possible thirty-year
sentence hanging in the balance, Spell put


--- PAGE 189 ---
his faith in the advice of his lawyer.
In his closing argument, the state’s
attorney asked that the “lust-mad Negro”
be convicted lest “shame and disgrace”
fall upon Mrs. Strubing. The all-white jury
of six men and six women deliberated
from noon until nearly midnight on
February 1 and voted unanimously to
acquit Joseph Spell of all charges. Very
little uproar followed the verdict, aside
from the reaction of some of Strubing’s
society friends, who telegraphed the
governor to state they “resent bitterly this
acquittal which casts such an unfair slur
on her character.” Spell could muster only
“What a relief!”
Thurgood Marshall appreciated that the
rape accusations against the butler might


--- PAGE 190 ---
afford the LDF secretaries some
amusement, but the vast majority of cases
that crossed Marshall’s desk were painful,
often horrible tragedies that he would
never even consider showing to the
women in the office. The most unsettling
involved teenage and preteen girls from
black communities who were raped and
often beaten or killed by advantaged, even
prominent white citizens and law
enforcement personnel in the South.
Frequently the accused men would not be
indicted, or else they’d stand trial (on
reduced charges of unlawful carnal
knowledge) before a jury of their peers,
who were not about to take the word of
poor blacks over that of white policemen,
doctors, insurance collectors, or plumbing


--- PAGE 191 ---
contractors. Most frustrating to Marshall
was the fact that the NAACP did not have
sufficient funds to provide legal
assistance; also, many of the rape cases
simply did not fit the criteria that Marshall
himself had defined for the LDF. Outraged
by the inhumanity of whites who abused
their power or authority, and moved
deeply by the suffering of their poor black
victims, Marshall could only apologize
that he and the organization could not do
more, in the affectively written letters he
sent to regional NAACP personnel, as
well as to the families of raped, beaten,
and sometimes murdered adolescent girls.
Limited though the NAACP was in its
ability to force prosecution on those who
perpetrated crimes against defenseless


--- PAGE 192 ---
blacks, the legal arm of the organization
had more options available when it came
to defending black men charged with rape
upon white women. W. J. Cash, in his
seminal exploration of Southern culture,
The
 
Mind of the South
, wrote that while
“the actual danger of the Southern white
woman’s being violated by the Negro has
always been comparatively small . . .
much less, for instance, than the chance
that she would be struck by lightning,” it
was “the most natural thing in the world
for the South to see it as very great, to
believe in it, fully and in all honesty, as a
menace requiring the most desperate
measures if it was to be held off.” In
Cash’s estimation, the Southern rape
complex “had nothing immediately to do


--- PAGE 193 ---
with sex,” but rather with the feeling
among Southerners that if blacks were to
advance beyond their severely
circumscribed social station, they might
“one day advance the whole way and lay
claim to complete equality, including,
specifically, the ever crucial right of
marriage.” Thurgood Marshall understood
perfectly the mind of the South, and he
knew he had to act fast when it came to
rape cases in the South, because a
lynching could quickly turn the defense of
the accused into a plea for the prosecution
of his murder.
A
T THE CONCLUSION
 of Joseph Spell’s
rape trial in Connecticut, Marshall


--- PAGE 194 ---
returned home to Harlem barely long
enough for a meal with Buster before he
was back at Pennsylvania Station, his bags
packed for a three-day train ride to
Oklahoma. Buster could do little more
than shrug when Marshall had told her
he’d be going back on the road, and in the
coming decade his absences would
become only more frequent. Buster, for
her part, would come to rely on the
constant assurances from fellow NAACP
wives and 409 Edgecombe neighbors like
Gladys White and Minnie Wilkins that
Thurgood was safe, in good spirits, and
heading homeward soon.
The long train trip to Oklahoma gave
Marshall the opportunity to bone up on
briefs from his next criminal case—a


--- PAGE 195 ---
gruesome one, in which he’d be defending
a sharecropper who had confessed to a
savage mass murder that had shocked all
of Oklahoma. A year earlier, a young
white couple, Mr. and Mrs. Elmer Rogers,
and their four-year-old son, Elvie Dean,
were butchered to death on New Year’s
Eve in their home in Choctaw County,
Oklahoma, before their farmhouse was
burned to the ground. Almost immediately
after the crime a white convict who had
been out on furlough confessed to the
murders. Newspapers reported that the
prisoner had also visited bars and
brothels in the area, and both the prison
warden and Governor Leon Chase
Phillips were severely criticized. To stem
the controversy, the governor had the


--- PAGE 196 ---
warden fired, then sent a special
investigator to Hugo, the Choctaw County
seat, to defuse the increasing political
fallout. Despite the prisoner’s confession,
the investigator arranged for him to leave
the state for Texas. Two weeks later the
investigator announced that he had found
the “real” killer: a Negro sharecropper
named W. D. Lyons.
Under the supervision of the governor’s
aide, Special Investigator Vernon
Cheatwood, Lyons was beaten over his
head and body with a blackjack while
Cheatwood and other police officers
interrogated the prisoner for several days.
Despite the beatings, Lyons refused to
admit his involvement in the murders—
until Cheatwood produced a pan of bones.


--- PAGE 197 ---
He placed the pan in Lyons’s lap and
growled, “There’s the bones of the baby
you burned up.”
The sleep-deprived Lyons was forced
to scrutinize the teeth, bones, and charred
remains of the young child and his mother.
It proved to be too much for the
superstitious sharecropper to bear. Lyons
confessed, in his words, because “they
beat me and beat me until I couldn’t stand
no more, until I gave in to them. . . . ”
A confession in hand, Cheatwood and
the police then chauffeured Lyons back to
the farmhouse, where one of the murder
weapons—an ax that had somehow
escaped notice in prior investigations—
was found in the ashes. Threats of being
burned and beaten with a pick hammer


--- PAGE 198 ---
prompted a second confession from Lyons
at the crime scene.
Marshall’s appetite for a coerced
confession case was buoyed by his recent
victory at the U.S. Supreme Court the year
before. In 
Chambers v. Florida
, Marshall
argued that the confessions used to convict
four transient blacks in the murder of a
Florida man should have been ruled
inadmissible because they had been
“extorted by violence and torture,” in
violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. In
a unanimous decision, the nine justices
overturned the Florida court’s
convictions, thus handing Marshall his
first win before the Supreme Court. In
delivering the opinion of the Court, Justice
Hugo Black wrote an eloquent passage


--- PAGE 199 ---
that, his widow later recalled, he “could
never read aloud without tears streaming
down his face.”
Today, as in ages past, we are not
without tragic proof that the exalted
power of some governments to
punish manufactured crime
dictatorially is the handmaid of
tyranny. Under our constitutional
system, courts stand against any
winds that blow as havens of refuge
for those who might otherwise suffer
because they are helpless, weak,
outnumbered, or because they are
nonconforming victims of prejudice
and public excitement. Due process
of law, preserved for all by our
Constitution, commands that no such


--- PAGE 200 ---
practice as that disclosed by this
record shall send any accused to his
death. No higher duty, no more
solemn responsibility, rests upon
this Court than that of translating
into living law and maintaining this
constitutional shield deliberately
planned and inscribed for the
benefit of every human being subject
to our Constitution—of whatever
race, creed or persuasion.
Marshall was cautiously optimistic that
he could at least establish on record that
Lyons’s confessions were coerced and, if
nothing else, take the case (now with
precedent) before a sympathetic Supreme
Court on appeal. First, however, he had to
navigate the dangerous and highly charged


--- PAGE 201 ---
atmosphere in Oklahoma. On this trip—
unlike his trips to the South with Houston,
which were essentially fact-finding
missions involving little conflict or even
contact with whites—Marshall was
coming to Choctaw County to fight. Word
of his imminent arrival had already spread
through town; the situation grew only more
volatile, and for Marshall, perceived by
whites as the enemy, more dangerous. As
a deputy sheriff said in the court hallways
at one of Marshall’s Tennessee trials,
“We are going to teach these Northern
Negroes not to come down here raising
fancy court questions.” The law may have
been on Marshall’s side, but law
enforcement wasn’t.
Upon his arrival in Choctaw County


--- PAGE 202 ---
after a six-hour bus ride, Marshall was
whisked away by blacks who felt it
necessary to hide him under armed guard
and to move him from place to place
during his stay. For word had gotten out
that “a Nigger lawyer from New York”
was trying the case, and the small black
community feared for Marshall’s life. An
aged, obstinate widow fearlessly took him
in. Marshall noted that she serenely
proclaimed, “I ain’t scared,” and snored
all night while he lay awake, sweating,
afraid. “I think I remembered every
lynching story that I had read about after
World War One,” he recalled. He was
unable to sleep; the ghastly photographs
appeared, and Marshall pictured himself
in each one—his crumpled body dumped


--- PAGE 203 ---
in a ditch at the center of town, or hanging
from a tree—the white children in their
Sunday clothes, pointing, grinning, and
rejoicing.
Marshall became convinced that Lyons
had been made a political scapegoat in the
governor’s attempt to avoid the fallout
he’d face if it was shown that furloughed
prisoners had been responsible for three
murders in his state. The yearlong delay
before trial only confirmed Marshall’s
suspicions that prosecutors were “scared
to try the case,” because usually, when
blacks confessed to murdering whites,
justice was swift and unmerciful.
As the trial was getting under way,
Marshall wrote to Walter White in New
York, telling him that the courthouse was


--- PAGE 204 ---
jammed with more than a thousand people,
many of whom had come in trucks and
wagons, to see “a certain Negro lawyer—
first time in this court—so sayeth the
bailiff.” Marshall added that white
schoolteachers had even brought their
classes to court, the judge remarking that it
was good for children to be able to
witness such “a gala day.” “Imagine it,”
Marshall wrote, “a Negro on trial for his
life being called a ‘gala day.’ ” He noted
that the “jury is lousy. . . . No chance of
winning here. Will keep record straight
for appeal.”
Before the first day of testimony,
Marshall appeared before an “informal”
county judge who smoked a big cigar as
he announced that there were “two


--- PAGE 205 ---
nationalities” involved in this case and
that he did not want any disorder. He did
not alleviate Marshall’s unease about the
reception a black New York lawyer might
expect in Oklahoma. The Lyons case was
called, and Marshall was introduced; he
took a seat at the counsel table and, as he
told Walter White, “the building did not
fall and the world did not come to an
end.”
After the noon recess, however, the
crowd “about doubled” and “the
fireworks started,” as Marshall moved to
have the first confession excluded from
evidence because police officers had
beaten the defendant. All morning the
officers had maintained, under oath, that
Lyons “was not struck, or injured in any


--- PAGE 206 ---
manner.” But when the county prosecutor
called Lyons to the stand, the defendant
shocked everyone in the courtroom by
testifying that the prosecutor himself had
witnessed the torture—a charge the
prosecutor denied before the judge. The
court went silent as the normally reticent
sharecropper met the prosecutor’s eyes.
“Oh, yes, you were there,” Lyons said.
The prosecutor’s face reddened. “Why,”
he stammered, pushing a finger in Lyons’s
face, “I stopped them from whipping you.”
The response in the courtroom was
tremendous. The spectators erupted in a
noisy buzz; the county judge rapped his
gavel on the bench in an effort to bring
order to his court. Marshall moved
quickly, making certain that the court


--- PAGE 207 ---
record showed the prosecutor had
conceded that Lyons was beaten while in
custody. No one in the courtroom had ever
seen anything like it before: a black man
in a Jim Crow state standing up in court
and talking to powerful white people
without the slightest form of deference—
all the while looking them straight in the
eyes. And he wasn’t done.
With Special Investigator Vernon
Cheatwood on the stand, Marshall asked
him about his interrogation of W. D.
Lyons, to which Cheatwood replied that
he had questioned Lyons for “six or seven
hours but never raised his voice, never
cursed him, and positively never struck
him with anything.” The special
investigator admitted to putting the pan of


--- PAGE 208 ---
bones in Lyons’s lap, but went on to deny
owning a blackjack or any kind of club.
After a hotel clerk testified that
Cheatwood had instructed him to “go up to
my room and get me my nigger beater,”
Marshall saved his best for last. He called
two white relatives of the slain woman,
including Mrs. Rogers’s father, who
testified that Cheatwood had shown him
his blackjack and admitted that he’d
beaten Lyons for “six—either six or seven
hours . . . [saying] I haven’t even got to go
to bed.”
One Oklahoma newspaper reported that
after Marshall’s grilling, the special
prosecutor stepped down from the witness
stand “shaking as though suffering from
palsy.” Marshall himself noted, “Boy, did


--- PAGE 209 ---
I like that. And did the Negroes in the
Court-room like it. You can’t imagine
what it means to those people down there
who have been pushed around for years to
know that there is an organization that will
help them. They are ready to do their part
now. They are ready for anything.”
Marshall was exhilarated by the
theatrics that criminal cases before a
packed courtroom could summon. He’d
committed himself and the NAACP to
chiseling away at the apartheid systems of
the South, but the work was painstakingly
slow, and victories in voting rights and
interstate transportation cases generated
little cause for attention outside the East
Coast conference rooms of lawyers and
editorial writers. Cases in criminal


--- PAGE 210 ---
courtrooms, though, generated immediate
excitement, and so did the Negro lawyer
from the North who could bring spectators
to their feet with his words. Not just black
spectators, either; for whites, too,
“stopped us in the halls and on the streets
to tell us they enjoyed the way the case
was going and that they didn’t believe
Lyons was guilty.” Marshall reported to
Walter White that “90% of the white
people by this time were with Lyons. One
thing this trial accomplished—the good
citizens of that area have been given a
lesson in Constitutional Law and the rights
of Negroes which they won’t forget for
some time. Law enforcement officers now
know that when they beat a Negro up they
might have to answer for it on the witness


--- PAGE 211 ---
stand. All of the white people in the Court
room passed some mighty nasty comments
after the officers lied on the stand. Several
told the officers what they thought of them
out on the halls.”
The white people in the courthouse
halls might have believed that Lyons was
innocent, but the whites on the jury were
not prepared to say so. After five and a
half hours of deliberation, they returned
with a guilty verdict. Marshall was not
surprised. “We are in a perfect position to
appeal,” he stated, noting that the
prosecution had asked for the death
penalty, whereas the jury’s sentence of
Lyons to life imprisonment for a crime that
resulted in “three people killed, shot with
a shot gun and cut up with an axe and then


--- PAGE 212 ---
burned—shows clearly that they believed
him innocent.”
The Lyons case reaped a harvest of
publicity, which was augmented by the
statement of E. O. Colclasure, the father of
the murdered white woman. He told the
press that he did not believe W. D. Lyons
was guilty; he opined further that the
Oklahoma police and prosecutors had
conspired to frame the sharecropper.
Moved by Thurgood Marshall’s argument
in court, the still grieving father joined the
NAACP.
Confident he could reverse the verdict
on appeal, Marshall boarded a train for
the long trip back to New York. Despite
the loss, he was becoming more optimistic
about what had happened in Oklahoma.


--- PAGE 213 ---
Every visit to a Jim Crow courtroom
confirmed to him that the American justice
system was wholly stacked against
powerless blacks—but he was seeing tiny
cracks in the veneer. Guilty verdicts with
recommendations of mercy instead of
death sentences. Police officers indicted
on brutality charges. Hope where there
was none before. Criminal cases could
affect people in unexpected ways. They
raised awareness, increased NAACP
membership, and if handled properly, they
could bring in money. Lots of it. “I think
we should aim at $10,000,” Marshall
wrote to White. “We could use another
good defense fund and this case has more
appeal tha[n] any up to this time. The
beating plus the use of bones of dead


--- PAGE 214 ---
people will raise money.” Between the
Spell case in Greenwich and Lyons in
Oklahoma, Marshall was optimistic about
the future. “The NAACP did all right this
month. . . . We have been needing a good
criminal case and we have it. Lets [
sic
]
raise some real money.”


--- PAGE 215 ---
CHAPTER 5:
TROUBLE FIXIN’ TO
START
The Southern Knights of the KKK, led by
Bill Hendrix in 1949. (
Courtesy of the State
Archives of Florida
)


--- PAGE 216 ---
N
ORMA PADGETT DIDN’T
 make it home
that night.
The first glare of another warm July sun
had just come up over the high and dry
pastures of Okahumpka, Florida, when
Clifton C. Twiss and his wife, Ethel, up
early as usual, heard a car coming up the
road. The motor shut off for a moment,
then started back up again, and when they
looked out the window they saw a thin girl
walking away from a small, dark car
toward the fork. Clifton picked up his
binoculars to get a closer look and then
passed them to his wife. The car, with a
white man driving, sped away. Unusual
thing to see this time of morning, they
thought—young, blond girl dressed nicely,


--- PAGE 217 ---
pacing back and forth along the newly
paved road, a purse slung over her
shoulder. They kept an eye on her, curious
as to why this waifish teenage girl would
be up at six o’clock on a Saturday morning
out here in Okahumpka—a town that
wasn’t much more than an intersection in
Lake County. It was odd, they thought, but
she didn’t appear to be in any trouble. The
couple, seeing her dropped off by the side
of the road, decided she must be
hitchhiking or waiting for someone, so
they went about their morning rituals,
stirring their coffee and reading the
morning paper, and occasionally glanced
up the road at the girl in the pink dress
with the purse.
At about 6:45 a.m. nineteen-year-old


--- PAGE 218 ---
Lawrence Burtoft, who was finishing his
shift as watchman at his father’s
Okahumpka restaurant, looked out the
window and saw the girl standing by the
crossroads of Leesburg and Center Hill.
He didn’t know her by name, but he’d
seen her in the restaurant before and knew
that she was from Bay Lake, a small
community of mostly dirt-poor farmers
about twenty miles south, and he
wondered what she was doing up here by
the cattle pens in Okahumpka so early in
the morning. She looked as if she was
waiting for somebody. Burtoft got dressed
and went outside to pick up the fresh
bread that was dropped off each morning
before daylight.
“Good morning,” the girl said as Burtoft


--- PAGE 219 ---
approached. After they’d exchanged
greetings, she asked if anybody might be
coming along who’d be able to take her
back to Groveland. Burtoft told her no and
offered her some water or a cup of coffee.
She declined, but they went inside the
restaurant anyway. Sitting across from
Norma Lee at a table, Burtoft slowly
sipped his coffee and tried to figure out,
without prying, what had brought this girl
out here to the middle of nowhere.
After a few minutes of small talk,
Norma indicated that there had been some
trouble. She told Burtoft that she’d been
out last night with her husband, Willie
Padgett, and his car had broken down on
the way toward Groveland. Some black
men, she said, had come along in a car and


--- PAGE 220 ---
pulled over, to see if she and Willie
needed any help.
Burtoft had just finished his coffee when
the girl told him the black men had hit
Willie over the head and carried her away
in their car.
Burtoft’s eyes studied the girl. “Did
they hurt you?” he asked.
“No,” she said, adding only that her feet
hurt from walking such a long way.
Burtoft noticed a tear in the girl’s dress;
it had gotten caught on a barbed wire
fence, she explained. Burtoft remarked
nothing in the girl’s behavior to suggest
that she’d been kidnapped by some black
men a few hours earlier. Except for a few
tears and an occasional sniffle, she
“looked to be in a pretty calm condition


--- PAGE 221 ---
for her husband to be lying down dead
beside the road.”
The two sat inside the restaurant for
fifteen minutes or so, with Norma waiting
patiently until Burtoft had finished his
breakfast before she asked him to help
find her husband. Burtoft detected no
urgency in her voice, and as he rode his
bike to his parents’ house to get their car,
it struck him how strange it all was:
Norma Lee so calmly relating how her
husband might be lying dead at the side of
the road to Groveland.
When he returned to the restaurant in the
family car, he and Norma Lee drove south,
back toward Groveland. Burtoft’s
reluctance to pry was vying with his
curiosity. His heart raced as he began to


--- PAGE 222 ---
register the reality of what the girl had
told him.
“Do you think you would recognize
them?” he asked.
“No,” she said. She didn’t think she
could, as it was too dark, although she did
note that one was extremely dark and one
was “high yellow.”
A few miles down the road, Norma
asked Burtoft to pull over. He followed
the girl into the high grass alongside the
road, any moment expecting to stumble
over the body of her husband. But they
found nothing. Norma admitted that she
did not know exactly where to look, but
they did drive farther on. When it became
apparent to Norma Lee that they had now
driven too far, Burtoft turned the car


--- PAGE 223 ---
around and headed back to Okahumpka.
Having convinced Norma Lee that they
should report the incident to the police in
Leesburg, five miles to the north, Burtoft
had driven about a mile or so when they
came upon another car at the roadside.
Two men emerged from the parked car
and flagged them down. Burtoft stopped;
he recognized one man, Curtis Howard, a
classmate from Leesburg High School,
and he had seen the other one, short and
lean, more than once on the dance floor,
but not with Norma. Willie Padgett came
over to his wife; they didn’t speak a single
word to each other.
Strangely calm, Burtoft thought. Only
minutes before, Norma Lee had been half
expecting to find her husband dead. And


--- PAGE 224 ---
Willie Padgett couldn’t have been certain
his wife was alive, either. Burtoft had
anticipated a more emotional reunion, but
Norma simply got into the other car while
Willie thanked Burtoft for his time and
trouble.
“You’re quite welcome,” Burtoft said,
still dazed as he watched the two men
drive off with the girl.
S
HERIFF WILLIS MCCALL
 was on his way
back from an Elks Club convention in
Cleveland, Ohio, with a deputy, a
prisoner, and some friends when he
stopped his sturdy Oldsmobile 88 in Citra,
a small Florida town, home to the
pineapple orange, about an hour and a half


--- PAGE 225 ---
north of Groveland. Standing outside the
Olds in his tall, white Stetson hat, the
lumbering forty-year-old sheriff savored a
long swig from a Coca-Cola bottle; he’d
been driving for hours. The trip had been
a getaway from the never-ending job of
maintaining “lawanorder” in Lake County,
but he had managed to conduct a little
business in Ohio, picking up a prisoner in
Columbus to face break-in and assault
charges in Lake County court. McCall had
been away from Florida for only a few
days, but he couldn’t resist the urge to
check in on his domain. He reached down
and powered on the police radio.
“We’re probably too far away to get
anything from Tavares on this thing,” he
said as he started up the car and bucked


--- PAGE 226 ---
his six-foot, three-inch frame behind the
wheel. As he drove south into citrus
country, the radio cackled beneath the lull
of the heavy engine until McCall thought
he could make out the voice of his deputy,
James Yates, in distress. Something about
a shooting in Lake County. McCall
stiffened behind the wheel, then reached
for the radio and managed to get Reuben
Hatcher, the county jailer, on the other
end.
“What’s the trouble?” McCall asked
after identifying himself.
Hatcher was breathing hard and trying
to compose himself. “Boy, I’ve never
been so happy to hear anyone’s voice,” he
told McCall, adding that “there’s a lot of
trouble fixin’ to start . . . some of the


--- PAGE 227 ---
people down there are making all kinds of
threats.”
McCall tried to make sense of
Hatcher’s panic but he could barely make
out the jailer’s voice on the radio. He
wanted to know exactly what had
happened in Groveland. Only his radio
had gone silent. It was a long couple of
minutes till it cackled again. Then nothing,
a static hiss. Finally, with heavy clarity
the words came.
“A white housewife . . . raped by four
negroes . . .”
With his passengers sitting in stunned
silence, Willis McCall’s ears pricked up.
Black suspects were in custody, he was
told, but a mob was forming in Groveland
and there was a “pretty high feeling”


--- PAGE 228 ---
around the county. McCall stared straight
down the highway, one hand gripped tight
on the wheel as he pressed his foot down
on the accelerator. He knew Lake County
better than anyone and he could sense the
distress on the other end of the radio.
Night was coming; he needed to get back
fast. The sheriff had one more thought,
which he was able to relay to the jailer.
“Call Yates and tell him to get the
Negroes out right away,” he said. “Hide
them in the woods.”
M
CCALL HIGHTAILED IT
 to his split-level
farmhouse in Eustis, threw the Oldsmobile
into park, and began unloading luggage
from his trunk to the garage. Night was


--- PAGE 229 ---
falling, and he knew now that a large mob
of heavily armed men was forming in
Groveland, and another in Mascotte
twenty-five miles to the south. A gang of
blacks, he’d been told, had raped a young,
white Lake County girl, and as the news
quickly spread, cars were rapidly
gathering. Vengeance charged the county
air. McCall knew how it would end,
unless Yates got the Negroes hidden in the
woods. Say nothing more on the radio,
McCall had told his deputies: men at the
Leesburg station might be listening, and
McCall wanted no chance of a tip-off that
might lead to a roadblock or ambush. He
needed to secure the suspects because in
darkness, he knew these south Lake
County men would head north to Tavares.


--- PAGE 230 ---
He was sure of it. They’d storm the jail,
and there’d be no stopping the lynching.
The sheriff was hoisting his luggage
from the trunk when two cars pulled up to
his house. In the first car he could see
Deputy Yates and another man, Captain
Bill Allison, a warden of the prison
camps in Tavares. Deputy Leroy
Campbell pulled the second car in behind
them. Joining the sheriff in front of the
house, Yates told him the Negroes were
lying down in the back of his car; he’d
ordered them to keep their heads down, so
no one had seen them as they drove
through town. Yates added that they had
confessed to raping Norma Padgett.
Willis McCall was quiet. He walked
toward the rear of Yates’s car. His wife,


--- PAGE 231 ---
Doris, had stepped outside, and he could
hear his sons, Malcolm and Donnie,
laughing and playing inside—the two boys
oblivious to their father’s mood and the
deputies’ tension. McCall peered inside
his deputy’s car. He could see two
prisoners crumpled together on the
floorboard, handcuffs joining their wrists.
He opened the rear door and immediately
recognized the faces of Samuel Shepherd
and Walter Irvin, the two army veterans
from Groveland who had been picked up
by Lake County deputies early that
morning. As the door swung open, the
dazed prisoners could hear the echo of
children’s laughter at the same time they
caught a glimpse of the “Big Hat Man”
who stared down at them. They were all


--- PAGE 232 ---
of them in a world of trouble.
W
ITH SHEPHERD AND
 Irvin still slumped
down on the floor in the back of the car,
Yates and another deputy sped north
toward Florida State Prison, in Raiford,
some two hours away. McCall fired up his
Olds and headed in the opposite direction,
toward Groveland, where he aimed to
quiet any mob he might encounter. He
never made it. Just outside the city limits,
he spotted a motorcade of twenty-five cars
moving toward Tavares, their headlights
blazing a path to the jail. McCall, certain
they meant business, spun his car around.
After following them for a few miles, he
gunned the engine and, pulling ahead of


--- PAGE 233 ---
the convoy, he took the lead into Tavares.
He had his revolver at hand on the seat
next to him.
McCall parked the car and hurried to
the back of the courthouse. He left his gun
behind; with more than 125 men “armed to
the gills” coming toward him, a revolver
would be no deterrent. McCall recognized
many in the mob as Bay Lake farmers, men
he knew, and he knew a show of force
was likely to provoke them into violence.
If he was going to prevent a lynching,
McCall was going to have to do it with his
wits and personality.
“Willis, we want them niggers.”
Flowers Cockcroft, thirty-five, the
“husky, brash” son of a Lake County
watermelon farmer, stepped forward and


--- PAGE 234 ---
spoke for the mob. The sheriff removed
his hat and, attempting to meet their rage
with a smile, talked fast and
acknowledged as many of the men as he
could by name. “I can’t let you people do
this,” he said, looking toward Cockcroft.
“You fellas elected me to uphold the law,
and I’ve got to do it.”
McCall was answered by men in the
back of the mob hurling obscenities, but he
dared not show any fear. He lowered his
voice. “I may be in sympathy, and I know
you’re stirred up about this thing,” he said.
“You’ve got a right to be. But you don’t
have a right to take the law into your own
hands. These Negroes are going to be held
and tried in court.”
“Look, McCall,” one man shouted,


--- PAGE 235 ---
“we’re going to fix them niggers right now
or none of our women is gonna be safe.”
Even as the sheriff continued to reason
with them, he could sense they were
determined in their purpose and he feared
they might be on the verge of storming the
jail. His reputation around Lake County
might be enough to hold them off, but only
if he changed his tactics. “The prisoners
you want are no longer here,” McCall told
them. “They’ve been taken elsewhere.”
From the back, jeers and shouts of
“Liar!” pierced the night. The mob thought
McCall was bluffing; they demanded to be
let into the jail. A few minutes of heated
discussion later, McCall agreed to allow
a small delegation inside to search the jail
cells for two black prisoners. He pointed


--- PAGE 236 ---
to two men at the front of the lynch mob;
Willie Padgett and his father-in-law, Coy
Tyson, stepped forward. Padgett would at
least recognize the men who had beaten
him and abducted Norma the night before,
and Coy Tyson couldn’t wait to lay eyes
on the men who’d raped his daughter.
Flowers Cockcroft, the self-appointed
spokesman of the mob, also joined them.
McCall had negotiated an agreement, and
Deputy Campbell led the three men into
the courthouse while the sheriff and a few
nervous deputies waited outside with the
rest of the mob.
I
N HIS CELL
 on the top floor of the
jailhouse, sixteen-year-old Charles


--- PAGE 237 ---
Greenlee was still trying to figure out
what was happening to him. He had just
arrived in town the night before from
Gainesville, where he and his friend
Ernest Thomas had been washing dishes
and flipping burgers together at the
Humpty Dumpty Drive-In. The twenty-
five-year-old Ernest had been looking to
come home to Groveland and he’d
convinced his younger friend that plenty of
orange-picking work awaited both of them
in the groves of Lake County.
At six feet tall, Charles looked older
than his age, but he still had the wiry
frame and the fears of a teenager. Leaving
home hadn’t been easy for him. His close-
knit family had endured a summer of
unimaginable agony. In May, Charles’s


--- PAGE 238 ---
four-year-old sister had been killed when
she was struck by an Atlantic Coastline
train passing on the tracks close by their
home in Pine Top, near the Georgia
border, in Baker County, Florida. His
grief-stricken thirty-two-year-old mother,
Emma, was already inconsolable when, in
the cruelest of fates, just weeks later her
two-year-old daughter was killed on the
same tracks. The family had been
irreparably damaged. Charles’s own grief
had compelled him to leave.
On the morning of July 15, in Zuber,
Florida, Charles and Ernest had hitched a
ride south on the back of a University of
Florida truck. They’d caught a few more
rides, and eventually some white men in a
Dodge truck had dropped them off in


--- PAGE 239 ---
Mascotte. They had walked the remaining
couple of miles along the train tracks to
Groveland. Both of them were filthy, and
since their plan was for Charles to stay at
the Thomas house, they decided he should
wait in the train depot while Ernest picked
up some clean clothes at the Thomases’
home for Charles to wear. He had been
waiting about an hour and a half when
Ernest returned in a 1941 Pontiac with
two packages of cookies, a bag of peanuts,
and a bottle of soda water, but no clean
clothes. For those, Charles would have to
wait a few more hours, until Ernest’s
mother got home from her job running a
beer joint in Groveland.
The idea of loitering in the rail depot of
an unfamiliar town at night, when he was


--- PAGE 240 ---
all sweaty and caked in road dust, made
Charles more than a little anxious. So,
when he spotted a .45 Colt revolver with
a four-inch barrel beside his friend on the
front seat of the Pontiac, he asked, half
jokingly, if Ernest would let him
meanwhile hang on to the gun. To
Charles’s surprise Ernest agreed. He
handed over the gun, then drove off in the
Pontiac. Charles would never see his
friend again.
At nightfall, beside a tomato shed near
the station platform, with his suitcase for a
pillow, Charles did manage to sleep for a
few hours. Sometime after midnight he
awakened to the buzz and bites of
mosquitoes. Tucking the revolver in his
belt, he headed across the street to L. Day


--- PAGE 241 ---
Edge’s gas station. There he filled his
soda bottle with water at a drinking
fountain, and there the flashlights of two
Edge Mercantile night watchmen spotted
him.
“Is there anywhere a fellow can get
something to eat?” Charles asked the
watchmen.
“Hold still a minute, boy,” one said,
drawing his gun. Charles instinctively
raised his hands in the air.
They marched Charles across the street,
back to the depot, where they rifled
through his suitcase. They examined his
Social Security card and driver’s license.
They questioned him about the gun, which,
as it turned out, wasn’t loaded. Because
he didn’t want to involve Ernest in the


--- PAGE 242 ---
inquiry, Charles said the gun belonged to
his father up in Santa Fe, Florida, north of
Gainesville. They were about to release
him when another man from the filling
station appeared.
“What road camp you break out?” the
man asked. Charles patiently explained
where he had come from, but the man was
cautious. “You don’t know what that boy
done done,” he told the watchmen. “You
better hold him till morning.”
One of the men stepped into a phone
booth, and not long after, at about 3 a.m.
George Mays, Groveland’s chief of
police, arrived. He decided it was best to
put Charles in for the night. The two night
watchmen brought to the jail more cookies
and another bottle of water for him; they


--- PAGE 243 ---
also told him they’d like to “work out
something with the gun” if he was
interested in selling it. So Charles hadn’t
worried. The men were treating him well,
and they would soon enough discover he
hadn’t done anything wrong. Charles had
figured he’d be out of jail by morning.
But he wasn’t. The next morning,
deputies James Yates and Leroy Campbell
arrived at the jail, both of them in a foul
mood.
“Stand up, nigger,” Campbell had said
as they’d entered the cell, and
immediately they’d begun peppering the
teenager with questions: “Where are the
boys you were with last night?” “Where’s
the car?” “Was it an old Buick or a new
Buick?”


--- PAGE 244 ---
Charles was confused. “I wasn’t in any
car,” he replied, adding that he hadn’t
been with any boys last night, either. The
deputies made the boy drop his pants, as
Yates was looking for “anything to
indicate he was connected with the rape.”
When he failed to find anything,
dissatisfied, he walked away in a huff.
“You’re lying,” Yates growled.
Soon after, Charles became aware that a
crowd of men was gathering around the
jail. He’d heard a few remarks from
outside about “what they would do and
what they would not do if they got ahold
of this boy Greenlee.” Then he heard
footsteps approaching.
Chief Mays led a young white couple
over to Charles’s cell. Standing there


--- PAGE 245 ---
shirtless, Charles lowered his eyes to the
floor as Willie and Norma Padgett looked
him up and down.
“He’s not one of the boys,” Willie said.
Norma turned to Mays. “He looks like
one of the boys,” she said.
Willie took another look. “He is not one
of the boys,” he said again, then left with
Norma.
Returning a few minutes later, Willie
quietly asked Charles if he’d been with
any boys the night before. Charles replied
that he didn’t know what boys Willie was
talking about. “The boys what took me out
of the ditch last night,” Willie said.
“No, sir,” Charles answered. “I wasn’t
one of them.” Willie described them in
more detail and again asked if Charles had


--- PAGE 246 ---
seen them. Charles responded that he
hadn’t seen anyone last night “but the men
who had put me in jail.”
Willie Padgett appeared satisfied and
left the jail, but others arrived to question
Charles further about some boys in a car
the night before. He had no idea why until
finally Chief Mays told him: “Boy, if you
don’t know it, you in trouble. Some boys
raped a white woman last night and
robbed a man. If I don’t hurry up and get
you away from here they gonna take you
out and kill you.”
With the clamor outside the jail
growing, Charles begged Mays to “hurry
up and take me away.” The police chief
told him that some cars were on the way.
At about the same moment, Elma Lee


--- PAGE 247 ---
Puryear, the mayor of Groveland, saw
about fifty Bay Lake men standing outside
the jail as he was driving by. Feeling
uneasy and suspecting they “might cause
some trouble,” he learned from a Lake
County deputy that the crowd believed the
jail was housing a Negro who had raped a
Bay Lake girl the night before. Puryear
and the deputy determined that the Negro
should be moved from the rickety
Groveland jail. They hustled the teen
outside, past the gathering mob, and into
the mayor’s car. Charles was transferred
to Tavares without incident.
At Tavares, Charles found himself in
the bullpen, where he saw, among the
prisoners, “two colored boys who were
all beat up.” Their faces were swollen


--- PAGE 248 ---
and bloody; they sat slumped in
resignation; they said nothing. One of
them, Charles noticed, “had a big hole
knocked in the back of his head.” When
the prisoners were served supper, the two
beaten ones were removed from the cell.
The taller of the two returned before
Charles had finished his meal. He
removed his shirt; bruises and welts
covered his upper body.
The turn in Charles’s fate was hard for
him to fathom. He had never been in any
serious trouble with the law. The day
before, he and his friend Ernest had set out
for Groveland, where they’d be sure to
find decent jobs picking citrus. They’d
even lined up a place to stay. Most
important, Charles had traveled with the


--- PAGE 249 ---
blessing of his parents, who hoped that by
striking out on his own he’d have a chance
for a fresh and optimistic start in a new
town. When his father told him, “Go ahead
and try,” Charles felt ready for an
adventure. But not for this one.
Night had fallen. Charles Greenlee had
been in the supposedly more secure county
jail in Tavares for about nine hours when
the angry shouts of a much larger crowd
had the prisoners on the top floor stirring.
Unlike his fellow inmates, Charles had
some idea why the mob had gathered, and
he was scared for his life. He could hear
some men moving from cell to cell. When
they reached the bullpen, he immediately
recognized Willie Padgett, the man who
had talked to him earlier that day in


--- PAGE 250 ---
Groveland. Padgett recognized Charles,
too; just as he had told Norma, he now
told her father that Greenlee wasn’t one of
the boys.
“That’s the boy they picked up in
Groveland for carrying a gun,” Padgett
said. Charles sighed in relief; he began to
think this whole misunderstanding would
be cleared up soon.
Except that Leroy Campbell was eyeing
him with suspicion and menace. The
“stout white man dressed in a white shirt
with bloody specks, felt hat, brown
summer pants, revolver strapped to his
hip, and a small brown badge on his belt”
was one of the deputies who had grilled
him in Groveland, and at Tavares he’d
been conducting the two brutalized


--- PAGE 251 ---
colored boys back and forth from the
bullpen.
After searching the basement and the
other floors in the courthouse, the three
Bay Lake men—Padgett, Tyson, and
Cockcroft—were finally satisfied that
Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin had
been moved to Raiford, just as the sheriff
had said. Still, they weren’t happy, and
they left the building grumbling. The mob
outside assured Coy Tyson that they’d take
care of things their way if the law failed
him and his daughter. Willis McCall urged
them all to go home.
“You’ve got families and
responsibilities,” he told them. “I’m sure
you have many things to do on a Saturday
evening besides sit here and argue with


--- PAGE 252 ---
me about some nigras. I’ve secured them,
and that’s all there is to it. I’ve got to
follow the law. Now, you fellas give it up
and go on about your business. Some of
your wives are probably waiting supper,
or they may be wantin’ for you to take ’em
out to a movie or something.”
Slowly, and to McCall’s great relief,
the crowd began to disperse.
By the end of the weekend, Sheriff
Willis McCall would be proclaimed a
hero in newspapers across the country for
successfully preventing a lynching in Lake
County. The 
Orlando
 
Sunday Sentinel
trumpeted McCall’s fortitude before the
mob under the headline “Lake County
Bride Kidnapped,” while a paper as far
away as Eugene, Oregon, shouted,


--- PAGE 253 ---
“Sheriff Staves Off Lynching.” Even the
New York Times
 noted that the “fast
talking” sheriff moved quickly to
“disperse a mob of about 100 armed men
who came to take two Negroes from his
jail.” Th
e Miami Herald
 praised
McCall’s “steadfast courage,” but added,
“the whole setting smells Ku Klux Klan.”
A steady Florida rain had begun to fall
as the dispirited Bay Lake vigilantes
returned to their cars and trucks with their
rifles and ax handles. McCall decided that
now would be a good time to talk to the
young boy who was the third suspect in
the rape of Norma Padgett. He rode the
slow elevator in the courthouse up to the
jail on the top floor.
For both Sheriff Willis McCall and


--- PAGE 254 ---
Charles Greenlee, their evening of fear
was far from over. And their weekend
would be anything but quiet.
B
Y THE SUMMER
 of 1949, Walter White,
who had been suffering from a heart
ailment, had become the focus of a
damaging controversy within the NAACP.
After admitting to an affair with Poppy
Cannon, a white South African socialite,
White divorced his wife of twenty-seven
years, Gladys, a black woman, and
married Cannon in June. The interracial
marriage did not sit well with the black
press, and the distraction was causing a
rift within the NAACP, where “all hell
broke loose.” Roy Wilkins, editor of the


--- PAGE 255 ---
Crisis , the organization’s official organ,
and, like Marshall and White, a resident at
409 Edgecombe Avenue, thought it best
that White not attend the NAACP’s annual
convention. White had become a lightning
rod for criticism among those who had
previously viewed him as a race leader,
and the blond-haired, blue-eyed Negro
who “dressed like a tweedy English
country squire” and was known as “Mr.
NAACP” did not make things any easier
for himself that summer. He wrote a
provocative piece for 
Look
 magazine’s
August issue, “Has Science Conquered the
Color Line?” in which he pondered the
benefits of hydroquinone, an antioxidant
that could be used to remove melanin from
human skin, and wondered whether the


--- PAGE 256 ---
ability to turn dark skins pale might “solve
the American race problem.”
For his part, Marshall felt White was
entitled to marry “whomever he wished
provided she consented,” but that did not
stop White from considering Marshall
“obstreperous” and even “mean-spirited”
at the time. Marshall had never shied from
confronting White about his lack of a law
degree, and he bristled whenever the
executive secretary attempted to exert his
influence in the LDF’s legal affairs,
especially when White began traveling to
Washington to observe Marshall’s
arguments before the Supreme Court—
during which proceedings White would sit
“within the rail,” a section reserved only
for members of the Supreme Court bar.


--- PAGE 257 ---
“Now look,” Marshall told him, “you’re
not supposed to be in there, and they know
you’re connected with me, and one of
these days they’re going to find out you’re
not a lawyer. And I’m gonna get blamed
for it. And it’s going to affect my standing.
And I don’t believe in letting anything
affect my standing in the Supreme Court.
So I’m telling you, don’t let me catch you
sitting there again. If you do, I’m going to
tell the guard.”
“You wouldn’t,” an indignant White
replied.
“Try me,” Marshall said.
Not long after that exchange, Marshall
spotted White again within the rail.
Marshall quietly approached a guard and,
pointing to White, whispered, “See that


--- PAGE 258 ---
fellow over there? I don’t think he’s a
member of the bar.” The guard politely
requested White to move to the spectators’
section in the rear of the court.
The next time Marshall appeared before
the Supreme Court he was pleased to note
that White had chosen not to defy him.
That is, until he discovered the executive
secretary even more exclusively seated.
At White’s behest, Justice Hugo Black
arranged for him to sit as a guest in the
judge’s box. Marshall could only shake
his head. “So he won, anyhow,” he said.
Despite the fact that White still had the
full support of Eleanor Roosevelt, he
ultimately decided to take a leave of
absence in the summer of 1949, leaving
Marshall and Wilkins, now the acting


--- PAGE 259 ---
secretary, responsible for day-to-day
operations at the NAACP. Aside from the
teachers’ pay, voting, education, and
transportation cases that constantly
occupied the LDF in its multipronged
legal attack on Jim Crow, a steady stream
of capital rape cases continually flooded
its offices. Marshall had long been aware
that such charges raised serious human
rights issues, since the death penalty for
rape was “a sentence that had been more
consistently and more blatantly racist in
application than any other in American
law.”
Since sex cases involving race were
complicated and controversial, Marshall
always worried over their potential to
“crowd out other important work.” He had


--- PAGE 260 ---
also learned, however, that headline-
grabbing press coverage of the NAACP’s
more salacious criminal cases produced
an increase in both membership rolls and
financial donations more immediately and
more dramatically than the segregation
cases that they’d labor on quietly for
years. As special counsel, Marshall was
the public face of the NAACP, and he too
was capturing headlines. His presence
inside and outside courtrooms around the
country on behalf of defenseless blacks
seeking justice had cemented his
reputation as Mr. Civil Rights. He was
collecting important victories before the
Supreme Court, including 
Shelley v.
Kraemer
 (1948), wherein the Court,
siding unanimously with Marshall, ruled


--- PAGE 261 ---
that the enforcement in a state court of a
restrictive covenant that barred “people of
the Negro or Mongolian Race” from
owning property violated the equal
protection clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. Marshall’s name was being
splashed across the headlines of every
major newspaper in America, and on
radio broadcasts he was being hailed as
“the Joe Louis of the courtroom.”
On July 17, 1949, the day after Samuel
Shepherd and Walter Irvin stopped to
assist Willie and Norma Padgett on a
lonely stretch of road just north of
Groveland, Florida, Marshall was 2,500
miles away with Wilkins in Los Angeles,
where the delegates to the NAACP Annual
Convention were still buzzing about


--- PAGE 262 ---
Walter White. Half of them, Wilkins
noted, “wanted to lynch Walter for leaving
Gladys, and the other half wanted to string
him up for marrying a white woman.” The
organization’s attempt at damage control
on the West Coast required most of the
executive staff and LDF lawyers, so the
national office in New York was working
with a skeleton crew. Marshall had left
only one young lawyer behind at the home
office, associate counsel Franklin
Williams, in the event that any legal
emergencies arose.


--- PAGE 263 ---
CHAPTER 6: A LITTLE
BOLITA
The Groveland Boys. 
From left to right:
Sheriff Willis McCall, jailer Reuben
Hatcher, Walter Irvin, Charles Greenlee, and
Samuel Shepherd. (
Library of Congress,
Prints & Photographs Division, Visual
Materials from the NAACP Records
)


--- PAGE 264 ---
B
Y THE HUNDREDS,
 blacks cleared out of
Groveland on the backs of citrus trucks.
Others took blankets, food, and water and
fled with their children into the pine leaf
forests, surer than rumor that the Ku Klux
Klan would be coming from all directions
to burn down Stuckey Still, the black
enclave west of Groveland.
Not satisfied that he had appeased the
mob at the jail for the night, Sheriff
McCall took some highway patrolmen
down to Groveland, where he was
troubled to see that the Bay Lake men
hadn’t gone straight home to their wives
and families as he’d suggested. Their
numbers, in fact, were growing. The


--- PAGE 265 ---
sheriff estimated that some 250 men had
gathered in the streets, around their cars
and trucks, and more vehicles were
spilling into town by the minute, their
horns blaring. The streets of Groveland
were noisy with dangerous excitement.
Two of the rapists may have made it to
Raiford, but that didn’t mean the night was
over.
Ernest Thomas had seen the writing on
the wall, what with Norma Padgett
claiming she’d been raped by “four
niggers” and his friend Charles Greenlee
in jail, where a large crowd was aching
for a lynching party. Ernest wanted out
and hopped on a bus heading north that
morning.
Disappointed that they had left the


--- PAGE 266 ---
Tavares jail empty-handed, Coy Tyson
and Flowers Cockcroft made it clear to
the “sullen, glint-eyed” mob that they still
had some business to settle. And they’d
settle some of it in Stuckey Still, an area
just outside Groveland where blacks lived
in wooden, weather-beaten shacks on
small plots of land dotted with palm scrub
and pines. By nightfall, however, most of
the blacks had already evacuated.
McCall was trailing cautiously behind a
cluster of cars when a volley of shotgun
blasts rang out. In a din the cars sped off
in all directions and disappeared in
clouds of dust. Stunned, the sheriff’s gaze
followed the trajectory of the shots. It took
him to their target: the Blue Flame, the
juke joint owned by Ethel Thomas,


--- PAGE 267 ---
Ernest’s mother. As he was assessing the
damage to the cinder block shack—the
windows had been blown out by “15
loads of buckshot”—McCall discovered
one man inside: he’d been roused from his
sleep but was uninjured. The sheriff
figured the shooting at the Thomas place
had at least blown some steam off the
mob. He monitored the area for a while,
but apparently the Bay Lake rabble had
headed home to sleep things off. The rest
of the night was mostly quiet around
Groveland.
B
OY,” LEROY CAMPBELL
 said, stepping
toward Charles, “I believe you lying. That
gun what you got came from Groveland.”


--- PAGE 268 ---
Not long after Campbell had escorted
Coy Tyson and Willie Padgett out of the
courthouse, the stocky, forty-year-old
part-time truck driver and deputy returned
to the fourth floor; it made Charles
Greenlee nervous that the deputy was
eyeing him again. The mob may have left
the precincts of the courthouse, but the boy
did not feel that the danger had passed.
Not with this deputy, who’d barked
“nigger” at him that morning in Groveland,
standing outside the bullpen, glaring in at
him. He’d come and go, Charles noticed,
and he’d murmured words that Charles
could barely make out: something about
the gun; Charles thought he’d heard Ernest
Thomas’s name. Sitting on the floor, his
bare back against the wall, Charles tried


--- PAGE 269 ---
to snatch some sleep as the hours blurred,
and every set of bootsteps he’d hear on the
cement floors of the Tavares jail caused
his heart to race. But the stocky deputy,
Leroy Campbell, had come to pay him
another visit, still focused on the gun.
Charles could make out other men in the
shadows, including Reuben Hatcher, the
fifty-three-year-old jailer with a big ring
of cell keys, but still he was shocked
when they grabbed his arms and dragged
him down to the basement. The room was
clammy, with exposed water pipes and a
dirt floor. One of the men handcuffed him
to an overhead pipe so that his feet just
barely touched the ground. Charles, still
shirtless, hung from the pipe as Deputy
Campbell loosened the sixteen-year-old’s


--- PAGE 270 ---
pants and pulled them, along with his
undershorts, to the floor.
Charles looked Deputy Campbell in the
eyes, and he knew how and where the two
men in the bullpen had been beaten
swollen and bloody. Campbell picked up
what looked to be a piece of rubber hose
about a foot and a half long; he inserted
his meaty hand through a cord on one end
so that it wouldn’t slip from his grasp.
Without saying a word, the deputy started
whipping the boy hard across the chest.
After three or four blows, Campbell asked
again if Charles was lying. “Were you one
of the boys?” he snarled.
“No,” Charles answered, just as Deputy
James Yates stepped out from behind
Campbell and reared back with another


--- PAGE 271 ---
piece of leaded hose. He slashed across
the boy’s pelvis. Then twice; and again.
Charles could see that Yates was “trying
to hit me in my privates,” and he’d tried to
keep his legs crossed, but when Campbell
set to whipping the hose across his arms
and face, the boy, stunned, let his legs
drop, giving Yates some clean shots to his
groin.
“Are you one of the boys that raped the
woman?” Campbell asked repeatedly,
each time punctuating the question with
another swing of the hose.
“No!” Charles screamed.
Blood began to pour from Charles’s
nose and mouth. He felt his eye swelling
shut. He felt something sharp stinging the
soles of his feet; Yates had smashed a


--- PAGE 272 ---
Coca-Cola bottle and scattered the broken
glass in the dirt beneath the boy’s bare
feet. The stocky deputy was doing most of
the questioning, except for a few
interjections from Yates when Campbell
paused between blows, catching his
breath. Behind the two deputies stood a
third man, Charles noticed; he seemed to
be “directing the traffic.”
The interrogation of Charles Greenlee
continued for about forty-five minutes,
with the teen slipping in and out of
consciousness. Campbell, his voice rising
as the force of his blows increased, was
unrelenting. “Did you rape that woman?”
he snapped at the beaten boy yet again.
There was only one way to stop it:
“Yeah,” Charles answered.


--- PAGE 273 ---
The men behind him stirred and
mumbled. Deputy Campbell let his arms
drop slowly to his sides. Without blows,
he asked a few more questions: Was he
with those other boys? Did they rob that
man? Did they pull a gun on the girl?
“Yes,” Charles said. To all of it.
Campbell let the hose fall to the floor.
He stared a long minute at the boy, then
pulled the gun from his holster and pointed
it at Charles’s belly. “Better start saying
your prayers,” he advised.
The jailer, Reuben Hatcher, wanted
Campbell to show some mercy. “Shoot
him in the stomach and he will die
quickly,” he said.
Charles Greenlee—one eye puffed shut,
blood pouring down his face, broken glass


--- PAGE 274 ---
imbedded in his feet—finally broke. He
began sobbing like his tortured mother,
who all summer long suffered the
unbearable pain of losing her two
daughters on the railroad tracks.
Quivering between gasps for air, he
begged Campbell not to kill him.
Savoring the moment, the deputy took
his time before he shoved the gun back
into his holster. But Charles could not
escape the menace in his gaze even as
Hatcher uncuffed him from the pipe. His
wrists burning and bloody, Charles was
bending over to pull up his pants when a
hard kick from behind knocked him to his
knees. He fell forward and lay, a
crumbled heap, in the dirt. That’s when he
recognized one of the men in the shadows


--- PAGE 275 ---
staring down at him. It was the Big Hat
Man, Sheriff Willis McCall.
Crowding around him now, the men led
Charles to the elevator. McCall was all
business. Like Samuel Shepherd and
Walter Irvin, the young boy from Santa Fe
had confessed to raping a white woman—
and he’d catch up with Ernest Thomas yet.
Just as the elevator was about to ascend,
Charles was treated to a hard kick “in the
privates”; he doubled up on the floor,
unable to move or breathe. The elevator
rose to the fourth floor. Campbell dragged
the boy to a cell and locked the confessed
rapist in.
W
ILLIS V. MCCALL
 was Lake County born


--- PAGE 276 ---
and bred, and like Charles Greenlee, he
knew the anguish families endured after
the death of children. His parents had seen
a daughter and two sons die before Willis
was born, and as a boy living at his
father’s “heart yellow pine house,” he’d
experienced the tragedy of his younger
brother’s drowning in a nearby lake. The
son of a dirt farmer, McCall had spent his
“scratch-hard childhood” working long
hours in the fields, plowing, and chopping
and picking cotton, often barefoot. Those
Bay Lake men riding through Groveland
weren’t much different from his father,
McCall knew, but he had also determined
early on, perhaps because of a deep-set
fear of poverty, that he wasn’t going to
walk in his father’s shoes. For he also had


--- PAGE 277 ---
smarts and ambition. By the age of twenty-
one, he had not only acquired a wife—
he’d married his girlfriend, Doris Daley, a
local Umatilla girl—but also accumulated
some cows, and he soon turned a small-
time milking operation into the Bluebird
Dairy, a business venture complete with
state-of-the-art pasteurizing machinery, the
first in Lake County.
In the mid-1930s, at the age of twenty-
six, McCall had sold his dairy and taken a
job with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture as a fruit and vegetable
inspector, in an industry that had been
taking more than its share of lumps. Aside
from countless bank failures at a time
when citrus prices hit record lows during
the Great Depression, central Florida was


--- PAGE 278 ---
also devastated by hurricanes, a
Mediterranean fruit fly outbreak, and the
coldest winter freeze in the state’s history.
Yet over the next nine years, McCall
would witness a remarkable rebound in
central Florida’s citrus industry—one that
would enable the state to overtake
California as the largest harvester of
citrus, thanks to a series of government
programs, contracts, and interventions.
The Civilian Conservation Corps, one
of President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s work
relief programs, built railways and
highways in Florida that, once completed,
made it easier and faster for growers to
ship fruit to other parts of the country.
Then, in 1945, the National Research
Corporation developed a new method of


--- PAGE 279 ---
concentrating orange juice and won a
$750,000 government contract to prepare
more nutritious and better-tasting food
products for U.S. soldiers overseas. The
company created the Florida Foods
Corporation to fulfill the contract, but the
war ended shortly thereafter, and the army
canceled its order; so the corporation, its
research and development completed,
shifted its focus to the consumer market,
setting up a new entity that would
ultimately become Minute Maid Company.
It wasn’t long before America’s freezers
had the six-ounce tins that brought Florida
orange juice to their kitchen tables just by
adding water, and Willis McCall couldn’t
drive anywhere in Lake County without
passing a roadside sign that read “This Is


--- PAGE 280 ---
a Minute Maid Grove.” That same year,
too, the federal government allowed
farmers to begin spraying crops with
DDT; the toxic synthetic pesticide, used
during World War II to control typhus and
malaria, proved to be extremely effective
against citrus insects that had long
menaced Florida orange groves.
With Lake County on its way to
becoming one of the richest counties in the
nation, USDA inspector Willis McCall
was able to foster relationships with the
powerful citrus barons of central Florida.
In the mid-1940s, the issue most crucial to
citrus growers was labor. More groves
were sprouting up everywhere in the
region; the trees were healthier, the crops
more bountiful. Business was good,


--- PAGE 281 ---
especially for growers large enough to do
their own packing, shipping, and
processing. But profits depended on
keeping the cost of labor down, because
labor represented by far the largest
proportion of costs. Since the 1920s,
black migrant workers had been coming to
Florida from two directions: Georgia to
the north, and the Bahamas to the south.
Poor whites, too, streamed south into
Florida for seasonal jobs picking and
packing in the citrus groves. As the
industry began to lengthen the production
period, however, migrants, both black and
white, started settling in the area. Still, in
the early to mid-1940s with the country at
war, even the combination of an influx of
workers and new settlements of permanent


--- PAGE 282 ---
workers could not offset the chronic labor
shortage in the area.
Imposing, gruff, intelligent, and focused,
Willis McCall, in his country boots and
wide-brimmed Stetson, caught the eye of
some local bankers and citrus barons as
the kind of man who understood their
needs as businessmen—a man with a
“tough reputation in the groves.” Before
the citrus boom, Lake County was rife
with lumber mills and turpentine stills,
where forced labor thrived and camps
were often guarded at gunpoint to prevent
workers from escaping. Camp bosses
ruled with an iron fist. They were hard
men who frequently resorted to beating
workers to satisfy production demands,
and despite a steady flow of European


--- PAGE 283 ---
immigrants arriving in America in the
early twentieth century, blacks were still
the preferred workers. “No white people
from any country . . . will . . . submit
quietly to such treatment as the common
Negro,” read an editorial in the Christmas
1904 edition of 
Southern Lumberman
.
Willis McCall was a throwback to the
bygone days of Lake County.
When the incumbent sheriff died in
office in early 1944, McCall threw his hat
into the ring with the backing of the
county’s big citrus men and began
campaigning. He was a natural. Quick-
witted and folksy, with a big, round face,
McCall was capable of showing
extraordinary self-confidence as well as a
self-effacing, aw-shucks modesty around


--- PAGE 284 ---
voters. Even his opponents swore he
could “charm a snake.” He branded
himself “the People’s Candidate.”
Smiling, with one of his meaty hands
placed affectionately on a man’s shoulder
while shaking hands with the other, he
inspired trust and a feeling of safety.
“People have confidence in me,” he said.
“They know where I stand.”
After knocking off five challengers in a
primary, McCall won a tight race against
interim sheriff and former Pittsburgh
Pirates pitcher Emil Yde to become the
new sheriff of Lake County in May 1944.
One of his first moves as sheriff was a
lightning-quick response to a newspaper
allegation that McCall’s campaign had
been financed by gambling interests and


--- PAGE 285 ---
that McCall himself would prove to be a
“sell-out in politics.” To prove the paper
wrong, McCall raided a warehouse where
he destroyed, he claimed, eighty-six slot
and pinball machines belonging to his
alleged financial backer, the county’s
“King of Slots.” The 
Leesburg
Commercial
 subsequently stepped back
from its allegations, stating somewhat
apologetically in an editorial, “It looks
very much like we have a fine sheriff in
Lake County.”
Cleaning up the slots racket and
sweeping punchboard lottery games out of
Lake County’s taverns, however, were
mostly symbolic gestures on McCall’s
part, rather than demonstrations of a
morally driven, sustained attack on illegal


--- PAGE 286 ---
gambling. For the new sheriff was
presiding over a county where 
bolita
 was
king. A lottery game also known as Cuba,
bolita
 (“little ball” in Spanish) employed
one hundred Ping-Pong-type balls with
numbers on them, which were tossed in a
sack and then pulled out blindly, one by
one, in a nightly or weekly “throw.”
Players might bet as little as a nickel on
their selected numbers, and the last
numbered ball to be pulled from the sack
was the winner. Depending on who was
running the game, the payoff was roughly
from 70–1 to 90–1. 
Bolita
 thrived in
Hispanic and black communities, a fact
that wasn’t lost on McCall. “Just as long
as you got a little handful of ’em together,”
he said of the blacks of Lake County, “you


--- PAGE 287 ---
gonna have a little bolita , a little
moonshine, and a whole lot of sex.
Anybody that don’t know that, don’t
understand ’em.”
The game also lined the pockets of
politicians and law enforcement officials
wherever it was played, and bloody turf
battles frequently erupted over who
controlled the game and who got the
payoffs—from the “cracker mob of
Central Florida” right up to the king of
bolita
, Santo Trafficante Sr., the
renowned Mafia boss from Tampa.
Some of McCall’s critics and political
opponents accused him of turning his back
on the 
bolita
 business and allowing it to
thrive. Others argued that the amount of
money generated—supposedly under the


--- PAGE 288 ---
nose of a sheriff who liked to boast of his
awareness in regard to every activity in
all 1,100 square miles of Lake County—
would not be possible unless McCall had
reached some kind of financial
understanding with moonshine and 
bolita
racketeers. Indeed, one of McCall’s
deputies later acknowledged that the
sheriff and his deputies controlled
gambling in Lake County “from the back
door of the county jail.” It was no surprise
to McCall’s foes and critics when the
Tampa Tribune
 reported that nineteen slot
machines seized by state beverage agents
had turned up in various Lake County Elks
Clubs where McCall had active
memberships. And a past president of the
county’s branch of the NAACP admitted


--- PAGE 289 ---
that his own mother was a bolita
collection agent for McCall.
What is certain is that Sheriff Willis V.
McCall, from his first day in office,
understood that citrus was the engine that
drove Lake County’s economy, and he
focused nearly all his efforts on issues
surrounding labor. With so many young
men serving in the military and the
demand for citrus products increasing
with every month, growers were
scrambling to find enough hands to work
in the groves. Every able body was
needed, and in January 1945, Florida
governor Millard Caldwell sent letters to
all sheriffs in the state, urging them to “use
their good offices” to take vigilant action
to enforce “work or fight” laws that were


--- PAGE 290 ---
designed to “prevent loitering, loafing and
absenteeism.” To further incentivize
Florida law enforcement, Caldwell’s
statute allowed sheriffs to pocket all of the
fines they collected up to a yearly
maximum of $7,500. McCall had his
mandate. Still, despite the additional
money collected from fines, journalists
wondered how the sheriff was able, on a
mere four-digit salary, to accumulate the
vast stretch of land on which he later built
his ranch in Umatilla.
Despite the chronic labor shortage in
the groves, wages were kept low, and
with the new sheriff enforcing the work or
fight laws, citrus barons had in the blacks
of Lake County “a ready pool of [cheap]
involuntary labor that could be tapped


--- PAGE 291 ---
whenever whites faced any sort of labor
emergency.” Within days of receiving
Governor Caldwell’s letter, McCall
arrested forty citrus pickers for vagrancy
when they did not show up to work on a
Saturday. The next month, another picker,
Mack Fryar, similarly failed to appear on
a Saturday after having put in a full
week’s labor. McCall, without a warrant,
entered Fryar’s home and placed him
under arrest. Fryar protested, but McCall
was in no mood to explain: “None of your
damn jaw, come on with me,” the sheriff
said and, unprovoked, whipped out his
blackjack and knocked Fryar out cold in
front of his wife and fourteen-year-old
son. McCall then dragged the supposedly
delinquent picker to his car and hauled


--- PAGE 292 ---
him off to jail in Tavares, where he was
held for days before receiving any
medical treatment.
Pickers like Fryar were assessed
exorbitant fines, which trapped them in
debt peonage, a condition not unlike
slavery. The “Florida bail bond racket”
was, according to a former Orlando
newspaper editor, the “most lucrative
business in the state.” The bondsmen
worked hand in glove with employers to
secure labor in exchange for fines and
bond costs. Citrus grove foremen
informed bondsmen how many men were
needed, and workers were “secured from
the stockades.” If workers attempted to
flee across state lines, they could be
recaptured “without the formality of


--- PAGE 293 ---
extradition proceedings.” They had no
choice but to work to pay off their fines at
whatever grove or camp they were taken
to, and they often worked under the
supervision of armed guards, as they might
on a chain gang.
In April 1945 six pickers accused the
sheriff of brutality—McCall had gotten
wind that they were attempting to organize
citrus pickers to protest a mandatory
seven-day workweek at A. S. Herlong &
Company in Leesburg—so it didn’t take
long for Sheriff McCall to come to the
attention of the NAACP. Complaints
mounted at the NAACP that McCall’s
main function in law enforcement
“appears to have been to dragoon the
colored peons used in the county’s citrus


--- PAGE 294 ---
fields and packing plants.” The NAACP,
observing “a pattern of beating and
abusing” on the part of the sheriff,
contacted the U.S. Justice Department.
The FBI was ordered to open a civil
rights investigation. The federal field
agents were stymied, however, when the
pickers and their families suddenly began
disappearing: fleeing Lake County for
faraway states like Texas and Missouri,
or, in the case of the Fryars, as far north as
Harlem. (The Fryars managed to sell their
chickens, but left behind all their
possessions.) Local whites had made it
clear that blacks could expect
consequences and possible mob action if
they stirred up trouble for the sheriff and
the county by talking to J. Edgar Hoover’s


--- PAGE 295 ---
men. Thus was Sheriff Willis McCall able
to successfully dodge charges, as the FBI
abandoned its investigation due to lack of
evidence.
Emboldened by the support he received
from both the citrus growers and the
whites in Lake County, McCall became
more audacious in his arrests—audacious
enough to make headlines in the winter of
1948. The local groves had slashed fruit-
picking wages by 20 percent, an action
that brought an out-of-town union
organizer named Eric Axilrod from the
Congress of Industrial Organizations
(CIO) to Mount Dora. At a public meeting
Axilrod encouraged pickers to protest the
wage cuts by staging an “Easter Holiday”
strike in order to prevent “the return to


--- PAGE 296 ---
eight cent boxes of fruit.” When McCall
arrived on the scene with some of his
deputies and spotted Axilrod’s “Don’t
Starve Tired” circulars, he immediately
handcuffed and arrested the organizer,
then paraded him in front of more than one
hundred men as a lesson to any pickers
who might be considering joining a union.
“Look at his wrists!” McCall bellowed
before carting Axilrod and six pro-union
workers off to jail, where they sat for
days. The activist’s father posted a
thousand-dollar bond, and on Axilrod’s
release, McCall warned him and his
“communist infiltrated groups” never to
return to Lake County. Axilrod forfeited
the bond and drove straight to Alabama,
with McCall’s deputies tailing behind to


--- PAGE 297 ---
make sure the union rabble-rouser left the
state of Florida.
I
’M WILLIS MCCALL
 and you’re a damn
liar!”
In 1948, thirty-four-year-old reporter
Mabel Norris Reese hadn’t been in Lake
County for very long when “this great big
hulk of a man in a ten-gallon hat burst
through the door.” She was still trying to
understand the Jim Crow world that she
found herself in after her husband, an Ohio
newspaperman, purchased the Lake
County weekly newspaper, the 
Mount
Dora Topic
, the year before. It wasn’t
long, either, before Reese, as the 
Topic
’s
editor, had her first run-in with Sheriff


--- PAGE 298 ---
McCall. She’d written a story about
McCall’s “political shenanigans” in his
first term as sheriff, when he’d claimed to
raid the warehouse of Lake County’s King
of the Slots. As it turned out, the King had
not been one of McCall’s backers, but
rather a political opponent, who in fact
had gotten out of the slots business by
then. Nor had McCall smashed to pieces
any pinball and slot machines, according
to the King, whose garage was housing
only machine parts he hadn’t disposed of
yet. McCall, the King told Reese, had put
on a show and tried—unsuccessfully—to
pin a slot machine rap on him.
Patiently producing her notes for the
irate and intimidating sheriff, Reese
showed him direct quotes by his accuser


--- PAGE 299 ---
and explained that she was only reporting
the words of others. McCall was not
satisfied. He left the office in a huff, and at
every store and office up and down the
quaint, tree-lined business streets of
Mount Dora, he stopped to recommend
strongly that they not advertise in the
Topic
.
For several days following Axilrod’s
release and banishment, McCall was
apoplectic. The CIO, effectively barred
from Lake County by the sheriff, hired
pilots to buzz the citrus groves in small
planes. From out of the sky, leaflets
fluttered to earth. They accused McCall of
running union organizers out of the county
at gunpoint and resorting to “Hitler’s
gestapo technique” by using the sheriff’s


--- PAGE 300 ---
office to intimidate workers in order to
drive them back to their “cut-rate jobs,”
all in violation of the law.
Mabel was at home when she received
a tip that a black picker who had been
spotted talking with a labor union
representative had gotten into some
trouble. On arriving at the black laborer’s
house, she found him bandaged from head
to foot. The beating, he told Mabel, had
been executed by two of McCall’s
deputies, one of them his right-hand man,
James Yates. “Now let that be a lesson to
you,” the picker had been warned. “Don’t
talk to any of these organizers again.”
That “lesson” was exactly the hard-line
stance that whites in Lake County had
come to expect from their sheriff, and the


--- PAGE 301 ---
threat of a union-organized labor strike in
the groves and packinghouses of Florida’s
interior citrus belt during the height of the
harvest season spelled bad news for any
opponents hoping to unseat Sheriff Willis
McCall. McCall had shown that he was,
according to the CIO, willing to throw up
a “big ‘red scare’ trying to hide the
illegality and one-man campaign of
intimidation,” and he was not afraid to
play hardball with blacks, either. More
worrisome to McCall were the sustained
efforts on the part of the NAACP to
unsettle his, and central Florida’s,
political way of life. The Democratic
Party had controlled Southern politics
since Reconstruction, and most general
elections were determined by the


--- PAGE 302 ---
outcomes of Democratic primaries. For
McCall, as for many sheriffs and
politicians in the South, once they’d made
it through the all-white primaries,
Republicans usually did not have the
numbers to challenge.
In the landmark case 
Smith v. Allwright
,
Thurgood Marshall had argued before the
U.S. Supreme Court in 1944 that it was
unconstitutional for the state of Texas to
ban blacks from voting in the Democratic
Party’s primary. The Supreme Court
agreed and overturned the party’s practice
of all-white primaries, a ruling, Marshall
noted, that was “a giant milestone in the
progress of Negro Americans toward full
citizenship.” He later assessed the 
Smith
v. Allwright
 victory to be “the greatest


--- PAGE 303 ---
one” of his career.
When the Court’s decision was
announced in June 1944, a raucous party
broke out at Manhattan’s NAACP office.
Phones were ringing off the hook, and the
secretaries made a game of transferring
the various, ceaseless press and
congratulatory calls around the office in
circles. Marshall cracked a bottle of
bourbon with his staff—and managed to
miss a call from Supreme Court justice
Frank Murphy, who later told Marshall
that “a guy had the right to get drunk at a
time like that.”
Attorney General Tom Clark made the
victory even sweeter when he “told the
other states they’d better fall in line or
he’d whack them one.” It was indeed a


--- PAGE 304 ---
watershed moment that, Marshall knew,
would usher blacks closer toward full
citizenship and enable them to vote in
primaries everywhere once and for all. He
knew, too, that the South would not
acquiesce to the Court’s decision without
a fight, as by reflex states erected
legislative hurdles to slow the tides of
change. Still, with blacks in Texas no
longer prohibited by law from voting, a
revolution in Southern politics had truly
begun, as had the dismantling of white
supremacy at the ballot box.
Meanwhile, not far from Lake County, a
quiet but relentless NAACP man was
about to make Sheriff Willis McCall’s life
difficult. A schoolteacher from Mims,
Florida, Harry Tyson Moore had been


--- PAGE 305 ---
closely following the Smith v. Allwright
case because he himself had had the
opportunity to work with Thurgood
Marshall on an equal pay case in Brevard
County a few years earlier. Not long after
the Supreme Court’s 1944 ruling, Moore
and some of his NAACP associates
organized the Progressive Voters League,
which mounted an aggressive campaign to
register blacks onto the voting rolls in
Florida. By 1948, he had brought nearly
seventy thousand new black Democratic
voters into the system, and with Florida’s
black population growing significantly
every year, Moore’s voter registration
drive represented the single greatest threat
to the citrus belt, to the Southern way of
life, and to Willis V. McCall.


--- PAGE 306 ---
It was no coincidence that the Ku Klux
Klan held five rallies in Lake County in
the weeks leading up to Election Day to
show their support for McCall as well as
presidential candidate Strom Thurmond of
South Carolina, who was running as a
member of the splinter group of
segregationist Southern Democrats who
became known in 1948 as the Dixiecrats.
Clearly, any CIO-backed candidate for
sheriff was going to have a tough time
getting black voters to the polls. To make
it tougher, on the eve of the election 250
hooded Klansman formed a motorcade
that snaked its way through Lake County,
“warning blacks not to vote if they valued
their lives.” Trailing behind the
motorcade in a big Oldsmobile, his


--- PAGE 307 ---
trademark white Stetson visible to all,
was the incumbent sheriff himself,
“making no attempt to interfere” when the
Klansmen stopped to burn a cross in front
of a black juke joint in Leesburg. The
evening ended in a field just north of Lake
Okahumpka, with Klan speeches and a
barbecue. It may as well have been a
celebration of what would prove by a
landslide to have been the inevitable—the
reelection of Willis V. McCall. Thus
began his most eventful term as sheriff of
Lake County.


--- PAGE 308 ---
CHAPTER 7: WIPE
THIS PLACE CLEAN
State Attorney Jesse Hunter, Sheriff Willis
McCall, and Deputy James Yates visit the
remains of Henry Shepherd’s home. (
Photo
by Wallace Kirkland/Time & Life


--- PAGE 309 ---
Pictures/Getty Images )
G
ROVELAND WAS A
 ghost town.
Mabel Norris Reese slammed down the
phone and sped south to see for herself.
“Everything was silent,” she observed.
The reporter for the 
Mount Dora
 
Topic
had never seen anything like it. Blacks had
simply vanished. She wasn’t there long
when she heard the roar of the engines in
the distance and experienced a “scary
feeling” when a long line of cars rolled
into town, and it was only as the noise
grew louder that she began to get a
glimpse of anyone. “People would rush
inside and shut their doors, pull their
blinds,” she said. Blacks ran for the


--- PAGE 310 ---
woods “or streaked for miles into the
groves.” Mabel tried to count the cars;
there were more than two hundred
vehicles, she observed, many with license
plates from Polk and Orange counties. Her
instincts told her to get home to Mount
Dora to be with her husband and young
daughter, but as a reporter, Mabel sensed
trouble. She couldn’t leave.
I
NSTEAD OF DRIVING
 back home to Eustis
after the Saturday night ruction of the Bay
Lake men, Willis McCall commandeered
a room at the Groveland Hotel in the event
that they were planning another ride. The
night, though, was mostly quiet, and the
sheriff even managed to get a few hours of


--- PAGE 311 ---
sleep in the old hotel on Cherry and Main
streets. On Sunday morning he went with
his deputies to survey Mascotte and
Stuckey Still for damage, but apparently
only Ethel Thomas’s bar, the Blue Flame,
had been shot up. At mid-morning
Groveland had the eerily quiet atmosphere
of a town deserted, as if warnings of a
landfall by a powerful hurricane from the
Atlantic had driven the residents away. It
was clear to McCall that a black exodus
wouldn’t have occurred without good
reason, and his instincts told him to hold
on to his room key at the hotel—that more
trouble might be yet to come. A few miles
to the south, in the Bay Lake homes with
telephone service, white farmers and their
wives were spreading word to friends and


--- PAGE 312 ---
relations that four Lake County Negroes
had raped Coy Tyson’s seventeen-year-
old daughter.
McCall kept himself busy. Annoyed that
Ernest Thomas had managed to skip town
before he’d had a chance to talk to him,
McCall telephoned the Gainesville Police
Department and the sheriff of Alachua
County to put them on the lookout for the
young black man wanted for kidnapping
and rape. He interviewed Norma and
Willie Padgett to ascertain their version of
events since Friday evening, and he
concluded a meeting with State Attorney
Jesse Hunter by assuring the prosecutor
that he’d find more than sufficient
evidence, beyond the accusations of the
young Bay Lake couple, to show that a


--- PAGE 313 ---
kidnapping and rape had occurred in Lake
County. He’d already gotten confessions
from the prisoners, and Deputy James
Yates was collecting physical evidence
including tire tracks and shoe prints from
the crime scene; a physician in Leesburg
had examined Norma. He’d bring the
attorney a case rock-solid, McCall told
Hunter, and he’d get Ernest Thomas.
By mid-afternoon Groveland was
getting unquiet. “Knots of men stood about
on the main street, hard-eyed and
watchful,” and McCall noticed that the
automobiles—some parked, others
cruising the streets—had come from
neighboring counties, as well as from
Georgia. It was common Klan practice to
use outside Klaverns on “rides” or “jobs”


--- PAGE 314 ---
in cars with the license plates
intentionally obscured so that local riders
could not be easily identified. At dusk, a
twenty-car procession rolled into
Groveland; flyers advertised the cause.
Headlined “Ideals of the Ku Klux Klan,”
they extolled the virtues of white
supremacy under the logo of Dr. Samuel
Green’s Association of Georgia Klans. An
Atlanta obstetrician and Grand Dragon,
Green boasted that the Klan was once
again growing by “leaps and bounds” in
its purpose to establish “a beachhead in
Florida.” Outraged by President Truman’s
espousal of civil rights legislation, Green
had promised that any Yankee attempt to
force equality between the races would
oblige Americans to “see blood flow in


--- PAGE 315 ---
these streets. The Klan will not permit the
people of this country to become a
mongrel race.”
Willis McCall sensed events could
easily escape his control. Hailed as a hero
in the morning’s papers for preventing a
lynching on the steps of the Tavares jail,
the sheriff knew that he and his handful of
deputies would be powerless should the
four hundred to five hundred men now
milling about in the business section of
Groveland decide to make a second move
on Stuckey Still. He knew, too, that in
countless instances in the South angry
mobs had pressured, sometimes at
gunpoint, local sheriffs who were holding
black men accused of raping white women
to walk away from their jails. What


--- PAGE 316 ---
usually followed were lynchings “at the
hands of persons unknown.” (The NAACP
defined “lynching” as an illegal killing by
three or more persons claiming to be
serving justice or tradition.) The case in
Groveland was uncomfortably similar to
events seventeen years earlier in
Scottsboro, Alabama, when two white
women accused nine black youths of rape
and Sheriff M. L. Wann headed off a lynch
mob outside the Scottsboro jail, declaring,
“If you come in here I will blow your
brains out,” before he called in the
National Guard. In his stand against the
KKK, Sheriff Wann may have been a hero
to the North, but under mysterious
circumstances he was also shot dead one
year later by a white man who was never


--- PAGE 317 ---
apprehended. Willis McCall realized fully
how fine was the line he’d have to walk
between the requirements of the law and
the unspoken expectations of the Klan. For
neither politicians nor the powerful citrus
barons held sway over white mobs bent
on vengeance in the matter of Negroes, the
flower of Southern womanhood, and rape.
A group of Lake County’s leading
citizens met with McCall to voice their
concern over developments in Groveland.
Among them was Norton Wilkins, one of
the owners of Groveland’s B&W Canning
Company, the largest employer of any
canning operation in the state. With more
than five hundred plant workers, mostly
women, who famously dressed in nurses’
uniforms, and countless more pickers in


--- PAGE 318 ---
the groves, B&W was, in 1949, shipping a
million cases of canned fruit and 250,000
boxes of fresh oranges and grapefruit
annually. Wilkins was concerned that
Klan violence would lead to a mass
exodus of blacks, which would have a
disastrous negative impact on production,
and profits, at his plant. Also present was
L. Day Edge, a wealthy businessman and
former state senator with extensive real
estate holdings in the county. His family
had once owned a turpentine still, which
stood on all the land that was now called
Stuckey Still; when the still shut down,
Edge gave the “colored people their
homes and property for being so faithful in
his service.” In attendance as well were
Groveland’s mayor, Elma Puryear (who


--- PAGE 319 ---
had on Saturday transported Charles
Greenlee from Groveland to Tavares),
and a few other prominent Lake County
residents. Fearing that the gathering
restive mob intended more damage than a
few potshots at a black juke joint, they
discussed a course of action for
“protecting lives and property of persons
in the colored section of Groveland.”
They ultimately agreed that McCall should
place a phone call to Florida’s governor,
Fuller Warren, to request assistance.
Within minutes, Warren notified the
National Guard, informing commanders
that following the rape of the Bay Lake
girl, the “situation was getting out of
hand” in Groveland.
By 11 p.m. troops had arrived from the


--- PAGE 320 ---
National Guard in Leesburg and Eustis. At
McCall’s behest, they were dispatched to
strategic locations in black sections of
town, mostly for, as McCall told them,
“psychological effect.” The commanding
officer on the scene observed five hundred
armed men in cars stalking the streets of
Groveland, and Lieutenant James Herlong
saw immediately that his twenty men were
far outnumbered and stretched too thin
over the potential areas of disturbance. He
phoned the governor to request additional
troops. By midnight, some seventy more
guardsmen were spreading over the vacant
lots and open fields around Stuckey Still.
Around 1:30 a.m., McCall observed
that the unwelcome cars in Groveland had
begun to disperse—the local whites were


--- PAGE 321 ---
returning to their homes in Bay Lake. The
presence of the National Guard had gone a
long way toward preventing any further
mayhem, the sheriff was convinced, and
once he was confident the threat had
passed, McCall relieved both the Eustis
and the Leesburg units from duty. At
daylight, he and State Attorney Hunter met
in the sheriff’s office with several
reporters and a photographer from the
Associated Press. Hunter and McCall had
succeeded not only in maintaining law and
order in Lake County, but also in averting
a labor crisis in the citrus groves; they
wore smiles of accomplishment. Outside
the courthouse, however, some men from
Bay Lake were again milling around in a
restless manner, and the sheriff’s teeth


--- PAGE 322 ---
gritted behind his smile. He still had work
to do, as word had obviously made it out
of Tavares that the third rapist was being
held in the county jail. While the affable
Jesse Hunter entertained the reporters,
McCall slipped upstairs with his deputies
Leroy Campbell and James Yates.
The prisoners had just been served
breakfast. Charles Greenlee, half dazed by
the beating he’d endured at the hands of
McCall’s deputies, was sitting in his cell.
Crusted in dried blood, his shirtless body
ached; his eye was swollen shut. He could
barely crane his neck when he heard the
familiar footsteps of Deputy Campbell.
For the second time in twenty-four hours,
the boy was told that he’d have to be
moved to a more secure jail or else he’d


--- PAGE 323 ---
be facing a lynching. He didn’t doubt it
was true. The deputy took Charles
upstairs, where, according to the plan
devised by McCall, Campbell and Yates
had the boy change into a prisoner’s work
outfit before they took him downstairs to
McCall. The sheriff shoved a scythe into
the boy’s hands and told him to walk, “as
if he was a trusty going out in the yard to
cut grass,” all the way out to an unmarked
blue 1948 Ford in the parking lot. Limping
stiffly along, grimacing in pain, the glass
cuts in the soles of his feet burning more
with each step he took, he finally reached
the patrol car. Campbell grabbed the
scythe from the boy’s hand and told him to
lie down out of sight on the floor.
Campbell and Yates hopped in the front,


--- PAGE 324 ---
and the three of them began the long ride
to the state prison at Raiford.
Later that day, McCall received a
telephone call from the manager of a
Leesburg radio station who wanted to
confirm a news story before he put it on
the air. McCall listened intently; the
manager had been informed that one of the
prisoners in the Lake County rape case
had been seized from two deputies and
lynched. The sheriff was shaken: Had a
mob gotten to Greenlee? Had somebody
gotten wind of the transfer and tipped off
the Klan? Or had Campbell and Yates
themselves? Immediately the sheriff called
Raiford and learned that less than two
hours after the deputies had left Tavares,
Charles Greenlee had been safely


--- PAGE 325 ---
delivered to the Florida State Prison,
where he’d joined Samuel Shepherd and
Walter Irvin behind bars. McCall’s sigh
of relief was abbreviated by the noise of
the crowd loitering outside the courthouse
walls.
The reporters had come to see the “High
Sheriff” who had prevented a lynching just
two nights before, and McCall was
determined to convey the cool confidence
of a man who had his county under
control. The local papers had already
reported that he had confessions from
three of the rapists; that morning’s edition
of the 
Ocala Star-Banner
 had run the
front-page headline “Three Negroes
Confess to Rape Near Groveland.” As the
news had spread about the sheriff’s call


--- PAGE 326 ---
upon the National Guard to quell a
potential riot, journalists had begun
descending on Lake County, pressing
McCall with questions about reports of
Klan activity around Groveland. McCall
answered that he didn’t know much about
the cars that had rolled into town from
Orange and Polk counties; nor was he
around when any KKK literature was
distributed, he said.
McCall was more interested in
conveying the message that he had three
rock-solid confessions, and that he would
have four if he hadn’t been so busy trying
to hold back the mob on Saturday; but for
that, he would have apprehended Ernest
Thomas by now. “There’ll be no lynching
of Negroes in Lake County as long as I am


--- PAGE 327 ---
sheriff,” McCall proclaimed. Indictments,
he told reporters, would be coming down
soon, and he wanted it to be known that
the prisoners would be treated well and
they’d receive a fair trial. “We’re not
going to run anything over on them,” he
said. Although he conceded that there
might be more “demonstrations” over the
next night or two, he wasn’t expecting any
violence. McCall was telling the
reporters, especially the Northern ones,
exactly what they wanted to hear, and he
was basking in the adulation.
Willis McCall was also a man who did
not shy away from speaking his mind,
even with reporters. In fact, he divulged to
them that he had received a call from a
woman at, of all places, the New York


--- PAGE 328 ---
office of the NAACP. (Most likely, it was
from LDF attorney Constance Baker
Motley, who would, a few years later,
help write briefs for Thurgood Marshall
for 
Brown v. Board of Education.
) She
wanted to know what the sheriff’s
department was doing to protect the black
citizens of Groveland. “I told her we were
looking after them all right,” McCall
announced to reporters, “and I said we’d
take care of half of those in Harlem if they
wanted us to. Then I hung up.”
A
T SUNSET, ON
 Monday, July 18, a mob
of more than one hundred men was spotted
just a few miles north of Groveland.
They’d set up a roadblock and were


--- PAGE 329 ---
stopping cars, searching for blacks.
Rumor reached McCall’s office that the
“Ku Klux Klan was planning to wipe out
the entire Negro community of
Groveland.” The sheriff grabbed a handful
of deputies and made a dash to Stuckey
Still, where they waited with the National
Guard, watching as cars loaded with
whites circled the streets. Suddenly there
was a volley of gunshots as riders began
firing their guns indiscriminately into
houses. Most of the black residents had
already cleared out of the area, but some
continued their nightly retreat into the
swamps and woods, fearful of more
violence. Joe Maxwell wasn’t one of
them. He had stayed behind with his
family, in the small house that he had built


--- PAGE 330 ---
himself, determined to ride out the night.
Maxwell had recently returned from
military service; with a wife and three
small children to provide for, he was
planning on being in the groves the next
morning, where it was entirely possible
he’d be working for some of the same
whites night-riding in that long line of cars
menacing Stuckey Still. He could hear the
roar of the motors, the ugly shouts of
fired-up men.
There were at least three cattle trucks
packed full with men, all of them
screaming and hollering, their guns poking
out from the slotted sides. Behind them
followed countless cars with long guns
poking out the windows. Maxwell heard a
frightening cry: “That’s old Joe


--- PAGE 331 ---
Maxwell’s house over there!”
Maxwell told his children to hide under
the bed, and trying to keep them safe, he
piled mattresses up around them. He
“heard a window break and that’s when
they shot in the house,” Maxwell later
recalled. Shotgun fire pelleted a bag of
crayons just inches above his six-year-old
daughter’s bed. Glass shattered
everywhere. The screams of Maxwell’s
children inside counterpointed the horrific
rebel yells from outside.
McCall and his deputies sped toward
the shooting. When someone warned,
“You better not go down there, they’ll kill
you,” he replied, “I don’t have any
choice.”
Shots were echoing nonstop in the dark,


--- PAGE 332 ---
but the sheriff could make out the
flickering figures of men running in the
glare of headlights. “Sons of bitches,” he
said. “Now they got me mad.”
The sheriff jumped out of his car and
fired a tear-gas canister into the crowd—
to no effect; the mob just moved farther
ahead. McCall reloaded the tear-gas gun
and fired at a truck; this time the smoke
cleared the crowd from the area. When the
sheriff and his deputies made an attempt to
follow the mob, the wind blew the tear
gas back at them and they were
temporarily incapacitated.
By this time reporters had also made
their way to the scene. The mob had
parked along Route 50 to regroup and
clear their eyes. Deputies Yates and


--- PAGE 333 ---
Campbell and Lieutenant Herlong of the
National Guard joined McCall, and
together, with reporters in tow, they
approached the mob. McCall recognized
many in the crowd as the same Bay Lake
men who had descended on the Lake
County Court House two nights before,
including Flowers Cockcroft, the man who
had accompanied Coy Tyson and Willie
Padgett up to the jail in their search for
Shepherd and Irvin. Cockcroft, the
proprietor of a general store and filling
station in Mascotte, had sold out all of his
ammunition earlier in the day; he was
leading the mob.
“You fellas don’t want to do this!”
McCall shouted. “You’re breaking the
law, and I want you to know I’ll arrest


--- PAGE 334 ---
you. You got no business here. Go on
home.”
A voice pierced the darkness. “We
wanna wipe this place clean of niggers!”
The men were riled up, and McCall
could sense that they were in no mood to
abandon their plan as they had two nights
ago at the jail and the night before when
the National Guard had appeared. The
men were shouting McCall down; his
threats of arrest were making no impact on
them. He tried one more time to appeal to
reason, telling them that their families
would suffer if they did anything rash.
“Don’t go out there and do something
you’re going to be sorry for.”
But they didn’t retreat. Exasperated,
McCall huddled with Herlong. The sheriff


--- PAGE 335 ---
and the guardsman had to come up with a
plan—fast. As McCall surveyed the
crowd, among the unmasked faces he
sighted many men he knew, some of them
as law enforcement officers, like C. E.
Sullins, the police chief in Clermont.
Groveland’s Curtis Merritt was one of the
leaders, as was Wesley Evans, the stout,
illiterate citrus grove caretaker the sheriff
himself had on occasion recruited:
proficient with a leaded hose in his
treatment of black pickers, Evans proved
to be useful in helping the law obtain
confessions from black suspects in the
basement of the Lake County Court House.
McCall also recognized Sumter County’s
deputy sheriff, James Kimbrough—he’d
be forced to resign when state patrolmen


--- PAGE 336 ---
identified his car as the source of shots
being fired at black residences—and
Klansman William Jackson Bogar, who
“was the chief of the Klokann
Committee,” an investigative unit within
the Klan. McCall had attended meetings
with Bogar at the Apopka Klavern of the
Association of Georgia Klans, where
many central Florida law enforcement
officials were initiated into the Ku Klux
Klan. As one reporter noted, it was
impossible “to tell where the mob left off
and law enforcement began.”
Mass arrests being out of the question,
McCall and Herlong were considering a
more prudent alternative when, behind
them, one of the riders offered his solution
to a guardsman. “Why don’t you take that


--- PAGE 337 ---
peashooter and go home,” he said. “You
look like a Boy Scout.” In reply, the
guardsman popped several loud rounds
from his M3 submachine gun into the
ground and asked the rider if that sounded
like a peashooter. The air was thick with
smoke and tension.
McCall and Herlong decided they’d
best confer with the apparent leader of the
riders, Flowers Cockcroft. After a few
minutes of bargaining, the obdurate
Cockcroft nodded, but his eyes hardened.
Apparently he and McCall had struck a
deal. Herlong ordered the guardsmen to
withdraw.
If the guardsmen were confused by
Herlong’s order, reporters were more so,
especially as the sheriff appeared to be


--- PAGE 338 ---
unprepared to make any arrests. One
writer from the Associated Press asked
McCall for the names of the rioters. “I
don’t know the names,” McCall replied.
“I don’t know who they are.” Pressing
McCall, the reporter asked why a mob
firing weapons into homes of blacks in
Stuckey Still warranted no arrests.
McCall brushed him off.
Word of the inquisitive reporter
reached Cockcroft, who confronted the
sheriff. “Where is that son of a bitch that
wanted our names?” Cockcroft demanded.
Knowing that “all hell would break loose”
if he fingered the journalist, McCall
merely shrugged. And Cockcroft fumed:
“I’ll tell him my goddamn name and I’ll
fix his ass, too.” As if on cue, the rioters


--- PAGE 339 ---
began threatening all the newsmen, telling
them to get out of town and warning them
not to print any lies about what was
happening in Lake County.
McCall urged Herlong to execute his
order and withdraw his troops “down the
road toward Leesburg and wait out of
sight.” The sheriff, as agreed, pulled his
deputies back; reporters tagged along for
safety. Cockcroft stood glaring while the
law and the Guard withdrew. Then he
turned to his men. “Go and get more
ammunition,” he barked, “and clear the
streets of women and children.”
The cattle trucks, again packed with
armed men, started rolling away, with
dozens of cars following behind. The
National Guard and Lake County law did


--- PAGE 340 ---
not pursue. In less than half an hour,
driving along “miles of clay roads into the
backwoods farmlands” of Bay Lake, the
rioters were igniting bottles of gasoline
and tossing them through the windows and
onto the roofs of the Negroes’ deserted
homes. By the time McCall and the
journalists caught up with them, a church
had been shot up and two houses were in
flames. A third, the home of confessed
rapist Samuel Shepherd, was smoldering
—it had already burned to the ground. The
Klan and the Bay Lake whites watched in
indifference as the flames licked the pines
and the heat exploded the crackling sap. A
nine-year-old girl, “Little” Mary Hunter
Valree, was separated from her family as
she fled from the mob. Terrified by the


--- PAGE 341 ---
angry shouts and explosions, she hid for
hours, then fell asleep alone in the woods.
(The missing Valree girl turned up the next
afternoon when she returned to the site of
her charred home to look for food.)
At midnight, Lieutenant Colonel Harry
Baya arrived in Bay Lake with more than
two hundred National Guardsmen from
Tampa. He immediately reported to
McCall, who refused to identify any of the
men involved in torching the Negroes’
homes, although “he knew all of the
ringleaders who were responsible for the
mob’s actions.” The sheriff allowed that
many of the men were from Bay Lake and
were related to either Norma Tyson or
Willie Padgett, but he was unwilling to
have any of them arrested or even brought


--- PAGE 342 ---
in for a conference. McCall justified his
refusal to identify or arrest Coy Tyson,
Flowers Cockcroft, and fellow Klansmen
like William Jackson Bogar as necessary
steps in ensuring peace and preventing a
full-blown race riot. Handled his way,
McCall reasoned, the riders, by torching
deserted houses in the Negro section of
Bay Lake, were able to blow off steam
without causing any bloodshed.
Baya’s meeting with Flowers Cockcroft
was no more satisfying. Cockcroft’s riders
would take no further action against the
blacks as long as the National Guard
maintained its presence, but once it
withdrew, they would resume until they
accomplished their goal of “terrorizing the
negroes” and driving out “five or six


--- PAGE 343 ---
negroes whom they believed were
undesirable.” Cockcroft added that he
could not speak for any of the other “out of
county” people who were pouring into
Groveland by the carload, heavily armed.
Nonetheless, the riot and its evident
destruction of the Negroes’ homes, and
especially the Shepherd property, seemed
to have appeased Cockcroft’s mob for the
time being, and by 1:30 a.m. Lake County
had quieted down again.
Cockcroft had advised his men that their
work was done for the night, that they
should return to their cars and disperse.
Muttering darkly, he had given a glimpse
of his true resolve to a lingering reporter.
“The next time,” he said, “we’ll clean
out every Negro section in south Lake


--- PAGE 344 ---
County.”
I
N GROVELAND, L. D.
 Edge, Norton
Wilkins, Mayor Puryear, and other
prominent white citizens and business
owners brooded over the terror unfolding
in their community. Whatever racial views
they held, they held them secondary to
economic interests, and the shooting,
razing, and torching of homes in black
communities could have devastating
economic consequences. Edge and
Wilkins both owned businesses that relied
heavily on black labor in a county where
labor shortages were already a serious
problem. Puryear, who owned a number
of homes that he rented out in black


--- PAGE 345 ---
neighborhoods, “had all of his life savings
tied up” in the Negro economy.
For these pillars of the white
community, the situation in Groveland’s
black enclaves was unfolding in a manner
uncomfortably close to the events of the
Rosewood Massacre in Levy County,
Florida, twenty-six years earlier. With
law enforcement in Rosewood complicit
in the rioting, white owners of turpentine
and lumber mills, whose businesses
would be devastated by a black exodus,
appealed to the governor for help. The
sheriff, however, insisted that it was
unnecessary to call in the National Guard,
as he had the situation under control. Any
control he may have had, though, he lost
when hundreds of unmasked Klansmen


--- PAGE 346 ---
joined local whites in driving out black
residents by gun and torch. The vigilantes
destroyed every Negro home in
Rosewood.
The trouble that began in Rosewood in
January 1923 bore eerie similarity to what
occurred on Friday night in July just
outside Okahumpka after Willie Padgett
left the dance hall with his seventeen-
year-old estranged wife. In Rosewood,
neighbors discovered twenty-two-year-
old Fannie Taylor bruised and beaten in
her own home one morning; she’d claimed
that a black man had forcibly entered her
home and assaulted her. Coupled to the
rumors that the white girl had also been
raped was the dubious report that an
escaped prisoner was hiding in the same


--- PAGE 347 ---
area. Both stories spread like wildfire
throughout Levy County, and a mob of
hundreds gathered. Torching homes, the
mob sent blacks fleeing into the swamps.
The violence escalated when blacks
attempting to defend their homes fired
back at the mob. Churches were burned. A
white turpentine mill owner, W. H.
Pillsbury, helped blacks escape the area
—he even hid a black man in his home—
at the same time that he pleaded with
whites to cease the riot. Unfortunately,
rioters learned that Pillsbury was
harboring a Negro. They made the black
man dig a grave; then they shot him dead.
One woman was shot in the face while
hiding under her house; Fannie Taylor’s
brother-in-law took credit for her death.


--- PAGE 348 ---
An undetermined number of blacks were
killed in the rioting, but no escaped
convict was ever found. Nor was it ever
proved that a rape, or even an assault, had
occurred. In a forced migration, the blacks
who survived the massacre moved on,
never to return, and the white businesses
that depended on their labor or patronage
suffered tremendous losses.
Twenty-six years later and a little more
than one hundred miles to the south, L. D.
Edge and Norton Wilkins and their cohort
of wealthy business owners wanted no
repeat of Rosewood in Groveland.
T
HEY TELL ME
 my chickens and ducks are
all gone,” Henry Shepherd said.


--- PAGE 349 ---
The father of Samuel Shepherd had
holed up with his family at a daughter’s
home in Orlando and was listening to the
radio when he learned that his house had
been burned to the ground during the
violence in Groveland the night before.
Not long ago Shepherd had been a
proud, successful farmer. He had raised a
large family and dramatically improved
its economic lot by rising from tenant
farmer to landowner, but events over the
last few years had left him broken and
despondent: a “ravaged ghost” of a man,
who was often heard to mumble that he
wanted “no more trouble.” Henry
Shepherd was convinced that the previous
night’s terror in Groveland was more
about him than about his son Samuel’s


--- PAGE 350 ---
alleged rape of Norma Padgett. His own
neighbors, he later learned, were the very
men who’d thrown lit kerosene-filled
bottles through his windows.
To Henry Shepherd, a lifetime picking
fruit in groves owned by wealthy whites
in Groveland did not seem like much of a
future. Though forced labor and peonage
conditions continued in Lake County, there
had also been a movement toward “Negro
self-emancipation” over the last several
years. Some blacks had purchased
swampland around Bay Lake as cheaply
as eight dollars an acre, and in their spare
time drained the swamps and cleared the
land to create sustaining farms. Once the
land was drained, the surrounding acreage
was automatically relieved of water, and


--- PAGE 351 ---
white farmers bought up the adjacent land
at bargain prices. The unintended
consequence of the wasteland drainings
was a breakdown in segregation in Bay
Lake. As a result, Henry Shepherd’s
northernmost land bordered the Padgett
farm. The two families were no strangers
to each other.
Determined to escape the backbreaking
work in the groves, Shepherd lived
thriftily and augmented whatever meager
savings he could muster from tenant
farming with Samuel’s army allotments. In
1943, for $255, he purchased fifty-five
acres of swampland in Bay Lake. Working
tirelessly to drain the swamp, not to
mention enduring countless snakebites on
his legs, he was eventually able to


--- PAGE 352 ---
cultivate rich Florida soil. Before long he
had good crops, hundreds of chickens, and
a few cows, while his wife, Charlie Mae,
had “the best preserve cellar in the area.”
He also built a relatively modest six-room
house on the property.
Not by intent, Shepherd also drew the
resentment that festered among the poor
white farmers in Bay Lake. Neighbors tore
down Shepherd’s fences, thus allowing
cows to graze on his farm—and to destroy
his crops just before harvest. Shepherd
confronted them, but to no avail, and when
it happened again he called upon Sheriff
McCall to help him with the dispute.
McCall merely confirmed what Shepherd
already knew: “No nigger has any right to
file a claim against a white man.”


--- PAGE 353 ---
For want of any legal recourse, Charlie
Mae tried appealing to civility. She
suggested to Oscar Johns, whose cows
had again ravaged Shepherd’s crop, that
they might come to some sort of agreement
regarding compensation for loss. Johns
responded by cussing and threatening to
kill her.
The harassment continued. Fences were
torn down and rebuilt, crops replanted.
And the Shepherds refused to leave Bay
Lake.
Despite the setbacks, Henry Shepherd
continued to prosper, in part because the
older of his six children worked on the
family farm rather than in the citrus
groves: another irritant to many whites. So
was Shepherd’s refusal to allow his


--- PAGE 354 ---
teenage daughter, Henrietta, to do service
in the home of a white neighbor who,
Shepherd knew, had attempted to rape a
prior teenage maid. When James
Shepherd, the oldest son, found work as a
mechanic and started driving a late-model
Mercury around town, the Shepherds had
become, in the eyes of local whites, “too
damned independent”: an “uppity nigger”
family with two cars outside their house.
Envy of Shepherd’s prosperity and
growing bargaining power intensified
when Samuel, home from the army in
1949, did not return to the citrus groves
but worked with his father instead. The
sight of that “smart nigger” Samuel, still in
his military uniform, driving around town
in his brother’s Mercury, rankled whites.


--- PAGE 355 ---
It was about time “that somebody put both
Henry and Sammy in their places.”
Terence McCarthy, a British economist
and writer studying peonage in the South,
arrived in Groveland in the aftermath of
the rioting. On a tour of Stuckey Still and
Bay Lake, his driver, a Klansman, pointed
out the ashy remains of Henry Shepherd’s
home. McCarthy noted “three twisted bed
frames warped by the fire’s heat, a
smashed camp cot, an upturned stove”; he
could hardly believe anyone had ever
lived there. Marauding neighbors had
stolen Shepherd’s chickens and Charlie
Mae’s preserves. When McCarthy asked
why, his driver replied, “They should
never let those niggers live here. We
should keep ’em together where we can


--- PAGE 356 ---
keep our eyes on ’em and not let ’em buy
white man’s land.” McCarthy learned that
whites in Groveland (who accounted for
about 60 percent of the town’s population
of one thousand) were tolerant of blacks,
as long as they continued to work in
white-owned citrus groves. “The Negroes
do most of the work around here,” the
Klansman told McCarthy. “It’s these
nigger farmers—they’ve got to go.” Black
farmers like Henry Shepherd and his
family threatened, “by their example, the
whole system of servitude and forced
labor which is the base of the local
economy,” McCarthy wrote. He noted that
the whites he spoke with were less
interested in seeking revenge for the rape
of Norma Padgett than in seeing the


--- PAGE 357 ---
demise of “all independent colored
farmers.”
A
 FEW OF HENRY
 Shepherd’s children,
reluctant to leave the farmhouse
undefended, had decided to stay in Bay
Lake. Worried by the radio report of the
riot, Shepherd went back to Groveland the
next day to look for them. He arrived at
his property and discovered that more than
a thousand dollars in tools and equipment
had been looted, as well as a hand drill
press, a gristmill, and thousands of auto
parts. He found his family; they were still
hiding in the woods.
And his son Sammy was locked up in
jail, staring at a death sentence. No one in


--- PAGE 358 ---
his family was safe. “I keep getting orders
to stay away from Groveland,” Shepherd
said. “They say the mob is after everyone
in my family and that they was going to
kill us.” Henry Shepherd knew he had to
leave his farm, and he knew he could
never return. As proud as he was of his
house and the farm that for six years had
supported him and his family, he knew he
had no choice but to walk away. “My
family is all scattered,” he said.
Terence McCarthy, after seeing the
burned ruins of Henry Shepherd’s house,
wondered what would become of the
other blacks who dared to desert the
groves and independently farm land they
had purchased. His Klansman driver
didn’t have to wonder. “They’ll get out,


--- PAGE 359 ---
be driven out or be killed, especially
around Bay Lake.”
T
HE MOB HAD
 disbanded, but Groveland
was restless, impatient for justice. One
Lake County resident bluntly told a
newspaper, “We’ll wait and see what the
law does, and if the law doesn’t do right,
we’ll do it.” Both Sheriff McCall and
State Attorney Jesse Hunter hoped to
forestall mob violence by ensuring that the
wheels of justice moved swiftly in the
Groveland rape case. Hunter began
drafting indictments. On Tuesday, July 19,
however—before any charges were made,
before any details of the alleged crime had
been announced to the public, and while


--- PAGE 360 ---
the National Guard was still patrolling the
area to prevent any further mob and Klan
violence—the 
Orlando Morning Sentinel
published prominently on its front page an
editorial cartoon titled “No
Compromise!” It featured a drawing of
“The Lake County Tragedy” depicting four
empty electric chairs, side by side, with a
sign over them reading “The Supreme
Penalty.”
As Sheriff McCall had let it be known
that the New York office of the NAACP
had contacted him about the violence
around Groveland, the 
Morning Sentinel
addressed the possibility of an NAACP
defense in an editorial:
If smart lawyers or agents of
different organizations seek to


--- PAGE 361 ---
hamper justice through the
employment of legal technicalities,
they may bring suffering to many
innocent Negroes.
The paper also reported that Norma
Padgett had been “bludgeoned” by her
assailants; that all three prisoners had
confessed to rape; and that Norma had
identified Shepherd, Irvin, and Greenlee.
While none of it was true, the 
Morning
Sentinel
 editorial effectively captured the
sentiment among most Lake County
whites, especially in its implicit warning,
or threat, that unless the accused men
were, as McCarthy wrote, “offered up as
a ‘legal’ blood-sacrifice . . . evil will
befall the rest of the Negro community.”
Mabel Norris Reese did her part as


--- PAGE 362 ---
well to assure Lake County residents that
lynching was unnecessary because McCall
and Hunter would efficiently see to it that
the rapists be executed soon by the state of
Florida. In her editorial “Honor Will Be
Avenged” in the 
Mount Dora Topic
,
Reese wrote, “It was a sorry thing that
happened to the young couple. The
trampling of their honor must be avenged
[and that] revenge will be accomplished
by a more frightening and awful means
than a mob has at its command.”
Sheriff Willis McCall, fearful of more
violence, was not eager to release the
National Guard, but by Tuesday morning
he was butting heads with the battalion
commander, Lieutenant Colonel Baya,
over a host of issues. For one, Baya knew


--- PAGE 363 ---
false rumors were being circulated—that
the blacks who had fled Groveland were
now arming themselves and preparing to
return—in order to allow groups of
deputized whites to stop vehicles and
confiscate weapons from blacks. For
another, the commander knew that
McCall, who had issued orders in writing
that “any persons bearing arms shall be
disarmed and turned over to the sheriff,”
was himself ignoring this edict if the
persons were white. For a third, the
sheriff not only had refused to furnish
Baya with the names of the mob’s
ringleaders but also had declined to
apprehend them himself, being “too busy
trying to catch the Negro who had gotten
away.”


--- PAGE 364 ---
Because McCall was unwilling to arrest
or implicate white rioters, on the grounds
that such action “would result in a terrific
race riot,” Baya wanted to withdraw his
two hundred plus troops. He contacted
Governor Warren, recommending that
political pressure be put on McCall to
pick up the ringleaders and take “positive
action against them.”
Willis McCall had been up all night and
most of the morning. The hot Florida sun
was beating down when he parked his car
in front of the Groveland Hotel. He
trudged to his room, where he hoped to
catch a few hours of sleep before
sundown, in the event that the Bay Lake
men, and maybe the Klan, should night-
ride again. He’d talked with Coy Tyson,


--- PAGE 365 ---
and told him that the rioting had to stop—
that Tyson had to make it stop. They’d
made their point, McCall told him—
houses had been burned to the ground,
property destroyed—but if they rode out
looking for trouble again, McCall couldn’t
guarantee he’d be able to keep them out of
jail. He told Tyson he had three Negroes
locked up at Raiford, and he and Jesse
Hunter were going to see to it that all three
boys were found guilty and sent to the
electric chair for raping his daughter.
He’d get the fourth one, too, McCall
promised.
Coy Tyson talked it over with some of
the ringleaders. He reported to the sheriff
that they “had agreed to stop any further
violence.” With that news, McCall phoned


--- PAGE 366 ---
Governor Fuller Warren. He convinced
the governor that he had the situation in
Groveland under control. But, he added,
he’d like to keep the Guard around through
the weekend, just to be safe.


--- PAGE 367 ---
CHAPTER 8: A
CHRISTMAS CARD
Sheriff McCall and Deputy Yates (
behind
him
) confer with the National Guard in
Groveland. (
Photo by Wallace
Kirkland/Time & Life Pictures/Getty
Images
)


--- PAGE 368 ---
Y
OU CAN EITHER
 jump into the river, or
take what is in this gun.”
Standing at the rock’s edge, the white
man held the pistol steady and waited for
the boy to make his choice. James
Howard, helpless, watched his sobbing
fifteen-year-old son—hands and feet
bound by rope—shuffle back off the edge
of the embankment, watched him plunge
into the cold, deep water of the Suwannee
River, where he disappeared.
The lynching of Willie James Howard
in January 1944 occurred more than a
decade before the fourteen-year-old black
youth Emmett Till was beaten and shot,
and his body then dumped in a river in
Tallahatchie County in Mississippi for


--- PAGE 369 ---
reportedly whistling flirtatiously at a
young white woman. Tens of thousands of
mourners viewed Till’s disfigured body in
an open-casket funeral in Chicago, and the
ensuing investigation and trial of two
white men accused of the murder
generated an unprecedented amount of
media coverage and outrage that crossed
racial lines. Both suspects were acquitted,
and young Emmett Till became a civil
rights martyr.
By contrast, the killing of Willie James
Howard barely attracted any attention
inside or outside Florida, and presented
Thurgood Marshall with one of his
earliest introductions to violence and
whitewashed investigations in Florida. In
December 1943 Willie had a job


--- PAGE 370 ---
sweeping floors at Van Priest’s Dime
Store in the sleepy city of Live Oak. He
was a precocious boy with a round face
and a sweet singing voice, and his good-
natured disposition had prompted his
family to nickname him “Giddy Boy.” It
also prompted Willie to present his
coworkers at the dime store with
Christmas cards.
Among the recipients of Willie’s cards
was a fifteen-year-old cashier at Van
Priest’s named Cynthia Goff, a student at
the town’s all-white high school.
Offended by the black boy’s gesture, she
reported it to her father, Phil Goff, a
former member of the Florida House of
Representatives and the postmaster in
Live Oak. Willie, meanwhile, aware that


--- PAGE 371 ---
he had displeased Cynthia, wrote her a
note in which he attempted to explain
himself. He gave Cynthia the note on New
Year’s Day 1944. It read:
Dear Fried:
Just a few line to let you hear
from me I am well an hope you are
the same. this is what I said on that
christmas card. From W.J.H. with L.
I hope you will understand what I
mean. that is what I said now please
don’t get angry with me because you
can never tell what may get in some
body I did not put it in there my self.
God did I can’t help what he does
can I. I know you don’t think much
of our kind of people but we don’t
hate you all we want to be your all


--- PAGE 372 ---
friends but you want let us please
don’t let anybody see this I hope I
haven’t made you made if I did tell
me about it an I will for get about it.
I wish this was an northern state I
guess you call me fresh. Write an
tell me what you think of me good or
bad.
Sincerely yours, with,
From. Y.K.W
 
[you know who]
For Cynthia Goff
I love your name. I love your
voice,
For a S.H.
 
[sweetheart]
 
you are my
choice.
Willie Howard’s choice of Cynthia as
his sweetheart incensed the Goff


--- PAGE 373 ---
household. According to Lula Howard, the
boy’s mother, on the morning of January 2,
Phil Goff and two other white men arrived
at the Howards’ house and asked for her
son Willie. When the two men tried to
drag Willie off the porch, Lula Howard
struggled to hold on to her boy—until Goff
pulled a gun on her. She released Willie,
who was then shoved into their car.
The three men drove to the Bond-
Howell Lumber Company. There they
picked up the boy’s father, James
Howard, a company employee, and then
drove the father and son down a red clay
road in the woods. They stopped at an
embankment on the Suwannee River.
Inside the car, once the boy admitted that
he’d written the letter to the girl, Goff and


--- PAGE 374 ---
the two white men bound the fifteen-year-
old’s hands and feet with rope. When
James Howard tried to speak to his son,
he was ordered, at gunpoint, to keep his
mouth shut.
The next order forced James Howard to
remove his son from the car and stand him
up several feet from the riverbank. With
the boy in place, bound and now crying,
Goff asked him if he understood “the
penalty of his crime.”
Willie sobbed. “Yes, sir.”
By now, James Howard knew his boy
would find no mercy in these woods, and
finally permitted to speak, he said to his
son, “Willie, I cannot do anything for you
now. I’m glad I have belonged to the
Church and prayed for you.”


--- PAGE 375 ---
Goff allowed the boy a last request, and
Willie asked his father to take his wallet
from his pocket. The postmaster lifted his
gun and forced the boy to choose between
a bullet and the Suwannee. Bawling and
terrified of the gun, Willie staggered
backward and toppled over the rock’s
edge, into the river, where the deep, dark
water swallowed him.
The three white men returned James
Howard to the lumber company. In the
Bond-Howell office Lula had been
waiting, hysterical, for about an hour.
Looking “terribly afraid of something,”
James Howard told his wife, “Willie is
not coming home.” He would say nothing
more.
Later that evening, Phil Goff and his


--- PAGE 376 ---
two friends, along with James Howard,
appeared before the Suwannee County
sheriff to give an affidavit. The three
white men claimed that they had taken
Willie James from his home in order to
have his father punish him for the
offensive note he’d written to teenager
Cynthia Goff. The three men had bound the
boy’s hands and feet only to prevent him
from trying to run from the whipping he
deserved, but the boy had become
hysterical. He’d refused to be humiliated
by anyone, including his own father. He
had stated he’d “rather die,” and with that
he had jumped into the river and
committed suicide. The three men entered
their signatures on the affidavit, which
James Howard was also required to sign


--- PAGE 377 ---
so as to indicate that he agreed with the
version of events therein. A second
document stated that James Howard had
recovered the body of his son and that he
did not desire a coroner’s inquest.
Three days later the Howards sold their
house and moved to Orlando.
The lynching of Willie James Howard
soon came to the attention of Harry Tyson
Moore, who had grown up just outside
Live Oak and had attended school with
Lula Howard. With two daughters,
Peaches and Evangeline, close in age to
Willie James, Moore was infuriated by
the murder of a fifteen-year-old boy. On
learning that James Howard was willing
both to testify he had been threatened into
signing the affidavit and to provide the


--- PAGE 378 ---
true version of the events surrounding his
son’s death, Moore, who was president of
the Florida State Conference of the
NAACP, contacted the national office. To
Moore’s surprise, not only had the New
York office already caught wind of the
lynching but also Thurgood Marshall was
already working on the case.
Armed by Moore with an eyewitness to
the lynching, Marshall wrote a letter to
Governor Spessard Holland requesting an
investigation. The governor assured
Marshall that protection would be
provided for James Howard during his
testimony, in light of which Holland
roundly condemned the murder but at the
same time warned Marshall not to get his
hopes up, stating, “I am sure you realize


--- PAGE 379 ---
the particular difficulties involved where
there will be testimony of three white men
and probably the girl against the testimony
of one negro man.”
Marshall also called upon the left-
leaning Florida senator Claude Pepper to
exert his influence in the case. Invoking
patriotism, Marshall reminded the senator
that the War Department had recently
confirmed stories of American servicemen
who had been tortured by the Japanese in
Philippine prison camps and argued that
the lynching of a fifteen-year-old boy
would taint America’s international
reputation: “the type of material that radio
Tokio [
sic
] is constantly on the alert for
and will use effectively in attempting to
offset our very legitimate protest in


--- PAGE 380 ---
respect to the handling of American
citizens who unfortunately are prisoners of
war.” Claude Pepper refused to get
involved.
In Florida, Harry T. Moore continued to
press for action, even though past
experiences in lynching investigations had
convinced him that it would be “a waste
of time to seek help from state
authorities.” On May 8, 1944, the state of
Florida convened a grand jury in the death
of Willie James Howard. Sheriff Tom
Henry did not appear pleased that the
boy’s father showed up to testify.
Nonetheless, Howard’s testimony failed
to return an indictment against Phil Goff
and his two friends. Moore could have
predicted it; the case would not even go to


--- PAGE 381 ---
trial.
Still, Moore refused to quit.
Commenting upon the grand jury
proceedings, he wrote to Marshall, “We
are forced to wonder if the sheriff himself
is not involved in this crime. It is very
probable that he at least has tried to help
cover up the facts in this case.” Nor was
Marshall ready to give up on Willie
Howard. He dispatched new affidavits to
Attorney General of the United States
Francis Biddle and requested a federal
investigation. A few weeks later, Tom C.
Clark, the assistant attorney general,
replied that the Justice Department had
begun a preliminary investigation into the
boy’s death. Weeks turned into months,
months into a year, and the Justice


--- PAGE 382 ---
Department had not yet any progress to
report. Moore could not hide his
disappointment; in a letter to Clark he
opined, “The life of a Negro in Suwannee
County is a very cheap article.”
The death of Willie James Howard was
effectively shelved in 1945. Beyond the
Justice Department, Moore and Marshall
had nowhere to go. The process of the
case, frustrating in the extreme from its
deplorable beginning to its unjust end,
was a repulsive reminder to Moore and
Marshall of the ruthless measures men
took to protect the flower that was
“Southern white womanhood.” It was a
lesson no doubt made more bitter that
same year in the case of a Suwannee
County constable who had forced a black


--- PAGE 383 ---
man, again at gunpoint, to jump off a
bridge to his death by drowning in the
Suwannee River. Not surprisingly, a local
grand jury refused to indict. In federal
court, however, the constable was tried—
and convicted, but not of murder. The
sentence—for civil rights violations—did
not satisfy Harry T. Moore: “Thus a man
gets off with only a year in jail and a fine
of $1,000 for committing first degree
murder. So long as these conditions exist
in America, our democracy is little more
than ‘sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.’
”
Moore’s tireless work did not go
unnoticed by the national office of the
NAACP in New York. “Your letters on
lynching and mob violence in which you


--- PAGE 384 ---
point out cases within your own state are
excellent and help us focus the attention on
the need for Federal legislation,” wrote
Gloster B. Current, director of branches.
Current, like Marshall, knew that the state
of Florida, despite recording a higher
number of lynchings and registering more
members of the Ku Klux Klan than any
other state in the South, inexplicably
remained in the shadows of Dixieland in
the 1940s. Florida was epithetically
“south of the South,” and racial incidents
that would have likely attracted national
attention had they occurred in Mississippi
or Alabama somehow managed to escape
scrutiny because they’d taken place in the
forgotten land of sun and surf. The
postwar years would find Moore


--- PAGE 385 ---
involving himself in more and more
criminal cases, including the (often
confessed) rapes of black teenage
schoolgirls and maids by whites who’d be
sprung from jails not by angry lynch mobs
but by family members posting bail.
Without Moore’s voice, his agitating
letters, and his telegrams of protest, the
all-too-frequent atrocities committed in
his backyard would have been that much
easier to conceal or ignore.
He would raise that voice, too, when
another Florida sheriff demonstrated his
contempt for the civil rights of blacks and
justice for all, in Groveland in 1949.
S
EVENTY-FIVE MILES TO
 the east, in the


--- PAGE 386 ---
small town of Mims, just off the Atlantic
Ocean, Moore had been following the
events in Lake County with much distress
but little surprise. As the NAACP’s
executive secretary in Florida, he’d been
traveling the state for more than a decade:
holding meetings, raising money,
investigating lynchings and incidents of
police brutality, and then pressuring
politicians into action. Without pay, he’d
worked for the black people’s cause on
weekends and in whatever spare time he
could manage outside his teaching job in
the Brevard County school system. Both
he and his wife, Harriette, also a teacher,
were forced out of the jobs they’d held for
twenty years because Harry was deemed,
in the summer of 1946, a “troublemaker


--- PAGE 387 ---
and Negro organizer.”
Insightful yet quiet, unassuming, and
mild-mannered, Moore composed his
public speeches with passion and focus,
but his delivery, soft-spoken and
understated, reflected the manner of the
man and contrasted sharply—and for
evangelistic Southerners, unfavorably—
with the customary fire-and-brimstone,
church-pulpit rhetoric. Moore, however,
was not about to allow an uninspiring
delivery to impede the urgent messages he
wanted to spread. Recruiting his teenage
daughter to speak on his behalf, every
night after dinner he would rehearse her
delivery of his words, which she had
memorized, so that she could dramatically
place a pause or drive home a point to


--- PAGE 388 ---
stirring effect. Evangeline was nearly
paralyzed with fear the first time she
spoke at a Baptist church in Lake County,
but she finished the speech as perfectly as
she had practiced it. Moore began
traveling the state with his family in their
blue Ford sedan, with Evangeline dividing
her time between homework and the
demanding work of the NAACP.
The Moores lived in a three-bedroom,
one-story wooden frame home that Harry
had built in 1926. Approximately forty-
five feet long and twenty-two feet wide, it
was propped up on wooden blocks nearly
two feet off the ground. The house had a
large front porch that stood behind four
wooden columns at the end of a white
sand driveway off Old Dixie Highway.


--- PAGE 389 ---
Orange, grapefruit, and palm trees
brightened up the landscape close to the
house. Whereas most of the black laborers
in Mims lived in wooden shacks on small
parcels of scrub, the Moores’ house sat on
nearly eleven acres of land and was set
deep in an orange grove. Whites referred
to it as the place where “that rich
Professor Moore” lives. Though far from
rich, a family with two educated, working
parents in a home packed with books was
no doubt more exceptional among the
blacks in Mims.
Harry’s political activism continued to
render him unemployable, but after nearly
two years of job searching, in May 1948
Harriette was offered a teaching position
in Palm Beach County, about two hours


--- PAGE 390 ---
south of Mims. The Moores decided to
rent a bedroom in a private home in
Riviera Beach during the school year so
that they could keep the house in Mims.
Still, they had some financial belt-
tightening to do, especially with two girls
enrolled at Bethune-Cookman College in
Daytona Beach. While Harry had always
planned to live off his grove when he
retired, he had not been planning to retire
in his mid-forties. Nor was he planning,
whatever his circumstances, to retire from
the cause he had dedicated his life to: the
civil rights of the Negro in Florida.
Born in Florida in 1905, Harry T.
Moore was just three years older than
Thurgood Marshall, and both men had
started working for the NAACP, though at


--- PAGE 391 ---
a distance of a thousand miles from each
other, before their thirtieth birthdays.
Moore founded the Brevard County
chapter of the NAACP in 1934, the same
year that Marshall began assisting Charles
Hamilton Houston in civil rights suits.
What introduced Moore to Marshall three
years later had its roots in the Margold
Report, a study commissioned by the
NAACP that would ultimately lay out a
legal strategy for racial reform.
In 1930, the NAACP hired the Harvard-
educated lawyer Nathan Ross Margold to
study areas in which legalized segregation
might be most vulnerable to attack in the
courts, and finding discrimination in the
financing of public schools to be
especially assailable, Margold advised


--- PAGE 392 ---
the NAACP to “boldly challenge the
constitutional validity” of black schools
that were systematically underfunded in
direct violation of the Fourteenth
Amendment’s equal protection clause; for
in every case, when states exercised their
discretion to spend public funds
designated for elementary and high
schools, appointments to white schools
significantly exceeded those to black
schools. After studying the report,
Houston devised a long-term plan
whereby the NAACP would establish
over a number of years a series of
precedents in courts across the South
regarding inequalities in public school
budgets and facilities—to demonstrate that
“the law functioned to sustain white


--- PAGE 393 ---
supremacy.”
Harry Moore had been following events
at the national office of the NAACP
closely, and in 1937 he wrote a letter
informing Walter White that the
association’s Brevard County branch had
hired a lawyer to file suit for equal pay
for teachers in that county. When the letter
landed on Marshall’s desk, the young
lawyer could barely contain his
excitement. It was exactly the type of case
he and Houston were looking to pursue,
and it appeared that Moore not only was
fully committed to the lawsuit but also had
already done much of the legwork. The
letter occasioned the first of many
meetings between Marshall and Moore
over the next decade, some of them at


--- PAGE 394 ---
Moore’s house in Mims. There Moore
played host to Marshall (in part because
the local hotels were closed to blacks) as
they prepared the case against the Brevard
County school board.Marshall said of
Moore, in a letter to Walter White: “He
seems to be a fine sort of fellow,” if
“under tremendous pressure because of
his actions in the teachers’ salary case.”
Moore in many ways perfectly
complemented the ebullient, self-
assertive, larger-than-life New York
lawyer Thurgood Marshall in that the
erstwhile teacher was exactly the selfless,
committed, and detail-oriented sort of
person on whom the attorney depended.
The two men thrived on their mutual
respect. In time the school case in Brevard


--- PAGE 395 ---
County would inspire similar lawsuits in
counties across Florida, and Harry T.
Moore would be the first to credit their
success to Thurgood Marshall’s energy
and dedication. “Thurgood was the
savior,” said Dr. Gilbert Porter, Moore’s
friend and colleague. “We never started
winning any cases until he came. But after
he won a few, all you had to say to a
white superintendent, ‘Well, I’m gonna
talk to Mr. Marshall,’ and they’d
cooperate.”
Marshall’s visits to Florida had an
undeniable impact on Moore. With even
more ardor he discharged the monotonous
tasks at his local branch—collecting
signatures, raising a few dollars here and
there from the poorest blacks in the state


--- PAGE 396 ---
—because he saw it did make a
difference. He spent hours at night
bludgeoning countless typewriter ribbons,
writing letters to politicians and
membership reports to the New York
office, whose field administrators saw in
Moore a valuable point man in a state
with unlimited potential for growth. In the
postwar decade Florida would also prove
to be a state with a boundless capacity for
racial inhumanity, even by measure of the
rest of the South, and Marshall and Moore
would find themselves challenging law
enforcement officers and elected officials
determined, without conscience, to
whitewash some of the most horrific
lynching cases of the twentieth century.
From 1882 to 1930, Florida recorded


--- PAGE 397 ---
more lynchings of black people (266) than
any other state, and from 1900 to 1930, a
per capita lynching rate twice that of
Mississippi, Georgia, or Louisiana. But
neither Marshall nor Moore needed
statistics to know that by World War II,
Florida still ranked high among the most
violent states in the South. Jack E. Davis,
a University of Florida history professor
who studied racial violence in the South,
concluded that “a black man had more risk
of being lynched in Florida than any other
place in the country.” Alarmingly, despite
the shocking and heinous nature of the
lynchings in Florida, the crimes and the
cover-ups generated little attention, let
alone outrage—beyond the black
newspapers. The state of Florida—that


--- PAGE 398 ---
tropical vacation territory lying south of
Georgia and, it would seem, of the Jim
Crow South—appeared to be immune to
media scrutiny.
H
ARRY T. MOORE
 saw no hero in the
newspaper accounts of Willis McCall’s
stand against mob violence in Groveland
following the supposed rape of Norma
Padgett by four black men. To Moore, the
devastation of the black homes and
property occurred not in spite of the
sheriff’s brave watch but because of his
blind eye: it simply wasn’t plausible that
McCall neither knew nor could discover
the parties responsible for the rioting in
Lake County. On Wednesday, July 20,


--- PAGE 399 ---
1949, Moore sent a telegram to Governor
Fuller Warren urging “prosecution of mob
leaders responsible for terrorism and
vandalism against innocent Negro citizens
of Lake County.”
Warren at least seemed to be more
sympathetic to the Negro cause than his
predecessor, the segregationist Millard
Caldwell, who viewed the murder of
blacks as a political nuisance, and once
had his executive secretary request a local
judge to launch an investigation because
“[l]ynching of negroes is really beginning
to give the Governor a terrific headache.
. . . ”
Fuller Warren had won the 1948
election by running as a moderate and
promising to ease racial tension and


--- PAGE 400 ---
violence in Florida. He’d denounced the
Klansmen who paraded through Lake
County on election night (with Sheriff
Willis McCall following behind) as
“hooded hoodlums and sheeted jerks,” and
Moore cautiously held out some hope for
the new governor. Warren had admitted to
being a former member of the Ku Klux
Klan, but renouncing his past, like many a
politician before and since, he’d stated
that he had joined years before “as a favor
to a friend” and that he “never wore a
hood.” Moore did not adopt a wait-and-
see approach with the new governor. On
July 22, 1949, two days after his original
telegram to Warren in regard to Willis
McCall, Moore wired a second message
to the governor, in which he used the


--- PAGE 401 ---
sheriff’s own words to make his point.
“Since mob leaders are known,” Moore
wrote, “we again urge that they be
arrested and vigorously prosecuted for the
damage done to innocent Negro citizens.
. . .”
Moore’s telegram was intercepted by a
staff person at Warren’s office. “Have
written him enough,” the aide scratched
across the top and filed the telegram
away.
W
ITH HUNDREDS OF
 National Guardsmen
camped around Stuckey Still, Mascotte,
and Bay Lake, and with only one arrest
(for public intoxication), Tuesday night
had passed without incident. Convinced


--- PAGE 402 ---
that speedy indictments of the three
Negroes in custody would significantly
curb the violence around Groveland,
McCall and State Attorney Jesse Hunter
had met with Judge Truman G. Futch on
Wednesday, July 20, to expedite the
formal charges against Samuel Shepherd,
Walter Irvin, and Charles Greenlee for the
rape of Norma Padgett. By late afternoon
the grand jury, which included the first
black ever to so serve in Lake County, had
been seated in the courtroom to consider
the evidence. Norma Padgett told the court
she’d been raped by four men. Willis
McCall testified that he had confessions
from three of them. By midnight, Hunter
had his indictments.
The only reporter present, Mabel Norris


--- PAGE 403 ---
Reese of the Mount Dora Topic , who’d
been invited by the state attorney, was
impressed with the strength of the case
against the accused. She had only praise
for “sage and trial-trained Jesse Hunter”
and Sheriff Willis McCall, who, she
wrote, had “earned a badge of honor” for
the way he conducted himself during Lake
County’s “eye-blackening rape case.”
Things were beginning to quiet down
around Groveland. McCall could finally
focus on hunting down the fourth rapist.
F
RANKLIN WILLIAMS HAD
 been following
press reports of the violence in Groveland
from the NAACP’s midtown Manhattan
office, but with most of the staff counsel


--- PAGE 404 ---
still in Los Angeles for the annual
conference, he could do little more than
gather information so he’d be prepared to
answer any questions Thurgood Marshall
might raise. Constance Baker Motley had
already spoken with Sheriff Willis
McCall about protecting blacks in Lake
County from rioting whites; the
conversation had not gone well. Harry T.
Moore, down in Mims, had learned that
Shepherd, Irvin, and Greenlee had been
indicted for rape with a trial date set for
Monday, August 29. That left barely a
month to prepare for a capital case that
would most likely sentence three men to
the electric chair, and they didn’t even
have legal representation yet. Moore had
dispatched a young black lawyer from


--- PAGE 405 ---
Tampa to Florida State Prison in Raiford
for the purpose of taking down statements
from Shepherd, Irvin, and Greenlee.
Marshall returned to a New York office
in chaos. The phones were ringing nonstop
with calls from the Florida branches about
the assaults upon the Negro communities
in Lake County, as well as from NAACP
members who had concerns about events
at the annual convention in Los Angeles,
where delegates had just passed a
resolution to permit its board of directors
to weed out known communists from local
branches. Marshall had begun a tricky
political dance with FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover. With Hoover’s agency being the
key to the public’s perception of the Red
Scare, Marshall was eager to demonstrate


--- PAGE 406 ---
the NAACP’s (anticommunist) patriotism.
At the same time, Marshall’s gravitas and
popularity with the press exerted pressure
on Hoover to reshape the image of the FBI
as a government agency with no
commitment to the civil rights of blacks.
Each man uttered his public statements
about the other’s organization with politic
caution.
Behind the discreet public statements,
though, lay decades of tension. Marshall
had seen, time and again, the FBI arrive at
the scene in the aftermath of a lynching,
and time and again leave without any
suspects. Moreover, Marshall had
learned, the bureau’s agents in the
aftermath of a lynching evinced so much
antagonism toward the black victims and


--- PAGE 407 ---
witnesses that the latter simply would not
talk to the FBI, out of fear that any
information they provided would be
relayed to local law enforcement and thus
put their lives in danger. Marshall had
aired his complaints against the FBI in an
appearance before the President’s
Committee on Civil Rights: “You don’t
investigate a lynching in the same way you
investigate a hot automobile. . . . You have
more local feeling to overcome. You have
more unwillingness of people to talk.”
Agents, he said, needed special training,
and most important, Marshall stated, they
must “themselves believe in the
enforcement of civil rights.”
After a black army veteran, Isaac
Woodard, had been beaten and blinded in


--- PAGE 408 ---
South Carolina in early 1946, Marshall
seethed when he was yet again informed
that an FBI investigation had been unable
to acquire sufficient evidence to pursue
the case further. That summer had borne
witness to a rash of lynchings across the
South—all of which had gone unsolved (if
not uninvestigated)—and a frustrated
Marshall wrote a letter to Tom C. Clark,
asking the attorney general to investigate
the bureau itself. “The FBI has established
for itself an uncomparable [
sic
] record for
ferreting out persons violating our federal
laws. . . . [This] extends from the
prosecution of vicious spies and saboteurs
. . . to nondescript hoodlums who steal
automobiles and drive them across state
lines. On the other hand, the FBI has been


--- PAGE 409 ---
unable to identify or bring to trial persons
charged with federal statutes where
Negroes are the victims.”
Clark, in turn, forwarded Marshall’s
letter to Hoover. Furious, the FBI director
fired back, “I have found from previous
dealings with [Marshall] that he is more
careless to the truth and facts in the
charges which he makes against the FBI.”
He added, “I believe that Mr. Marshall’s
obvious hostility to the Bureau dominates
the thinking of his associates in the legal
operation of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People.”
Hoover then challenged Marshall to
provide specific names of Southerners
who believed they had been wronged by
the FBI—a challenge Marshall refused to


--- PAGE 410 ---
meet.
By all accounts, Hoover cringed at the
start of every civil rights investigation,
before “rushing pell-mell” into them at the
urging of “vociferous minority groups.”
Satisfied that the FBI had put together a
very strong case for prosecutors, with
“clear-cut, uncontroverted evidence of
conspiracy” in lynchings, Hoover himself
became apprehensive of Southern
courtroom justice when all-white juries
either acquitted defendants or refused to
indict suspects altogether. For it was the
bureau that bore the brunt of criticism in
such cases, not the prosecutors or juries
who chose to ignore sound evidence. In
Hoover’s estimation, such cases,
perceived by the public as losses,


--- PAGE 411 ---
weakened the FBI’s reputation.
When Walter White attempted to
arrange a meeting between Marshall and
Hoover in the hope that they might come to
a truce, Marshall was not optimistic. “I
. . . have no faith in either Mr. Hoover or
his investigators,” he wrote to White, “and
there is no use in my saying I do.” Hoover
simply refused to meet. White persisted,
however; in the face of the mounting
anticommunist fervor he felt the NAACP
needed to be viewed by the FBI as a
bastion of democracy, not as a target. In
April 1947, putting together an NAACP
anticommunism position pamphlet, White
requested a patriotic encomium from J.
Edgar Hoover, who replied that it would
be his “pleasure.” Hoover offered:


--- PAGE 412 ---
“Equality, freedom and tolerance are
essential in a democratic government. The
NAACP has done so much to preserve
these principles and to perpetuate the
desires of our founding fathers.” A few
months later, White finally persuaded
Marshall to travel to Washington to meet
Hoover, and the director, in his turn,
extended an olive branch of future
cooperation. It didn’t take long for
Marshall to win Hoover over “with his
charming, good-ol-boy, ‘I’m a little ol’
Baltimore lawyer’ persona, which worked
so well with southern sheriffs and
politicians.” He made it clear to Hoover
that the NAACP could help him avert
criticism that the FBI was uninterested in
race crimes, and Hoover recognized the


--- PAGE 413 ---
value that an endorsement from someone
of Marshall’s stature in the black
community would have on the public’s
perception of the bureau and,
concomitantly, on the agency’s reputation.
Marshall asked only that the FBI recommit
itself in cases where the civil rights of
blacks were clearly violated.
By the time the Groveland case memos
first crossed Hoover’s desk, the director
was disposed to write, “Give this matter
your full attention,” across the bottom,
ordering a full investigation. Soon
thereafter, FBI field office directors were
reporting to Hoover that “Thurgood
Marshall of the NAACP complimented the
Bureau on its hard work in this case.” The
two men appeared indeed to have


--- PAGE 414 ---
reconciled their differences. The
NAACP’s Jack Greenberg took a more
cynical view. “The Association and
Hoover were using each other,” he said.


--- PAGE 415 ---
CHAPTER 9: DON’T
SHOOT, WHITE MAN
Just days after the alleged rape, Florida


--- PAGE 416 ---
newspapers were calling for capital
punishment of the Groveland Boys. (
Library
of Congress, Prints & Photographs
Division, Visual Materials from the
NAACP Records
)
B
LOODHOUNDS HAD PICKED
 up the scent
of Ernest Thomas. Willis McCall had led
more than one thousand armed men into a
cypress swamp in northern Florida where
they had the fourth Groveland Boy
trapped. Around dusk, one group of men
on horseback spotted Ernest running
across a field two hundred yards in the
distance. When they yelled at him to stop,
he only ran faster, and six to eight men,
spurring their horses to full speed, started
firing their guns, McCall noted, “like you


--- PAGE 417 ---
see in a western movie.”
E
RNEST THOMAS NEVER
 made it back to
the train depot in Groveland on the night
of July 15. He’d left behind the mosquito-
bitten sixteen-year-old Charles Greenlee
with a gun tucked into his pants, and then
he’d as good as disappeared. He was
nowhere to be found the following day.
Something must have spooked him by the
time the sun came up. He may have heard
about Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin
being picked up by Lake County deputies
early that morning for the rape of a white
woman, or heard about the mob gathering
outside Groveland jail, where Charles
Greenlee had landed in a cell. There was


--- PAGE 418 ---
talk around town that Ernest had returned
to Groveland with an eye to getting more
involved in the 
bolita
 business—perhaps
running it from his mother’s juke joint, the
Blue Flame—and in that, he had maybe
upset certain parties, Henry Singleton in
particular. The owner of the only other
alcohol-serving Negro juke joint in town,
the Blue Moon, for years Singleton not
only had run a lucrative 
bolita
 operation
but also had managed to stay on the good
side of Sheriff Willis McCall. Had Ernest
Thomas and Henry Singleton perhaps
faced off in a confrontation the night
before? Might that have been why Ernest
had thought it wise to leave Groveland the
following morning on the first bus out of
town?


--- PAGE 419 ---
A picture began to emerge after Richard
Carter, a reporter for the
 Daily Compass
,
a short-lived leftist newspaper in New
York, arrived in Lake County to
investigate. Carter had been reporting on
the dockside rackets of New York’s
waterfront when he turned his sights to
Groveland. With a keen understanding of
organized crime and its political and
economic effects, Carter quickly focused
on the 
bolita
 business in Lake County in
an attempt to understand why Ernest
Thomas might have fled Groveland on the
morning of July 16.
In the course of his investigation, Carter
discovered that Ernest Thomas had been
“peddling 
bolita
” in Gainesville for a man
named Leroy McKinney, when the two


--- PAGE 420 ---
men decided “that there was money to be
made by paying odds higher than the
traditional 70–1 on a winning 
bolita
number.” By returning to Groveland,
Carter learned, Ernest had hoped to
expand his 
bolita
 business, but he would
need a partner in Groveland, so he turned
to George Valree, “a bearded, fantastic
Negro, who had amassed a fortune in
voodooism.” Valree owned two houses in
Groveland. In one of them “he looked into
his crystal ball” for both local blacks and
wealthy whites who came from miles
away to pay for his clairvoyant services.
The other house “was known to be the
headquarters for 
bolita
 in South Lake
county.” Business was so good that Valree
“had recently bought himself a Cadillac.”


--- PAGE 421 ---
Ernest Thomas, according to Carter, had
worked out a “cozy arrangement” with
Valree, who began sending business to
him. But the new partnership didn’t sit
well with the “well-entrenched local
bolita
 hustler” in Groveland, Henry
Singleton. In addition to running his own
juke joint, Singleton had his hand in
bootlegging and the numbers game, and
“the law enforcement officers whom
Singleton paid for protection” were not
pleased with the new competition, Carter
wrote. Ernest Thomas would not be
allowed to come back into Lake County
and take money out of their pockets. Not
without a fight. “Things were coming to a
head in the 
bolita
 war,” Carter wrote,
when Singleton and Thomas ran into each


--- PAGE 422 ---
other on the night of July 15 and quarreled
on the streets of Groveland. “Thomas was
feeling his oats and Singleton was
resentful,” but Singleton had a powerful
Lake County ally who had a definitive
interest in the 
bolita
 dealer’s continuing
prosperity. All Singleton would have to
do was pick up the phone and call Willis
McCall and let the sheriff know he was
having some 
bolita
 trouble.
Three nights after the alleged rape of
Norma Padgett, a Bay Lake mob had
torched both of George Valree’s homes to
the ground. Ernest Thomas had already
fled Groveland in fear for his life. And
Henry Singleton no longer had to worry
about the crystal-gazing seer or the cocky
Ernest Thomas cutting into his 
bolita


--- PAGE 423 ---
throws.
B
Y THE END
 of the week, the mobs
having finally vacated the streets of Lake
County, Willis McCall had released the
National Guard: and with the three
confessed rapists now indicted and
secured at Raiford, the sheriff turned his
mind to Ernest Thomas. A phone call to
the Gainesville Police Department
apprised the sheriff that Ernest had been
seen in town recently with his wife, Ruby
Lee. Promptly, with his deputy James
Yates, McCall was heading up to
Gainesville.
Ruby Lee Thomas claimed she had not
seen her husband since the day he had left


--- PAGE 424 ---
for Groveland. “It was obvious she was
lying,” McCall noted, and after spending
the next day pursuing leads that went
nowhere, he decided to further question
Ruby Lee. As it happened, she was not
home, and for the first and “only time in
the whole investigation,” as McCall
would later say, “I violated the law.” A
letter in the Thomas mailbox caught his
eye. It “was not sealed very well and
came open with very little effort.” It was
from Ernest Thomas. The letter told Ruby
Lee where her husband would “be until
things cooled off” and how she could
reach him, under the assumed name of
Willy Green, at an RFD mailing address
with a box number in Shady Grove, which
lay about two hours northwest of


--- PAGE 425 ---
Gainesville, near the Georgia border.
Thomas would be staying there, he said,
“with some kin folks” deep in the
swamps.
The letter being a sure lead, McCall
contacted Simmie Moore, the sheriff of
Madison County, as well as the sheriffs in
neighboring Lafayette and Taylor counties,
and together they formulated a plan. Once
McCall and Yates, who both had no
jurisdiction beyond Lake County, had been
deputized by local sheriffs, they set out on
their manhunt along with several
patrolmen from nearby Perry and Mayo.
They’d narrowed Thomas’s whereabouts
to a tenant house on a woodland farm near
an old turpentine still, where they decided
to lie low until their quarry had “settled


--- PAGE 426 ---
down for the night”—they’d move in on
Thomas when he was sleeping.
They broke into the tenant house at three
in the morning on July 25. They found
Thomas’s clothes and a few personal
effects, but not Thomas himself. He had
switched to another house nearby, but he’d
heard the lawmen’s commotion. Roused
from his sleep, he had slipped out a
window and made a dash for the woods.
McCall admitted, “We had not cased the
place as well as we would have liked.”
The lawmen put in a call to the State
Road Camp at Perry for bloodhounds. An
hour later trucks arrived with men, dogs,
and horses; by then Ernest Thomas had
had a two-hour head start. The hounds
picked up Thomas’s scent at the house


--- PAGE 427 ---
where he’d slept, then led his pursuers
through a “cotton patch and through a hog
pen, and . . . through a big swamp.” The
posse knew they were on Ernest’s trail in
the swamp when one of the dogs found
where Ernest had “cut his breeches legs
off”; the hound got so excited, he pulled
the leash out of the hand of the Perry
prison camp inmate. For six miles they
pursued the trail, until the dog gave out
and they had to send back to their camp
for more hounds. This reprieve allowed
Ernest Thomas a little more time to put
some distance between himself and the
posse, but by early afternoon the dogs had
again picked up his scent. The sheriffs
continued the chase. As the hours passed,
however, they recognized that the black


--- PAGE 428 ---
fugitive’s apparent familiarity with the
backwoods and swamps of Madison
County had made of him elusive prey.
Word of Thomas’s escape had spread
by then, and the posse grew. Since before
nightfall cars had been descending on the
area, and men were being deputized in
groups to join the manhunt. McCall made
sure that the men of Bay Lake and
Groveland had been alerted, in the event
that any of them might still be seeking
justice for the rape of Norma Padgett.
With more than a thousand armed men
having answered the call, they were able
to encircle the farmlands and cypress
swamps where they believed Thomas had
hidden. Around dusk, a group of men on
horseback spotted Thomas briefly and


--- PAGE 429 ---
gave chase, firing their guns and ordering
him to halt. Again Thomas escaped his
pursuers. He disappeared into a thick
cypress pond, where the dogs less
effectively followed his scent and
darkness hindered the search. Still, the
posse had him confined, and by daylight
on Tuesday, July 26, when they resumed
the chase, every road Thomas might have
hoped to cross had been blocked off. His
sole recourse was the swamp.
In his legless dungarees, a dirty white
flannel shirt, and a pair of muddy tan
slippers, Ernest Thomas had been worn
down by lack of sleep and his unending
flight beneath a ruthless sun. He’d run
twenty-five miles, at least, when he found
himself in an area of densely wooded


--- PAGE 430 ---
pines at the edge of the swamp; he was not
far from Moseley Hall—a black section of
Madison County in which he hoped to be
able to disappear. The hope evaporated
when he saw the cars and the armed men
patrolling the road. He retreated deeper
into the woods, and sitting down, his back
against a tree, he drifted into sleep.
Nearby, so did one of the bloodhounds in
his pursuit. Sheriff McCall had no way to
determine if Ernest had befriended the dog
asleep at his side or if the dog was
guarding the quarry until the posse
arrived. The sheriff couldn’t ask Ernest
because the posse’s first sight of him
asleep prompted a volley of shots that
rang out across the swamp. Around 11:30
a.m. on Tuesday, July 26, Ernest


--- PAGE 431 ---
Thomas’s lifeless body lay crumpled in a
pool of blood, clay, and pine needles. A
broken, half-empty pack of Camels was
sticking up from the one pocket of his
shirt.
The next day, McCall and Yates drove
Norma and Willie Padgett to Madison
County in order to view the body of Ernest
Thomas at the T. J. Beggs Funeral Home.
Also present was the state attorney Jesse
Hunter. Norma approached the casket.
“That is him,” she said, staring down at
the corpse. No matter that Ernest’s face
and head were riddled with bullets, she
further affirmed, “I would know that face
anywhere. He is the one that had the gun
and he is the one that drove the car.”
Willie Padgett never said a word.


--- PAGE 432 ---
Two days after the shooting, at a
coroner’s inquest, a string of witnesses
paraded before county judge Curtis Earp.
Almost all of them testified they had been
close enough to observe that Thomas was
armed and had attempted to fire a .32-
caliber Harrington & Richardson revolver
when he was discovered; yet virtually
none of them could say or even
approximate, not with “so much
excitement” at the scene, how many shots
were fired or who was actually present to
fire them when Thomas was killed. One of
them claimed he was close enough to hear
Thomas’s last words, “Don’t shoot, white
man, don’t shoot,” but not to see who did
the shooting. Nor could he say how many
shots had followed, although he did attest


--- PAGE 433 ---
that with all the bullets flying, one of the
dogs was shot.
On the one hand, Willis McCall told
reporters that Thomas was “belligerent as
the devil. He had a loaded pistol in his
hand and he had his finger around the
trigger”; on the other, under oath, McCall
stated he had been nowhere near the spot
where Thomas was killed, telling
investigators, “I was across on the
opposite side of the swamp when the
shooting occurred.” He didn’t know who
fired the fatal shots, he later told
reporters, “but it was a bunch of good
fellows.”
Called as a witness before the inquest,
Sheriff Simmie Moore stated that when he
arrived at the scene, Thomas was already


--- PAGE 434 ---
dead with a bullet hole in the back of the
head, two bullet holes in his right temple,
and bullet wounds in the forehead, “above
the eyes.” Moore had laid down
newspapers “because it was a little
bloody” and covered Thomas with a cloth.
The actual number of bullet wounds
sustained by Ernest Thomas was never
clearly established, although the
Baltimore Afro-American
 estimated that
“nearly 400 slugs” were found in the
body. The coroner’s report found that
“there were other holes in the body” and
that Ernest had been “shot with buckshot,
as well as with rifle or revolver bullets.”
At the end of the testimony, Sheriff
Moore was recalled as a witness in the
Ernest Thomas inquest. Apparently Moore


--- PAGE 435 ---
had been discomposed by the chronic
amnesia that had plagued witnesses
throughout the hearing, and he wanted
something on the record to show which
sheriffs were in the vicinity “when this
negro was shot.” When asked, Moore
replied, “Sheriff McCall of Lake County,
and Sheriff Towles of Taylor County.”
“How many deputy sheriffs were down
in that area?” the state attorney then asked.
“One,” Moore said.
“Who was that?”
“Sheriff McCall’s deputy.”
Ormond Powers, a reporter for the
Orlando Sentinel
, had been covering the
Groveland story and he told Milton C.
Thomas, a former editor from the
newspaper, that he had become frustrated


--- PAGE 436 ---
with what he perceived were “glaring
flaws” in Willis McCall’s versions of
events. To start, Powers had never seen
any of the confessions McCall claimed to
have obtained from the Groveland Boys.
He just printed what the sheriff and his
deputies told him, but he doubted the
defendants had so freely admitted their
guilt. Powers believed that reporters were
“being told just the things they [law
enforcement] wanted written” and that his
own “probing questions were never
welcomed.” The 
Sentinel
 reporter also
suspected that Ernest Thomas’s
involvement with 
bolita
 was the reason
the young man had fled Lake County, not
the fact that Norma Padgett claimed to
have been raped. Powers had questions


--- PAGE 437 ---
for Sheriff McCall about the specifics of
Thomas’s resistance at the time the
Groveland native was gunned down, and
those questions “have never been
answered.”
The reporter had come to suspect that
McCall was “desperate to seal Thomas’s
lips” and that the reason for such an
extensive manhunt “was for the purpose of
shutting up Thomas permanently.” Officers
in northern Florida, Powers believed,
“could have taken Thomas,” but Powers
suspected “a plot to GET Thomas—and
they did. The ‘they’ in this case being
organized gamblers.”
The authorities, Powers said, viewed
Thomas as a “definite threat to the
established and entrenched gambling set-


--- PAGE 438 ---
up in that section of Lake County,” and the
posse was organized to make “absolutely
sure Thomas had no chance to TALK.”
The reporter also observed, “It seemed
there was relief that Thomas was dead.”
Finally, Ormond Powers told the editor
that McCall “was present—and probably
shooting—when Thomas was killed,” and
that “this might have been cold-blooded
murder.”
T
HE CORONER’S JURY
 found that Ernest
Thomas had been “lawfully killed” and
ruled his death a justifiable homicide.
Two hundred miles to the south of
Moseley Hall, many of Thomas’s
neighbors found the evidence supporting


--- PAGE 439 ---
the jury’s ruling to be suspect. One of
Groveland’s white elected officials
“broadly hinted” to a reporter that it was
unlikely that Ernest Thomas had attempted
to shoot his way out of the swamp, as
“Thomas was a bright, well-dressed,
college-educated man. He wasn’t a rough
of any sort.” Beyond dispute, though, was
the fact that the “Groveland Four,” as the
newspapers referred to the Lake County
rapists, were now the Groveland three.
After the inquest, on the drive back to
Bay Lake, Willis McCall asked Norma
Padgett to hold out her hand. He’d
retained a token from the crime scene:
something to ease the pain of the
seventeen-year-old farm girl. Norma
extended her pale, white palm. The sheriff


--- PAGE 440 ---
plunked into it a .38-caliber slug that had
recently been pumped into the black body
of Ernest Thomas.
I
T DIDN’T TAKE
 much for Franklin
Williams to convince Thurgood Marshall
that events in Groveland resembled a
Little Scottsboro and that NAACP counsel
ought to intervene. On first hearing, the
case for the most part fulfilled the three
requirements Marshall had established to
guide his staff. For one, the injustice
stemmed from race. Second, while the
innocence of Shepherd, Irvin, and
Greenlee might be open to question,
Marshall had argued enough cases to be
suspicious of confessions obtained by law


--- PAGE 441 ---
enforcement in Southern jails—especially
if the crimes carried a death penalty.
Lastly, the case obviously raised due
process and equal protection issues.
Williams presented a persuasive
argument, but the New York office was
shorthanded. With White, Wilkins, and
Marshall’s assistant special counsel,
Robert Carter, unavailable, options were
limited. In 1949, Constance Baker Motley
was still “learning to try cases,” under
Marshall, and the prospect of dispatching
her to Florida to try a criminal case did
not appeal to Marshall. Nor could he
enlist a more experienced attorney like
William Hastie, the former dean of
Howard University School of Law and
cousin to Charles Hamilton Houston, as


--- PAGE 442 ---
Hastie was still serving his term as
governor of the Virgin Islands. (President
Truman would soon appoint Hastie to the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third
Circuit, thus making him the nation’s first
black appellate judge.)
In the end, Marshall assigned the case to
Franklin Williams himself. Williams had
argued 
Watts v. Indiana
 with Marshall
before the Supreme Court a few months
earlier—another instance when the
NAACP was shorthanded—and the young
lawyer effectively convinced the justices
that a murder confession had been
obtained involuntarily. So it was that
Williams found himself on a plane to
central Florida.
The thirty-one-year-old assistant


--- PAGE 443 ---
special counsel had been hired by the
NAACP in 1945, when he’d impressed
Walter White by passing the New York
state bar examination 
before
 receiving his
degree from Fordham University Law
School. Williams, a native of Flushing,
Queens, New York, and like Marshall, an
alumnus of Lincoln University, had served
in a segregated unit of the U.S. Army
during World War II, his military
experience being particularly useful to
Marshall at a time when the NAACP was
handling numerous cases in which black
servicemen appeared to have been
unjustly court-martialed. Like all counsel
under Marshall, though, Williams had
soon found himself working on briefs and
appeals for cases involving school


--- PAGE 444 ---
desegregation, restrictive covenants, and
transportation. A 1946 case that had
especially commanded Williams’s
attention concerned a young former
sergeant in the U.S. Army, Isaac Woodard,
who had been maimed by police just hours
after receiving his honorable discharge.
On February 13, Woodard, in uniform,
had boarded a Greyhound bus at Camp
Gordon, near Augusta, Georgia, and was
heading to South Carolina to pick up his
wife so they could travel on to New York
together to visit his parents. Not long into
the trip he and the bus driver got into a
dispute over Woodard’s need to use a
drugstore bathroom during a stop. The
argument was brief, but when the driver
stopped again in Batesburg, South


--- PAGE 445 ---
Carolina, Woodard was removed from the
bus and taken to a nearby alley, where the
policemen beat him with their nightsticks.
They then arrested Woodard for
disorderly conduct and threw him into a
cell, where he was again drubbed with a
nightstick, by the chief of police, Linwood
Shull. When Woodard awoke the next
morning, both eye sockets had been
ruptured and his corneas irreparably
damaged, but police denied him any
medical attention for two days. Woodard
had already been blinded for life when,
two days after the beating, he was
dropped off by police at a hospital in
Aiken, South Carolina. The substandard
medical care he received there resulted in
amnesia, and it was several weeks before


--- PAGE 446 ---
his relatives, who had reported the
sergeant missing, were able to find him.
While Williams was eager to take
Woodard’s case, which certainly met
Marshall’s guidelines, he knew that any
investigation would be difficult given that
his client was both blind and unable to
remember many of the details of his
ordeal. Eventually Williams managed to
locate a student from the University of
South Carolina who had been on the bus
with Woodard; the student identified Shull
as the arresting officer. With that the
NAACP immediately began publicizing
Woodard’s story. When Walter White met
with President Harry Truman during “that
terrible summer of 1946” after several
high-profile lynchings of black soldiers in


--- PAGE 447 ---
the South had caught the nation’s attention,
Truman “exploded” on being informed
that the state of South Carolina had simply
dismissed the Woodard incident. Truman
ordered the Justice Department to
investigate; the indictments of Shull and
his officers followed shortly thereafter.
The blinding of Isaac Woodard enraged
the public. Orson Welles campaigned on
his radio broadcasts for punishment of the
police officers; Woody Guthrie recorded
“The Blinding of Isaac Woodard.” To
raise awareness further, the NAACP sent
Woodard on a national tour with Franklin
Williams to speak about the soldier’s
beating and blinding at the hands of
police. The pair made an unforgettable
impression. Woodard, who had begun to


--- PAGE 448 ---
regain his memory, was initially terrified
to address an audience he could not see,
but from the outset of the tour his account
of the pride he felt at serving his country
in the Pacific, which earned him a Battle
Star and a Good Conduct Medal, deeply
stirred his audience, as did the poignant
rendering of his anticipation as he
boarded the bus, believing he was only
hours away from seeing his wife, and then
his desolation over the loss of his memory
and sight. The soldier was “a good
platform person,” according to Williams,
who would follow Woodard’s story with
a passionate appeal for funds.
Williams was good on the platform, too.
Thin and handsome, with a chiseled face
and dark, deep-set eyes, he dressed in


--- PAGE 449 ---
sharp, tailored suits, often with a bow tie
and fedora. What he lacked in experience
the urbane young lawyer more than made
up for in confidence, and his substantial
intelligence matched his forceful
presence. Williams perfectly projected the
NAACP’s desired public image. As the
newest attorney on a staff that included
Thurgood Marshall, Robert Carter, and
Constance Baker Motley, Williams was
proving himself a worthy addition in his
tireless advocacy on behalf of Isaac
Woodard. When Woodard and Williams
appeared at Harlem’s Lewisohn Stadium,
at a rally cochaired by heavyweight
fighter Joe Louis, twenty thousand people
attended, and the event pulled in more than
twenty-two thousand dollars for


--- PAGE 450 ---
Woodard’s aid and an “antimob violence
fund.”
The case against Woodard’s attackers
was less successful, and Williams
witnessed Southern justice as he sat
beside Isaac Woodard in court. The judge
in the trial, a proponent of civil rights,
was so outraged by the U.S. attorney’s
inept and uninspired efforts to make a case
against the defendants that he declared it
“disgraceful.” Adding insult to injury,
Shull’s defense lawyers outright shouted
racial epithets at Woodard in the
courtroom. The jury needed not even a
half hour to find Shull and the police not
guilty on all charges; the gallery burst into
applause.
Williams could barely believe what he


--- PAGE 451 ---
had witnessed. Marshall had always
returned from his trips down south with
colorful stories of crazy sheriffs, violent
mobs, and vicious death threats, and
Williams had laughed at Marshall’s
mockery along with the rest of the legal
staff in the comfort of the NAACP’s
midtown offices. But Williams could find
nothing funny in his acquaintance with that
Southern landscape. The stories he could
tell of his experiences with Woodard
below the Mason-Dixon Line would,
Williams said, “make your hair stand on
end.”
Still, Williams was beginning to
appreciate Marshall’s strategy in regard to
criminal cases in the South, where local
law enforcement, prosecutors, judges, and


--- PAGE 452 ---
juries all guaranteed that the scales of
justice would tip in favor of white
supremacy. You fought, as Marshall
repeatedly reminded his staff, so that you
lived to fight another day, whether by
filing an appeal to a higher court or simply
by recognizing that when an all-white jury
handed a black defendant a life sentence
instead of the death penalty, you had in a
sense won, because the jurors believed
your client to be innocent. For Marshall,
the fight was never over with a jury’s
verdict. For him the Supreme Court was
as level a playing field as you’d find in
the land: that was the courtroom he
wanted to fight in. Williams, too.
Yet here Williams was, on a plane,
heading back down to that strange,


--- PAGE 453 ---
lawless other land where people didn’t
take kindly to niggers wearing suits and
talking back to judges just like they were
white men.


--- PAGE 454 ---
CHAPTER 10: QUITE
A HOSE WIELDER


--- PAGE 455 ---
Willie Padgett, Mabel Norris Reese, and
Jesse Hunter. 
Life
 magazine photographer
Wallace Kirkland protected Norma
Padgett’s identity by hiding her behind
Hunter. (
Photo by Wallace Kirkland/Time


--- PAGE 456 ---
& Life Pictures/Getty Images )
D
ON’T WORRY, MAMA.
 I haven’t done
anything.”
Walter Irvin spoke calmly, then walked
past his sobbing mother toward Deputy
James Yates and the patrolmen who were
waiting outside the house to take him and
Samuel Shepherd away. He had only
gotten a few steps from the front door
when Willie Padgett darted from a black
sedan and charged.
“You little son of a bitch. You were
there. You had better get my wife or I am
going to kill you.”…
Irvin, confused, told Padgett he didn’t
know anything about his wife.


--- PAGE 457 ---
“Yes you do,” Padgett fumed, and as he
rushed toward Irvin, Deputy Yates and
Deputy Leroy Campbell pulled the
sputtering Bay Lake farmer away and sat
him back in the car.
The patrolmen ushered Shepherd and
Irvin into the backseat of another car, and
a caravan of squad cars sped its way
through Groveland. Meanwhile, James
Shepherd’s Mercury, which Samuel had
been driving the night before, was
confiscated by the police; Deputy
Campbell had it taken to a filling station,
where a search was begun on it for
evidence. By then the caravan, which had
been heading toward Mascotte, had turned
onto a deserted clay road. Four or five
miles got the patrol cars to a secluded


--- PAGE 458 ---
spot. They stopped alongside the road.
It was Yates who opened the door on
Irvin’s side. “Get out of the car, boy,” he
ordered, and Irvin did.
“Why did you rape that white woman?”
Yates demanded, but Irvin didn’t have a
chance to answer. Yates smashed him
across the forehead with a nightstick.
Shepherd had watched his friend
collapse on the road before he, too, was
ordered out of the car. The patrolmen
were standing in a semicircle before him.
“Better talk,” Yates advised, and
Shepherd replied that he didn’t know
anything.
At that the patrolmen converged on both
Shepherd and Irvin, who had pulled
himself up from the ground. With some


--- PAGE 459 ---
patrolmen holding the two of them and
others beating them with blackjacks and
fists, Shepherd and Irvin ended up
eventually on the roadbed. Curled up, they
were kicked repeatedly, then dragged
again to their feet.
“Nigger, you the one that picked up this
white girl last night?” someone asked.
“What white girl?” Irvin replied before
being struck again.
“Well you might as well tell us you’re
the one did it,” another one said, “ ’cause
we gonna beat the hell out of you until you
tell us you did do it.”
Shepherd’s vision was blurring, and
Irvin was drifting in and out of
consciousness. As best they could, they
denied having anything to do with the


--- PAGE 460 ---
missing white girl.
One of the patrolmen brought Willie
Padgett over to the beaten men and asked
if he was sure these two were “the right
ones.” Padgett paused, grimacing at all the
blood.
“The hell with it,” the cop said, lifting
his blackjack and bringing it down hard on
skull and bone.
W
HEN FRANKLIN WILLIAMS
 arrived in
Orlando, before he could even think about
investigating the Groveland case he had to
attend to the basics of housing and
transportation. Blacks traveling by car
commonly relied upon 
The Negro
Motorist Green Book
 as a guide. The


--- PAGE 461 ---
eighty-page booklet, published by Victor
H. Green & Company in New York, under
the sponsorship of Esso and the Ford
Motor Company, listed by city and state
the names and addresses of hotels,
restaurants, taxi services, and gas stations
that would accommodate blacks: thus it
aimed to “solve your problems” if you
happened to be traveling in unfamiliar
territory, especially in Jim Crow states.
The 1949 
Green Book
 confirmed
Williams’s suspicions. Not a single hotel
in Lake County was open to blacks.
Further, because he had been advised not
to spend too much time near the
courthouse in Tavares—Willis McCall
country—especially after dark,
Williams’s misgivings far exceeded the


--- PAGE 462 ---
assurance of the Green Book ’s tagline,
“Now We Can Travel Without
Embarrassment.”
Through the NAACP’s network of
Florida branches, Williams lined up a
room at an Orlando “tourist home,” akin to
a black-run bed-and-breakfast. It was here
that Williams met and befriended Joe
Louis, who was visiting Orlando for a
boxing exhibition. On learning of the
Groveland case, Louis aided Williams in
his work with some ready cash and
subsequently donated five hundred dollars
to the NAACP for the defense of the
Groveland Boys. A picture of Louis and
Williams appeared in the 
New York Post
below the caption “Slugs for Equality,”
for news of Ernest Thomas’s killing had


--- PAGE 463 ---
made headlines in Northern newspapers,
like that in the July 27 
New York Times
,
which ran “Posse Kills Negro, Florida
Fugitive; He Was Hunted in Groveland
Rape Case.”
In New York, too, Thurgood Marshall,
after consulting with Williams in Florida,
attached his notable name, for the first
time publicly, to the Groveland case. He
fired off a telegraphed request for a
federal investigation to U.S. attorney
general Tom Clark, stating, “This wanton
killing by a deputized mob is worse than a
lynching.” He followed with a protest to
Governor Fuller Warren of Florida,
charging, “There is serious doubt that the
man killed was in any manner connected
with the alleged rape.” The national press


--- PAGE 464 ---
accounts of Marshall’s actions included
his phrase “alleged rape,” which was
another first, for until then, except for
black newspapers, coverage of the events
in Groveland had eschewed the word
alleged
 in connection to the plight of
Norma Padgett on the night of July 15.
In Florida, in order to proceed with the
investigation, and working with a limited
NAACP budget, Williams had to retain a
lawyer who was a member of the state’s
bar: not any easy task, given that the state
registered a total of less than two dozen
black lawyers, with most of them
practicing in Miami or the larger cities
and none of them in Lake County or any
county nearby. Williams nonetheless
managed to find two young law school


--- PAGE 465 ---
graduates—William Fordham from Tampa
and Horace Hill, a Howard University
Law School graduate, from Daytona
Beach—who had been admitted to the
Florida bar the year before. Of course,
they had been reading the papers, too, and
were not so sure they wanted to be
involved in a Lake County rape case.
Williams, though, could detect the
excitement in twenty-four-year-old Hill at
the prospect of working alongside an
attorney from the national office of the
NAACP and Thurgood Marshall’s legal
defense team. Still, fully aware of the
Lake County rioting, the renegade posse,
and especially the vindictive Big Hat Man
sheriff, Hill was reluctant. “My aunt
wanted to know if I had lost my mind,”


--- PAGE 466 ---
Hill recalled. “I even called my parents,
and they wanted to know whether or not I
was crazy, and they said how dangerous it
was.”
On Friday, July 29, the smooth-talking,
persuasive Franklin Williams was driving
north to the Florida State Prison in
Raiford not only with his new recruit
Horace Hill but also in Hill’s 1948
Chevrolet and with Hill’s wife, Dorothy,
whom Williams had convinced to serve as
their stenographer. And with William
Fordham, too. By late afternoon they’d
arrived at the prison farm known as “the
Rock” and had settled in a room where
they met the three defendants one by one.
Although Fordham, who had previously
been dispatched to Raiford by Harry T.


--- PAGE 467 ---
Moore, had tried to prepare the New York
attorney for the visit, Williams was
profoundly shocked by his first sight of
Samuel Shepherd, Walter Irvin, and
Charles Greenlee. It had been nearly two
weeks since they had been transported to
Raiford, but their faces and bodies still
bore the effects of the beatings they’d
suffered in Lake County. “Their heads
were a mess” and caked with “encrusted
dry blood,” Williams observed. “Their
hair was a mess. It was shocking to me
that in a state prison, they had not even
been able to wash their hair.” Bruises,
scars, and swellings were the badges of
their brotherhood.
Samuel Shepherd was the first to be
interviewed. After taking the lawyers


--- PAGE 468 ---
through events on the evening of July 15,
when he and Walter Irvin had driven to
Eatonville for a few beers, he described
what happened the following morning.
Samuel had just dropped off his sister-in-
law at the beauty parlor in Groveland
when he stopped by Walter Irvin’s house
around 7 a.m. to see if his friend had
gotten up on time for work. At the same
moment, two Florida Highway Patrol cars
and a third, black car pulled up in front of
the house, and several white men
emerged, among them the deputies
Campbell and Yates. “Where is the guy
that was with you last night?” Yates asked
Shepherd, and what began with that
question led to the beatings he and Irvin
endured on the deserted clay road outside


--- PAGE 469 ---
of Groveland.
“They must have beat us about a half
hour,” Shepherd told the lawyers, who
were at once riveted and appalled by his
testimony. After the beating, he and Irvin
were shoved back into the patrol car.
Irvin’s shirt was drenched in blood, and
when he reached his hand up to his head
he felt “a big chunk knocked out of it.” A
patrolman told them to scoot up to the
edge of the seat so their blood wouldn’t
drip onto the upholstery. As did Irvin,
Shepherd opened his mouth to show
Williams’s team his broken teeth and
lifted his shirt to reveal still numerous
bruises.
Then Shepherd continued, telling the
lawyers how Yates and Campbell in their


--- PAGE 470 ---
black sedan led the caravan to the place
where Padgett’s car had broken down on
that Friday night after the dance. Ordered
out of the car, Shepherd and Irvin stood
beside Deputy Yates, who was trying to
match their footprints to those in the sand
and clay. After examining Shepherd’s
shoes, which Shepherd avowed he’d worn
the night before, Yates once more studied
the ground, and declared, “These are not
your tracks.” Similarly questioned, Irvin,
who was still bleeding profusely from his
head, admitted that he had in fact been
wearing a different pair of shoes.
Frustrated, Yates returned the men to the
patrol car, which delivered them to the
Tavares jail.
They had been locked in a large cell


--- PAGE 471 ---
with other inmates, who could plainly see
that Irvin, sitting in a corner on the floor
with his hand pressed against his head,
was unable to stop his wound from
bleeding. One of the prisoners remarked
that it looked like the police had tried to
kill them, but Irvin, understandably, was
in no mood to talk. Hours had passed
when Yates and Campbell showed up at
the bullpen. The interrogation of Samuel
Shepherd and Walter Irvin was not over
yet.
“Nigger, you are gonna tell us the truth
or we are gonna beat the hell out of you,”
Campbell warned. “We will make you tell
it.”
They were in the bowels of the jail.
Irvin surveyed the basement room; a


--- PAGE 472 ---
number of pipes ran the length of the
room, which housed “a lot of motors.”
The deputies hoisted Irvin up; they cuffed
his hands to an overhead pipe. As Irvin
stood only five foot two, his feet did not
reach the floor. Satisfied that Irvin was
hanging securely, Yates and Campbell
took turns beating him with a leaded
rubber hose.
“They hit me across my back, shoulders,
head, arms and hindpart,” Irvin told
Williams and the two young black
lawyers, but neither Yates nor Campbell
had any questions for him. Campbell just
“kept on trying to get me to admit that I
had raped some woman, which I would
not admit because I did not know what
they were talking about.”


--- PAGE 473 ---
Tossing aside the rubber hose,
Campbell pulled out his gun and taunted
Irvin, saying “he would get a thrill out of
blowing my brains out.” But instead he
stepped aside for another man, who held
Irvin up by the chin and with his fist made
a punching bag of Irvin’s face. Then the
man reared back and with his “high top
boots,” Irvin said, he “kicked me in the
privates.”
They dumped Irvin in a cell. It was
Shepherd’s turn next, and the deputies
now led him down to the basement, where
he, too, endured another brutal beating.
“My mouth was bleeding where a front
tooth went through my lip,” Shepherd
recounted. “I have three teeth broken in
the back of my mouth. Nobody at the


--- PAGE 474 ---
prison camp has looked at it, though I
asked to see the doctor when I first came
here.”
Williams wanted to know about another
critical issue, the much-publicized
confessions of the three defendants in the
case. Shepherd said he had never signed
anything, but the repeated beatings had
wrenched an oral confession from him—
particularly the blows delivered by the
man in the high-topped riding boots,
whom he recognized as Wesley Evans, a
regular customer at the dairy in Groveland
where Shepherd had once worked. Evans
had asked for a few cracks at the prisoner,
and with a hose he was so vengefully
smashing Shepherd’s face and chest that
Yates, deeming him “quite a hose


--- PAGE 475 ---
wielder,” wondered if Evans might be
related to Norma Padgett. Evans said no,
he wasn’t related, but he did pause to
allow that both Norma and Willie Padgett
were “good friends,” before continuing to
slash away at Shepherd. Two nights later,
Wesley Evans would be standing among
the ringleaders of the mob that burned the
Shepherds’ house to the ground in Bay
Lake.
“They tried to make me say that I had
been with the group of fellows that raped
a white woman,” Shepherd said. “It was
terrible the way I was whipped, there was
just knots all over me. They said they
were not going to stop whipping me until I
said that I was the one. I kept telling them
I was in Orlando where I was. Finally,


--- PAGE 476 ---
when I couldn’t take it anymore, I said
yes.” Shepherd said yes, he raped Norma
Padgett, and the men dropped their hoses.
Yates told Shepherd he could have “saved
all the beating” if he had just said yes the
first time they asked.
Williams cataloged the still visible
evidence of Shepherd’s injuries: scars on
his head, broken teeth, tooth puncture of
upper lip, lash scars across back and
chest, scars on the wrists, which
supported Shepherd’s claim that he had
been cuffed to a metal pipe above his
head. Irvin evidenced similar injuries:
body scars, wide bruises, lash marks,
scars across the wrists. Also, Williams
noted, Irvin’s “right jaw appeared to be
fractured.”


--- PAGE 477 ---
After the beating Shepherd, too, was
returned to the fourth floor of the jail,
where, like Irvin, he was locked in a
separate cell. Irvin, however, did not
remain long. Again he was removed to the
basement for a second round of beating by
Campbell and Yates; for Irvin had not yet
confessed. At the end of it “I was bleeding
pretty bad,” Irvin told Williams, but to the
end he had refused to admit to raping
Norma Padgett. The deputies took him
back to his cell; on the way up “one of
them kicked me in the balls,” Irvin said.
Around 6 p.m., Yates and Campbell
informed the two exhausted, beaten black
men that “a mob was on its way”; they
were “lucky,” said the deputies, in that
they were going to be taken away from the


--- PAGE 478 ---
jail so they wouldn’t be killed.
Handcuffed together, Shepherd and Irvin
were led to a car and ordered to lie down
in the backseat so as not to be seen. They
could hear the chaos on the police radio,
which relayed that colored people were
being beaten and killed in the vicinity,
while the black sedan made its way to a
watermelon field in the woods. There the
two prisoners were handcuffed with their
arms wrapped around a small pine
sapling. They’d expected to be doused in
gasoline and set afire, but instead they
simply waited. A young girl on horseback
passed by; the deputies stayed by the
sedan. After a half hour or so, Shepherd
and Irvin were again stuffed into the back
of the car, then driven to Eustis. The sedan


--- PAGE 479 ---
had pulled into a driveway when they
heard a voice shout, “Where are those
niggers at?”
The door on Shepherd’s side of the car
was flung open, and immediately a tall
man in a white Stetson was bashing the
prisoner with a large, heavy flashlight and
stomping him with his boots. Already
displeased—the sheriff had just gotten
home from Ohio only to find that all hell
had broken loose in his county—McCall
became only more provoked when
Shepherd entreated him to stop: the sheriff
started “really kicking him then.” With
venom to spare, McCall went round to the
other side of the sedan and with the
flashlight gave Irvin a taste of it across his
arms and legs. The deputies then resumed


--- PAGE 480 ---
their journey with Shepherd and Irvin. In
about two hours they arrived at Florida
State Prison in Raiford.
The third prisoner in the Groveland
rape case, Charles Greenlee, did not
escape a trip to the basement of the
Tavares jail. He, too, had wounds to
show. Because of his young age, Horace
Hill’s wife, Dorothy, was asked to step
out of the room while the lawyers
examined the boy. Williams recorded that
Greenlee’s left eye was “red and
bruised”; his right cheekbone bore a
double scar and he had “scars all around
his neck”; also scarred was the groin area,
and his testicles were still swollen; his
feet had numerous cuts. The examination
complete, Hill’s wife returned to take


--- PAGE 481 ---
down the rest of Greenlee’s statement.
When he had finished he said to Williams,
“All of this is true. I know nothing about
this rape. I don’t even know Samuel and
Irvin.”
The lawyers closed their notepads.
What Williams had suspected had proved
to be true: Sheriff Willis McCall and his
deputies had tortured the three Groveland
boys in order to secure the confessions
that supported the sheriff’s boast to the
press, no matter that one of them, Walter
Irvin, had refused to confess even to stop
the beating. Individually, the three men’s
stories were remarkably similar in their
descriptions of their torturers and of the
basement below the jail in Tavares. But,
while Greenlee’s denial that he had ever


--- PAGE 482 ---
seen Norma and Willie Padgett on the
evening of July 15 was convincing
enough, the account that the two army
buddies related of their whereabouts that
night was indeed problematic, as it
included an encounter with the alleged
victim and her husband.
After assuring the three defendants that
he would arrange for a physician’s visit
so as to have a more complete,
professional medical report on their
injuries, Williams inquired if they had
been offered or had sought legal counsel
since their incarceration at Raiford two
weeks earlier. Apparently, neither at the
jail in Tavares nor in the state prison had
any officer or official advised them of
their right to be represented by a lawyer.


--- PAGE 483 ---
The state attorney, Jesse Hunter, had
brought Norma and Willie Padgett to
Raiford so that the young couple could
identify the three suspects, and before the
indictment, when he had interviewed each
of them, Hunter had asked only if they had
lawyers. That both Irvin and Greenlee had
replied, naively, that they didn’t need
lawyers because they hadn’t done anything
wrong—that it was merely a case of
mistaken identity soon to be cleared up—
left Williams incredulous. No less naive
had been Shepherd’s response that he was
a member of a church and “was going to
tell the thing just like it happened.” The
defendants’ naïveté aside, the oversight on
the part of county and state officials
bolstered Williams’s confidence that his


--- PAGE 484 ---
report from the state prison would prompt
the NAACP to commit more substantially
to the Groveland case, especially since
the hunting and gunning down of Ernest
Thomas by a posse of more than a
thousand armed men, many of them
deputized, had already engaged Thurgood
Marshall more actively in the fray.
It was when the three prisoners stood
up, as the lawyers were preparing for
their departure, that Williams noticed,
first, Irvin’s bare feet and then the
bloodstains on the back of his pants, the
same pants he’d been wearing the day he
was beaten in the Tavares jail. “I have no
shoes up here,” Irvin told Williams. “I
only have my shirt and pants.”
Williams and his team had begun the


--- PAGE 485 ---
long drive back to Orlando and the
attorney from the New York office of the
NAACP was still shaken. Unsettled
though he naturally was by the defendants’
revelations, the injustices they had already
suffered, and the physical pain they had
endured, it was a comment the sixteen-
year-old Greenlee had made in his
stuttery, backwoods accent that Williams
couldn’t shake. The boy had implicitly
articulated what every black male since
the dawn of slavery in the South
instinctively knew about race and sex. It
could also explain Ernest Thomas’s
bolting out of Lake County on the morning
of July 16, 1949. On Greenlee’s first night
in Groveland, when the deputies picked
him up at the train depot and put him in


--- PAGE 486 ---
jail, they had left him alone in a cell with
a cot and without a lock. “Jesus,”
Greenlee had said, remembering for
Williams the night he’d lost his future. “If
I, if I thought a white woman had been
raped within a hundred miles of
[Groveland] and Negroes were suspected,
I would have opened the door and left.”
W
ILLIAMS’S STAY IN
 Orlando was
proving to be fruitful. His investigation of
the case against the Groveland Boys took
him to Terence McCarthy, whose
coverage of the story for the
 New Leader
,
a leftist intellectual weekly newspaper
“devoted to the Socialist and Labor
movements,” had convinced him—as he


--- PAGE 487 ---
would convince Williams—that the case
had more to do with race and the citrus
industry, with intimidation tactics and
status, than it did with the alleged rape of
Norma Padgett. Henry Shepherd, who had
long suffered the ire of his white
neighbors, and finally their torch-lit
violence, agreed. “I been told by a lot of
people it was nothing but jealousy and
jealousy is what it was,” Shepherd told
Williams. Shepherd also had a second
theory, one that the World War II veteran
Williams understood well: “Sammy is a
good boy,” Shepherd said. “All the white
people will say he was before he went to
the army. Since he come back people
didn’t like Sammy and the Irvin boy
driving James’s car around. They didn’t


--- PAGE 488 ---
like no veterans’ attitude.”
Both Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin
had recently returned from military ser
vice. As U.S. Army regulations allowed
soldiers to continue to wear their military
uniforms after completing their service,
many black veterans did exactly that,
perhaps to remind their communities that
they, too, had defended their country. They
had also been dispatched to foreign
nations, particularly in Europe, where
minorities experienced more tolerance
and openness than they ever had in
America, especially in the South. So, like
many black veterans returning home to
states in the South and the one south of the
South, Sam Shepherd and Walter Irvin
were not prepared to return to the fields or


--- PAGE 489 ---
citrus groves of Lake County under the
conditions defined by Jim Crow. White
Southerners, meanwhile, may have been
outraged by the reported egalitarian
attitudes of Europeans toward Negroes,
but they were flat-out enraged by stories
from France of white women sleeping
with American black men; they were thus
determined to put returning black veterans
back in their place. After World War I,
dozens of Negro soldiers had been
lynched in the South, some of them still
wearing their uniforms, and in the summer
of 1946 the lynchings of black veterans
resumed with a vengeance. Fathers of
black soldiers warned their sons not to
come home in their uniforms because
police had made a practice of searching


--- PAGE 490 ---
and beating black military men. “If he had
a picture of a white woman in his wallet,
they’d kill him,” one Mississippi man
related.
A veteran himself, and having worked
extensively with the blinded veteran Isaac
Woodard, Franklin Williams understood
fully the antagonism blacks experienced in
the United States on leaving military
service. That veterans Samuel Shepherd
and Walter Irvin had still been wearing
their army uniforms around Groveland
was bound to incense the whites of Lake
County, Williams knew, and he was also
not surprised to learn that Sheriff McCall
had expected them to be picking fruit in
the groves the way black men were
supposed to, with poor pay for long hours


--- PAGE 491 ---
of hard labor. Instead, Shepherd and Irvin
were driving around town in a late-model
Mercury as if the streets were theirs; to
the whites, this was gallingly plain
“arrogance.” Resentment was general and,
according to Williams, that resentment
among rural whites “had been
communicated to them from the sheriff . . .
from Willis McCall.” Henry Shepherd
was more succinct. He said that to the
whites around Groveland, his son was an
“uppity Nigger.”
The more Williams poked around the
Groveland area, the more he considered
the likelihood that the alleged rape had
simply provided the Lake County Sheriff’s
Department with an excuse to do some
heavy housekeeping with regard to black


--- PAGE 492 ---
troublemakers and potential instigators.
“McCall knew exactly who he wanted to
get,” Williams said. “He wanted to get
Shepherd and Irvin. He wanted to get
them.”
I
MMEDIATELY UPON HIS
 return to New
York, Franklin Williams briefed
Thurgood Marshall fully on the case of the
Groveland Boys: how lucky they were to
be alive after the beatings they’d endured;
how, two weeks later, “blood was still in
their hair and head and the soles of their
feet were still cut”; how Shepherd and
Greenlee had confessed—but only orally
—in order to end their torture, whereas
Irvin had not confessed either orally or in


--- PAGE 493 ---
writing. None of it surprised Marshall,
who had seen enough such cases to know
that in the South coerced confessions were
more the rule than the exception. Even
President Truman’s 1946 
Report of the
President’s Committee on Civil Rights
acknowledged as much, with J. Edgar
Hoover testifying that “lawless police
action” against blacks was so
commonplace in the South that at one
particular jail “it was seldom that a Negro
man or woman was incarcerated who was
not given a severe beating, which started
off with a pistol whipping and ended with
a rubber hose.”
With one suspect dead under legally
questionable circumstances and three
others severely and lawlessly beaten,


--- PAGE 494 ---
Marshall did not hesitate to ratchet up the
commitment of the NAACP to the case. He
told Williams to enlist the best local
lawyer available to try the case, and he
told the press, forcefully, “The resources
of the association will be thrown behind
the defense of these boys, and at the same
time, we will insist upon protection of
other Negroes in the area.” Marshall had
served notice to the state of Florida. If
local officials with racial bias had been
planning to run helpless blacks through
their justice system to predetermined
convictions, they were going to have to do
so against attorneys with formidable
backgrounds in both state and federal
appeals. Furthermore, NAACP
involvement in a criminal case guaranteed


--- PAGE 495 ---
it attention in the national press, which
would place the prosecuting state attorney
Jesse Hunter in the spotlight of
newspapers that, unlike Florida’s local
ones, had no investment in maintaining
racial tranquillity and the Jim Crow status
quo. By then, at a press conference in
New York, Franklin Williams would have
already told national reporters that his
investigation in Lake County had
convinced him not only that the Groveland
Boys were “entirely innocent” but also
that the “trumped up rape charge” against
them had less to do with the riots and
destruction in Negro communities than did
the resolve of the white mob’s ringleaders
to intimidate blacks into accepting their
designated place in the citrus groves.


--- PAGE 496 ---
While Marshall and Williams attempted
to put together a preliminary legal
strategy, the New York office of the
NAACP advised Harry T. Moore in
Florida that the LDF would vigorously
defend the three Groveland boys and
requested that Moore rouse local public
support for the case. Moore immediately
sprang into action. He had already sent
telegrams to Governor Warren on July 20
and 22 calling for punishment of the
parties responsible for the rioting in
Groveland, and now, in a letter to the
governor on July 30, he demanded a
special investigation and a special session
of the grand jury “to indict the guilty
mobsters.” Moore also had Sheriff
McCall in his sights. While Moore had


--- PAGE 497 ---
commended the sheriff for preventing a
lynching on July 16, he had been critical
of McCall as well, especially of the
county lawman’s “lenient attitude toward
the mob” in permitting certain of its
ringleaders to search the jail for the
suspects. Moore had inquired, too, if the
sheriff, who’d claimed to have known or
recognized all the armed men in the mob,
planned to bring charges against those
who did not have permits to carry
weapons. Now that Moore had learned the
defendants had been physically tortured,
he composed a circular that he released to
the press. It charged that the blacks
indicted in the Groveland case had been
“brutally beaten by local officers in an
effort to force confessions from them” and


--- PAGE 498 ---
it called upon Governor Warren to
suspend the officers responsible.
Sheriff McCall did not react kindly to
Moore’s accusations. He had carefully
crafted an image of himself for the press
as an unimpeachable county official, a
man “duty bound” to run the sheriff’s
office by the rule of law, even if that
included his standing up to an angry white
mob in order to protect black rapists in his
jail. Indeed, obsessed with his public
image, McCall clipped every newspaper
article that, favorably or not, mentioned
his name, and he was quick to correct
reporters on issues of fact as well as to
dispute any negative statement or opinion
written about him—on occasion in person,
as he did when he stomped unannounced


--- PAGE 499 ---
through Mabel Norris Reese’s door at the
Mount Dora Topic
 and accused her of
writing lies about him. When the 
Ocala
Star-Banner
 reported Harry T. Moore’s
charge that local officers had
systematically beaten the suspects in the
Groveland rape case in order to obtain the
confessions McCall had been vaunting not
three weeks before, the sheriff was
apoplectic. “It’s a damn lie,” was his
answer to the charge. “There’s absolutely
no truth to it.”
After the consultations with Marshall in
New York, Williams returned to Florida
and traveled again to Florida State Prison
in Raiford, this time with a physician and
a dentist, both black, in order to complete
the medical report of the prisoners’


--- PAGE 500 ---
injuries. Dr. Nelson Spaulding did the
driving, on a hot August day, in his yellow
convertible, sporty but with no air-
conditioning. When Williams suggested
they might at least ride with the top down,
the doctor explained that if the police in
rural Florida spotted them, three “negroes
in a yellow convertible Cadillac,” they
could only expect trouble. With the top up,
Spaulding said, the police “will not notice
us.”
The evidence, medical and otherwise,
gathered by Williams was convincing.
Due process in the case of the Groveland
Boys had been violated; infractions of the
law by law enforcement officers could be
substantiated. Williams’s interviews thus
far had produced sound testimony. But


--- PAGE 501 ---
Marshall’s man in Orlando had yet to find
an experienced lawyer willing to
represent three black men accused of
raping a white woman in Lake County.
Shortly after Williams’s first trip to
Raiford with Horace Hill and William
Fordham, the latter had withdrawn from
the case. Although Hill was more than
willing to go forward, Williams still
needed a seasoned attorney to navigate
skillfully a case that would most likely
rush the three defendants through a trial to
conviction with a death sentence. The case
was scheduled to go to trial at the end of
August.
In early August, Williams’s search for a
local lawyer turned up a qualified CIO
attorney, but he wanted ten thousand


--- PAGE 502 ---
dollars to take the case—a figure well
beyond the limited means of the NAACP.
Next, a “very distinguished criminal
lawyer in Daytona Beach” appeared to be
willing to consider representation of the
three defendants, until he learned the
venue for the trial. Scared off, the white
lawyer said to Williams, “You know,
Franklin, those clay eating crackers down
there in Lake County would just as soon
stand off and shoot me with a high power
rifle as they would you.” Another attorney
agreed to take the case but refused to raise
any technical issues. He stated that “he
would not raise any issue of change of
venue or jury selection or anything like
that,” recalled Williams, who viewed all
such issues as being essential to


--- PAGE 503 ---
challenge, especially in the very likely
event that they would be appealing a guilty
verdict in a higher court.
Spessard L. Holland Jr., the twenty-
nine-year-old son of the former Florida
governor and current U.S. senator, had
caught the attention of the NAACP after
he’d represented several black migrant
workers who had been held in
confinement and forced to work in the
orange groves. He’d even filed charges
with the Justice Department on behalf of
the workers. In light of Holland’s apparent
sympathies with civil rights cases,
Williams thought the young white lawyer
might be interested in representing the
Groveland Boys. He was, and agreed to
meet with Williams and Hill the next


--- PAGE 504 ---
morning. When they arrived, as arranged,
at Holland’s office in Vero Beach to
discuss the case, the attorney had
reconsidered.
“I can’t do this, Frank,” he said, sitting
down at his desk.
“Why not?” Williams asked.
Holland sat in silence, the two black
men contemplating him from across his
desk. Suddenly he dissolved into tears.
Once he’d begun to compose himself, he
struggled to explain. “You may not
understand this, but my wife is a typical
flower of southern womanhood and this is
a rape case and I can’t take it.”
There was nothing more to be said.
Williams and Hill left Holland’s office
for the long drive back to Orlando. If


--- PAGE 505 ---
finding a black attorney with criminal trial
experience in Florida had proved to be a
futile task, that of finding a reputable
white lawyer who was willing to risk his
career in order to represent three black
men accused of raping a white teenager
was proving to be herculean.
Days were slipping by. As Judge
Truman Futch had already promised the
citizens of Lake County a speedy trial, it
was bootless to think he might delay the
trial to allow a black New York lawyer
more time to prepare a defense for three
confessed rapists. In the South the bargain
between justice and the public was
implicit: an expeditious trial with swift
punishment by death or else a riot and
lynching. With less and less time for the


--- PAGE 506 ---
daunting sum of it, Williams had to
continue his investigation, locate and
interview potential alibi witnesses, and
sign on a top-notch criminal lawyer for the
defense. Add to that the fact that the New
York–based lawyer Williams had little
stomach for his necessary, if infrequent,
ventures into Lake County either alone or
with Horace Hill. If the two attorneys had
to speak with someone in the Groveland
or Bay Lake area, they would sneak in and
out of the county, for they had been duly
warned about those trigger-happy, clay-
eating crackers. “I was not completely at
ease,” Williams later recalled. “We just
did not tell anybody we were in town.”
On one occasion, while preparing to
make the dreaded journey from the


--- PAGE 507 ---
rooming house in Orlando to Tavares in
order to interview a woman who’d had a
dispute with Sheriff McCall, Williams
had an inspiration: he would ask Joe
Louis, who was also in residence, to
accompany him. For surely the presence
of the world heavyweight boxing
champion “would give me some unusual
kind of protection,” Williams figured, and
noted: “Joe would not go.”
O
N AUGUST 5,
 at a Federal Housing
Authority conference in Washington, D.C.,
Thurgood Marshall argued that, despite
his victory in 
Shelley v. Kraemer
, the war
to end legalized housing discrimination
against blacks went on, and he sharply


--- PAGE 508 ---
criticized the FHA “for failing to follow
through on the implications” of the
Supreme Court’s decision. He was not of
a mind to be his most patient self when he
addressed the conference, as was noted
afterward by one NAACP associate, who
remarked to Marshall, “You were in rare
form last Friday and handed out liberal
education all over the place.” (During the
address, a slightly annoyed government
lawyer passed a note to the same NAACP
associate that read, “Who’s that guy?”
Barely had the associate uttered the
second syllable of Marshall’s first name
than the lawyer responded with an “Oh!”
and then “closed up like a tongue-tied
clam.”)
While in Washington, Marshall also


--- PAGE 509 ---
pressed the Justice Department and the
FBI to initiate a civil rights and domestic
violence investigation into the beatings of
the three surviving Groveland boys.
Marshall by then had been unable to gain
support in Washington for a full
investigation into the killing of Ernest
Thomas; the FBI had conducted a
preliminary investigation but concluded
“it would appear undesirable to become
involved in the killing of Victim Ernest
Thomas as there is no indication, with the
exception of the statement by Thurgood
Marshall, that there was serious doubt that
Thomas was involved in the rape. On the
other hand, the state has apparently
produced evidence to indicate that he was
involved in the rape.” More successfully,


--- PAGE 510 ---
Marshall convinced the Justice
Department that the beatings had seriously
violated the Groveland Boys’ rights.
Within two days the FBI had dispatched
Special Agents John L. Quigley and
Tobias E. Matthews to the Raiford prison,
where they interviewed and photographed
Shepherd, Irvin, and Greenlee. Their
initial reports back to headquarters
prompted J. Edgar Hoover to order a “full
and exhaustive investigation into the entire
matter of the arrest and mistreatment by
the authorities of all the victims.” The
agents meanwhile continued downstate.
They interviewed residents of Lake
County by the dozens; they took down
statements from witnesses, law
enforcement officials, victims of the mob


--- PAGE 511 ---
violence, and even Norma and Willie
Padgett. In the course of their
investigation, Quigley and Matthews
began to notice some disturbing elements.
For one, “all of the persons interviewed
who were allegedly implicated” in the
beating and torture of the three Groveland
boys “refused to furnish any information
whatsoever unless they made it in
statement form,” thus indicating that
Sheriff Willis McCall, deputies James
Yates and Leroy Campbell, and Wesley
Evans—the four suspects positively
identified by Shepherd, Irvin, and
Greenlee—had all received legal advice
not to provide complete cooperation with
the FBI’s investigation.
Not surprisingly, the statements of


--- PAGE 512 ---
McCall, Yates, Campbell, and Evans,
though totally consistent with one another,
differed dramatically from those of the
three rape suspects. For example, both
deputies and Evans stated that all the
interrogations took place in a radio room
on the same floor as the jail, rather than in
the basement with the three prisoners
handcuffed to overhead pipes or, as was
the case with Greenlee, in the elevator.
Also, whereas Shepherd and Greenlee
admitted that they’d confessed to the rape
of Norma Padgett only when they could no
longer tolerate the painful beatings, and
while Irvin stated he did not and would
not ever confess to a crime he did not
commit, Campbell, Yates, and Evans
shared a different account. They claimed


--- PAGE 513 ---
that during the interrogations, when the
suspects were shown “a pair of pants, a
handkerchief and some other evidence,”
each of them readily confessed to robbery
and rape (punishable by death in the state
of Florida) and each of them named Ernest
Thomas as the fourth accomplice. Further,
Irvin and Shepherd, on the one hand,
stated that they were seated in the back of
Deputy Yates’s car when the door was
flung open and Sheriff Willis McCall
began striking them with a large flashlight;
the sheriff, on the other hand, said that
when the two black prisoners arrived at
his house in the backseat of Yates’s car he
had simply opened the door and “asked
them why they wanted to do such a thing.”
According to the sheriff, the two army


--- PAGE 514 ---
buddies then told him that “the other two
made them do it.” Finally, none of the
Florida highway patrolmen or Lake
County law enforcement agents questioned
by the FBI had noticed any bruises, marks,
or blood on any of the rape suspects when
they were transported to Raiford prison;
yet special agents Quigley and Matthews
themselves not only had observed and
photographed evidence of the prisoners’
“trauma” but also had taken statements
from several prison officials who had
documented “numerous bruised marks,”
cut wounds, broken teeth, and
bloodstained clothes at the time the three
black men were taken into custody.
Quigley and Matthews took their
investigation in Lake County beyond law


--- PAGE 515 ---
enforcement personnel and established
witnesses to civic officials, politicians,
prominent businessmen, and grove owners
in this largely rural area of central Florida
with a population of thirty-six thousand.
What they discovered was a county
controlled not by politics, money, the
citrus industry, or the law, but by an
embittered contingent of the Ku Klux Klan
intent upon codifying a racial caste
system, through violent means if
necessary, that would effectively deny
blacks access to political influence,
economic opportunity, and social justice.
On August 13, the agents met with
Groveland’s mayor, Elma Puryear, who
had witnessed the gathering of the mob
outside the jail on the morning of July 16


--- PAGE 516 ---
and had safely transported Charles
Greenlee to Tavares. In his statement to
the FBI, Puryear related his efforts to help
Groveland’s “leading citizens” protect
their lives and property from the KKK,
which by the evening of July 16 was
filling the streets of Groveland. Off the
record, Puryear disclosed that most of the
trouble around Groveland had been
“caused by the people of the Bay Lake
region.” He also told the agents that
certain parties were aware of the FBI’s
presence in town, and that “word had
gotten to them [the town’s prominent white
citizens] that if they didn’t keep their damn
mouths shut about what happened around
Groveland, their homes and business
property would be burned.” Neither did


--- PAGE 517 ---
Puryear identify in his statement who of
those prominent citizens had enabled the
blacks to be evacuated to safety, but he
did indicate, again off the record, that
Norton Wilkins, owner of B&W Canning
Company, and L. Day Edge, the wealthy
owner of a large mercantile store and
formerly Florida’s speaker of the House
and Groveland’s mayor, had been
instrumental in the evacuation.
The Edge family, having once amassed
a fortune in the turpentine and timber
business before the sawmill men “cleared
the county of pine trees,” had since
cultivated in the same fertile soil Lake
County’s increasingly profitable citrus
groves. Citrus baron L. Day Edge had
earned a reputation among blacks for his


--- PAGE 518 ---
generosity and fairness, and on the
morning that Walter Irvin was picked up
by Willis McCall’s deputies, both he and
his father, Cleve Irvin, had been readying
themselves for another day’s work at Mr.
Edge’s groves. Agents Quigley and
Matthews were thus eager to speak with
Edge, who had in fact been quite willing
to cooperate with the FBI until he, too, fell
under the cloud of threats cast by the
county’s Klan. Having been informed that
if he didn’t keep quiet, “he wouldn’t have
a building left in Lake County”—and
having spotted one of the Groveland night
riders, Curtis Merritt, “watching the City
Hall” to see who might be cooperating
with the FBI—Edge had decided it would
“very imprudent” for him to meet with the


--- PAGE 519 ---
federal agents. Edge, however, did tell
Puryear—and the mayor told Quigley and
Matthews (off the record)—that Curtis
and Bill Merritt along with Wesley Evans,
the illiterate, hose-wielding grove
caretaker identified by Samuel Shepherd
as one of the men in the basement, had
been among the ringleaders of the mob
violence nearly a month earlier and were
behind the current rash of threats being
leveled at Groveland’s respectable
citizens.
In an interview with agents Quigley and
Matthews on August 14, Groveland’s
chief of police, George Mays, told them
he was a “one man police department”
and he “absolutely refused to furnish a
signed statement form.” Informally,


--- PAGE 520 ---
however, Mays confirmed it was common
knowledge that deputies Yates and
Campbell had participated in the beating
of the three rape suspects, as had Wesley
Evans, who’d been witnessed laughing
“heartily” at the banter among some locals
about Evans being “quite a hose wielder.”
Mays also apprised the agents that if
anyone were to discover what he had
relayed to them, “his life would be in
serious danger and he would probably
lose his job and have to leave the area.”
During the agents’ interview with
Lieutenant Colonel Harry Baya of the
Florida National Guard in Tampa,
Matthews and Quigley could sense the
frustration that the commanding officer
had experienced in trying to bring order to


--- PAGE 521 ---
unruly Groveland in July, with much of
that frustration being centered upon the
unwilling Willis McCall. The sheriff’s
refusal to identify the mob’s ringleaders,
let alone take any “affirmative action” in
regard to them—because, as he’d
informed Baya, he was “too busy” to
concern himself with arresting the
ringleaders—had baffled Baya, who could
not tell for sure whether McCall “knew
who they were or not or was just
withholding them from him.”
In rural counties and parishes across the
South, as the FBI was well aware, the
sheriff’s office was the seat of power.
Elected to office by a countywide vote,
the sheriff was viewed by his electorate
not only as the county’s chief law


--- PAGE 522 ---
enforcement officer but also as a
community leader who shared his
electorate’s interests. The FBI knew, too,
that in Florida in the 1940s and ’50s,
“County Sheriffs openly joined the Klan,
and law enforcement officers boldly
attended Klan meetings armed and in
uniform,” as indeed did some of McCall’s
good friends like Sheriff Dave Starr of
neighboring Orange County. Lake County,
though, was Willis V. McCall’s personal
territory, and he bullied his county like no
other sheriff in the state of Florida. Tom
Hurlburt Jr., the former chief of the
Orlando Police Department, whose father,
a citrus buyer, had served as one of
McCall’s deputies, said, “I believe the
only thing more powerful than Willis


--- PAGE 523 ---
McCall was the Ku Klux Klan in those
days.”
Nor was Willis McCall’s power
unallied with that of the KKK. So it was
that Lake County’s “leading citizens”—
men like Mayor Elma Puryear, Chief of
Police George Mays, L. Day Edge, and
Norton Wilkins—had no recourse in
Sheriff McCall when they received open
threats from the Klan. The citrus barons
and respected citizens of the county may
have been instrumental in McCall’s
election to office in 1944, but five years
and one landslide reelection later, McCall
had made Lake County his own. In 1949,
McCall’s always ambiguous allegiances
lay less in his oath of office than in the
demands of a restive electorate capable of


--- PAGE 524 ---
extreme violence. “Bay Lake region
people,” Mays told the FBI agents, “were
in some manner related to one or the other
of the Padgetts. These people are very
clannish and stay to themselves, but when
any one attempted to molest or abuse their
women folk they got up in arms about it
and felt that the law should be settled in
their own way.” McCall knew his
constituents, and he knew what they
expected of him if he planned on having
them keep him in the sheriff’s office.
McCall held the office until 1972.
B
Y MID-AUGUST IN
 1949, mainstream
newspapers across the state of Florida
had joined the black press in the coverage


--- PAGE 525 ---
of Harry T. Moore’s charges that savage
beating at the hands of local law
enforcement had coerced the Groveland
Boys to confess to the rape of Norma
Padgett. Between the press and the FBI—
their agents, no doubt in cahoots with the
NAACP, snooping all over his county—
Willis McCall was livid. Still, he knew
he’d have to come up with some
explanation for the bruises, blood, and
lacerations that had been plainly observed
and reported by witnesses. “They might
have got in a fight somewhere in prison or
somewhere and had a mark or two on
them, but they didn’t get that in Lake
County,” the sheriff emphatically told the
reporters.
By mid-August, too, Franklin Williams


--- PAGE 526 ---
and Horace Hill had in their investigation
been collecting increasingly more
evidence and testimony that contradicted
the “official” narrative being doled out to
the press by McCall and State Attorney
Jesse Hunter. With just two weeks
remaining before the scheduled start of the
trial, however, Williams had still not
found a defense lawyer for the Groveland
Boys. From the New York office,
Thurgood Marshall could offer Williams
only moral support until the NAACP had a
trial lawyer in place, but Marshall
meanwhile continued to keep the Justice
Department informed of any leads that
developed. One of them was startling.
Marshall telephoned Alexander
Campbell, the assistant attorney general,


--- PAGE 527 ---
immediately upon learning that the
“physician who examined the alleged
victim of the rape reportedly found that
this woman’s charges were not true.”
Campbell in turn informed J. Edgar
Hoover, who dispatched a third FBI agent
to Florida, to Leesburg, in order to verify
the examining physician’s “Report of
Accident” in the alleged rape of Norma
Padgett. No matter that the report
bolstered the NAACP’s defense case and
introduced new issues for Williams’s
further investigation, and no matter that
Williams had yet to find the defendants
legal representation: the overwhelming
sense in Marshall’s office was that neither
the judge, Truman Futch, nor State
Attorney Hunter would allow a delay of


--- PAGE 528 ---
the trial. Indeed, for both the judge and
Hunter, with the FBI everywhere in the
county asking questions and setting
everyone from law enforcement to black
pickers and packers on a perilous edge,
the trial could not happen soon enough.
Franklin Williams’s knottiest problem
began to be resolved on August 22, when
he met with Alex Akerman Jr., an
experienced Orlando trial attorney with
something of a maverick’s reputation in
central Florida. The son of a Republican
federal judge in Florida—Akerman Sr.
had been nominated by Calvin Coolidge in
1929 and served on the bench until his
death in 1948—Alex Jr. was the only
Republican member of the Florida
legislature. More important for Williams,


--- PAGE 529 ---
Akerman was currently representing a
black faculty member at Bethune-
Cookman College, Virgil Hawkins, in his
attempt to gain admission into the
University of Florida College of Law, as
well as five other black graduate school
applicants to the university who had been
added to the case. Akerman’s concern that
the first desegregation lawsuit in the state
would be compromised in Florida’s
supreme court if he were also representing
the Groveland Boys made him reluctant to
take the NAACP’s case. So did the fact
that Akerman was just beginning to
establish a career in state politics. “I
knew that this would be an end to that,” he
later said.
After a long, fruitless search for an


--- PAGE 530 ---
attorney to try a case now only one short
week away, Williams was not prepared to
accept no as an answer. If desperate in his
appeal to Akerman, Williams also argued
soundly that the thirty-nine-year-old
lawyer had already risked his chances of a
political career when he’d initiated the
inflammatory, high-profile law school
integration suit. Furthermore, the
Groveland Boys had no other legal
counsel open to them, and the consequence
they thus faced was not a denial of
admission to a university but a sentence to
death in the electric chair—for, Williams
insisted, a crime that they did not commit.
Their innocence or guilt aside, the three
defendants, all of them facing a death
penalty, certainly had a right to counsel,


--- PAGE 531 ---
and that, for Akerman, made his
representation of them the right thing to
do. He also appreciated Williams’s
refusal, for all his frustration and the
pressure of time constraints, to settle for
some indifferent criminal lawyer who
might have signed on solely for the fee.
Not that the fee was handsome or, at
$1,500, even adequate. Akerman
negotiated, and with a handshake he and
Williams agreed on a payment of $2,500
for the case. It was more than Williams
had expected to pay but less than any other
attorney had asked, and the New York
office would no doubt be counting on
Harry T. Moore to continue to raise both
awareness of the case and cash to offset
some of the legal costs. In closing,


--- PAGE 532 ---
Akerman acknowledged that time was
short, although he knew that even if he had
a year to prepare for the defense of the
Groveland Boys, in all likelihood they’d
still be sent to the chair. He promised
nonetheless to commit his expertise and
energies to the case as well as the
assistance of a second attorney, Joseph E.
Price Jr., Akerman’s nephew, who had
graduated from law school the previous
June. So Williams might find some
comfort in the fact that he was getting two
lawyers for the price of one.
As Alex Akerman contemplated the
black New York lawyer from the
NAACP, he might well have wondered if
Franklin Williams realized fully what
awaited him in a Lake County courtroom.


--- PAGE 533 ---
For weeks Williams, out of concern for
his own safety, had been avoiding visits to
Groveland and Tavares, where he had yet
to step inside the county courthouse. Nor
had he yet had occasion to meet Sheriff
Willis McCall, although he had seen the
handiwork of McCall’s deputies on the
bodies of the defendants they had
interrogated. Likewise, State Attorney
Jesse Hunter and Judge Truman Futch
were still mostly names to Williams. For
the benefit of the New Yorker’s education
in the courtroom culture of Lake County,
Akerman arranged to have Williams and
Hill introduced to their opposing counsel,
Jesse Hunter, in Tavares the week before
the pretrial hearings were to begin.
Jesse Hunter was born in 1879 in


--- PAGE 534 ---
Naylor, Georgia, about two hundred miles
north of Tavares, but as a young boy he’d
moved to Lake County with his family. At
the age of sixteen, after just two years of
formal schooling, he proved himself
qualified to teach at the public school in
Mascotte, and at twenty-two he was
named principal of a school in Marion
County. Always an avid reader, in his
spare time Hunter began devouring books
on the law, for he’d set his sights on a new
career; but first he had to pass the state’s
bar examination. Unable to fulfill
satisfactorily the demands of both his full-
time job and his intensive study of law, he
resigned his principalship and joined the
Railway Mail Service as a clerk on the
run from Key West to Jacksonville and


--- PAGE 535 ---
back. The schedule—“one full day of
work and two days of rest”—afforded him
the time he needed for the rigorous study
necessary to pass the Florida bar without
attending law school. Five years of
countless mail runs and mountains of
borrowed law books later, Hunter felt
prepared. While he may not have engaged
in Socratic debates on the finer points of
law or have established a host of law
school friendships and future contacts, he
had learned a thing or two about self-
discipline. And self-confidence.
In 1913, appearing before a justice of
the Supreme Court of Florida for the
administration of the bar examination,
thirty-one-year-old Jesse Hunter had
listened as one candidate after another


--- PAGE 536 ---
rose and stated the name of the prestigious
university where he’d studied law. Then
Hunter heard his name called, and with no
time allotted for elaboration, the erstwhile
mail clerk announced with pride and
brevity, “The University of Scuffletown.”
Muffled laughter filled the room. The
justice, wielding no gavel, shook a box
that he’d “filled with odds and ends” to
restore order, and asked, “Young man,
WHAT college did you say?”
Hunter’s reply—“The University of
Scuffletown, Your Honor”—brought a
pause, then a smile, from the justice. “Mr.
Hunter,” he said, “that is the best
university in this entire country.”
Jesse Hunter passed the bar, and that
same day so did Truman Futch, another


--- PAGE 537 ---
graduate of the “U. of S.”—they met; they
became friends. The summer of 1913 took
Hunter to Tavares, where, on a loan of a
few hundred dollars from a friend, he
rented “a tin building” around the corner
from the courthouse and furnished it with
some used chairs, an old desk, and a
secondhand typewriter. In that office he
practiced law for ten years, until 1923,
when he became county attorney. Two
years later, Governor John W. Martin
appointed him state attorney, a post he had
held for nearly a quarter of a century by
the time rape and race detonated the riots
in Groveland. In thirty-six years of
practicing law in Lake County, Jesse
Hunter had gotten past being surprised by
mobs and murder. Yet he was maybe a bit


--- PAGE 538 ---
startled that day late in August 1949 when
Alex Akerman walked into his office with
two black men.
Certainly Franklin Williams was struck
by the presence of the seventy-year-old
man who occupied the state attorney’s
office. “He was almost a caricature of the
Southern country boy,” Williams
observed. “He literally had red
suspenders and no jacket, sleeves rolled
up.” When Hunter advanced to shake
Akerman’s hand, Williams noticed the
sidelong glance the prosecutor cast at him
and Horace Hill as Akerman indicated
he’d be representing the Groveland Boys.
Then, to Williams’s astonishment, Hunter
asked Akerman, “Where is the third
defendant? Aren’t these boys the


--- PAGE 539 ---
defendants?”
“The dirty bastard,” Williams thought,
“trying to belittle us like that!” Now
outraged—did this country lawyer
honestly think Akerman would waltz into
the state attorney’s office with three black
men who were facing the death penalty for
raping a white woman, as if they were out
on bail?—Williams responded with cold
civility, “We are not the defendants. I am
an attorney from New York and this is
Horace Hill.”
After a grunt, Hunter smiled and, with a
nod of acknowledgment, said, “Well,
come on in and have a Coke with me.”
For Williams, that brief exchange
between him and Hunter on their first
meeting defined their relationship


--- PAGE 540 ---
thereafter. “It was very clear to me that he
was a sharp character,” Williams
recalled, adding that he was “never at
ease with Jesse Hunter.” Hunter’s
reference to a third defendant may have
been merely a momentary lapse of
memory, for Hunter had visited all three
defendants at Raiford and had more
recently questioned them at the
arraignment. On the other hand, Hunter’s
comment may have been a wily attempt to
put the two black attorneys off their mental
balance, and thus to gain a psychological
advantage over them. One thing was
certain: Hunter knew that Franklin
Williams would be the first black lawyer
ever to be sitting on a legal team in any
Lake County courtroom. If Hunter’s aim


--- PAGE 541 ---
had been to keep Williams off his balance
in relation to the state attorney’s attitudes
and intent, he succeeded. “At one moment
he [Hunter] would have the most acerbic
and bitter racist comment,” Williams
noted, “and then the very next moment he
would be the most pleasant good fellow,
country lawyer you had ever met.”
On August 25, at the county courthouse
in Tavares, the pretrial hearings opened
with Judge Truman Futch presiding. They
argued motions around a table “in shirt
sleeves, drinking cokes and smoking with
feet of judge up on the table in front of
us,” Williams wrote to the New York
office. “All very friendly—while deputies
swarm all around the joint!” The defense
had no expectations of success, but to


--- PAGE 542 ---
establish grounds for appeal, Akerman
filed, first, a motion to quash the
indictments, citing that at the time the
defendants were indicted, “lawless mobs
were roaming throughout the County of
Lake determined to seek and find your
defendants and to then inflict grievous
bodily injury upon them. . . .” The motion
stated, too, that widely distributed
newspapers had published editorials and
cartoons “calling for and demanding that
the extreme penalty of death be leveled”
against the Groveland Boys. “Filed too
late,” Futch ruled.
Akerman then put forth an application
for removal of cause for a change of
venue, arguing that lynch mob violence,
prejudice, and the hostile environment in


--- PAGE 543 ---
Lake County would prevent the defendants
from receiving a fair trial. With Sheriff
McCall and deputies James Yates and
Leroy Campbell in attendance, the defense
called attention to the apparent “brutal”
beatings and abuse “by persons purporting
to be law enforcement officials of Lake
County.” Futch ruled the support of the
motion to be “completely irrelevant and
immaterial”; furthermore, Futch
announced, he would not permit any
testimony regarding its substance during
the trial.
Next, the defense filed a motion for
continuance, citing good faith reasons why
the trial should be postponed—namely,
the inadequate time to properly prepare a
defense, especially given the fact that with


--- PAGE 544 ---
the defendants more than a hundred miles
away at the state prison in Raiford, their
meetings with counsel had been
“extremely inconvenient and impractical.”
Futch considered the motion. Deciding it
to be a fair request, he delayed the start of
the trial by three days. Jury selection
would begin on Thursday, the first of
September.
During the remaining days of pretrial
hearings Williams and Akerman hoped
both to build a case for the defense and to
determine specifics of the case being
mounted by the prosecution. They thus
filed a bill of particulars, which required
Hunter to specify what facts the state of
Florida intended to prove with regard to
the crimes charged in the indictments. The


--- PAGE 545 ---
defense attorneys had made a start, albeit
late. It would get later.
With the pretrial motions under way, the
defendants—Irvin, Shepherd, and
Greenlee—had been removed again to the
jail in Tavares, to the same cells they’d
occupied on the fourth floor a month
earlier. The bloodstained sheets on the
beds had not been changed, as Williams
had noticed with disgust when he’d
visited the three defendants. Still,
Williams trusted that the Groveland Boys
would at least escape abuse during their
second stay at the Tavares jail, since the
beatings they’d previously endured had
been not only well documented but also
fully reported in the local and national
press, which had laid blame on Willis


--- PAGE 546 ---
McCall and his deputies. So it would be
in the sheriff’s best interest to ensure that
the prisoners appear in court with no
visible evidence of abuse, or so Williams
reasoned—incorrectly, as it turned out.
“Every time” the defendants exited the
courtroom, on the stairway back up to
their cells McCall would kick the three of
them repeatedly, although he’d strike
Shepherd with special animosity.
“Sammie,” Irvin said, “he hit Sammie
with his fist.”
McCall had sat silently with his
deputies throughout the August 25 pretrial
hearings at the county courthouse. He’d
brooded. For more than a month the case
had been his. He’d been pursued by
reporters; he’d enjoyed celebrity. After


--- PAGE 547 ---
all, he had stood up to a lynch mob; he had
policed the riots without the loss of a
single life. Within hours of the rape he’d
had three of the suspects behind bars, and
he’d taken care of the fourth one, too. Only
now it was Jesse Hunter’s case. The
sheriff had been sidelined, and worse,
he’d had to bear the sight of a black New
York NAACP lawyer in a fancy suit
sitting before the bar, conferring with the
judge and prosecutor about the admission
of coerced confessions into evidence:
more of the same claptrap he’d read in
those “disgusting and disheartening”
newspaper articles from up north (he’d
clipped them nonetheless). Something had
been agreed; Hunter wasn’t going to
introduce the confessions—as if this


--- PAGE 548 ---
weren’t Lake County. Then they’d
adjourned.
The sheriff and his deputies escorted the
Groveland Boys from the courtroom. In
the stairwell, the sheriff let out a little of
his frustration with a booted foot and his
fists. Between blows, McCall demanded,
“What are those nigger lawyers putting
you up to now?”
The defendants had no answer to the
angry question and tried only to protect
themselves from the sheriff’s rage, which
seemed finally to be directed no longer at
them but at the defense counsel. “Nigger
lawyers better watch their steps,” McCall
told them, or they’ll “end up in jail” along
with their clients.
After the adjournment Williams and


--- PAGE 549 ---
Hill, along with Akerman, returned to
Orlando to take advantage of every minute
available to develop strategies and
construct a defense. At the same time a
tropical storm was heading for South
Florida from the Bahamas, and the
following day, August 26, what would
now be classified a Category 4 hurricane
hit land at West Palm Beach and roared
north from Lake Okeechobee. By the time
it reached Lake County that evening,
hurricane-force winds had wreaked havoc
in central Florida, with damages running
to millions of dollars. Particularly hard hit
was the citrus industry; agricultural losses
approached $20 million, as the heavy
winds uprooted about one-third of the
citrus trees—what would have amounted


--- PAGE 550 ---
to 14 million crates of fruit. For two days
Williams and Akerman were stranded in a
rooming house in Orlando without access
to the court or the prosecutor’s bill of
particulars or a working telephone.
Residences had been unroofed; the streets
were obstructed by fallen pines, downed
utility poles, and industrial debris. And
the defense case was a shambles.
The prosecution can’t have regretted the
losses in time and preparation that the
storm had cost the lawyers for the defense.
Still, the state was hedging its every bet.
As Hunter was planning to call Samuel
Shepherd’s brother James as a time line
witness for the prosecution, and in order,
therefore, to prevent him from fleeing the
county or conspiring with other potential


--- PAGE 551 ---
witnesses, the state attorney requested that
Judge Futch dispatch Sheriff McCall to
place and hold James Shepherd in the
county jail until he had testified at his
brother’s trial. Never a man for half
measures, especially when dealing with
blacks, McCall had Samuel’s parents,
Henry and Charlie Mae Shepherd, jailed
as well, and with a phone call north to the
sheriff of Alachua County he also had
Charles Greenlee’s parents detained. It
was the sheriff’s way of guaranteeing that
the families of the Groveland Boys did not
get together in an attempt to fabricate
alibis for the defendants by scripting a
scenario contrary to his own official
record on the events of July 15–16.
McCall paid a visit to Ernest Thomas’s


--- PAGE 552 ---
parents, too. Then he drove them from
Groveland to Tavares, where Ethel and
Luther Thomas were also jailed until the
date of the trial. Jesse Hunter needed
Ethel Thomas for the prosecution’s case,
which hinged in part on establishing
Ernest Thomas’s whereabouts the night of
July 15, and McCall thought it likely that a
friendly, private conversation, albeit in
jail, would convince the grieving mother
to cooperate. Her son Ernest was dead,
and with the Klan shooting at the Blue
Flame, Ethel Thomas didn’t have many
options if she wanted to stay in
Groveland. If the High Sheriff could see to
it that she’d be able to run her juke joint,
what harm would she be doing by
agreeing to testify for the state?


--- PAGE 553 ---
Henry Singleton need worry no more
about the crystal-gazing racketeer or
cocky Ernest Thomas cutting into his
bolita
 throws. He might have worried a
little, though, about McCall, who, as
Singleton knew better than most, was not
of a mind to do favors for a black man
without expecting something in return. So
it wasn’t much of a surprise to anyone in
Groveland that the name of Henry
Singleton—bootlegger, 
bolita
 dealer,
nightclub owner, stool pigeon—showed
up on the list of witnesses for the
prosecution.


--- PAGE 554 ---
CHAPTER 11: BAD
EGG
The
 New York Post
 was the only newspaper


--- PAGE 555 ---
to publish a photograph of Norma Padgett at
the time of the trial.
 (
New York Post
)
I
F I WERE
 asked if the woman was raped, I
would have to answer ‘I don’t know.’ ”
It was not what Willis McCall wanted
to hear. He had come to the Theresa
Holland Hospital in Leesburg for the
physician’s report on the examination of
Norma Padgett after the alleged rape. He
left in a huff—after a brief, unsatisfying
conversation with the examining
physician, Dr. Geoffrey Binneveld—and
headed back to Tavares with a notarized
copy of the document and with some bad
news for State Attorney Jesse Hunter. The
medical evidence did not support Norma
Padgett’s claim that four men had raped


--- PAGE 556 ---
her.
In mid-August, when the existence of the
examining physician’s Report of Accident
was leaked to the NAACP in New York,
Thurgood Marshall soon had the FBI
scrambling to locate the doctor and the
document. It took some digging by Special
Agent Watson Roper of the Miami bureau,
but on August 30, at the small, private
Theresa Holland Hospital in Leesburg, he
was querying the young (at thirty) though
“highly regarded” Dr. Geoffrey Binneveld
on the matter of Norma Padgett. While
“the confidential Doctor-Patient
relationship” disallowed his providing a
signed statement to the FBI without
written permission from Norma Padgett,
Binneveld did allow Roper to read and


--- PAGE 557 ---
take notes on his physician’s report.
Norma Padgett had appeared at the
whites’ entrance to the hospital with her
father, Coy Tyson, and her husband,
Willie Padgett, on the morning of July 16.
In the absence of the senior physician and
founder of the hospital, Dr. Howard
Holland, Binneveld had attended. The
father and husband remained in the
waiting room while in an exam room the
doctor explained the procedure they’d
follow. He noted that the girl appeared to
be in “emotional shock” and that, if what
she was saying was true, she had not slept
in more than twenty-four hours, as she had
spent the night hiding and wandering in the
wooded area outside Okahumpka. In his
external examination he found scratches


--- PAGE 558 ---
on both knees and on the palm of her right
hand; the soles of her feet were
“irritated.” When he had proceeded to the
pelvic examination, he observed that the
labia majora and labia minora were “very
red and irritated” and there were “several
small mucosal lacerations about posterior
fornix” as well. He attributed a small
amount of blood present in the vagina to
her regular monthly menstrual period, then
in its last stages, since he otherwise
“found no evidence of tears or wounds in
the vagina other than the lacerations
mentioned above.” Laboratory analysis of
a vaginal smear revealed “no spermatozoa
were present in the vagina, nor were any
organisms resembling gonococci found.”
Binneveld’s conclusion to the report read:


--- PAGE 559 ---
“Finding—Traumatic vaginitis,” a
noninfectious inflammation that might
result from vaginal exposure to a condom,
soap water, or douches, among numerous
other possibilities.
Because he had not examined the
accused men, and “since VD is so
prevalent among the colored people he
treats,” the doctor told Agent Roper that
he had consulted with a physician and
former instructor of his at the University
of Virginia School of Medicine. He had
recommended that Binneveld put Padgett
on penicillin, aureomycin, and some other
prophylaxis to prevent any possible
venereal infection and that he “give the
patient the benefit of the doubt.”
Binneveld had of course, by way of


--- PAGE 560 ---
Sheriff McCall, provided the state
attorney with a copy of the report, and he
said that he’d also informed the sheriff
“there were no other gross signs of
bruises, breaks in the skin, or other signs
of violence.” The doctor had not,
however, discussed with any other party
the results of his examination, as he
emphatically stated to Special Agent
Roper. Nor did Dr. Binneveld—the only
physician, insofar as he knew, who had
examined Norma Padgett—have any idea
how such confidential information might
have been leaked to the NAACP or
anyone else. Agent Roper’s final question
for the doctor echoed that of Sheriff
McCall the month before: how would he
testify should he be called as a witness by


--- PAGE 561 ---
the prosecution and asked if Norma
Padgett had been raped? The doctor had
been pondering the answer to that question
for weeks. He didn’t have to think about
his reply. He’d said it before:
“I don’t know.”
T
HE LAST WEEK
 of August 1949 brought
newspaper reporters from all over the
country to cover the trial of the Groveland
Boys, a case that the press was calling
“Little Scottsboro.” Certainly it was
strikingly similar in many ways to the
infamous 1931 case, in which young white
women’s accusations of rape by young
black men triggered coerced confessions,
lynching attempts, and mob violence


--- PAGE 562 ---
involving powerful sheriffs, unruly
posses, and the Ku Klux Klan in
Scottsboro, Alabama. In central Florida,
the black papers had been covering the
Groveland story since the rioting in mid-
July, largely on the basis of information
passed on to them by Franklin Williams in
the course of his investigation. In late
August local reporters were joined in
Tavares by correspondents from the
Pittsburgh Courier
 and the 
Chicago
Defender
 as well as a few “Northern”
writers who had taken an interest in the
story. So had the 
Christian Science
Monitor
,
 but surprisingly, to Williams, the
Associated Press and United Press
International had not. Yet while Marshall
and the NAACP in New York were trying


--- PAGE 563 ---
to focus national attention on the racial
tension and racist violence in Groveland,
Florida, the big race story that August was
unfolding in their own backyard.
On August 27, 1949, in Peekskill, New
York, Paul Robeson had planned to
perform at a concert for the benefit of the
Civil Rights Congress, an organization led
by his friend the black communist, lawyer,
and activist William Patterson. Earlier
that summer Robeson had unpopularly
delivered his controversial anti-American
speech in France, and at the moment he
was about to sing his first selection,
hundreds of protestors stormed the stage,
pelted the musicians with rocks or
slammed them with chairs, and burned the
“Dirty Commie” song sheets. Police did


--- PAGE 564 ---
little to intervene, but Robeson vowed to
return the following week. True to his
word, he did, along with twenty-five
thousand supporters and hundreds of union
members who formed a human wall
around the grounds at Cortlandt Manor to
protect the performers onstage. A mob of
protestors meanwhile threw rocks,
overturned vehicles, and shouted epithets
like “Kikes!” “Nigger lovers!” and “Go
back to Russia!” They burned Robeson in
effigy on a nearby hillside; close by they
burned a cross.
Five months later, in a speech to the
Republican Women’s Club of Wheeling,
West Virginia, Wisconsin senator Joseph
McCarthy would brandish what he
claimed was a secret list of more than two


--- PAGE 565 ---
hundred known communists working for
the U.S. State Department. Thus began the
strong wave of venomous anticommunist
sentiment that for the next decade would
threaten not only government entities, but
academia, the motion picture industry,
labor unions, and the NAACP. Thurgood
Marshall, ever vigilant, would strive
continually to safeguard the reputation and
activities of the NAACP from the taint of
communism. As Roy Wilkins wrote, “We
were having enough trouble getting
Congress to consider even the most
elementary civil rights legislation. The
last thing we needed was to give
ammunition to red-baiting southern
congressmen and senators, who would
have loved nothing better than to paint us


--- PAGE 566 ---
pink.” For all that, neither McCarthy’s list
nor the HUAC’s unduly upset Marshall,
who later said, “If you were a Negro and
you were not on both of those lists, you
should blow your brains out.”
That the eyes of the nation were fixed
on Paul Robeson and the Peekskill riots
late in the summer of 1949 afforded
Marshall some relief, for it kept the CRC
more fully occupied with its own affairs
and thus less disposed or able to insert
itself into the Groveland case as it had in
the trials of the Scottsboro Boys.
Supposedly, “Franklin Williams had
falsely accused [the CRC] of trying to
steal the case” in Groveland. The
accusation may have been false but
Williams’s suspicions would have been


--- PAGE 567 ---
justified, for it would not by any means
have been the first case the CRC had tried
to steal from the NAACP.
In May 1949, seven young black men in
Virginia confessed to the rape of a white
woman, and in a series of six trials over a
period of eleven days, each one of the
“Martinsville Seven” was convicted and
sentenced to death. Only after the trials
did the NAACP enter the case, at the
request of relatives to the condemned men.
Sensitive though Marshall was to the fact
that the NAACP did not function as a legal
aid society, he was equally attuned to
opportunities for the establishment of
important legal precedents through the
process of appeals. The death sentences of
the Martinsville Seven offered apparent


--- PAGE 568 ---
grounds for appeal in that since 1908,
when the state of Virginia instituted use of
the electric chair, all forty-five of the men
executed for rape had been blacks
convicted in attacks on white women.
Problems arose when one of the wives of
the Martinsville Seven agreed to allow the
CRC to represent her husband in an
appeal. Marshall was livid.
Marshall and Patterson were deeply
divided in their philosophies on both legal
tactics and civil rights. Marshall
particularly resented the CRC’s strategy in
high-profile capital cases, which, he
believed, “was to go into the local
community, spit on the door of the
courthouse, cuss at the judge and raise
holy cain—and, incidentally, get the men


--- PAGE 569 ---
electrocuted.” In Marshall’s eyes, the
CRC existed and operated primarily to
raise money, lots of it, for the communist
cause—by calling attention to racial and
economic oppression under American
capitalism and “giv[ing] foreign
governments something they can yell
about.” Unlike the NAACP, the CRC did
not apply the bulk of the funds it raised for
the actual defense of its clients, what with
the production of leaflets, advertising on
billboards, and fashioning of “high-
powered petitions that the jury will never
read” commanding significant
expenditures. Patterson, for his part,
maintained that nationwide awareness
was vital and that “only the movement of
the people as a whole guarantees a


--- PAGE 570 ---
victory.” Nonetheless, Marshall
contended, a noisy mass campaign led by
an organization that had been cited as
subversive and communist by the Truman
administration could only be detrimental
to the defendants in appeals to higher
courts. Ultimately, Patterson pulled the
CRC from the defense of the Martinsville
Seven. He chose instead to maximize
publicity for the case—and raise
consciousness of the communist cause—
without risking a possible loss in court.
There was no love lost between
Marshall and Patterson, personally or
professionally. They exchanged letters,
and on occasion they attended meetings
held by interested third parties hoping to
broker a treaty between their two


--- PAGE 571 ---
organizations—a futile effort, as both men
were equally entrenched in their positions
and fiercely committed to their opposing
principles. Their relationship was further
strained, since both men happened to live
at the same address, 409 Edgecombe, in
Harlem, although Marshall’s demanding
travel schedule limited possibilities of
chance encounters, or contention, with
Patterson in New York. Of course,
Patterson did his own share of traveling,
and that late summer of 1949 he was more
than contemplating a trip to Groveland.
Marshall issued a warning to his
neighbor: “These cases, the Groveland
cases and any other cases under the
jurisdiction of this Association will be
carried forward in a lawfullike [
sic
]


--- PAGE 572 ---
manner with the lawful machinery of our
Government. We have never been
convinced that the Civil Rights Congress
is primarily interested in the protection of
the rights of Negroes [or] in the particular
Negroes involved. . . . We therefore have
no intention whatsoever of permitting you
to interfere in any of these cases.”
Marshall forwarded his letter to
Stephen Spingarn, who was working in the
White House as assistant to the special
counsel to the president, with the
following note:
Dear Steve:
I thought you would be interested
in the latest developments in the
efforts of the Comrades to move in


--- PAGE 573 ---
on our cases. These boys never give
up and it is a pleasure to crack their
knuckles.
Sincerely,
Thurgood Marshall.
A
S THE PRETRIAL
 hearing proceeded in
Groveland, Franklin Williams phoned in
the rulings on motions to Thurgood
Marshall in New York and updated him
on the roster of witnesses and composition
of the jury. Williams assured Marshall
that in the jury selection process the
defense would challenge in any way they
could, but he and Marshall both knew that
at the end of the day, twelve white Lake
County jurors were going to be seated in


--- PAGE 574 ---
the box. “I never believed that we would
have anything but a verdict of guilty,”
Williams said. “It never entered my mind.
. . . I hoped that we might get life rather
than death. But I never believed that these
boys would be found innocent.”
Marshall had full confidence in
Williams, who, he observed, “can come
up with more ideas in a minute than most
people I know of. And they’re darn good
ones.” Williams was ambitious but also
dedicated to the mission of the NAACP—
a man who willingly “puts in a real day’s
work,” Marshall said. Nonetheless,
Marshall recognized that Williams was
facing heavy odds by having been hobbled
with the lightning-fast trial date when he’d
barely had time to find a Florida lawyer,


--- PAGE 575 ---
let alone map out a sound strategy. The
want of time would force Williams and
Akerman into reactive lawyering once the
trial began, and Williams promised
Marshall “every bit of energy and effort
[would be] directed toward trying to
create an error in the case, so that we
could get it reversed on appeal.” The job,
Marshall stressed, was, as always, “to
cause constitutional error or to find
constitutional error in the process.”
Both the prosecution and the defense
were required to submit to the court lists
of their evidence before the trial began.
Jesse Hunter kept it simple; his list
included a mere ten items:
1.Handkerchief & lint
2.Cast of left rear tire


--- PAGE 576 ---
3.Cast of right rear tire
4.Cast of left front tire
5.Cast of right front tire
6.Left shoe & cast
7.Right shoe & cast
8.Pants of Walter Irvin
9.Pistol
10.Almanac
The list reflected the simplicity, and
strength, of the prosecution’s case as
Hunter would argue it for the jury,
whoever might be sitting on it. Hunter
hardly had to worry about jury selection;
as Mabel Norris Reese noted in her
pretrial coverage, “Jesse Hunter won’t
have to ask probing questions of the jury
because he already knows all about them,
and probably he could call any of the 100
or so selected jurymen by their first


--- PAGE 577 ---
names.” Nor did he have to worry about
the credibility of his witnesses or their
testimony. He had reviewed thoroughly
with the state’s witnesses the testimony
they would present, from Norma and
Willie Padgett to the sheriff’s deputies
and highway patrolmen. He indeed had
reason to feel confident that, as Reese
wrote, “Honor Will Be Avenged” in just a
matter of days.
If Hunter’s list was strategically simple,
the evidence for the defense was perforce
limited: forty-one local newspaper
articles published on specific dates in July
and August 1949. The list of witnesses for
the defense indicated that they would call
only three: Walter Irvin, Samuel
Shepherd, and Charles Greenlee. And then


--- PAGE 578 ---
they would pray.
Judge Truman Futch had a list of his
own. He had posted his “Special Rules of
Court” on telephone poles outside the
courthouse. Among the twelve rules for
spectators at the trial were bans against
loitering in the halls and stairways; the
conveyance of bags, bottles, or packages
into the courtroom; and hand clapping or
outbursts in response to testimony or
argument. The judge’s rationale, he stated,
lay less in any fear of a disruption in the
proceedings by the Ku Klux Klan than in
his concern that outside “agitators or
agents” may have been dispatched to
Tavares, perhaps by the NAACP,
purposely to start trouble at the trial so
that “critics of the south might have


--- PAGE 579 ---
something to base criticism upon.” Judge
Futch had also taken other, more visible
preventive measures against the
unwelcome presence of any suspect
strangers, as Williams and Akerman
noticed when they arrived at court on the
first day of the trial and viewed the
heightened security. “They had deputies
who stood every 10 stairs coming up the
staircase into the courtroom,” Williams
recalled. “They were all big characters
with guns on. It was a very intimidating
scene.”
It did not intimidate Mabel Norris
Reese, however. Nor did the lawyers for
the defense, who had called her as a
witness in the pretrial hearings so that her
exclusive coverage of the “worst crime in


--- PAGE 580 ---
Lake county’s history” could be entered
on record. On that occasion, under oath,
she had indicated that the source for her
many articles and editorials about the case
had been State Attorney Jesse Hunter. She
had also stated that, on the basis of her
observations, “there is considerable more
satisfaction among the negroes here” in
her adoptive South than in her native
North and, indeed, she had found no
evidence of prejudice in her part of Lake
County. On the morning of the trial itself,
intercepting Williams and Akerman on
their arrival at court, Reese asked them
for a statement regarding their
expectations in the courtroom. In a rare
unguarded moment, Williams responded
that he did not hold out much hope for


--- PAGE 581 ---
justice in Judge Futch’s courtroom and
that anyway, the “Supreme Court is the
aim.” Off the record or not, his comments
appeared on the front page of the 
Topic
the next day, and the relationship between
Williams and Reese continued only to
sour thereafter. In the same front-page
article Reese looked forward to the relief
that would come “to the staunch believers
in the wonderfulness that is Lake county
when the smudge against her fair name is
removed” by the trial, as again she
lamented the sensational press stories in
the North about beatings and mistreatment
of Negroes, which stories, she wrote,
strive “to make Lake county sound mean
and cruel—unfitted for the God-given
loveliness about her.” Of course, since


--- PAGE 582 ---
Reese relied on Jesse Hunter as her main
source of information about the case, she
knew that before Lake County could return
again to being the “Garden of Eden” it had
always been, the prosecution would have
to recount the unspeakable events of that
night in July “when the true story of what
happened to that young Bay Lake couple
will be told, probably in unpretty details
so that a jury can be convinced.”
Relief, for Franklin Williams, at least in
regard to the press, came to Tavares in the
form of Ted Poston, a black reporter from
the 
New York Post
 who had successfully
lobbied his editor to fly him south to
cover the trial for the newspaper.
Formerly a resident at 409 Edgecombe, he
had long been friends with Thurgood


--- PAGE 583 ---
Marshall. In fact, Poston had once
accompanied Marshall on one of the
NAACP attorney’s late-night adventures,
on this particular occasion to obtain
affidavits from blacks who were being
terrorized by police in Freeport, New
York, then (in the 1930s) a hub of KKK
activity. On learning that the Klan-infested
police were out looking for two
troublemakers from Harlem, Poston was,
in his words, “damned scared”; but, as
much as he wanted to “get out of town
fast,” he spent the night dodging the Klan
with Marshall as the lawyer continued
collecting his affidavits, which he hid in a
spare tire, and meanwhile making “more
and more outlandish jokes about what [the
police would] do to us if they ever caught


--- PAGE 584 ---
up with us.” The jokes may not have eased
Poston’s anxiety, but the affidavits
enabled Marshall eventually to win from
the state attorney general “a restraining
order to close down KKK activities” in
Freeport. Poston could only admire the
courage of a man and attorney who
“involv[ed] himself in a case to that
degree.”
Nor did Poston want for courage, savvy
though he also was in protecting himself.
In 1933, when he was covering the
Scottsboro trial in Alabama for the
Harlem-based 
Amsterdam News
, each
night after court he would sneak out to the
railroad tracks in order to deposit his
stories “in the mail car of the midnight
special.” He was evidently not sneaky


--- PAGE 585 ---
enough, however, as one night some young
white men were waiting near the tracks
for the black reporter on the Scottsboro
case. They put a pistol to his back and
Poston produced fake credentials
identifying him as a reverend with the
African Methodist Episcopal Church—for
which he got a “kick in the pants” but
otherwise escaped harm. When Scottsboro
had completed the retrial and Poston his
assignment, he made a show of reserving a
seat on the day coach at the train station so
that the ticket seller would be sure to
remember him. Then he quietly slipped
out of town by bus. He later learned that,
as he had feared, about the time the train
he’d reserved the seat on was due to
arrive, a crowd of angry whites, nearly a


--- PAGE 586 ---
thousand strong, had turned up at the
depot, obviously not to offer him a
friendly good-bye.
Poston’s own personal experience of
the hazardous link between racial and
sexual tensions for black males in the
South had drawn him to the story of
Norma Padgett and the Groveland Boys
from its outset. Born in Hopkinsville,
Kentucky, in 1906, two years before
Thurgood Marshall, the especially dark-
skinned Poston found himself assigned as
if by nature to a lower social and
economic status among both whites and
blacks. At the age of thirteen, he was
earning fifty cents a week for tending the
fireplaces at the house of a dentist in
town. On a particular morning he’d


--- PAGE 587 ---
entered one of the rooms to clean out the
ashes and lay wood to build a new fire
when he encountered there a “grown
young lady.” She beckoned the boy to her,
and with her hand pressed to the front of
his pants, she commented on his anatomy,
then asked the tongue-tied Poston, “Are
you diddling with the 
nigger
 gals?”
Aghast, the boy watched as she disrobed
before him, and he trembled, as much with
fear as desire, as she coaxed him into
sexual intercourse—as she would again
the next morning, and the next, for it
became “an every morning occurrence.”
And the boy became increasingly
traumatized; even thirteen-year-olds knew
what happened to blacks caught with
white women. When guilt and fear finally


--- PAGE 588 ---
compelled him to tell the woman he was
going to quit his job, she replied with a
threat. “If you quit, I’m going to tell the
doctor you raped me,” she said, and for
three more years Poston remained a slave
to her bidding.
Weeks before the Groveland Boys were
brought to trial, Poston had been writing
features for the 
New York
 
Post
 under the
series headline “Horror in the Sunny
South.” As soon as he had picked up the
story on Norma Padgett’s claims of rape
from the newswires, he had begun
investigating the case. He had interviewed
the family of Samuel Shepherd; he’d
spoken with victims of the mob violence.
It was Poston who first compared the
events in Groveland to those in a similar


--- PAGE 589 ---
rape case nearly twenty years before. It
was Poston who called it “Florida’s Little
Scottsboro.”
Ramona Lowe, a part-time Florida
correspondent for the 
Chicago Defender
,
also arrived at Tavares to cover the trial.
Lowe had been the first reporter to break
the story of the gross mistreatment that the
Groveland Boys had borne while in
Sheriff McCall’s custody. If her
incendiary pieces on the case had in
general won the appreciation of the
NAACP, a particular story that ran on the
front page of the 
Defender
 had Marshall
and Williams both scratching their heads.
In addition to carefully documenting the
“seething jealousy” that fueled the
resentment of Bay Lake’s poor white


--- PAGE 590 ---
farmers toward more prosperous black
farmers like Henry Shepherd, Lowe
claimed that, according to an unnamed
source, Samuel Shepherd and Norma
Padgett had been longtime friends. So
distraught was Norma over Shepherd’s
arrest, the source said, she had asserted
that should anything bad happen, “I will
leave this place [Groveland]. I have
known Sam all my life.” If Lowe and her
source were to be believed, the assertion
would certainly alter the complexion of
the sheriff’s and state attorney’s official
narrative and would buoy Williams’s
defense, but in another article, with equal
conviction, Lowe had reported that
Charles Greenlee had been riding in the
car with Irvin and Shepherd on the night of


--- PAGE 591 ---
July 15: an affirmation that Williams had
determined was simply not true. Lowe’s
reporting puzzled Williams, but he was
happy to have one more journalist on his
side covering the trial.
For Marshall and Williams—indeed,
for any NAACP defense counsel assigned
to a criminal case in the hostile South—
the presence of a reporter, even from a
black newspaper like the 
Pittsburgh
Courier
 or 
Chicago Defender
, helped to
ensure their protection. “The theory was,”
Williams said, “if the world knew you
were there, you were safe.” (Though it
was no guarantee. An FBI informant in a
central Florida Klavern later revealed that
the 
Pittsburgh Courier
 was “generally
read from the Klan meeting floor.”) In the


--- PAGE 592 ---
event that the press did not find a trial
significant enough to warrant coverage,
Thurgood Marshall himself would issue
press releases from the NAACP’s New
York office in which he would announce
his own or an associate’s arrival and
departure times in a given Southern town.
With Poston in Lake County, Williams had
a major New York newspaper covering
his every move and thus, he felt, a “greater
modicum of security.” For a measure of
security, too, Poston reserved a suite in a
Negro hotel in Orlando for the duration of
his assignment, but each night he would
steal out the back door of the hotel to
sleep instead at one of three secret private
homes. Not a man to take any chances in
the South, Poston made sure the defense


--- PAGE 593 ---
lawyers had the telephone number of the
city editor at the 
New York Post
 “just in
case anything happens.”
With trial testimony about to begin,
Franklin Williams might have envied the
confidence of Mabel Norris Reese that the
“true story,” however “unpretty” its
details, had been uncovered in the case or
have wished he could validate Ramona
Lowe’s discoveries about Norma
Padgett’s past. Rumors and clues and
speculation tantalized the lawyer for the
defense with possibilities, but they did not
constitute sound evidence for the court, so
he had to face what for him was the truth:
that for all his interviews and
investigation, he still did not know what
had happened on that Friday night in July.


--- PAGE 594 ---
Certainly suspicion densely clouded
Norma Padgett’s claim that she’d been
raped by the four Groveland boys, and not
just among the blacks. Terence McCarthy,
the British economist who’d been
researching the story for the 
New Leader
,
told Williams that Groveland’s police
chief, George Mays, had informed him off
the record that Norma Padgett was a “bad
egg” and that her denial of acquaintance
with the Groveland Boys was suspect—
Norma, according to Mays, “had grown up
as a child next door” to Ernest Thomas.
Franklin Williams himself had spoken
with the Reverend Collis C. Blair, a white
Methodist minister in Orlando, who had
been in Bay Lake after the rioting. On that
occasion, Blair told Williams (as


--- PAGE 595 ---
Williams subsequently told the FBI during
an August briefing in the New York office
of the NAACP), various members of the
mob who had “stirred up” the violence
and “kept it going” had been pointed out to
him, but with no names named. When
pressed by Williams as to who they were,
the understandably nervous Blair had
answered, “The Klan,” adding that the
men told him “these niggers needed to be
taken down a notch.” Whatever
sympathies Blair may have had with the
victims of that violence and whatever
horror he may have had of the Klan, the
minister knew that the KKK could burn a
church with as little compunction as they
would a Negro home; he needed to limit
his risks.


--- PAGE 596 ---
Sensing that the white minister was
holding back perhaps critical information
from him, Williams pressed further:
Hadn’t Blair, a young Methodist from
Florida, pursued his religious studies in
the enlightened North, at Yale Divinity
School? Didn’t he acknowledge the
church’s strategic role in combating
interracial violence? With one boy
already dead and three others facing the
likelihood of execution, would he offer
only silence? The lawyer was practically
pleading, and the minister, after more than
a moment’s hesitation, did finally admit
that he had had a met with a few people
after Norma Padgett had been found
walking barefoot up near Okahumpka.
With whom? Williams asked. And Blair


--- PAGE 597 ---
replied, “Mrs. Padgett, her husband, and
mother in law.”
Williams, in his conscience, recognized
that he could not put Reverend Blair on
the witness stand. The substance of
Blair’s knowledge, vital to Williams’s
insight into the elusive truth of the case,
would have to be imparted in confidence.
Williams asked what the Reverend Blair
had concluded after talking with Norma
and the Padgetts? Blair was neither coy
nor evasive. He observed that Norma did
not show “any traces of having gone
through a bad experience,” and seemed
“quite thrilled to be the object of so much
publicity.” As a native Floridian familiar
with the Bay Lake community, Blair also
found it curious that “none of the family


--- PAGE 598 ---
showed any such resentment [toward the
Groveland boys] as one would expect.”
He ultimately admitted to Williams that he
had “grave doubts as to whether a rape
actually occurred.”
Williams passed on the minister’s name
and telephone number to the FBI, whose
agents, the New York lawyer was sure,
had gathered information equally valuable
to the defense, although the FBI
investigation had been “considerably
affected” once word of the brutality
exerted upon the three suspects by Lake
County law enforcement had spread.
Williams was of course aware that the
willingness of some Lake County
residents to talk to the FBI had evaporated
in the face of rumors and threats and


--- PAGE 599 ---
misinformation to the effect that “the
investigation will result in defense
material for NAACP attorneys.” Williams
had in fact attempted to compel agents
Quigley and Matthews to testify by
serving them an anonymous “Richard Roe
and John Doe” subpoena, which was
ultimately quashed in the U.S. attorney’s
office by reason of “the confidential
nature of the FBI’s investigation.”
Williams had been frustrated by the state
attorney’s office as well, in its
strategically sound decisions not to call
Dr. Geoffrey Binneveld as a witness or to
place into evidence his physician’s report
—and likewise, the (coerced) confessions
of the Groveland Boys. Jesse Hunter
would rely on the probability that the


--- PAGE 600 ---
testimony of a young white woman would
trump anything the three Negroes might
say in their defense. Judge Futch,
meanwhile, compounded Williams’s
frustration in his rulings not to make the
medical report available to the defense
and not to allow any testimony about
beatings of prisoners at the hands of law
enforcement. What the judge called
irrelevant Williams considered to be
deliberate moves to assure Hunter the
convictions he sought.
On Friday morning, September 2,
before the commencement of trial
testimony, Judge Futch presided over the
completion of jury selection and the
defense did the best they could with the
few challenges still available to them.


--- PAGE 601 ---
Over the past few days, as, one by one, the
prospective jurors—Lake County farmers
and pickers and truckers, with their meaty
hands and their worn work clothes—had
appeared before the court, Williams, the
sharply attired New York lawyer, had
recalled again, and more than once, the
words of the Daytona Beach attorney
who’d refused the case because “those
clay eating crackers down there” would as
soon shoot you as look at you. In quizzing
the potential jurors, Akerman had been
trying to gauge what might be their
reactions should they see a black man
addressing whites in ways they had never
witnessed before, thus implicitly
challenging the racial power structure as
they knew it. “How would you feel about


--- PAGE 602 ---
one of these negro lawyers jumping up and
objecting?” he’d asked one. To another
he’d posed, “And you would feel that it
would be proper for them, as defense
counsel, to cross-examine witnesses, even
though the witness happened to be white?”
(One potential juror had become confused
when Akerman pointed to Williams and
Hill at the defense table: “They are not on
trial, are they?” the juror had asked.)
Akerman’s other primary concern had
been to discover if potential jurors were
“kin” to any Tysons or Padgetts, and the
few who were had been excused. Jesse
Hunter, on the other hand, focused largely
on any objections the prospective jurors
might have to capital punishment; most
were “in favor of it.”


--- PAGE 603 ---
Most of the prospective jurors, not
surprisingly, were also white. Of the three
black men whose names had been pulled
from the jury pool, only one made it to
court: a “gray haired old handyman”
whose father-in-law had recently died.
The court clerk implored Williams to
excuse the “boy” so that he could attend
the funeral, adding that the handyman was
“one of the best niggers in Lake County.”
Then all the jurors were white, and by the
end of that Friday morning in early
September both Hunter and Akerman had
announced to Judge Futch that they were
satisfied with the jury in the box. While it
might have been worse, it was, to
Williams’s mind, nonetheless terrible.
Still, the defense had managed to establish


--- PAGE 604 ---
on record that blacks were historically
and systematically excluded from jury
service in Lake County, so he would be
able to tell Marshall on Friday night that
the NAACP was well positioned for
appeal. It was a small victory and in this
trial, Williams feared, most likely his last.
Testimony in 
State of Florida v.
Samuel Shepherd, Walter Irvin, Charles
Greenlee, Ernest E. Thomas
 began after a
recess on Friday, September 2, 1949.
Hundreds of spectators packed into the
Lake County Court House, among them a
few dozen blacks who filed up to the
balcony to a section reserved for
coloreds. A few days earlier Mabel
Norris Reese had written a news piece
under the header “Women Beg for


--- PAGE 605 ---
Reserved Seats at Trial,” but it was
mostly white Lake County men who filled
the wooden benches. Ramona Lowe
observed: “Through sentiment whipped-
up by Florida daily newspapers, the trial
has become a side-show for thrill-seeking,
sadistic country-bred whites.”
Williams and Hill shuddered at the
entrance into the courtroom of steely-eyed
“Bay Lake Crackers with snuff in their
mustache,” local men who had been
deputized as security police, whose
presence was more menacing than
reassuring. It was not unlikely that security
included some of the very same men who
had descended on the courthouse less than
two months before with Coy Tyson and
Willie Padgett, although Williams could


--- PAGE 606 ---
not be sure. When he spotted Willis
McCall—strutting around the courtroom
like a man in his home at Thanksgiving,
shaking hands and welcoming in friends
and family—Williams felt a pang of
apprehension. McCall “always
intimidated me,” the lawyer said.
Around 2 p.m., the clang of an iron gate
quieted the crowd. A door behind the
judge’s bench swung open. Slowly, the
sheriff’s deputies Yates and Campbell
paraded the three solemn young black men
to their seats at the defense table, and the
people of Lake County got their first look
at the men accused of raping Norma
Padgett. Weeks earlier, at the arraignment,
Mabel Norris Reese had noted for her
readers that Irvin was wearing no shoes,


--- PAGE 607 ---
his “bare feet making a soft, pattering
noise as he climbed the steps,” but he
appeared at the trial in shoes and, like his
codefendants, dressed in a suit. That
September afternoon the temperature had
reached the low nineties and a large
electric pedestal fan whirred behind the
witness box, the sound promising to
drown out any quiet testimony. On the
judge’s desk lay a pile of cedar sticks;
seated, Truman Futch pulled a knife from
a drawer and demonstrated, as he would
throughout the trial, how he’d gotten
nicknamed “the Whittlin’ Judge.”
Oppressive heat, old Southern lawyers in
red suspenders, whittling judges, a
fearsome sheriff, and a crowd of racist,
tobacco-stained crackers on the benches


--- PAGE 608 ---
behind him—“it was,” Williams
observed, “almost to me like a story that I
was living through and these were
caricatures that I was being exposed to.”
A glance up to the balcony did not allay
any of Williams’s misgivings. In the
somber faces of the blacks he read
resignation mixed with fear—fear of
McCall, “of what he might do and of what
he could get away with”—and in no face
could he see an expectation of justice.
“They were just there watching.”
Then Williams spotted the girl: Norma
Padgett, seated in the front row beside her
husband, her blond locks newly curled,
lips tightly pursed. There would be no
mercy, either, for the Groveland Boys.
The state attorney called his first


--- PAGE 609 ---
witness, whose sole purpose was to attest
that he had seen Ernest Thomas on the
afternoon of July 26 and that Ernest
Thomas had been and was in fact dead.
Williams had suspected that the
prosecution had a “dying declaration all
rigged,” but Hunter was content with the
testimony. The defense had no questions,
and with one of the Groveland Boys out of
the way, the state turned to their next
witness, the twenty-three-year-old
husband of the rape victim, Willie
Padgett. Hunter led Padgett through what
seemed to Williams a tightly scripted
scenario: how Willie had been beaten and
robbed on the side of a road near
Okahumpka; how he had come to his
senses just long enough to see four black


--- PAGE 610 ---
men drive away with his wife; how he’d
driven miles, to Dean’s filling station in
Leesburg, where he told the attendant,
Curtis Howard, about the attack and
abduction. Finding room for doubt in
Willie Padgett’s story, Williams
whispered to Akerman before the Florida
lawyer began cross-examination. By the
end of his testimony, Padgett had
conceded that of the four defendants he
was able to identify only two, Shepherd
and Irvin, from that night. It was a small
gain for the defense, one to be lost in a
matter of minutes.
Hunter next called Norma Padgett. Her
chin held high, shoulders back, she
strolled more than strode to the witness
box. She was wearing a dark party dress


--- PAGE 611 ---
with a large corsage flower at the hip, and
into an ample white belt Norma had
tucked a kind of homemade, sleeveless
bolero, the bright, wide fabric slung up
and over both her shoulders like wings on
an angel costume. To Williams and Hill,
she seemed to be “promenading” with no
sense of shame or discomfort before the
court, as if her purpose were to command,
and relish, the attention of several hundred
Lake County men rather than to testify that
she, a white girl still in her teens, had
been recently raped by four black men. If
initially baffled by the girl’s appearance
and demeanor, Williams in a moment
recalled the publicity that another Lake
County girl, Lois Driver, had recently
been gleaning in the local and national


--- PAGE 612 ---
press. Having won a few local beauty
contests—Miss Merry Christmas as well
as various agriculturally related titles, like
Tangerine Queen—Lois had achieved at
least countywide fame when 
Ladies’
Home Journal
 began scouring small
towns across America for a series of
covers called “Undiscovered American
Beauties.” The magazine urged
photographers around the country to be on
the lookout at the beach, football game,
church, or high school for a girl “whose
face would launch a thousand ships or sell
a million magazines.” The 
Journal
promised it would pay top dollar to
photographers and models who made the
cut in the highly subjective business of
selecting one beautiful girl each month


--- PAGE 613 ---
from thousands of entries. In July 1949, as
every girl in Lake County was aware,
whether with admiration or envy or
aspirations, the Undiscovered American
Beauty on the cover of 
Ladies’ Home
Journal
 was Lois Driver. Franklin
Williams was also aware of it, because J.
E. Driver, Lois’s machinist father, had
been summoned and questioned for jury
duty on the Groveland rape case (he was
not selected). And Norma Padgett was
making the most of her moment.
Just as he had led Willie Padgett
through his testimony, Jesse Hunter
prompted Norma. Evidently he had
coached her, too. When he asked Norma
to “rise and point out” her rapists, she
seemed first to take a few seconds to


--- PAGE 614 ---
compose herself for the task as she
directed her gaze toward the defendants.
She glanced steadily at each of them in
turn before she stood and straightened her
dress. She eyeballed the Groveland Boys,
then, as Williams recalled, Norma slowly
raised an arm and extended her index
finger, which, again in turn, she pointed at
each of the defendants as unhurriedly she
drawled: “The nigger Shepherd . . . the
nigger Irvin . . . the nigger Greenlee.”
Williams declared it “probably the most
dramatic moment in the trial,” and he, like
everyone else in the courtroom, had been
riveted by her every gesture. “Christ,” he
later recalled, “you could have cut the air
with a knife.” What Mabel Norris Reese
saw in Williams’s eyes as he followed


--- PAGE 615 ---
Norma’s testimony, and indeed throughout
the trial, was bitter resentment and hatred.
In her articles on the trial, Reese
described Williams as being “resentful-
eyed” and having eyes “that were so filled
with hate as he sat in that courtroom that
you could see it, you could feel it.”
Akerman and Williams had agreed that
the cross-examination of Norma Padgett
should be restricted to an attempt to raise
reasonable doubt in regard to the
identification of the defendants rather than
to pursue the possibility that no rape had
occurred—a futile tack in light of the
admissible evidence. Akerman questioned
both the accuracy of the time line in the
prosecution’s case—she couldn’t be
accurate, Norma told him, as she “wasn’t


--- PAGE 616 ---
wearing a watch”—and Norma’s
apparently absolute certainty as to the
identity of her attackers. Norma Padgett
proved to be unflappable, however. She
left the witness box as confidently as
she’d taken it. Whatever Mabel Norris
Reese may have read in Williams’s eyes,
in his mind he knew that Norma Padgett
had just sent the Groveland Boys to the
electric chair. That delicate white finger
of hers had as good as flicked the switch
itself.
If Norma Padgett had sent the
Groveland Boys to their deaths, the state’s
next witness was ready to bury their
bodies. Deputy James Yates testified that
the tire tracks on James Shepherd’s car
exactly matched those that were found in


--- PAGE 617 ---
the roadbed outside of Okahumpka, at the
very spot where Norma Padgett claimed
she’d been raped. Using FBI procedures
as a guide, Yates had made “plaster Paris
casts” to determine the match. He had also
made casts of footprints found at the
roadside where Willie Padgett claimed to
have been beaten and robbed; the
footprints proved to be an exact match to
Walter Irvin’s shoes. In cross-
examination, Akerman questioned Yates’s
qualifications as an expert in tire-track
and footprint analysis, but the deputy
remained confident in his abilities. Yates
noted that he must be doing it right
because “the sheriff has kept me for 4
years.” It was all the jury needed to hear.
The sun had set on Tavares, and Judge


--- PAGE 618 ---
Futch, who had whittled through the first
day of the trial, declared a recess. The
jury exited the courtroom with the bailiff,
who would, as the judge had instructed,
“feed you and sleep you.” Ted Poston
rushed to find a phone so that he could
call in a story on the day’s proceedings to
the news desk at the 
New York Post
. In the
stairwell he had to run a gauntlet of
deputies and other Lake County men
armed and ready to provide security.
Before he got to a phone, without any
warning or cause he got “jostled by a
couple of hoodlums,” as he put it, and one
of them “accidentally” stepped on his
eyeglasses. Poston hadn’t brought a
second pair.
The trial resumed at 9:30 a.m. on


--- PAGE 619 ---
Saturday, September 3, and Jesse Hunter
had some cleaning up to do. He first
called Groveland bootlegger and 
bolita
dealer Henry Singleton to the stand. On
the night of July 15, Singleton claimed, a
young man whom he recognized to be
Charles Greenlee showed up at his house,
supposedly to buy some numbers for a
Cuba game. Singleton was suspicious, he
told Hunter. Nearly certain that Greenlee
was casing his home in order to come
back and rob him, Singleton chased the
boy off, and shortly thereafter he himself
went out for a drive. That’s when he had
by chance run into Samuel Shepherd, and
Walter Irvin was with him. So it was that
Henry Singleton had, in rather a bland
narrative, put all three defendants in


--- PAGE 620 ---
Groveland in the early evening of July 15.
He had also put himself, and the sheriff,
back in control of the county’s 
bolita
business. It was Hunter’s next witness
who put the now-deceased Ernest Thomas
in Groveland on the fifteenth. His mother,
Ethel Thomas, who had been in the lockup
during the days preceding the trial and had
no doubt had time to contemplate the
future of her business, the Blue Flame, had
decided to cooperate with the sheriff and
state attorney. She testified that her son
had gone to a party in town that evening.
Proceeding toward the close of the
prosecution’s case, Hunter introduced the
state’s last piece of evidence: a July 1949
almanac, by which he showed the jury that
the moon had risen at 10:36 p.m. on the


--- PAGE 621 ---
fifteenth day of the month and argued that,
therefore, the sky was bright enough for
Willie and Norma Padgett to easily
identify their attackers. Akerman objected
on the grounds that the evidence was
irrelevant, since the almanac indicated
only that the moon rose at 10:36 p.m. in
St. Louis, Missouri. The defense might
have enjoyed the moment if the judge,
whittling at a cedar stick, had not
responded, “Objection is overruled.”
So confident of his case was Hunter by
this point that he abstained from calling
his remaining witnesses. “I see no purpose
in introducing them,” he said. “Therefore,
the State rests.” Futch called a recess until
1:30 p.m. that afternoon, and Williams and
Akerman decided they’d try to clear their


--- PAGE 622 ---
heads and review their strategy in the
Florida air.
Just outside the courtroom, the defense
attorneys, exhausted by work and nerves,
encountered an overly friendly clerk, who
asked, “Well, Mr. Williams, how do you
like the way the trial is going?” The ill-
timed question received an unconsidered
reply. “It’s the worst framed-up case I
have ever seen in my years of practice!”
Williams snapped.
Williams later elaborated on the frame.
“It was like a story,” he said. “Like a
Hollywood story. They had it down pat.
They had Irvin’s shoe prints. Imagine
making a cast at the scene of the crime.
That only happens in movies. You know,
of course [they] could make a cast. They


--- PAGE 623 ---
had taken his shoes when they arrested
him. They had the handkerchief that
belonged to either Irvin or Shepherd
which they claimed they had tied over
their license plate to hide their license
plate. Come on. That is too pat. They had
the tire mark. Of course, they had the tire
mark. They had the car. They made the tire
mark and they made it so you have this
country jury impressed by all of this high
falutin’ FBI type evidence. . . . So, we
were up against what appeared to be a
firm case . . . that I knew or suspected had
been totally manufactured. . . . What were
you going to do?”
They were going to put the Groveland
Boys on the stand. They had no other
choice.


--- PAGE 624 ---
Williams and Akerman took their seats
at the defense table. The iron gate behind
Judge Futch’s desk clanged, the door
swung open, and their clients, escorted by
deputies, shuffled in. Samuel Shepherd
seated himself next to Williams; his
brother James and his mother were sitting,
attentive, in the balcony. Williams
recalled the father, the snakebites on
Henry Shepherd’s legs, and the sweat, the
toil, he dedicated to draining that
swampland in Bay Lake so he could plant
fields all his own and build a life for
himself and his family away from the
citrus groves; his son Samuel had gone off
to war, come back, found some trouble,
and now the father had lost his house and
farm, and his boy was looking at the


--- PAGE 625 ---
electric chair and . . . Williams was
looking into Samuel Shepherd’s eyes,
telling him that Mr. Akerman was going to
call him to the box, ask him some
questions, and that Samuel should tell the
court plain what happened that night.
When Williams had finished with his
instructions, Shepherd turned to him and
earnestly offered an instruction of his
own. “Mr. Williams,” he said, “when the
trial is over, be careful.”
More words followed, most of them
lost by the dazed attorney after he’d heard
Shepherd say that someone was “going to
get that nigger lawyer.”
Where did he hear that? Williams
needed to know.
“Willis McCall,” Shepherd told him.


--- PAGE 626 ---
“Said he was going to get that nigger
lawyer.”
Williams spotted McCall across the
court, and he saw the monster in the man
who, behind the badge of sheriff, had
“murdered blacks” in Lake County.
Williams had heard the stories, like that of
the 
bolita
 dealer’s widow who’d
collected a sum of money on her
husband’s insurance policies—money that
McCall claimed was owed to him. He
went so far as to have the woman arrested,
and when she still refused to pay McCall
the alleged debt, she fell to her death from
the fourth-floor window of the county jail.
Williams himself had seen evidence of the
beatings on the bodies of his clients, had
seen the bloodstained sheets and the blood


--- PAGE 627 ---
on the floor in the cells. By the sheriff’s
doings as much as anyone’s in the state
attorney’s case, in a matter of hours three
black men would be convicted by the
court and almost surely sentenced to
death.
Judge Futch brought the court to order.
Akerman called Samuel Shepherd to the
witness box, and Shepherd recounted less
plainly than discursively what happened
in the course of his night out with Walter
Irvin: a narrative about a broken car, a
stop for gas, drinking beers in Eatonville,
the drive home to get some sleep. Hunter,
confident of the state’s case, did not
bother to cross-examine Shepherd, or
Irvin, whose testimony corresponded with
Shepherd’s, though he spared the court the


--- PAGE 628 ---
side stories.
Charles Greenlee was called last.
Seated in the box, the look on his face
suggesting perpetual shock, the “tall,
gangly, overgrown country kid,” who to
Williams seemed to be “just this side of
illiterate,” adjusted his posture and, with a
glance toward Akerman, waited for the
questions to begin. As far as Williams
could tell, the boy “did not know what the
hell was happening to him,” but he’d
barely begun his testimony when Williams
found himself, literally, on the edge of his
seat. In a naive, country-bumbling way,
with a childlike attention to detail as
amusing as it was engaging, Greenlee
recounted the events of his first-ever
weekend in Groveland. His “melodious


--- PAGE 629 ---
Southern drawl” at once countered and
heightened the suspense and danger as
well as the gallows humor in his
narrative, which frequently elicited
appreciative laughter from the benches
and the gallery. His guileless, animated
delivery prompted Akerman to allow the
boy simply to tell “the truth”—because, as
Charles reminded his attorney, “if you just
tell the good white folks the truth and
make them understand, then everything
will be all right”—rather than to lead him
through his testimony with questions.
When Charles’s narrative brought him
to the Groveland jail, with him still not
knowing that the Bay Lake men had
suspected him of being one of Norma
Padgett’s rapists, he recalled (as the trial


--- PAGE 630 ---
transcripts record):
I said to myself, “What’s coming off
here?” And then the man what put
me in jail, he came and went in the
office, there. I guess it was an office.
It was a door. And men kept going in
the office and coming out. Kept
going in and coming out. Kept going
in and coming out. Directly an old
fellow come in there. I don’t know
who he was. He about the size of Mr.
Hunter, and looked like him but I
don’t think it was. I don’t think he
was as old as Mr. Hunter. He say,
“Nigger, you sitting up here and
telling a lie like that,” say, “I ought
to go get my shotgun and put you
through this hole and shoot you.” I


--- PAGE 631 ---
say, “What about, Mister?” He say,
“You know what I’m talking about.”
Well, he walked on off. Because, I
said to myself, “Something must be
wrong around here, somewhere.” I
know I hadn’t done nothing.
Greenlee testified that he’d never
before known or seen his codefendants
Shepherd and Irvin until he met them in
jail. Furthermore, he said, he had not seen
the inside of any car that night, which he
had spent at the train depot getting bitten
by mosquitoes while waiting for Ernest
Thomas to come back for him. Instead, the
police had thrown him in jail for loitering
and possession of a gun. It was the next
morning that he began to be afraid,
because more and more men were


--- PAGE 632 ---
gathering outside the jail and he heard
someone say the men outside were going
to kill him. He begged one of his jailers to
“hurry up and take me away from here
somewhere, I don’t care where,” and he
was told that some police would soon
come to move him to a safer jail.
So I was sitting up there waiting for
the cars, and soon a 48 black
Chevrolet pulled up in front of the
cell and mens started crowding back
around in there. One fellow say, “If
you’ll lay the keys down, I’ll go in
there and get him.” Another fellow
say, “If you’ll just tell me that I can
have him if I get him.” And people
kept talking, questioning and telling


--- PAGE 633 ---
what they would do if they had me.
One fellow drug a big knife in there
about this long. Said to me, “Stand
up to the door.” I told him, say,
“Mister, I ain’t done nothing and me
standing up to the door wouldn’t
make sense if you want to joog me
with that big old knife.” So he said,
“All right.” But say, “You’ll get it
first and last anyhow, you little
black so-and-so.” So I sat back
down on the bed. Well, I was about
to cry, because I didn’t know what
was happening, all of these people
around there going to kill me, and I
didn’t have no money and Santa Fe
was a hundred miles from there and
that’s a long ways of walking and I


--- PAGE 634 ---
didn’t have no money.
“Would you have been hanging around
down there in Groveland if you had done
something like that, Charlie?” Akerman
asked.
“Me? If I’d even thought something like
that had happened, I would have been on
my way back to Santa Fe or somewhere.”
The defense rested.
Once again, the prosecution chose not to
cross-examine. Akerman and Hunter
discussed a short break to prepare for
closing arguments and Judge Futch called
a recess until 4 p.m. Outside the
courtroom, Williams bumped into “the
white lady with the bebop glasses,”
Mabel Norris Reese, again. The trial
wasn’t over yet, but Reese couldn’t resist


--- PAGE 635 ---
commenting on the sixteen-year-old’s
performance in the witness box.
“Charlie Greenlee’s such a good actor,”
she called out. Williams was stunned.
Here was a boy on trial for his life. He’d
just told a packed courtroom that a train
had killed his baby sister and his mother
cried so much he had to leave home.
Deputies had nearly beaten him to death a
few weeks ago and he’d been in jail ever
since. And now his aged father, “eyes
filled with grief,” was forced to sit by his
son each day in court and watch him being
led away in handcuffs.
“When are you going to put him on
Broadway, Franklin?”
It was always “Franklin” with Mabel.
Never “Mr. Williams.” The lawyer had


--- PAGE 636 ---
had enough.
“You know what your problem is,”
Williams sneered. “You’ve got a business
here, and you’re trying to out-cracker the
crackers.”
Mabel was taken aback by yet another
unpleasant exchange with the New York
lawyer. That night she would drive back
to her office and begin typing her
coverage of the trial, sarcastically
comparing the NAACP’s defense to
nothing more than fictitious theater. Under
the headline “At Long Last, the Groveland
Story Is Put into Production,” Mabel
lauded “Star Greenlee” and noted that the
boy “brought in the finale as would Negro
singer Paul Robeson emphasize the
crescendo of a song,” so much so that he


--- PAGE 637 ---
“would have made a Broadway critic cut
the rope of racial prejudice to give him a
rave notice in his column.”
Ted Poston followed Jesse Hunter out
of the courtroom, and couldn’t get Norma
Padgett out of his mind. “Except for the
slender, petulant blonde’s own
testimony,” Poston noted, “there was not
one bit of evidence placed in the record of
the three-day trial at Tavares to support
her story that four Negroes raped her
successively on the back seat of a 1946
Mercury car in the early morning hours of
July 16.” Poston had heard she’d been
examined by a doctor, yet no doctor was
called to testify. Approaching Hunter,
Poston asked why.
“Not necessary,” Hunter snapped. “She


--- PAGE 638 ---
said she was raped, didn’t she?”
“Mr. Hunter didn’t want to embarrass
Mrs. Padgett by bringing out all those
details,” an assistant prosecutor added.
Poston noted that the state did not
produce any evidence of “possible stains,
spots or any other evidence which must
have accompanied a four-way rape in the
same corner of the car’s back seat.” One
spectator even said so much to Poston
while they were in the “Colored” men’s
room on the courthouse floor.
“If that white lady was raped like she
said, then it was the cleanest rape in Lake
County or the cleanest one anywhere.”
Heading back into court, Poston spotted
bolita
 dealer and witness for the
prosecution Henry Singleton, “bowing and


--- PAGE 639 ---
cringing behind a deputy sheriff—more
frightened even then of the vengeance of
his own people. . . .” He even overheard
the deputy discussing Greenlee’s
testimony in the corridor. “Too bad that
Greenlee nigger got mixed up in this. You
know, he’s the kind of nigger you like. It’s
a shame Miss Padgett had already said he
was there.”
When court resumed, Jesse Hunter was
eager to finish off the defendants. He told
Judge Futch, “I won’t take very long, Your
Honor,” then leaned into the jury box and
assured the jurors that whatever questions
they might have about who was where and
at what time, they should remember that “a
lot can happen with a good fast car and
vicious men.” He informed the jury that


--- PAGE 640 ---
“no human being ever went through such a
terrible night as this girl did,” then
reminded them that the defense did not
call any witnesses to prove Shepherd and
Irvin were in Orlando that night “because
those two men were not in Orlando that
terrible night—they were out on the road
to Center Hill raping this woman!”
Akerman rose to counter with a
reasonable-doubt argument, claiming that
the prosecution’s time line defied logic.
Greenlee had been apprehended twenty
miles away at the same time that Norma
Padgett would have been attacked.
Without Charles Greenlee on the scene,
there was no gun. Akerman closed by
telling the jury that in most cases he’d
tried, criminals fled after a crime of this


--- PAGE 641 ---
nature. Yet these three defendants did
nothing of the sort after the alleged crime.
Williams didn’t think the jury would be
out very long. Earlier in the trial, they had
requested to see the inside of the car
where Padgett was alleged to have been
raped. Williams had held out some hope
that perhaps they were considering exactly
how this “grim game of ‘Musical Chairs’
could take place” in the small backseat of
the car. But Futch declined, stating that the
request was “a little out of line.” There
weren’t going to be any surprises, and
Futch had kept a tight rein on the trial.
Williams thought Akerman’s closing
argument was quite good, given the lack of
time to prepare this case and the restraints
Judge Futch had imposed on them


--- PAGE 642 ---
throughout the trial. But Williams’s praise
of Akerman did not compare to the praise
Judge Futch had heaped on Jesse Hunter.
“Jesse,” Futch said, shaking the
lawyer’s hand, “I have never heard a
better argument in all my life.”
At 7:25 p.m., the twelve white Lake
County men were sent out to deliberate
and Poston darted down the block to “the
one long distance phone booth” in range of
the courthouse. He put a call in to the 
New
York Post
 news desk. He was told city
editor Jimmy Graham was nervous, pacing
the floor like “an expectant father”
because he hadn’t heard from Poston in
hours. Graham had even phoned Governor
Warren, hoping to secure some protection
for his reporter.


--- PAGE 643 ---
“Keep your shirt on,” Poston said.
“There’s absolutely nothing to worry
about. Tell Jimmy the verdict will be in
any minute, and I’ll be heading for
Orlando—40 miles away—later tonight.”
Poston wasn’t the only person on a
phone near the courthouse while the jury
was deliberating. William Bogar, Sheriff
Willis McCall’s fellow Klansman who
had been one of the night riders during the
rioting in Groveland in July, received a
call from another member of the Apopka
Klavern at around the same time. The
Klansman told Bogar that Sheriff McCall
“needed help” to “run the negro lawyers.”
A bunch of them were getting together to
meet in an open space near a house off
Route 441 near Lake Ola, where they’d


--- PAGE 644 ---
wait for the car.
Word began to spread that the jurors
had reached a verdict, and at 9:26 p.m.
they took their seats in the jury box and
waited for Judge Futch to bring the court
to order. Before the verdict was read,
Futch warned that there would be “no
demonstration, handclapping or anything
of that sort,” and that all spectators were
to remain in the courtroom until the sheriff
and his deputies removed the defendants.
The judge asked the clerk of courts to read
the verdict. Greenlee’s eyes followed the
paper that was carried and passed from
the jury foreman to the clerk.
We the jury find the defendants
guilty. So say we all, By majority
recommendation of mercy for


--- PAGE 645 ---
Charles Greenlee.
Charles A. Blaze Foreman
Mabel Norris Reese noted, “Hope was
gone from the eyes of Shepherd and Irvin.
They were looking past the jury as they
gazed forward—past them to their journey
to the electric chair.”
There was no outburst, just silence.
Franklin Williams reached back and
gripped the hand of Charles Greenlee.
“Then a smile—a smile of boyish triumph
came over the face of the Negro boy,”
Mabel wrote. “The play was done.
Charles Greenlee had no reason to be
acting then. He was accepting the plaudits
due any one who kept an audience
spellbound.”
A recommendation of mercy meant that


--- PAGE 646 ---
the sixteen-year-old would likely spend
the rest of his life in jail. The defense had
no interest in having the jury polled. They
needed to move.
A
LEX, PSST, ALEX,”
 came a hiss from
across the court. It was Judge Futch,
informing the two white lawyers for the
defense that they could slip out of the
courthouse through his private chambers.
Akerman quickly requested that sentencing
be delayed for three days so that he could
file a motion for a new trial. Futch granted
the request, seemingly more concerned
with getting the lawyers safely out of his
courtroom. As Shepherd, Irvin, and
Greenlee were taken away in shackles,


--- PAGE 647 ---
Akerman and Price retreated behind the
judge’s desk. Hunter stayed in the
courtroom, urging spectators to “go home
quietly and not to cause any trouble.”
Williams could hear the iron gate clang
behind him as the Groveland Boys were
led back upstairs by Sheriff Willis
McCall. Hunter approached Williams to
shake his hand, and Williams wanted
Hunter to know one thing, off the record,
as he watched the defendants leave the
courtroom. Those boys, Williams told
him, had been severely beaten by the
sheriff and his deputies.
“I don’t doubt it at all,” Hunter replied.
With nothing more to say, Williams and
Hill were escorted by highway patrolmen
downstairs and out the back door, where


--- PAGE 648 ---
they emerged in the back lot behind the
courthouse, right at the spot where McCall
had been met by a mob of angry Bay Lake
men who demanded to search the jail for
Norma Padgett’s rapists back in July. It
was hot and humid and dark and quiet, and
as they made their way to Hill’s car, the
patrolmen turned and walked in the other
direction.
“Aren’t you going to escort us to our
car?” Williams asked.
“No, my job is over,” one cop said.
“The trial is finished.”
It was the first time Williams had truly
felt fear during the case. He’d been
intimidated by Willis McCall, but “I was
young enough and I guess silly enough not
to be afraid of him.”


--- PAGE 649 ---
The two lawyers crossed the lawn just
as spectators were leaving the court, and
they hopped into Hill’s 1948 sedan. Hill
tried to light a cigarette, but the car’s
lighter had started smoking. Williams
reached over and knocked the lighter to
the floor, burning his finger. Somebody
had tried to short-circuit the car and
“jammed that cigarette lighter in just a few
minutes before we got to it.” The two had
promised to give Ted Poston and Ramona
Lowe a ride back to Orlando, and they
waited nervously in the car as spectators
came their way.
“Boy, nigger boy,” said one man with
his wife and daughter as he passed by.
More and more of them were filing past
the car and Williams was past being edgy.


--- PAGE 650 ---
“Now where the hell is Poston and
Lowe?” he muttered.
Ted Poston was just coming down from
the Jim Crow balcony when he touched
Lowe’s arm and guided her into a corridor
where they almost bumped into Norma
Padgett, who clenched her jaw and glared
at the Negro reporters. Poston reached the
lobby, but he’d lost Lowe in the jostling
and “hostile sea of white faces.” He took
a side exit and with his jacket slung over
one shoulder, he heard Horace Hill, idling
his car with the lights out, calling his name
softly.
“Hurry up and get in,” Hill told him.
“Jesus,” Poston remarked. “I am scared
stiff.”
“Where’s Ramona?” Williams asked.


--- PAGE 651 ---
Poston opened the door. He had to go
back for her, but Hill tried to stop him.
“Don’t argue now, Horace,” Williams
snapped. “Let him go.”
“Look, Frank,” Hill said. “You’re not in
New York now. These clay-eating
crackers aren’t joking. I know. I wasn’t
born down here for nothing.”
Poston raced back across the lawn and
into the courthouse, where he spotted the
heavyset Lowe talking to James Shepherd.
“Come on,” he said, leading her back to
the car.
“Now you’ve done it,” Hill scolded,
telling the reporters that the state patrol’s
escort was gone.
Even Williams wasn’t pleased at having
to wait. “They blame 
us
 for getting


--- PAGE 652 ---
Greenlee out of the chair,” he said. “You
both might have had a chance.”
Hill continued to curse Poston and
Lowe for their “damfoolishness” until they
were able to make it out of Tavares. The
traffic was thick until most of the cars
peeled north toward Eustis, and they got
onto Route 441, where the road opened
up. Hill was moving the car along at 60
miles an hour where the road curled south
toward Lake Ola. They were finally able
to breathe and even managed some
gallows humor about Hill having to live
down here with these crackers, but the
joking came to an abrupt end when they
spotted two cars parked on both sides of
the highway, facing Orlando. Hill shot
past them, but “the two parked cars lighted


--- PAGE 653 ---
up” and a third car followed behind.
Hill put the pedal to the floor and was
doing 80-plus miles an hour, passing
slower-moving traffic, when Williams
noticed two cars coming up on them, with
lights flashing.
“Jesus Christ,” Williams said. “There is
somebody behind us.”
Ahead, they spotted a man in the road
waving a white handkerchief or a cloth,
but Hill had no intention of stopping and
the man jumped aside as they passed.
Williams spotted three cars in pursuit and
in the first car, the silhouette of three men
in the front seat. The one in the middle,
Williams noted, was wearing a cowboy
hat—“the kind that Willis McCall wore.”
At high speeds, all four cars plowed


--- PAGE 654 ---
through a red light.
“Oh, shit,” Williams shrieked. “This is
it.”
Williams had been through a similar
and harrowing experience before, when
the car he’d been driving in hit a patch of
ice and skidded out of control back in his
college days at Lincoln. The crash had
been so horrific it made the news, but
Williams survived. Still, that car had been
totaled, and Williams had been going only
at half the speed that Hill was doing.
Ramona began sobbing. “Oh, God. It’s
my fault. I got you into this . . . I should’ve
—”
“Shut up!” Poston yelled.
In silence, the sedan rocketed toward
Apopka, with Williams calmly providing


--- PAGE 655 ---
updates. “He’s picking up, Horace.”
Poston had picked up some “second
hand make-shift glasses” but was grateful
he could see “no further than two feet
ahead.” Three times the city desk at the
Post
 had turned down his request to cover
the Little Scottsboro case, but he
persisted, and now he was back in one of
those moments that had haunted him every
time he went south. They were “hurtling
forward in a stygian blackness,” as Hill
cut the lights, “trusting only the light of the
Florida moon.” He’d reached 90 miles an
hour, but he hadn’t lost his Klan pursuers,
and he ever so slightly zigzagged on the
road so they wouldn’t shoot the tires. The
cars behind them were close enough that
they could hear the drivers honking their


--- PAGE 656 ---
horns. Coming into lighted downtown
Apopka, Hill ran a few red lights and
“missed by inches” a pickup truck near a
movie house. Williams noted that one of
the cars behind nearly crashed, but
straightened up, and “one of the crackers
was leaning out the front window.”
“I guess this is it, then,” Williams said.
“No cracker would endanger other
crackers—not to mention his own life and
limb—just to put a scare into a bunch of
Negroes. I guess they really intend to take
us.”
They were still on Route 441, past
Apopka and heading south to Orlando,
picking up speed again, when Ramona
Lowe screamed.
“They’re not back there now!”


--- PAGE 657 ---
The Klan cars had peeled off, perhaps
unwilling to take the chase any farther.
Williams reached for a cigarette, but Hill
kept the speed up until he was sure he
wasn’t being followed. They reached the
familiar Wigwam Hotel, with thirty-one
large white teepees off South Orange
Blossom Trail, which Hill passed before
turning left into Parramore, the black
section of town, where they stopped in
front of a little hotel.
“I have never been so happy to see so
many black folks in my life,” Williams
thought.
Poston was sitting quietly in the back,
where they all looked at each other in
silence. He was glad his good glasses
were broken, he later wrote. “I couldn’t


--- PAGE 658 ---
see my own shame, which must have been
reflected in their eyes.”
Hill parked the car and they entered the
hotel, only to go right out through the back
door and up to the woman’s house where
Williams was staying. They grabbed a
drink and sat for about an hour. Once
they’d settled their nerves some, Williams
and Hill got back into the car to drive to
Akerman’s office. “We’ve got to get to
work on that appeal,” Williams said.
When they arrived, Akerman and Price
were already going over the case files.
Williams told them the story of being
chased by three cars at 90 miles an hour
through Lake and Orange counties.
“Aw, you have got to be kidding,”
Akerman said.


--- PAGE 659 ---
“For Christ’s sake,” Williams told him,
he wasn’t kidding.


--- PAGE 660 ---
CHAPTER 12: ATOM
SMASHER
Flat Top, also known as the “death house,” at
Florida State Prison in Raiford. (
Courtesy
of the State Archives of Florida
)


--- PAGE 661 ---
W
ILLIS MCCALL HAD
 decided the time
had come for the Groveland Boys to “get
right with the Lord.” He’d had his
deputies drag Walter Irvin and Samuel
Shepherd to his office below the Tavares
jail. The two rapists would soon be
transported back to Florida State Prison in
Raiford, this time to death row, where
they’d be waiting for their date with the
electric chair. Now, though, while he had
the chance, McCall wanted to have a little
conversation with the two boys. He
preferred there be no lawyers present.
McCall pointed toward the wire
recorder. He suggested to the boys that the
time had come for them to clear their
consciences; that it couldn’t hurt to make a


--- PAGE 662 ---
statement, since they’d soon be heading to
the chair anyway. Shepherd and Irvin both
refused, both of them stating, as they had
in court, that they were innocent. McCall
looked them hard in the eyes; neither man
flinched. The sheriff had them taken back
to their cells. They’d be gone from Lake
County quick enough, and the only way
they’d be coming back was in a pine box.
With Charles Greenlee, the sheriff
played hardball. He pointed to the wire
recorder on his desk; he told the boy he
wanted a statement. The boy’s eyes darted
from the recorder to the sheriff to the
ceiling, a wall. Was he going to be beaten,
he wanted to know, “if he didn’t say what
the sheriff wanted to hear.” McCall
fumed. No, he told him, not beaten—


--- PAGE 663 ---
killed.
The sixteen-year-old was sufficiently
intimidated: “He was going to hand me
over to the mob,” Charles Greenlee said
later. McCall turned on the wire recorder
and proceeded to lead the prisoner
through a series of simple questions.
Convinced that he could avoid trouble if
he cooperated, the boy responded with the
answers he figured the Big Hat Man
wanted to hear. They were nothing like the
boy’s rambling responses from the
witness box, which prompted twelve
white men on a jury to spare his life. Life
on the chain gang—it galled the sheriff
that the boy had gotten off easy.
“You lied on the witness stand?”
McCall asked.


--- PAGE 664 ---
“Yes, sir.”
“Did you make up that story?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Sometimes it’s better if you tell the
truth about what happened,” McCall said.
“Who went first?”
“Ernest Thomas, I believe.”
“Now, you didn’t take a lot of talking
into, did you?”
“No, sir,” Greenlee replied.
“Why didn’t ya’ll kill the woman?”
“Well, I begged them not to, they were
talking about it.”
Seeing an opportunity to embarrass the
NAACP with a recorded statement by
their defense team’s star witness, he
asked, “Now, did these lawyers talk to
you, did they put you up . . . What did they


--- PAGE 665 ---
say to you?”
Greenlee didn’t bite. “They just asked
us our story. And then they said to don’t
worry, that they were going to defend us,
that they were going to fight for us.”
McCall finished with a string of rapid-
fire questions: “Now nobody has
promised you anything?” “Nobody has
offered you, or made any promises to
you?” “Nobody’s threatened you?”
“You’re not under any threat of any kind?”
“Now you didn’t have to say any of this,
did you?”
“No, sir.” “No, sir.” “No, sir.” “No,
sir.” “No, sir,” came Greenlee’s prompt
replies.
Willis McCall was satisfied. His voice
became quiet, almost reassuring. “I just


--- PAGE 666 ---
wanted to know for my own curiosity
what had really happened there,” he said
slowly. “I just wanted to know for my
own curiosity if you had lied.” Then he
reached across his desk and switched off
the recorder.
Deputies Yates and Campbell led the
lanky boy back to the elevator in the Lake
County Court House—the elevator that
just two months before had taken him
down to the basement where he’d been
cuffed to an overhead pipe and
mercilessly beaten. He’d survived the
question-and-answer session with Sheriff
McCall without a scratch. The deputies
locked him in his cell on the fourth floor.
Yates departed with a sneer.
Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin


--- PAGE 667 ---
watched in silence. The boy sat down. He
buried his face in the palms of his hands;
his body trembled. He began to cry.
S
COTLAND YARD, PLEASE
 Don’t Take Our
Yates.”
Mabel Norris Reese wrote her own
headlines for the 
Mount Dora Topic
, and
she seemed never to tire of advertising the
top-notch detective work of Deputy James
Yates. To his forensic analysis of the tire
tracks and shoe prints at the crime scene
Mabel attributed, in her posttrial
coverage, the sentences to death by
electrocution that the Whittlin’ Judge had
so justly delivered to Samuel Shepherd
and Walter Irvin. The photo of Deputy


--- PAGE 668 ---
Yates standing beside his plaster casts on
the front page of the 
Topic
 was enough to
turn Thurgood Marshall’s stomach, for the
Yates that he saw in the photo was the
sadistic deputy who had severely and
serially beaten the Groveland Boys.
The only good news that Franklin
Williams, on his return to the NAACP
office in New York, had to offer to
Marshall was that Charles Greenlee had
received a life sentence of hard labor:
“An unlettered but articulate 16-year-old
boy literally talked himself out of
Florida’s electric chair,” as one reporter
had written. On all other matters, Judge
Futch had ruled uncompromisingly, and
unsurprisingly, against the defense. He had
not only rejected the motion for a new


--- PAGE 669 ---
trial but also made a point of noting for the
record both that the attorneys for the
defense had had “ample opportunity to
prepare” and that Williams and Akerman
had “inject[ed] the racial question into the
record.” Meanwhile, the “vicious,” in
Williams’s judgment, Mabel Norris Reese
had filled the pages of the 
Mount Dora
Topic
 with her grossly biased coverage of
the trial and its aftermath, which was
spiked with quotes by the self-satisfied
sheriff Willis McCall, such as his
reminder to the residents of Lake County
that “the evidence was overwhelming, all
three confessed.” The reportage galled
Marshall no less than it had Williams.
In Williams’s absence from New York
over the past two months, Marshall had,


--- PAGE 670 ---
as usual, been overwhelmed with
casework, on top of which had been
added the responsibilities attendant to
overseeing, along with Roy Wilkins, the
day-to-day operations at the NAACP, as
Walter White continued to be on leave. In
August, Wilkins, as acting secretary, had
authorized a three-hundred-dollar annual
salary increase for Marshall, but in early
September he wrote to Arthur Spingarn,
“My feeling is that this is not a sufficient
raise” and recommended that the board
approve an additional five hundred
dollars, which brought Marshall’s total
annual salary to $8,500.
Of more immediate concern to
Marshall, and Williams, was funding to
sustain the Groveland Boys case, for, as


--- PAGE 671 ---
Williams had told his people in Florida,
“that Tavares business is only the first
scuffle” and “the real wrestling match is
just begun.” Yet, to date, the NAACP had
pulled in only about fifteen hundred
dollars, mostly in individual contributions
from poor Florida blacks, whereas the
case had already cost more than five
thousand dollars, with “far more costly
appeals ahead.” Roy Wilkins listened
sympathetically to Williams’s pleas and
Ted Poston’s stories, and he took the same
position as Marshall, who had stated
weeks before that the NAACP’s resources
should be “thrown behind the defense of
these boys.” Wilkins affirmed, “We’ll
keep Frank’s promise, although it will
cost at least twenty thousand dollars more


--- PAGE 672 ---
to fight this case up to the Supreme Court.
We’ll get the money somehow.”
“Somehow” was, at least in part, a
speaking tour, and Marshall decided to put
Franklin Williams back on the fund-
raising road, much the way he had when
Williams traveled the country with the
blinded soldier, Isaac Woodard, a few
years earlier.
Stories of prisoners’ beatings, abusive
interrogations, and legal lynchings in Lake
County had gained editorial attention in
regional and national newspapers after the
Groveland Boys trial, and by mid-
September Ted Poston’s “Horror in the
Sunny South” series had been running
daily in the 
New York Post,
 his story of
the ninety-mile-an-hour chase out of Lake


--- PAGE 673 ---
County by a “bloodthirsty, motorized
mob” having gotten particular, nationwide
attention. The time was ripe with
possibilities. As Williams noted, “We
have provably innocent sons of fine,
decent Negro-American families in the
old tradition. We have burnings. Mob
action . . . A whole community of peace-
loving Negro workers scattered . . .
lawyer intimidation, etc.” And Williams
proved Marshall to be right. His tour of
the Groveland Boys case—which in his
retelling afforded him “all the
characteristics of a dime-store novel . . .
A perfect frameup”—raised more than
$4,600 for the NAACP’s legal defense
fund.
Franklin Williams, at thirty-one years


--- PAGE 674 ---
old, appeared to have unlimited potential.
“He may have been the most gifted
speaker I’ve ever heard,” LDF associate
Jack Greenberg said of him. “His
admirers use the term ‘silver-tongued,’ but
even that didn’t seem adequate to describe
his oratorical skills.” To his detractors,
Williams was “glib,” sometimes brash,
and he could certainly raise Mabel Norris
Reese’s hackles. She’d once suggested
that the New York lawyer might benefit
from living some while in the gentlemanly
South; without courtesy Williams
bellowed, “I would 
not
 live in the South!”
Marshall placed his confidence in
Williams’s silver tongue and sterling
intellect, which the young attorney had
evidenced abundantly in Florida; so, to


--- PAGE 675 ---
Marshall, it only made sense to have
Franklin Williams argue the Groveland
case before the state appellate court: a
necessary step in the appeals process, if a
fruitless one, for the NAACP had no real
hope of a reversal in the state of Florida.
First, though, the LDF had to decide
upon the structure of the Groveland Boys’
appeal. With Shepherd and Irvin both
facing the electric chair, they would surely
join the appeal. Charles Greenlee,
however, had been sentenced to life
imprisonment on a jury recommendation
of mercy. It was therefore entirely
possible that he might win his appeal but
in the retrial be sentenced to death. Not
until 1981 (in an LDF-assisted case) did
the Supreme Court rule that such a


--- PAGE 676 ---
possibility discouraged appeal and
“deterred the assertion of constitutional
rights.” In essence, then, the Supreme
Court interpreted a less-than-death
sentence as an “acquittal” by the jury of
“whatever was necessary to impose the
death sentence” in the first trial, and thus
ruled, under the double jeopardy clause of
the Fifth Amendment, that an appellant
could not subsequently be sentenced to
death in a second trial. In 1949, though, a
legal misstep in the appellate process
could send Charles Greenlee from a work
farm to death row.
Williams’s own experience in Lake
County had convinced him, as he would
convince Marshall, that Greenlee’s life
sentence constituted as much mercy as the


--- PAGE 677 ---
callow, sixteen-year-old defendant or his
defense could expect. Further, any chance
of a second recommendation of mercy
would in all likelihood be forfeit,
Williams reasoned, when, after two or
even three years in prison, before a
retrial, an older, perhaps hardened, less
ingenuous, eighteen- or nineteen-year-old
Charles Greenlee would appear in court.
On the basis of this reasoning, Marshall
and Williams devised their strategy: They
would not include Greenlee’s name in the
appeal; thus, if they should fail, Greenlee
would still escape the electric chair. If, on
the other hand, they should succeed in
winning acquittals for Shepherd and Irvin,
the consummately persuasive Marshall
would strive to get the governor to


--- PAGE 678 ---
commute Greenlee’s sentence. The two
attorneys explained to the boy his
alternatives, and a week after he’d
received his life sentence in Tavares,
Charles Greenlee in his own hand wrote a
letter in which he stated that he understood
fully the choice he was making and that,
while he had consulted with lawyers and
his family, the decision not to join the
appeal was ultimately his. “So if God be
with me,” he wrote, “I’ll pray that he do I
will get a pardon if the other boys go
free.” Shortly thereafter he was shipped
off to Florida State Road Department
Camp No. 16 in Lake City to begin his
sentence of hard labor on a road gang.
Guilty verdicts and death sentences did
not, as Mabel Norris Reese had assured


--- PAGE 679 ---
her readers, return Lake County to its
Edenic bliss. Instead, wave after wave of
undesirable publicity had been inundating
the county ever since the close of the trial,
much to the chagrin of Judge Futch, State
Attorney Hunter, and Sheriff McCall. The
publication nationally of Ted Poston’s
New York Post
 story of the dramatic
posttrial chase in the
 Nation
 especially
pained Hunter, who preferred to believe
that the people of Lake County had
allowed the law to take its course. So, in
an attempt to discredit Poston, Hunter held
a hearing in Tavares, at which he invited
highway patrolmen, police, and deputies
from across Lake County to testify that
they had not seen any cars speeding at
ninety miles an hour toward Orlando on


--- PAGE 680 ---
the night of the trial; and that they had not
seen anyone step on Ted Poston’s glasses,
either; and that Poston had not complained
to any officers about anyone doing so.
McCall remained mostly silent about
the chase, but when Poston’s series on the
Groveland trial earned the reporter a five-
hundred-dollar award from the CIO
American Newspaper Guild, the press-
clipping, image-conscious sheriff was
apoplectic. That guild, he railed, was a
“damn bunch of Communists,” and Poston
was but another “part of the Communistic
element trying to tear down racial
relations; trying to separate the races
instead of bringing them together.” When
Poston won a second prestigious prize for
his series, Mabel Norris Reese took up


--- PAGE 681 ---
her pen; in a letter to the chairman of the
Heywood Broun Award committee she
disputed the accuracy of Poston’s
reporting. The committee was unmoved.
Satisfied though Hunter, Futch, and
McCall were that the hearing had
sufficiently debunked Poston’s story as
pure fiction—after all, why would the
residents of central Florida choose to
believe a communist reporter and lawyer
from the North over the police and
patrolmen of Lake County?—the FBI was
not. The FBI chose to believe Bill Bogar,
Exalted Cyclops of the Apopka Klavern of
the Ku Klux Klan and key informant for
the bureau. Bogar fingered Willis McCall
as the party who’d initiated the storied but
factual chase, and the FBI report indicated


--- PAGE 682 ---
that the Klan had “intended to stop car and
severely flog occupants, with instructions
to leave state.” It also later led to the
indictment of four Klansmen by a federal
grand jury on perjury charges.
The FBI’s investigations into the
Groveland Boys case as well as Poston’s
articles and Williams’s detailed reports to
the NAACP in New York prompted
Marshall again to contact the attorney
general’s office. In a letter informing the
attorney general that a “federal grand jury
investigation is warranted” not just into
the beatings of the Groveland Boys but
also into the actions of deputies James
Yates and Leroy Campbell, Captain
Herlong of the Florida National Guard,
and Flowers Cockcroft, the “leader of an


--- PAGE 683 ---
armed band of civilian men” who had
terrorized Negro residents and burned
their homes, Marshall urgently requested
that the attorney general prosecute these
individuals. He also offered the NAACP’s
complete cooperation.
On September 13, Alexander Campbell
of the U.S. attorney general’s office
informed Herbert S. Phillips, the U.S.
attorney in Tampa, that “there is
substantial evidence . . . that the victims
were beaten and tortured as charged and
that Yates, [Wesley] Evans, and [Leroy]
Campbell played active parts in
submitting the victims to the described
indignities.” Then the strength of
Alexander Campbell’s convictions
wavered. The attorney general’s office, he


--- PAGE 684 ---
said, would “greatly appreciate” if
Phillips would consider whether action
against Yates, Evans, and Campbell
“would be warranted and desirable,”
given the “temper of the people in the
area” as well as their “fears and
apprehensions.” In closing, he issued the
weakest of directives: “[W]e must
consider the need for enforcing the
paramount law,” Campbell wrote, “so
long as such action does not unduly
interfere with local processes.” Campbell
had provided Phillips with the opening he
needed.
In his response to the attorney general’s
office, Phillips stated that, in his opinion,
the defendants had “as fair a trial as any
persons could have,” and that although


--- PAGE 685 ---
Yates, Campbell, and Evans “may be
guilty of committing a serious and
despicable crime,” there were “certain
matters connected with this case that
should be carefully considered before
prosecuting the parties for beating the
alleged victims.” Reluctant to move
forward with the case despite the
overwhelming evidence proffered by the
Justice Department, Phillips stated he
“had serious doubt” that a grand jury
would indict, but if one did, “it might
result in another effort to commit serious
violence on the defendants or victims.” In
other words, any attempt to prosecute
Yates, Campbell, and Evans might only
incite violent parties to further harm the
Groveland Boys, who were in fact rather


--- PAGE 686 ---
fortunate , Phillips reasoned without
irony, to have been beaten when they
might have been lynched, the physical
torture being “a small matter as compared
to what would have happened if the sheriff
had not handled the matter as he did.” A
final point to consider, Phillips wrote,
was that although “a strict interpretation of
the law” protects prisoners from being
coerced into confessing, it was important
to remember that “the confessions were
not used in evidence.”
A
S THE 1940S
 came to a close, Thurgood
Marshall and his LDF attorneys were
about to enter the most productive and
important months of their careers. Cases


--- PAGE 687 ---
were mounting. Aside from his work on
the Groveland appeal, Marshall was
preparing briefs for two cases that for
twelve years the LDF had been waiting to
bring before the Supreme Court. In
addition, Marshall’s mentor Charles
Hamilton Houston, who’d recently
suffered a relapse after a heart attack,
asked his former pupil to take over a case
involving a black woman who had been
denied admission to the University of
Maryland’s School of Nursing.
Fifteen years before, in 1935, Marshall
and Houston together had successfully
sued the University of Maryland to open
the doors of its law school to black
applicant Donald Gaines Murray, and
Marshall now set out to convince the


--- PAGE 688 ---
judge that the striking similarity between
the two cases supported Esther
McCready’s admission. The defendants,
on the other hand, argued dissimilarity,
since the Murray case had involved the
law school whereas Esther McCready
was suing a school of nursing.
“Judge, I agree with that,” Marshall
apparently conceded. “The law school
and the nursing school are different, and I
can 
prove
 it.” The judge leaned forward,
attentive, curious as to the direction of
Marshall’s argument. “I can prove it,”
Marshall continued, “because I went to
law school—and I didn’t come out a
nurse.”
It was the kind of line that Marshall’s
mentor, “Old Iron Shoes,” as he was


--- PAGE 689 ---
known, would never have uttered in court,
but certainly the stroke of wit did not
diminish the strength of Marshall’s
argument. He did his ailing friend and
mentor proud. He won the case for the
plaintiff, and he didn’t even have to file an
appeal with the U.S. Supreme Court. The
Maryland Court of Appeals ruled in
McCready’s favor.
The New York office was meanwhile
buzzing with activity. Busy “all day and
virtually every night at the office,” the
LDF lawyers—Franklin Williams, Jack
Greenberg, and Constance Baker Motley
—were getting the education of a lifetime
as they worked on briefs not just with
Marshall but with academic consultants
and top-flight lawyers who were, in


--- PAGE 690 ---
Greenberg’s words, willing to use their
“considerable talents at something other
than getting rich”: men like Louis H.
Pollak, the former law clerk to Supreme
Court justice Wiley Rutledge. (His father,
Walter Pollak, had worked on the
Scottsboro Boys defense.) Space at the
NAACP offices in the Willkie Building
being limited, Marshall’s lawyers were
able, by his arrangement with the
Association of the Bar of the City of New
York, to work at its library in a landmark
building not far from the Willkie in
midtown Manhattan. After work, Marshall
and his LDF team would often gather at
the Blue Ribbon, a German restaurant just
down the street, to drink “great dark
Munich beer on tap” and, in Marshall’s


--- PAGE 691 ---
case, to eat pigs’ knuckles. After the
knuckles and beer and conviviality,
however, Marshall more often than not
would lead them back to the office for
another all-nighter.
The work, though, was exciting for both
Marshall and his young staff, who could
see in the briefs they were filing for the
Supreme Court real possibilities of
changing the racial face of America. One
such case was that of Heman Marion
Sweatt, a black mail carrier in Houston,
who had been denied admission to the
University of Texas Law School in 1946
solely on the basis of his race. Under
representation by the NAACP, Sweatt
sued the University of Texas on the
grounds that in the state of Texas there


--- PAGE 692 ---
existed no law school for blacks.
Marshall was clear in his intentions: “If
we can force the University of Texas to
admit Heman Sweatt,” he told one
reporter, “we can knock down this whole
theory of separate but equal
accommodations, not only in schools, but
in other public endeavors as well.” In
response to the lawsuit, the University of
Texas president, Theophilus Painter, had
leased the basement of a petroleum
building near the state capitol, dumped a
few boxes of textbooks inside, and
notified the NAACP that there was now a
separate law school for blacks that was
“equal to the University of Texas Law
School.”
When Thurgood Marshall arrived in


--- PAGE 693 ---
Austin in May 1947, he was confident that
he had found the perfect case to strike a
critical blow to legalized segregation.
Eager to hear how Marshall would argue
his case that a pile of textbooks in a
basement did not a law school make,
dozens of white University of Texas law
school students as well as local NAACP
members crowded into the Travis County
courtroom. The bailiffs’ commands that
the white students not sit in the black
section were met by recalcitrance, the
students refusing to budge unless a black
person requested them to move. After the
first recess, with blacks and whites sitting
shoulder to shoulder in the packed
courtroom, the bailiffs gave up trying to
enforce segregated seating.


--- PAGE 694 ---
The University of Texas students booed
when the dean of their own law school
stated under oath that the two law schools
were equal, and they booed when he
defended segregation as a necessity in
order to ensure quality education for
whites. Marshall, though, won their
applause when his witness, the dean at the
University of Pennsylvania Law School,
testified that it was absurd to call an
institution with one student a law school.
Half the show in Marshall’s courtroom
performance was played to those white
students outraged by their university’s
institutionalized segregation and
administrative hypocrisy. It was those
same students who founded in Austin the
nation’s first all-white chapter of the


--- PAGE 695 ---
NAACP.
To no one’s surprise, Judge Roy Archer
—who had laughed out loud in court when
he was shown photographs of the new
Texas law school for blacks—ruled
against Sweatt. So did the Texas Supreme
Court on appeal. Marshall, however, had
had the foresight to focus the legal debate
not on the obvious physical differences
between the two facilities, or on the
paucity of books or absence of a law
library, but rather on the intangible
advantages that a “traditional” law school
would offer as well as the social and
psychological disadvantages of learning in
a segregated environment: points that he
would argue before the U.S. Supreme
Court in 1950.


--- PAGE 696 ---
From the outset of Sweatt v .  Painter,
Marshall’s vision had extended beyond
the case in the Travis County courtroom,
by which he was essentially setting the
juristic stage for the U.S. Supreme Court
to overrule 
Plessy v. Ferguson
, the
landmark 1896 decision upholding racial
segregation. One reporter observing
Marshall in Texas wrote “everyone knows
what the score is . . . and those of us who
sit in the crowded courtroom day after day
realize that we are watching history being
made.”
At the same time that Marshall and his
attorneys were preparing for 
Sweatt v.
Painter
, they were also filing briefs for
another segregation case, 
McLaurin v.
Oklahoma State Regents
, wherein George


--- PAGE 697 ---
McLaurin, who’d already earned his
master’s degree, had applied to the
University of Oklahoma to pursue a doctor
of education degree. The state of
Oklahoma had never been friendly
territory for Marshall and his staff; he’d
lost the Lyons murder case there years
before, and more recently, in 1946, he’d
returned to argue a case on behalf of Ada
Sipuel, who had been denied entry into the
all-white University of Oklahoma Law
School. The Sipuel trial had been nearing
its end when the judge had summoned
Marshall to his chambers; there the judge
had acknowledged the clarity and
intelligence both of Marshall’s arguments
and of his black expert witnesses, all of
which had “ ‘opened [the judge’s] eyes,’


--- PAGE 698 ---
to the wrong of school segregation.”
Marshall could only briefly savor the
moment, for the judge had then returned to
the courtroom and ruled against Sipuel
and the NAACP attorney.
On that same occasion, but away from
the bench, Marshall had had a less
satisfying private exchange with the
assistant attorney general of Oklahoma,
who’d inveighed, “You keep talking about
equal justice, equal facilities. We’re
setting up an atom smasher at the
University of Oklahoma. Do you mean that
we’ve got to set up an atom smasher for
niggers? Everybody knows that niggers
can’t study science.” A year later, when
arguing the Sipuel case on appeal in
Oklahoma, Marshall had again run into the


--- PAGE 699 ---
distasteful assistant attorney general and
again, Marshall recalled, “it was ‘nigger’
this and ‘nigger’ that.” More surprising,
though, had been the assistant attorney
general who in 1948 had arrived in
Washington, D.C., to argue 
Sipuel v.
Board of Regents of Univ. of Okla.
 before
the Supreme Court, especially when, to
Marshall’s dismay, he’d informed the
justices that he was defending segregation
only because of his oath of office and that
if the Court ruled against him, he would
“not only follow the letter, but the spirit of
the law.” Marshall’s shock had ceded to
curiosity when, in the lawyers’ lounge,
he’d asked the attorney “what the hell
happened” to him. “My son’s been a
student at the University of Oklahoma,”


--- PAGE 700 ---
the attorney had replied. “He’s read about
this case. He’s been berating me about it,
including the question whether I really
believe in the U.S. Constitution. He
convinced me that I was a jackass.”
Marshall’s argument of 
Sipuel
 before
the Court was observed by the future
Supreme Court justice John Paul Stevens,
then a law clerk to Associate Justice
Wiley Rutledge: “Thurgood was
respectful, forceful and persuasive—so
persuasive that on the following Monday
—only four days after the argument—the
Court unanimously ruled in Sipuel’s
favor.”
At the time that Marshall had returned to
Oklahoma City to argue 
McLaurin v.
Oklahoma State Regents
, the Dixiecrats


--- PAGE 701 ---
had been stirring up their ranks with
forecasts of the perils immanent in any
legislation of social equality for Negroes,
particularly with their predictions that
“there would be intermarriage” if
desegregation was enforced in educational
institutions. Marshall, however, had
managed to stay one step ahead of the
South’s political powers that be. In
Oklahoma, Marshall noted, “we had eight
people who had applied and who were
eligible to be plaintiffs, but we
deliberately picked Professor McLaurin
because he was sixty-eight years old and
we didn’t think he was going to marry or
intermarry. . . . They could not bring that
one up on us, anyhow.”
The state had responded to the suit by


--- PAGE 702 ---
admitting McLaurin to the University of
Oklahoma’s doctoral program in
education, but with conditions. For one,
McLaurin was forced to sit at a desk in an
“anteroom” from which he could only
look into the classroom. (Marshall noted
that the “anteroom” was merely a “broom
closet.”) Protest had then prompted the
state to amend its ruling—slightly:
McLaurin was assigned a special seat in
the classroom; it was surrounded by a
railing and marked “Reserved for
Colored.” The absurdity had not been lost
on the white students, who’d immediately
torn down the original railing and sign, as
well as all the new ones that had replaced
them, at a cost to the state of more than
five thousand dollars.


--- PAGE 703 ---
Jack Greenberg found the McLaurin
case to be especially attractive, and
provocative, because “it offered the [U.S.
Supreme] Court no escape from deciding
the issue of segregation.” On the other
hand, Greenberg thought at the time that “it
was dangerous because it allowed no
victory on grounds short of overruling
Plessy
, which the Court might be reluctant
to do.” He, Constance Baker Motley, and
Franklin Williams focused their legal
savvy and abundant energy on getting the
briefs and petitions cast exactly as
Marshall wanted them, for 
Sweatt
 as well
as 
McLaurin
, since both cases were
scheduled to be argued before the
Supreme Court on the same day, April 3,
1950. At the printer’s shop, the young


--- PAGE 704 ---
lawyers stood by the “clattering hot-lead
Linotype machines and clanging presses,”
and as the pages came off the press they
edited them and read them aloud to each
other to be sure the proofs were
Thurgood-perfect. Their vision may have
begun to blur by the time the sun started to
rise; but not their focus. Or Marshall’s.
Standing by them, with them, like them, as
Greenberg averred, “Thurgood focused on
the end of Jim Crow.”
Once the briefs for both 
Sweatt
 and
McLaurin
 were filed, Marshall’s mentor,
Charles Hamilton Houston, did more than
offer his former pupil advice. He launched
an attack from the flank, by having his
solid connections at the Justice
Department file amicus briefs with the


--- PAGE 705 ---
Supreme Court in support of both Sweatt
and 
McLaurin
, essentially stating, “
Plessy
must go.” Marshall himself was
meanwhile filling notebooks with case
summaries so that he’d have every
relevant reference at his fingertips, and
he’d composed lists of every question he
could imagine the justices might possibly
pose. In Washington, in the days leading
up to his arguments, he’d regularly take
his staff down to Howard University for
“dry runs” before a distinguished panel of
academics and lawyers, including
Houston and his cousin William Hastie.
Mostly, they were trying to prepare for
any issue that might be raised by the
inquisitional associate justice Felix
Frankfurter, the former Harvard Law


--- PAGE 706 ---
School professor and the reputed
intellectual among the justices, who was
perceived by Marshall and his team to be
a potentially dangerous adversary.
Marshall entered the rigorous moot court
sessions at Howard “like a boxer going
into training,” said Jack Greenberg.
“Thurgood would limit himself to one
glass of wine at dinnertime, usually
sherry, and no other alcohol.”
On April 3 and 4, with associates
Greenberg, Williams, and Motley along
for support, the assistant special counsel
Robert Carter argued 
McLaurin
 and
Marshall argued 
Sweatt
. In just a few
sentences Marshall crystallized his
argument for the Court. Emotional but
reserved, the lawyer stood before the


--- PAGE 707 ---
justices and “employed a rhetoric with
persuasive force beyond its basic ideas.”
Marshall said:
The rights of Sweatt to attend the
University of Texas cannot be
conditioned upon the wishes of any
group of citizens. It matters not to
me whether every single Negro in
this country wants segregated
schools. It makes no difference
whether every white person wants
segregated schools. If Sweatt wants
to assert his individual,
constitutional right, it cannot be
conditioned upon the wishes of every
other citizen.
Marshall proved to be so well


--- PAGE 708 ---
prepared, and his argument so tightly
constructed, that he did not face a single
question he hadn’t already anticipated in
his “training” at Howard. The attorney
general of Texas attempted unsuccessfully
to counter Marshall’s case with the
argument that Sweatt’s admission to the
university would lead to blacks being
allowed in public places such as
swimming pools and hospitals. “All we
ask in the south,” he said, “is the
opportunity to take care of this matter and
work it out [ourselves].”
T
HE TWO ARDUOUS
 Supreme Court
arguments now behind them, Marshall and
his LDF lawyers returned to New York


--- PAGE 709 ---
and to their work on the Groveland
appeal, which Franklin Williams would
be arguing before the Florida Supreme
Court with Alex Akerman. Williams,
though, was not eager to revisit the orange
groves and white crackers of central
Florida, for by the spring of 1950 he had
developed a taste for arguing segregation
cases in the U.S. Supreme Court, cases
that, in Williams’s view, stood at the
forefront of the nation’s growing civil
rights movement. With the taste came
ambition.
One year earlier, Williams had
accompanied Marshall to Washington,
where as assistant counsel the thirty-one-
year-old lawyer had argued 
Watts v.
Indiana
 alongside the NAACP’s star


--- PAGE 710 ---
attorney, albeit he’d had to persuade a
reluctant Marshall—hard-pressed though
he was, as he had no one else to argue the
case—to allow him the opportunity. “I
was the first deputy of Thurgood’s to
argue a case before the court,” Williams
noted, and he’d made a memorable debut,
as the Court overturned a murder
conviction because the defendant’s
confession to the crime had not been
voluntary. Moreover, Williams’s
performance had caught the eye of Felix
Frankfurter, who wrote a note to his clerk,
Bill Coleman, during the proceedings:
“Bill, take a few minutes off to listen to
Franklin Williams (do you know him?).”
Coleman replied that Williams was “now
Mr. Marshall’s assistant” and that he had


--- PAGE 711 ---
“studied his law at Howard and comes
very highly recommended.” Frankfurter
crossed out “Howard” on the note and
wrote in “Fordham,” then added one more
word to describe Williams’s courtroom
comportment: “Excellent!”
Since his arrival at the LDF in 1945,
Williams had aligned himself closely with
Walter White, who in fact had hired the
recent Fordham Law School graduate. The
two men also socialized outside the
office. “Walter liked me and respected me
as a dynamic young guy in the office,”
Williams recalled, “and Thurgood
probably thought I was in league with
Walter—and since I did hang out with
him, I suppose I was.” So it had come as
no surprise to Marshall when he learned


--- PAGE 712 ---
that Williams’s promptings lay behind the
memos Walter White had issued regarding
the “overfamiliarity and casualness” in the
LDF offices that fostered a less
productive working environment. Still,
Marshall more than tolerated the young
attorney’s ambition. Indeed, he
encouraged it, for Marshall was not a man
to be threatened by bright, enterprising
minds.
A self-confident manager and a crafty
leader, Marshall thrived on the talents of
his staff and associates. Even Williams, as
critical as he was of Marshall’s apparent
informality, had to admire the
effectiveness of his modus operandi. “He
had great success in picking people’s
brains and manipulating them in the


--- PAGE 713 ---
interests of the cause,” Williams said of
Marshall. “He’d get a lot of outside
lawyers together in a room, and he’d be
talking and laughing and drinking along
with the rest of them and getting
everybody relaxed and open, and he’d
seem to be having such a good time with
them that you wouldn’t think he was
listening. But after they’d left, there it all
was—he’d had the benefit of all their
brains, which was his strategy in the first
place. Frankly, it was a little
embarrassing—until I came to understand
what he was up to.”
Williams also understood that, and why,
Marshall was chary in regard to the cases
he was willing to have the NAACP
represent, but understanding did not


--- PAGE 714 ---
restrain the younger attorney, who had
Walter White’s influential ear, from
criticizing Marshall for being “cautious to
a fault in taking thorny cases.” Williams,
not unlike other attorneys and associates
of the NAACP, was eager to pursue civil
rights suits more widely, whereas
“Thurgood,” said Williams, “had to be
convinced of victory beyond a reasonable
doubt before he said yes.” Fewer of the
staff and consultants at the NAACP office,
however, agreed with Williams than
agreed with Marshall, who was reluctant
to bring cases to the Supreme Court
prematurely “because they might make
lasting unfavorable precedents.” Still,
Marshall felt the debate as to the aims and
reach of the NAACP among its executives


--- PAGE 715 ---
and the LDF staff was a healthy one, and
he did not discourage it. (He was not
pleased, though, when the NAACP
magazine, the 
Crisis
, mistakenly referred
to Franklin Williams as “special counsel.”
Only half jokingly, the special counsel
Marshall dashed off a memo to Williams,
stating that “all pretenders to the throne
may use any . . . exit to the building
without picking up any past due salary,”
and closing with a not-informal “Please
acknowledge receipt.”)
In the spring of 1950, Williams’s
staunch ally Walter White still remained
on indefinite leave from the NAACP. So
Williams really had no choice. As much
as he might have wished to continue
working out of New York and Washington


--- PAGE 716 ---
on groundbreaking civil rights cases, he
was packing his bags and heading back to
the Sunshine State with its scary,
unwelcoming, clay-eating, car-chasing
crackers.


--- PAGE 717 ---
CHAPTER 13: IN ANY
FIGHT SOME FALL
Curtis Howard. (
Courtesy of Kim Howard
Turner
)


--- PAGE 718 ---
F
RANKLIN WILLIAMS MADE
 a gallant
attempt to argue to the Florida Supreme
Court that Charles Greenlee could not
have been involved in the alleged rape of
Norma Padgett because, according to the
time line established by her own
testimony, police had already
apprehended Greenlee miles away from
the scene. The Florida attorney general,
however, offered a simple explanation for
any discrepancies in the time line to which
the NAACP counsel attached such
importance:
Mrs. Padgett didn’t have any idea
how long the four negroes took to
rape her. While sexual intercourse
can be a prolonged affair in some


--- PAGE 719 ---
settings, it is probable that these
four negroes, goaded to a sexual
frenzy by the prospect of having
intercourse with a young white
woman, took about as much time as
a bull put to a cow in heat. Cover
her, a few rapid thrusts, all over,
and off again.
To Williams, who had traveled to
Tallahassee with Akerman to make their
case before the justices, it was like
arguing “in somebody’s back yard . . . to a
group of men whose tendency would be to
reject the fact that in their state there could
be such an oppressive atmosphere that
these young men could not get a fair trial.”
The justices were hardly inquisitive, and
there wasn’t “much of a play back and


--- PAGE 720 ---
forth” of the sort that Williams had
experienced when arguing in the U.S.
Supreme Court.
To no one’s surprise, Florida’s highest
court upheld the Lake County verdict.
Still, the justices did grant Shepherd and
Irvin a ninety-day stay of execution, which
allowed time for an appeal to the higher
court. Marshall set Jack Greenberg to
work on the briefs with Williams while
the office waited anxiously for the 
Sweatt
and 
McLaurin
 decisions. The Groveland
Boys waited anxiously in jail.
F
OR THURGOOD MARSHALL
 in 1950, T. S.
Eliot was right: April was the cruelest
month. By then the FBI had not only


--- PAGE 721 ---
completed its investigation into the
beatings of the Groveland Boys but had
also pressured the U.S. attorney, Herbert
Phillips, to file charges against deputies
James Yates and Leroy Campbell. Phillips
had responded by impaneling, at the
courthouse in Ocala, a federal grand jury,
before which Shepherd, Irvin, and
Greenlee testified as to their physical
abuse at the hands of Lake County law
enforcement officials. The grand jury
returned “no true bill,” essentially
declaring the defendants Yates and
Campbell innocent, and issued in addition
a statement praising Sheriff McCall for his
protection of the accused men from
extreme violence. In a letter to Phillips the
Justice Department’s assistant attorney


--- PAGE 722 ---
general stated that the department was
“disturbed and disappointed in the
inaction of the grand jury, for we are
convinced that the victims were beaten
and mistreated as charged.”
Marshall was outraged. Phillips had, at
the last minute, summoned to Ocala the
two physicians at the Raiford state prison
who had examined the Groveland Boys,
but by the time they’d arrived that
afternoon the hearing had already ended.
Phillips had not called any of the prison
officials or FBI agents who’d interviewed
the three prisoners and photographed their
quite visible injuries. Furthermore, not to
be accused of racial bias, Phillips had
made sure that three black men were
seated on the grand jury, and that they


--- PAGE 723 ---
would hear the words of two upstanding
deputies of the law pitted against those of
three convicted rapists. It was clear to
Marshall and the Justice Department that
if Phillips had actually wanted indictments
of the two deputies, he could easily have
secured them. Instead, Herbert S. Phillips,
an avowed segregationist appointed by
President Woodrow Wilson in 1913, had
left the critical decisions in the process to
his friend Jesse Hunter, who had
determined, for instance, that they didn’t
“need any assistance from F.B.I. agents.”
I
N AUGUST 1949,
 when the Groveland Boys
trial had been about to begin, Charles
Hamilton Houston wrote a letter to


--- PAGE 724 ---
Assistant Special Counsel Robert Carter.
Ordinarily, Houston would have written to
Marshall, but he knew that his former
student and longtime friend, along with
Roy Wilkins, was fully occupied in the
administration of the NAACP office in
Walter White’s absence; nor did Houston
want to burden Marshall with the news of
his failing health, that “something other
than fatigue” was a problem. The letter
assured Carter: “These education cases
are now tight and sufficiently so that
anyone familiar with the course of the
decisions should be able to guide the
cases through. You and Thurgood can
proceed without any fear of crossing any
plans I might have.”
Houston, who had suffered a heart


--- PAGE 725 ---
attack, had moved into the home of his
physician, Dr. Edward Mazique, while
attempting to regain his strength after what
would later be diagnosed as acute
coronary thrombosis. He had placed his
casework in the hands of his father,
William, with whom he’d been working
over the last quarter century, but the fifty-
four-year-old Charlie Houston really
“didn’t know how” to stop working, even
when bedridden. More worrying than his
casework were Houston’s concerns for
his five-year-old son, Bo, whom Marshall
called “Little Charlie.”
Houston’s constant chest pains had
increasingly been taking a physical toll on
his body, and he had not wanted his son to
witness him withering away but rather “to


--- PAGE 726 ---
remember his father as vigorous,
impressive and strong.” Houston had
always felt extraordinarily protective of
his young son. Joseph Waddy, Houston’s
partner at their law firm, recalled an
incident in a Washington, D.C., drugstore,
where little Bo had climbed up on a
counter stool while his father was making
his purchases. “Get down from there, you
little nigger—you got no business here,”
the man behind the soda fountain had
shouted at the boy, and had so upset the
father that “when they got back to the
office,” Waddy said, “we had to take
Charlie into the back room and give him a
sedative.”
Although both Charlie’s wife, Henrietta,
and his son had protested his more recent


--- PAGE 727 ---
protective impulses, he had kissed them
both good-bye as he’d put them on a train
to Baton Rouge and the home of
Henrietta’s sister.
That December Houston was too infirm
to shop for Christmas presents; so, to
express his appreciation of the attentive
Dr. Mazique, Houston gave him one of his
prized possessions, a poster of an “open-
air Scottsboro protest meeting in
Amsterdam”—in the hope that Mazique
would one day hand on the poster to Bo.
To explain further to Bo the “domestic and
international significance” of the landmark
case he had worked on twenty years
earlier, he recorded the story of the
Scottsboro Boys on tape. Since Scottsboro
“you have seen . . . the movement of the


--- PAGE 728 ---
great masses of the people,” said Houston
to his son, and therefore “it is necessary to
establish the principle of the indivisibility
of liberty so that the masses recognize that
no matter where liberty is challenged, no
matter where oppression lifts its head, it
becomes the business of all the masses.”
A second heart attack landed Houston in
the Freedman’s Hospital at Howard
University. Despite the setback, and
critical as his condition was, Houston was
not prepared to have his family come back
to Washington. His aunt Clotill was a
frequent visitor, however, and together
they would read and discuss the lessons in
Peace of Mind
, by Joshua Loth Liebman.
Aunt Clotill had given the book to her
nephew, and he exacted her promise to


--- PAGE 729 ---
pass the book along to Bo, should he not
make it out of the hospital.
In the early afternoon of April 22,
Mazique was preparing a medication for
nausea and his patient was resting in bed
when Joseph Waddy stopped in to visit.
“Hi, Joe,” Houston said softly, as his
slightly raised hand slumped to his side.
Charles Hamilton Houston had drawn his
final breath. Beside his bed lay his copy
of 
Peace of Mind.
 In its pages Houston
had written some last words for his son:
Tell Bo I did not run out on him
but went down fighting that he might
have better and broader
opportunities than I had without
prejudice or bias operating against
him, and in any fight some fall.


--- PAGE 730 ---
He had driven a young Thurgood
Marshall across the South; he had opened
his onetime student’s eyes and mind to the
inequalities blacks suffered by law. For
decades he had been laying the
groundwork to overturn the injustices
enacted against his race in 
Plessy
. He did
not live to see the culmination of his
labor. The funeral services for Charles
Hamilton Houston at Howard University’s
Rankin Chapel were attended by Supreme
Court justices Tom C. Clark and Hugo
Black, an official from President
Truman’s cabinet, numerous civil rights
activists, and hundreds of friends and
colleagues. Houston’s cousin, William
Hastie, whom President Truman had
nominated to a seat on the U.S. Court of


--- PAGE 731 ---
Appeals in 1949, paid homage to a civil
rights champion’s “unremitting struggle to
win for the Negro full status without
discrimination.” Hastie celebrated a
warrior’s spirit: “Yet, as we grieve, we
cannot forget that he believed, perhaps
above all else, in strength; strength to do
and to bear what lesser men would regard
as impossible or unbearable. He counted
nothing, no physical weakness and not
even death itself, as an obstacle to the
onward sweep of strong men and women
in the accomplishment of worthwhile
ends. He had a soldier’s faith that winning
the fight is all that matters; that every
battle must be fought until it is won and
without pause to take account of those
stricken in the fray. He reflected that


--- PAGE 732 ---
conviction in a slogan which he gave to
his students: ‘No tea for the feeble, no
crepe for the dead.’ I know he would wish
all of us to carry on in that spirit.”
Marshall was one of Houston’s
pallbearers. He was also one of the
NAACP executives who would ensure
that Houston be posthumously awarded the
thirty-fifth Spingarn Medal, a tribute that
came years too late. “Whatever credit is
given him is not enough,” Marshall said of
his mentor, whose contributions to the
cause of civil rights were ultimately
immeasurable as he had so willingly and
unselfishly toiled behind the scenes while
others received credit for the gains. It was
Marshall’s idea to present the Spingarn
Medal to Houston’s son at the NAACP’s


--- PAGE 733 ---
forty-first annual convention, in Boston. In
a photograph that appeared in newspapers
across the country, Marshall—the trace of
a smile barely masking his sorrow—can
be seen standing over the shoulder of the
boy as little Bo is being handed his
father’s medal.
Four years earlier, in Cincinnati,
Charles Hamilton Houston had presented
the Spingarn Medal to Thurgood Marshall.
Even then, Marshall had not outstripped
his mentor or ceased to follow his lead.
Rarely in the two decades before or four
years since had Marshall made an
important legal decision without
consulting Houston, and with his passing
Marshall, too, had lost a protector and a
champion. The master’s mantle had fallen


--- PAGE 734 ---
onto the pupil’s shoulders. The legal
strategy, Houston had told Marshall, was
in place; all that was needed was the
courage and strength to see it through. As
Hastie had so eloquently eulogized him,
Houston “guided us through the legal
wilderness of second-class citizenship.
He was truly the Moses of that journey.
He lived to see us close to the promised
land . . . closer than even he dared hope.
. . .”
T
HE CRUEL APRIL
 passed, but the spring,
as in Eliot’s metaphor, had begun to breed
lilacs out of the dead land. Just weeks
after Houston’s death, the U.S. Supreme
Court announced its decisions on 
Sweatt


--- PAGE 735 ---
and McLaurin . In both cases the justices’
opinions were unanimous.
Marshall immediately called Heman
Sweatt. “We won the big one!” he
proclaimed, explaining to the letter carrier
that the Court did not find “substantial
equality” between the University of Texas
Law School and a basement equipped
with a pile of textbooks. “Now the state
will have to age law schools like good
whiskey,” Marshall told him.
The 
New York Times
 opined that the
Court’s decisions left 
Plessy
 in “tatters.”
More privately, some justices on the
Supreme Court concluded that
 Sweatt
 and
McLaurin
, along with 
Henderson v.
United States
—a railway segregation
case that was decided on the same day—


--- PAGE 736 ---
had sealed the fate of Jim Crow. The
South braced for the inevitable end of
segregation in elementary and secondary
schools.
In June 1950, then, Marshall was finally
again in the mood to celebrate. Once again
he was “Thurgood . . . a party man. ‘Party’
was his middle name,” said Constance
Baker Motley. And he proved it. He
hosted a victory party at the midtown
office, where, as young Jack Greenberg
remembered, there was “lots of Scotch
and bourbon, clouds of cigarette smoke,
lots of laughter and noise and bragging,
jokes about race and racial banter, and the
almost obligatory poker game.” Bobbie
Branch, the office manager, “an ample
woman who resembled Bloody Mary in


--- PAGE 737 ---
South Pacific ,” was especially excited
after the decisions; she was swaggering
around the place and “swearing like a
marine,” Greenberg recalled. The press
was ringing the phones off the hook, and
visitors were parading through the office
with their congratulations. Nobody wanted
to go home.
Of course, Marshall knew that the
decisions had not gone so far as to
obliterate 
Plessy
 completely, but he was
at last beginning to see the fruits of the
seeds Houston had planted after he and
Marshall, in 1930, had sat down together
to study the findings in the Margold
Report. In the twenty years since, they had
honed “the tools to destroy all
governmentally imposed racial


--- PAGE 738 ---
segregation.” The work was not done, but
it had unquestionably and irrevocably
begun. “It will take time. It will take
courage and determination,” Marshall
said, as if to convince himself that he had
the fortitude to continue the mission
without the man who had envisioned it.
P
ERHAPS THE BIGGEST
 surprise that spring
came to Marshall and the LDF lawyers in
the form of a three-part exposé that
appeared in the 
St. Petersburg Times
 in
early April. Norman Bunin, a twenty-six-
year-old copy editor who had closely
followed the Groveland case as it had
unfolded in Florida, had felt that some of
the testimony simply did not add up. To


--- PAGE 739 ---
satisfy his own curiosity, he began reading
the trial transcripts and trying to piece
together exactly what had happened on the
night of July 15, 1949. From the outset, it
seemed glaringly apparent to Bunin, by
virtue of the accounts of several
witnesses, that at the time of the alleged
rape Charles Greenlee was already in jail.
Only Norma Padgett’s testimony placed
Greenlee at the scene of the supposed
crime, and in fact, with a stunning lack of
physical evidence, the prosecution had
based its case entirely on the word of
Norma Padgett and her identification of
the alleged assailants in court. Other
details in the court records nagged at
Bunin, such as the prosecution’s list of
witnesses, nearly all of whom were never


--- PAGE 740 ---
called to testify: Why? Bunin wondered.
The more he wondered the more
obsessed Bunin became with the case.
Whatever days he could—he had not been
officially assigned to the case for the
paper—he spent buried in the court
records, and on weekends, driving from
the Gulf Coast to Lake County, he did the
legwork that the defense had not had time
to do before the trial. He drove to
Eatonville, and back toward Mascotte,
then up toward Okahumpka, to the spot
where Willie Padgett’s car had stalled.
He drove to the scene of the alleged rape
near the Sumter County line, and then
drove back to the Groveland train depot.
He jotted down speeds and minutes and
distances; he tried to make sense of the


--- PAGE 741 ---
prosecution’s time line. But it made no
sense.
Bunin not only located alibi witnesses
that Williams and Akerman had been
unable to find, but also tracked down
Lawrence Burtoft, the young man who had
spoken with Norma Padgett in his father’s
café the morning after she’d allegedly
been kidnapped and raped. Jesse Hunter
had interviewed Burtoft on two occasions,
and chose not to call him as a witness.
Bunin began to understand why; for, by
Burtoft’s account, Norma had said that her
so-called kidnappers, whom she could not
identify, had not in any way harmed her.
Moreover, she had appeared to Burtoft to
be quite calm, despite the fact that, as
she’d claimed, her husband might be lying


--- PAGE 742 ---
murdered by the side of the road. She had
not asked Burtoft to notify the police. All
she wanted, she’d said, was a ride home,
and “she waited patiently while he
[Burtoft] had his breakfast.”
One weekend Bunin drove to Bay Lake.
A long, looping road took him to the
Tyson farmhouse, where he hoped to
interview Norma Padgett. His hopes were
not in vain: Coy Tyson voiced no
objections, perhaps because Bunin was
not a reporter for one of those New York
papers nor a person connected in some
way to the NAACP, or perhaps because
his daughter’s rapists had been safely
tried and convicted. Norma, in a green
farm dress, her hair mussed and her bare
feet very dirty, scarcely resembled the girl


--- PAGE 743 ---
with the blond curls and homemade bolero
who had appeared in the courtroom at
Tavares. Her story, however, was much
the same, although Bunin did note a few
discrepancies, most significantly in regard
to her state of mind that morning of July
16. Norma told Bunin that she had been
“crying profusely and [was] visibly
shaken” when she’d spoken with Burtoft
about her rape by the four Negroes, and
that she had been anxious to find out if her
husband was still alive after the black men
had beaten him. Her story did not match
entirely her testimony in court, and it did
not match at all Burtoft’s description of
her behavior that early Saturday morning.
As for her testimony, almost casually
Norma mentioned that her daddy hadn’t


--- PAGE 744 ---
had much confidence about her testifying
in court—he’d even bet a man that she’d
“mess up” on the witness stand. She also
told Bunin that she didn’t care for that
“nigger lawyer” one bit.
Bunin’s three articles, which were
printed in the 
St. Petersburg Times
 with
hand-drawn maps of key locations in Lake
County to illustrate the facts in the fiction
of the prosecution’s time line, infuriated
Jesse Hunter, who called the stories “a
dastardly lying libel on the people of Lake
County as a whole.” He added that Bunin
and the 
Times
 “are creating, or attempting
to create race hatred and discord in Lake
County, where relations between whites
and coloreds have always been good.”
Not one to miss an opportunity to attack


--- PAGE 745 ---
Senator Claude Pepper—derisively
nicknamed “Red” Pepper by his political
adversaries, for he favored civil rights
and organized labor—Hunter also made
political hay of the “libel.” He demanded
that Pepper, currently in the midst of his
heated reelection bid, repudiate the stories
because the 
Times
 “has become
recognized as your most ardent supporter
and what they publish is considered a part
of your campaign.”
Bunin’s series only confirmed what
Franklin Williams had suspected but had
neither the time nor the resources to
prove: the prosecution had been hiding
witnesses and evidence. He shared the
articles with Marshall and Greenberg,
then filed them away. They could be very


--- PAGE 746 ---
useful, if the NAACP’s appeal could
convince the Supreme Court to overturn
the verdict in the Groveland Boys case.
I
N MAY 1950,
 after nearly a year’s leave of
absence, Walter White, having failed to
find another job, decided to return to the
NAACP. He was not exactly welcomed
back with open arms. While a sizable
contingent within the NAACP had,
according to Roy Wilkins, “tried to keep
him from coming back,” board member
Eleanor Roosevelt was not one of them.
Rallying behind White, she convinced the
board that he should be allowed to resume
his role as executive secretary, on the
condition that he relinquish administrative


--- PAGE 747 ---
duties to Wilkins. Franklin Williams
appreciated Roosevelt’s intervention on
behalf of his ally and advocate, through
whose influence he hoped to strengthen his
position within the LDF.
In White’s absence, NAACP
membership had declined significantly.
The drop-off was attributed in large part
to the doubling of the one-dollar annual
dues to two dollars, but there were
concerns, too, about the growing
organizational divide between local
branches and the national office because
of failures in leadership and coordination.
Only a very small percentage of the black
population—in 1950, approximately 15
million—contributed financially to the
NAACP. To Morehouse College president


--- PAGE 748 ---
and civil rights activist Benjamin Mays,
such lack of support constituted a
“tragedy” and a “calamity”: “If we are
going to achieve a larger share of freedom
we will have to be willing to pay for it,”
he admonished.
Harry T. Moore had hoped that the
publicity generated by the Groveland case
could be used to boost membership in
Florida, but there, as in most of the states,
the NAACP was suffering from a
crippling budget deficit and a spiraling
decline in membership. Gloster Current,
the director of branches, had expressed to
Moore his concern over the “deplorable
state of Florida branches,” which
accounted for his decision to dispatch
Daniel Byrd, a Louisiana friend of


--- PAGE 749 ---
Marshall’s, to Florida to meet with the
state’s branch representatives. Current had
also informed Lucille Black, the national
membership secretary, that Moore, though
certainly well-intentioned, was simply not
“doing as much as could be done to revive
the work in that State.”
While on his speaking tour in Florida to
raise money for the Groveland Boys
defense, Franklin Williams had, at
Current’s request, visited some of
Moore’s urban branches in the state.
Having met with representatives in
Miami, Tampa, and Jacksonville,
Williams had returned to New York with
an authoritative report, concluding that
Florida’s plummeting membership could
be attributed directly to Moore’s


--- PAGE 750 ---
leadership. Although the members in the
NAACP branches of all three cities
agreed that Moore’s voter registration
drives were impressive, they roundly
criticized his endorsement of candidates
through the Progressive Voters League,
since it was alienating Democratic and
Republican Negroes alike.
No doubt, Moore could read the writing
on the wall. Nonetheless, he continued his
push for justice and money. By citing
unresolved issues in the Groveland case,
Moore had lobbied and successfully
arranged for a delegation of black leaders
to meet with Governor Fuller Warren to
discuss a wide range of topics politically
crucial to blacks, from police brutality to
voting rights. He continued traveling from


--- PAGE 751 ---
county to county in Florida, and continued
making speeches and raising money to
fund LDF appeals in the Groveland case.
He continued writing letters to editors of
Florida newspapers, among them Mabel
Norris Reese, in which he severely
criticized Sheriff Willis McCall, State
Attorney Jesse Hunter, and Judge Truman
Futch. Months after the convictions,
Moore was keeping the Groveland Boys
case alive in his hope of saving their lives
and his job, his mission, his calling. “I
plan to touch many more [branches] while
this Groveland Case is fresh in their
minds,” Moore wrote to the New York
office.
Harry Moore was not the only one in the
employ of the NAACP whose job stood in


--- PAGE 752 ---
jeopardy. Jack Greenberg was sitting at
his desk on the fourth floor of the
NAACP’s Manhattan headquarters
working on the Groveland writs when
Franklin Williams strode straight past him
and into Thurgood’s office. The door
slammed shut. The women in the office
braced themselves; they had witnessed the
like of it before, a year earlier, when
behind a closed door, in a bout of angry
shouting, Williams had confronted
Marshall about arguing 
Watts v. Indiana
before the Supreme Court. Within minutes
Greenberg heard “a lot of yelling and
screaming and carrying on” about the
Groveland Boys appeal. The Supreme
Court might be hearing the case soon, and
Williams wanted to be assured that he’d


--- PAGE 753 ---
argue it in Washington as he did in
Tallahassee. Only Marshall was not
guaranteeing anything, a response that
Williams interpreted as an undeserved
vote of no confidence, and the disputation
became even more heated. Fed up, restive,
Williams wanted and demanded a straight
answer. Was the Groveland case his?
Marshall told him no, and Williams
exploded with “I won’t take it!”
“Well . . . ,” Marshall replied, with a
glance toward the door to indicate that
Williams was free to go.
Williams ignored the gesture, holding
his ground, and Marshall laid into him
like, Marshall said later, a “Dutch uncle”:
“Frank, I know what you’re shooting at.
You’re shooting for either my job or Roy


--- PAGE 754 ---
Wilkins’s, and so far as I’m concerned,
you better start shooting for Roy’s because
you can’t take mine. You’re not man
enough.”
Williams stormed out of Marshall’s
office and into Walter White’s.
It wasn’t just about Groveland.
Thurgood knew that Williams had been
complaining to White, before the
executive secretary’s leave and since his
return, that Marshall was “less than bold
in his leadership,” particularly in the
LDF’s assault on 
Plessy
. White apparently
agreed; in 1949, he himself had voiced his
displeasure with Marshall’s not expressly
combative tactics to the civil rights–
friendly Judge Julius Waties Waring of
South Carolina, before whom Marshall


--- PAGE 755 ---
was bringing the school desegregation test
case 
Briggs v. Elliott
, the first of the five
cases that would ultimately constitute
Brown v. Board of Education
. Waring, in
turn, had arm-twisted Marshall into filing
a more aggressive attack on the state’s
segregation laws. The confrontation had
“made Marshall look either incompetent
or craven,” in Robert Carter’s opinion,
when in fact he was “not dragging his feet
in this” but merely “struggling to find the
right way.” More important, in regard to
the staff and operations of the LDF,
Marshall believed that the source of his
embarrassment over 
Briggs
 lay with
Franklin Williams, who had used Walter
White to influence Judge Waring.
Once the indignant Williams had


--- PAGE 756 ---
detailed his exchange with Marshall about
the Groveland case for Walter White, the
recently restored executive assured his
young colleague that “he didn’t have to
worry about Thurgood Marshall, that he’d
get a job as long as he was secretary.”
White’s statement of assurance got
relayed back to Marshall. As it happened,
Williams had stepped out of the office, so
Marshall asked the telephone operator to
call him the moment Williams returned.
Marshall did not have to wait long for the
call. He met Williams at the door, and
announced, “You’re fired.”
Again Williams stormed into Walter
White’s office. It was immediately
apparent to White that in his absence
power had shifted in the NAACP offices,


--- PAGE 757 ---
and it was soon apparent to Williams that
his ally and advocate could not make good
on his promises. Franklin Williams would
indeed have to worry about Thurgood
Marshall, and as for that job he’d get as
long as White was secretary . . . “Why, I
didn’t mean that,” White told him.
Franklin Williams did get another job.
Within weeks he had been named West
Coast director and regional counsel for
the NAACP in San Francisco. While his
transfer to the West Coast might justly
have been viewed as a promotion as well,
Williams left New York in
disappointment, for, he believed, he
would probably never again have the
opportunity to argue civil rights cases for
the LDF in the U.S. Supreme Court. He


--- PAGE 758 ---
told Jack Greenberg that his ambition was
to one day return to the NAACP as chief,
but he less optimistically confided to other
friends and associates that “he felt he was
being exiled.” As it turned out, he would
be back much sooner than he’d have
expected.
D
URING THE SUMMER
 of 1950, Marshall
decided to proceed more proactively in
the Groveland Boys case. Norman Bunin’s
exposé in the 
St. Petersburg Times
 had
convinced Marshall that Norma Padgett’s
story held more than she or the court had
revealed, and in the event that the U.S.
Supreme Court should reverse Lake
County’s verdict, he preferred to have


--- PAGE 759 ---
further investigations into the case
completed or at least under way before a
date was set for the second trial to begin.
To a meeting in New York with
representatives from the American Civil
Liberties Union, the Baltimore lawyer and
national secretary of the Workers Defense
League Rowland Watts, and 
New Leader
reporter Terence McCarthy, Marshall also
invited a friend from Miami, Buck Owens,
of the Owens Detective Agency, and a
young private investigator, one “Miss L.
B. De Forest.” Together, they carved out a
plan.
Bunin told Marshall that “although most
of the whites there [in Lake County] were
happy about the conviction, many of them
don’t believe Norma Padgett’s story.”


--- PAGE 760 ---
Marshall thought, and the others agreed,
that it “could prove fruitful” if Miss De
Forest could cultivate relationships with
some of the Padgetts, “not all of whom are
on good terms with Norma.” It was
agreed, too, that the detective “should try
to get on good terms with the people of
Groveland itself, especially the police
chief [George Mays],” who had
demonstrated a willingness to provide
information to both McCarthy and the FBI.
McCarthy and Watts would also brief
Miss De Forest on further leads. She, it
was decided, would enter Lake County
undercover, as a potential buyer of real
estate, and would regularly send reports
back to the “realtor” Rowland Watts in
New York, “to avoid any possibility of a


--- PAGE 761 ---
slip-up.” Marshall agreed to payment by
the NAACP of a five-hundred-dollar
retainer and thirty-five dollars a day, plus
expenses, for the investigator’s services.
The deal was struck. All Miss De Forest
needed to do now was pack her bags and
hop on a bus for Lake County, and follow
a piece of advice from Marshall, the
lawyers, and McCarthy. “Keep away from
Sheriff McCall,” they told her, although
“plied with beer, his deputies might do
some talking about their part in the case.”
T
HURGOOD MARSHALL ASSIGNED
 Jack
Greenberg the task of writing the writ of
certiorari asking the Supreme Court to
hear the Groveland Boys case, and


--- PAGE 762 ---
Greenberg did exactly as he had been
taught: he talked first to academics and
law professors; then he talked to Bill
Hastie. He learned.
Recently, in the appeal of a Texas
murder case, 
Cassell v. Texas
, the U.S.
Supreme Court had reversed the
conviction of a black man on the grounds
of unconstitutional jury exclusion
practices, the commissioners having
“chose[n] jurymen only from people with
whom they were personally acquainted,
and they knew no Negroes who were
eligible and available for grand jury
service.” As the state attorney in Lake
County had selected a grand jury in
virtually the same manner, Greenberg
made the 
Cassell
 ruling the first point in


--- PAGE 763 ---
his petition. Closed though the mind of the
Florida Supreme Court might have been to
the argument, the U.S. Supreme Court,
Greenberg noted, “would not be likely to
treat its own precedent so cavalierly.”
Further, in studying the court records,
Greenberg was pleased to discover that
Williams and Akerman had filed the
proper motions with the trial judge in a
timely fashion. They had also properly
raised constitutional objections over the
unfair trial atmosphere in Lake County
when filing their motion for a change of
venue. While Williams and Akerman
themselves may have felt that they were
being steamrollered by Jesse Hunter and
Truman Futch during the proceedings and
trial, what Greenberg felt after reviewing


--- PAGE 764 ---
the transcripts and affidavits was
confidence that the Groveland Boys might
very well prevail at the appellate level.
Greenberg’s confidence was not
misplaced. On November 27, 1950, the
U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the
Groveland Boys case. The young attorney
immediately began working on the brief,
in which he would include “a number of
old English cases from the 1700s on
change of venue, because Justice
Frankfurter liked English precedents.”
E
ARLY IN THE
 summer of 1950, at the
NAACP’s forty-first annual convention, in
Boston, Marshall announced to the
delegates, “The complete destruction of


--- PAGE 765 ---
all segregation is now in sight. . . . We are
going to insist on non-segregation in
American public education from top to
bottom—from law school to
kindergarten.” To achieve this far-
reaching goal in all (then) forty-eight
states without unnecessary political
distractions, Marshall and the board of the
NAACP found it necessary to pass and
adopt an anticommunist resolution, which
directed the organization’s leaders to
“eradicate Communists from its branch
units.” The irony of the resolution was not
lost on the NAACP itself; an article in its
magazine, the
 Crisis
, later pointed out, “It
was one of the great ironies of the era that
the nation’s oldest civil rights
organization discriminated against


--- PAGE 766 ---
individuals on the basis of their political
beliefs and affiliation.” Yet, ever since the
Scottsboro Boys case in the 1930s, the rift
had widened between communists and
NAACP executives who believed that the
“radicals had been extremely severe and
frequently unfair in their attempts to
discredit the NAACP.”
Marshall took special delight in
trumping the political maneuvers of the
NAACP’s communist wing. At the annual
convention in Los Angeles in 1949, the
communist faction of the NAACP had put
forth a resolution to stop the Marshall
Plan, in which General George C.
Marshall, after touring postwar Europe,
proposed massive U.S. funding to jump-
start the European economy and thereby


--- PAGE 767 ---
prevent the spread of communism.
Misguided in their conviction that the
communists had set out to defeat Thurgood
Marshall’s plans, delegates at the
convention were soon protesting the
measure: “They’re in there, the Commies
are fighting, they’re trying to get rid of our
lawyer!” the offended delegates shouted.
“They’re voting against the Marshall
Plan!” Marshall’s plans got passed pretty
easily that year.
The next year in Boston, Marshall could
again boast, “we socked them good,” after
an unsuccessful attempt by the communist
faction at the convention to weaken the
NAACP’s leadership by spreading rumors
that vastly inflated the salaries of the LDF
lawyers and the executive staff—in part


--- PAGE 768 ---
with Marshall’s collaboration. For
Marshall had been on his way to church
with some friends when he’d been spotted
by a group of communists who’d wanted
to know about “all this money that you and
Walter and Roy make.” Marshall had
replied that as Wilkins, he, and White
earned all that money, they deserved it,
but he had not appeared to be willing to
tell the agitators just how much “it” was.
Then he’d paused a moment, as if to
consider the matter further, and added,
with a touch of glee in his mischief, “Of
course, I’ll tell you. If you’re a member of
the NAACP, you’re entitled to know . . .
fifty-five thousand dollars plus expenses.”
Pressed further as to Walter White’s take,
Marshall had estimated “around eighty,”


--- PAGE 769 ---
although he knew that White was drawing
only about ten thousand dollars annually,
around fifteen hundred more than Marshall
himself. When one of Marshall’s friends
had inquired why he’d tossed out such
inflated amounts, Marshall had responded
that if any of those guys at the convention
quoted those figures, they’d be “hooted off
the floor.” And “sure enough,” Marshall
later recalled, “the damn fools did.”
The executive staff and majority
delegates of the NAACP had in fact
socked the communists good on virtually
every resolution they’d brought to the
convention floor in 1950. They walked out
in frustration “and never came back,” said
Marshall, whose management of the
communist issue in Boston earned him an


--- PAGE 770 ---
oral commendation from J. Edgar Hoover
(the FBI director had “evidently had the
meeting monitored”). “The communists
brought it on themselves,” Walter White
told reporters. “We have always kept the
door open. But they alienated and
infuriated the members by their clumsy
efforts to take over the NAACP.”
About the same time that the convention
in Boston was ending, on June 25, 1950,
communist North Korea invaded the
Republic of Korea. Thus began the first
significant military conflict of the Cold
War. In 1948, two years before the
outbreak of the Korean War, President
Truman had, by executive order,
desegregated the armed forces, but the
U.S. Army had not been prepared then or


--- PAGE 771 ---
since—and certainly not at a time of war
—to effectively integrate blacks into daily
military life. Racial prejudice and the
negative stereotyping of black soldiers—
their supposed fear of the dark, for one
example—had a particularly demoralizing
effect on the largely African-American
24th Infantry Regiment in Korea, in part, it
would appear, because the regiment’s
white leadership blamed its own failures
on the black soldiers in the field. When
dozens of men from the 24th Infantry
Regiment found themselves being court-
martialed and convicted for cowardice
and desertion, they began requesting
NAACP representation. It struck Marshall
as strange that the notable 24th, which,
despite “staggering casualties,” had


--- PAGE 772 ---
demonstrated exceptional valor in retaking
the city of Yechon on July 20, 1950, had
gone from “heroes to cowards, all within
a few days.”
Marshall decided he would have to get
the facts for himself, in Korea, but he
almost immediately encountered problems
in his attempt to secure military clearance
for his travel. Although the FBI approved
Marshall’s travel plans expeditiously
enough, General Douglas MacArthur,
commander of the U.S. troops in Korea,
cited evidence from the House Committee
on Un-American Activities that Thurgood
Marshall had belonged to two legal guilds
whose members were known to include
communists. On that basis, the State
Department denied Marshall entry to the


--- PAGE 773 ---
Far East. Marshall countered by appealing
to President Truman, and the White House
pressured MacArthur to withdraw his
objections. Marshall arrived in Tokyo on
January 14, 1951. He spent weeks there,
interviewing blacks who’d been
imprisoned at the Tokyo stockade, before
proceeding to Korea. There, Marshall had
to hunt down the military court’s records
of the “so-called trials,” which he
eventually found in a warehouse near
Tejon. The transcripts were astonishing.
In hearings that lasted mere minutes, men
had been sentenced to life imprisonment.
One man—Leon Gilbert, a black
lieutenant—had even received a death
penalty, for being absent in the presence
of the enemy: to Marshall’s mind, a highly


--- PAGE 774 ---
suspect charge, given the testimony of two
medical officers that Gilbert had not gone
AWOL but had been “in a base hospital.”
To track down witnesses, Marshall
traveled to the front lines. “There was so
much sniper fire that we couldn’t even go
to the bathroom without a buddy,”
Marshall recalled, “and then both of us
had to take rifles.” On one occasion, he
was walking with a group of soldiers and
his escort, Colonel D. D. Martin, when the
sound of a rifle pop and the whish-crack
of a bullet overhead sent the men
scrambling for their lives into a nearby
ditch. “Where are you, Marshall?” the
colonel shouted in alarm; in an
uncharacteristically small voice came the
reply: “Are you kiddin’? I’m under you.”


--- PAGE 775 ---
Marshall may have found humor under
fire, but he found nothing amusing about
the Jim Crow discrimination he witnessed
among the armed forces in Korea and
Japan. “What happened over there is that
they had this big withdrawal, and the
records show that that was just [the]
damnedest retreat you’ve ever seen,”
Marshall said. “They were running,
ducking—I mean, it was awful. And they
had to stop it. And the only way to stop it
was to pick a unit, and court-martial them
and make examples of them, and here was
this Negro unit. So that’s the one they
grabbed.”
Marshall eventually did meet with
General MacArthur, whom he
characterized as being “as biased as any


--- PAGE 776 ---
person I’ve run across.” Apparently
staunch in his conviction that blacks as a
race were “inferior,” the general had no
black soldiers in the honor guard
protecting him—had none in his entire
headquarters, in fact—“not even in the
band,” Marshall noted, “and I assume that
there are some Negroes who can play
instruments.” On MacArthur, who failed
to follow, or simply ignored, Truman’s
order to desegregate the troops, Marshall
laid the blame for the “ramrod justice” in
Korea, even as he reminded the general
and his staff that “the United States Air
Force took just one day to end
segregation. They gave a single order, and
the Air Force is now an integrated,
American body of men using the best


--- PAGE 777 ---
efficiency and skill each man can provide
in his country’s service.”
Ultimately, Marshall managed to have
the sentences on many of the black GIs in
Korea reduced, and he successfully
lobbied President Truman to commute
Lieutenant Leon Gilbert’s death sentence
to time served. In that the courts-martial
and convictions of the 24th’s black
infantrymen so clearly demonstrated racial
bias, Marshall was careful to point out
that the Korean War was a battle against
communism and not a war between the
races. “The Red Koreans and Chinese
bayoneted black as well as whites,”
Marshall said, adding that anyone who
signed petitions for communists claiming
to represent black GIs in Korea were


--- PAGE 778 ---
“dupes or dopes.”
In some of the GI cases Marshall
determined that no injustice had been
committed on grounds of race, such as one
in which he concluded that the convicted
soldier was “just a bad egg and is using
the race question as a cover up for his
misdoings.” With military as with civil
cases, Marshall urged his staff to exercise
caution in choosing which cases to
represent, to look at the person beyond the
color. It was a principle Marshall had
established early in his legal career at the
NAACP, and one he would follow for
nearly a quarter century. “My dad told me
way back”—way back being when young
Thurgood was growing up in Baltimore
—“that you can’t use race. For example,


--- PAGE 779 ---
there’s no difference between a white
snake and a black snake. They’ll both
bite.” Some lessons you don’t forget.


--- PAGE 780 ---
CHAPTER 14: THIS IS
A RAPE CASE
From left to right:
 Thurgood Marshall, Jack
Greenberg, Franklin Williams, Mr. and Mrs.
Alex Akerman, James Nabrit Jr., and Robert
Carter, on the steps of the U.S. Supreme


--- PAGE 781 ---
Court following the March 9, 1951,
argument of the Groveland Boys case.
(
Courtesy of
 The Crisis
 magazine
)
S
HE ARRIVED IN
 Lake County on a
Greyhound bus on July 24, 1950. First
thing she did, she called the Baptist
minister in Leesburg: she’d be needing
accommodations for a few days and
maybe he could direct her to some
parishioners with a room to rent? She
found a place, at a home on Main Street,
close by the filling station where Curtis
Howard was working the night that Willie
Padgett showed up after he’d been
assaulted, so he’d said, and his wife had
been abducted by four black men.
In her mid-twenties, wearing a plain


--- PAGE 782 ---
farm dress and lugging the suitcase she’d
packed with clothes, stationery, and a
Bible, she introduced herself to the
woman of the house on Main Street as L.
B. De Forest; only that wasn’t her real
name. She told the woman and everyone
else she met in Lake County that she was
looking to buy a house with a small orange
grove; that wasn’t true, either. She’d come
to the Bay Lake area foremost to cultivate
a relationship with Norma Padgett, and
through that acquaintanceship to uncover
evidence that might aid the Groveland
Boys case should the U.S. Supreme Court
overturn Lake County’s verdict. Miss De
Forest was strongly opposed to capital
punishment, and she was also convinced
that the Groveland Boys had been victims


--- PAGE 783 ---
of institutionalized injustice. Once the
young woman’s intentions on her visit to
Lake County had become clear, Judge
Truman Futch would tell reporters that a
“Communist agent . . . had been sent into
Lake County” and engaged in activities
that violated the laws of Florida.
Two nights after her arrival, at a Baptist
church service Miss De Forest was
introduced to the congregation as “a
stranger coming to live among us.” She
was welcomed warmly: “They seem to
have taken me into their hearts and
homes,” she reported. Some of the
younger ladies at the church invited her to
join them for a soda at Carney’s Drug
Store, just across the street from where
she was staying. Over vanilla Cokes they


--- PAGE 784 ---
discussed possible places Miss De Forest
might consider for a permanent residence,
and the young stranger feigned surprise
when she was told that Lake County had
experienced some racial trouble last year.
The ladies from the church offered details
about “the case” and about the Groveland
Boys. One of the ladies noted that
“Negroes are o.k.,” but if they “step out of
their place . . . they’ll burn.” Another said,
“The Northerners spoil them and treat
them like 
equals.
” The woman who’d
rented Miss De Forest a room in her house
was also eager to talk about the rape of
Norma Padgett, who, so she’d heard, had
been beaten so savagely she’d been
confined to the hospital for two weeks
after the attack because “her breasts were


--- PAGE 785 ---
lacerated and injured by the teeth of her
abductors.” Rumor had rewritten the
reality of the case.
Over the next few days De Forest had
“some success in dodging some of the
realtors” keen to show her houses with
orange groves in Lake County. She wore a
“World Peace” pin of her own design that,
she wrote, “interests everyone and is a
good cover.” Each night in her rented
room she composed letters on the progress
of her investigation, which she mailed to
Rowland Watts of the Workers Defense
League in New York. In the coming days,
she told him, she hoped to be introduced
to some of Norma Padgett’s relatives, so
she expected soon to be packing up her
stationery, clothes, and Bible and moving


--- PAGE 786 ---
to some place in Bay Lake.
O
NCE THE L.
 B. De Forest private
investigation had been set up by Thurgood
Marshall, Rowland Watts had shared with
NAACP lawyers the results of the WDL’s
own, long-running investigation into the
peonage conditions in Lake County. For
the WDL, the Groveland Boys case
provided an opportunity to focus media
attention upon the forced labor practices
common in Florida’s citrus groves and at
the same time to highlight, and hopefully
to rectify, a criminal injustice in a death
penalty case. Watts’s high-level contacts
in Florida, all of them sympathetic to the
Groveland Boys’ cause and willing to aid,


--- PAGE 787 ---
if clandestinely, in the investigation, had
access to official documents like driver
registration records and even police
department records. Among Watts’s
confidential informants was Milton C.
Thomas, formerly an editor at the 
Orlando
Morning Sentinel
 and now public
relations director for U.S. senator Claude
Pepper, sworn political enemy to Jesse
Hunter and Willis McCall.
Thomas had had numerous
conversations with reporters in central
Florida who had been following the
Groveland Boys case for their local
newspapers but had felt pressured by the
Lake County Sheriff’s Department not to
dig too deeply into the story. Ormond
Powers was one of those reporters. He


--- PAGE 788 ---
had covered the Groveland Boys trial for
the 
Orlando Morning Sentinel
, and prior
to that he had reported from the scene of
the Groveland riots. He’d seemed always
to find himself at the side of Sheriff Willis
McCall, who had spoon-fed Powers news
items like the claim that all three
defendants had confessed. Powers had
essentially collaborated with McCall,
he’d printed the news the sheriff deemed
was fit to print, but he’d later come to
resent the fact that he had been used by
law enforcement in Lake County. One of
the stories he had not reported in any
depth was that of Curtis Howard, which
Powers believed to be one of the keys to
the case.


--- PAGE 789 ---
L
. B. DE
 Forest hired a taxi to take her to
Burtoft’s Café, where Norma Padgett had
sought the help of Lawrence Burtoft on the
morning of the alleged rape. After
speaking with Burtoft’s mother about the
modern six-room home and three-acre
orange grove she was interested in selling,
De Forest turned the conversation to the
topic of Norma Padgett. “If we were to
tell the truth about the case, the true facts,”
a neighbor of Mrs. Burtoft’s said, “it
would bust the case wide open, and the
boys would have evidence for a new
trial.” The neighbor, De Forest wrote,
“scoffed at the rape theory—said it was
false.”
Mrs. Burtoft had other neighbors who


--- PAGE 790 ---
knew “true facts,” too, neighbors who had
even signed affidavits as to what they’d
witnessed on the morning of July 16,
1949, just outside their Okahumpka home.
Clifton and Ethel Twiss were already
awake that Saturday morning when,
sometime between 6 and 6:30 a.m., they
heard a car slow down in front of their
house. They heard the motor turn off, and a
moment later, when Clifton Twiss “heard
the motor start up again,” he looked out
his window and saw her: a young lady,
“quite small and slender,” in a light pink
dress; she was carrying a white handbag.
She did not look disheveled, and she did
not seem to be panicked. She walked
away from the car, “about 4, 5 or 6 feet
away—walking toward Center Hill,” and


--- PAGE 791 ---
when she got to the fork she simply paced
back and forth for about thirty minutes,
Twiss stated—he and his wife had taken
turns observing her through binoculars.
They’d thought she was a hitchhiker, but it
seemed funny to them “that a lady would
be hitching a ride at 6 o’clock in the
morning.” The small, dark car had driven
past the Twiss house “on the way to
Groveland,” after the lady had been
dropped off; a white man was driving.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Twiss had agreed to
sign statements about what they’d seen that
morning, but they had refused to testify on
behalf of the defense: “Wouldn’t do to be
called ‘nigger lover,’ ” Clifton Twiss
said.
One of Rowland Watts’s sources had


--- PAGE 792 ---
informed him that the initial “police
alarm,” which had been radioed before
Norma was found, may have indicated that
the deputies were searching for a Buick.
Indeed, when Deputy James Yates showed
up at the Groveland jail on the following
morning, one of the first questions he
asked Charles Greenlee was “Where’s
that new Buick or old Buick you was in?”
Also, the Twisses were later shown
pictures of a small, dark Buick, which,
they’d said, resembled the car outside
their house on the morning of July 16. And
Curtis Howard had testified in court that
on July 16 he had been driving a ’46
Buick. “I know you realize the
significance and value of untangling the
Buick car and Curtis Howard’s activities


--- PAGE 793 ---
that night,” M. C. Thomas wrote to Watts,
who had begun to suspect there was a
“probability that [Howard] knew the
Padgetts before” that weekend in July.
Watts’s suspicions about Curtis
Howard were well-grounded. In the days
following the alleged rape, Howard had
told several people around Lake County
that “it was he who had discovered and
rescued [Norma Padgett] as she wandered
in the woods.” By the time of the trial,
however, his story had become more
consistent with Norma’s account. In court
Howard had testified that after Willie
Padgett arrived at Dean’s filling station in
Leesburg and told Howard that Norma had
been kidnapped, Howard phoned his
uncle, Deputy Leroy Campbell, who


--- PAGE 794 ---
appeared at Dean’s in a matter of minutes
and took Padgett away in his car to
investigate. That might have been the end
of the story for this average filling-station
attendant who placed a helpful call to
police, but it wasn’t. Around 6:30 a.m.,
after he was relieved at Dean’s, Howard
was on his way to Groveland for a cup of
coffee when, he’d claimed, he spotted a
young blond girl “sitting in the grass” by
the side of the road. Howard slowed his
car. He knew that his uncle, a deputy
sheriff, had set out with Willie Padgett to
find his seventeen-year-old wife, who had
been kidnapped by four black men a few
hours earlier—he’d even told people
afterward that on leaving work he’d gone
to look for the girl himself—yet,


--- PAGE 795 ---
inexplicably, after seeing a young girl (in
a torn dress, by Howard’s account) sitting
in the grass by the side of the road just
after sunrise, Curtis Howard did not
connect her to Padgett’s missing teenage
wife. He’d testified that he “didn’t pay too
much attention” to the girl and kept driving
on to Groveland.
At about 7 a.m. Howard arrived at a
café in Groveland. There he ran into his
uncle and another deputy, James Yates,
along with Willie Padgett. They had still
not found Norma Padgett, and Curtis
Howard still made no mention of the girl
he’d seen only minutes before. Instead, at
Yates’s request, Howard agreed to drive
Padgett home; Willie wanted to change his
shirt. In the eight-mile ride to Bay Lake


--- PAGE 796 ---
they made two stops at the houses of
Norma’s relatives; Willie would testify
that he “thought she might have gotten
some way to get home.” On one of those
stops, Willie’s sister-in-law showed
Howard a picture of Norma. Only then, it
would appear, did Curtis Howard figure
that he knew where Norma was.
O
RMOND POWERS HAD
 no problem
expounding the flaws in the prosecution’s
case against the Groveland Boys: the lack
of medical evidence; Norma Padgett’s
reputation and credibility, both dubious;
“vagaries in both the husband’s and wife’s
stories”; “a series of marital rifts” that
were, Powers said, “substantiated.”


--- PAGE 797 ---
Powers told the former Sentinel  editor M.
C. Thomas that, in his opinion, “the four
boys were all mental superiors to the
alleged rape victim and her off-again, on-
again spouse.”
What Powers could not to his own
satisfaction explain were the strange
coincidences that brought Curtis Howard
into the Groveland story, most notably the
fact that Howard had actually “seen the
girl not far from the alleged attack scene.”
Powers speculated that Howard might
have a “Dick Tracy complex”—he was
frequently observed hanging around the
sheriff’s office with his uncle, Deputy
Leroy Campbell, when not at the filling
station—and thus “he apparently started
looking for the missing girl on his own


--- PAGE 798 ---
hook.” What did not make sense to
Powers, though, was that Howard would
fail to attach any significance to a young
blond girl he’d seen by the side of the
road at the exact time that he’d set out in
his Buick to look for a young blond girl
who’d reportedly been abducted by four
black men at a roadside.
Rowland Watts compiled a list of
“comments on defense in second
Groveland trials” should the NAACP be
successful before the U.S. Supreme Court.
It was clear that Watts gave credence to
Mr. and Mrs. Twiss’s statements. Watts
believed that Curtis Howard had not
driven past Norma Padgett on the morning
of July 16, 1949, but rather, the young
filling-station attendant had driven to that


--- PAGE 799 ---
spot and let Norma out of his car by the
side of the road. In his comments, under
the section heading “Discredit Curtis
Howard,” Watts listed a series of
questions: “Why did he go to Groveland
in the morning? Did he stop his car at
Okahumpka? How close was Norma to
car? Why didn’t he stop, get out, and talk
to her, knowing that a girl had been
abducted in that area? Why didn’t he
mention fact of having seen girl to Yates
and Padgett in café? Try to pin his own
activities that night and the probability that
he knew the Padgetts before.”
O
N MARSHALL’S RETURN
 to the New
York office after his travels in Tokyo and


--- PAGE 800 ---
Korea, which had overextended his
calendar and his energy, he resumed
working with his New York office staff on
preparation of the Groveland Boys case
for the Supreme Court. He had intended to
argue the case himself, but his trip to the
Far East, and his monthlong absence,
made him reconsider his plan. He faced an
awkward decision. While Robert Carter
was more than capable as a counsel, he
was not as especially familiar with the
case as Jack Greenberg, who had
prepared the brief. Greenberg, on the
other hand, lacked Carter’s experience,
since he had only recently started working
at the NAACP offices, and although he
had already gained Marshall’s confidence,
he was not yet ready, in Marshall’s


--- PAGE 801 ---
opinion, to argue his own Supreme Court
case.
In early December, Franklin Williams
wrote to Marshall, pleading for the chance
to argue before the Supreme Court. “I am
sure you can appreciate my having this
desire,” Williams wrote, adding that it
“would be the logical conclusion” of his
association with the Groveland case.
Marshall, however, was dismissive. “To
pull you out of the west coast for a week
or two would certainly deprive the
Association of your services during that
period,” he wrote, adding, “I think you
will agree that it will be better to leave
things as they are.”
His point made, Marshall soon realized
that he did not have any other real choices.


--- PAGE 802 ---
His differences with Williams did not
prevent him from acknowledging the
younger attorney’s notable legal talent, not
to mention his unmatched grasp of the
Groveland case, and in the winter of 1951
he brought the “exiled” Williams back
east to argue 
Shepherd v. Florida
 before
the Supreme Court. Marshall
acknowledged that Williams was not
merely the best available choice for the
job but also probably the best lawyer to
handle the arguments, period.
On March 9, Marshall, in a heavy
winter overcoat and fedora, arrived on the
steps of the U.S. Supreme Court, where he
posed for a photo with his LDF team: Jack
Greenberg, Franklin Williams, and Robert
Carter. Alex Akerman, who had worked


--- PAGE 803 ---
with Greenberg on the brief for the
appeal, as he himself had presented the
case for the Groveland Boys’ defense
before Judge Truman Futch in Tavares,
had traveled up from Florida to see the
attorney he had partnered at the original
trial, Frank Williams, argue before the
nine justices on the Supreme Court. On the
trip north, Akerman had run into Reeves
Bowen, the assistant attorney general of
Florida, against whom he had argued the
Groveland case before the Florida
Supreme Court. Akerman had wondered
why Bowen had decided to come to
Washington himself to argue 
Shepherd v.
Florida
. “Well,” Bowen had responded,
“I wasn’t going to send anybody else up to
be slaughtered.” For, once the Court had


--- PAGE 804 ---
ruled on Cassell , Bowen had little doubt
as to what the outcome would be in
Shepherd
.
“Oyez! Oyez! Oyez!” the marshal of the
court bellowed. “All persons having
business before the Honorable, the
Supreme Court of the United States, are
admonished to draw near and give their
attention, for the Court is now sitting. God
save the United States and this Honorable
Court!”
Shepherd v. Florida
 was called. Robert
Carter, who was sharing the case with
Williams, approached the podium. The
NAACP lawyers were set to argue three
specific issues before the Court: jury
exclusion, change of venue, and lack of
adequate time to prepare a defense. For


--- PAGE 805 ---
reasons known only to him, Marshall had
assigned the jury issue to Carter. Williams
later stated that it “irritated me a little bit
that Thurgood gave him that assignment
because that was the issue on which I was
probably at the time, according to
Thurgood, the nation’s leading authority.”
Still, Williams wasn’t surprised by the
move, as “Thurgood and I did not get
along anyhow, not too well.”
No sooner had Carter begun to present
the jury exclusion argument than, in
Williams’s words, he “botched it up”:
Frankfurter immediately interrupted him
by citing “five or six other systematic
exclusion of jury cases” and asking Carter
if the Groveland case proved to be the
same as them.


--- PAGE 806 ---
“Yes,” Carter answered, but when he
attempted to proceed, he was again
interrupted, this time by Justice Robert
Jackson. He failed to see why Carter
needed “to say anything more” rather than
simply to quote from Florida’s admission
that it used a racial proportional system
for jury selection.
“Well,” Carter asked rhetorically,
“what is the point of arguing for them?”
With that, he left the podium and sat down.
It was a strange beginning, and
awkward. Certainly Williams would have
handled the issue differently, but he had
been assigned to argue change of venue
and lack of time to prepare a defense. And
he soon proved himself to be equally
capable of producing an awkward


--- PAGE 807 ---
moment. Williams opened by “paint[ing] a
picture” of the atmosphere in Lake County
at the time of the Groveland Boys trial.
Oral arguments came easily to the
dynamic, eloquent New York lawyer, and
since he had experienced firsthand the
antagonistic, tension-filled environment he
was describing, he effectively
accomplished the task of showing that “it
was impossible to get a fair and impartial
trial” in Lake County. Most important,
Williams knew the record “backwards
and forward,” and the appellate record
included all those newspaper stories that
he and Akerman had collected: stories of
white mobs burning Negro homes in
Groveland; articles quoting Sheriff Willis
McCall’s proclamations to the press, such


--- PAGE 808 ---
as his notices that he had obtained
confessions from all three defendants.
Then, for no reason that was clear to him
or Marshall or the justices or anyone else,
Williams addressed Frankfurter: “And
Mr. Justice Frankfurter, this is a rape
case.”
Williams cringed at the words he
himself had spoken, and not just because
Supreme Court protocol required that
lawyers, unless they are directly posed a
question from the bench, address only the
chief justice. “Jesus, I wanted to go
through the floor,” Williams recalled, “but
I was so conscious of the fact that
Frankfurter had considered me excellent.”
Justice Jackson, not resisting the
awkwardness of the moment, leaned


--- PAGE 809 ---
forward and asked Frankfurter, wryly,
“Felix, since when are you an authority on
rape?”
Nonetheless, in Greenberg’s estimation,
Williams argued the case “superbly.” In
Florida’s response to Williams, the
assistant attorney general Reeves Bowen,
as he had anticipated, got slaughtered.
Bowen had barely uttered his denial of the
racial tension that Williams had so
dramatically presented on the change of
venue issue when Justice Jackson halted
him with the proposition that “the hardest
thing for you to overcome” is the
establishment by Judge Truman Futch of
special rules “in anticipation of some kind
of violence.”
Likewise, Bowen’s attempt to defend


--- PAGE 810 ---
the jury selection process was stopped
short, and he was forced to admit that “a
system of racial proportional
representation had deliberately been
used” to select grand jurors in the
Groveland Boys case. His argument
crumbled when he justified the jury
selection process in Lake County in terms
of “the historical background of the
South,” stating that the county
commissioners “just don’t think about
Negroes as jurors” in the same way that
they would not “think of having Negroes
on a list for a social function.” Justice
Harold Burton wondered if there was
“anything to prevent” jury commissioners
from putting the names of both whites and
blacks in a box and “drawing them out by


--- PAGE 811 ---
chance.” Justice Tom C. Clark marveled
that Lake County had never heard of
placing the names on a “jury wheel” and
allowing spins of the wheel to randomly
select the names of prospective jurors.
Both justices drew laughs from the
spectators and reporters. Bowen absorbed
the judicial blows, and Marshall grinned
from ear to ear.
Marshall relished any moment in
Supreme Court proceedings that forced
Southerners to defend their Jim Crow
traditions before the country’s top legal
minds. It almost made up for the constant
humiliation he’d had to endure so often in
the courtrooms of the South. Except that
when the lawyer for the state of Florida
walked out of the Supreme Court building


--- PAGE 812 ---
at the end of arguments, he would shake
hands with his opponents and return safely
to his home in the south of the South. No
one was going to chase Assistant Attorney
General of Florida Reeves Bowen out of
the capital at ninety miles per hour, or
drag him at gunpoint to a waiting mob
along the banks of the Potomac.
Akerman, too, headed back to Florida,
and Williams boarded a long flight back
to the West Coast. Marshall joined the
other LDF attorneys on the train to New
York.


--- PAGE 813 ---
CHAPTER 15: YOU
HAVE PISSED IN MY
WHISKEY


--- PAGE 814 ---
Sheriff Willis McCall. (
Courtesy of the
State Archives of Florida
)
T
HURGOOD MARSHALL SENT
 a twelve-
word telegram to Dellia Irvin: “Won new


--- PAGE 815 ---
trial for Walter Irvin in Supreme Court of
United States.”
On April 9, 1951, exactly one month
after they had heard arguments in
Shepherd v. Florida
, the nine Supreme
Court justices handed down a per curiam
decision—that is, a decision authored by
the Court as a whole rather than by a
specific judge—and thus were the
convictions of Samuel Shepherd and
Walter Irvin overturned.
It had been Robert Carter’s argument in
regard to Lake County’s grand jury
selection process that had afforded the
grounds for reversal. Justice Robert
Jackson wrote a concurring opinion, in
which he was joined by Felix Frankfurter,
scorching the roles that Judge Truman


--- PAGE 816 ---
Futch, State Attorney Jesse Hunter, Sheriff
Willis McCall, and even Mabel Norris
Reese of the 
Mount Dora Topic
 had
played in convictions that “do not meet
any civilized conception of due process of
law.” Justice Jackson pointed to
“prejudicial influences outside the
courtroom . . . [that] were brought to bear
on this jury with such force that the
conclusion is inescapable that these
defendants were prejudged as guilty, and
the trial was but a legal gesture to register
a verdict already dictated by the press and
the public opinion which it generated.” So
it was, Jackson opined, that “[t]he only
chance these Negroes had of acquittal
would have been in the courage and
decency of some sturdy and forthright


--- PAGE 817 ---
white person of sufficient standing to face
and live down the odium among his white
neighbors that such a vote, if required,
would have brought.” In the end, the
justice accounted the jury selection issue
on which the two convictions were
overturned to be of “only theoretical
importance.” To characterize aptly
Florida’s handling of the Groveland Boys
case required, for Justice Jackson,
stronger language than that offered by
counsel or by the precedent cited in
Cassell v. Texas
;
 and in a stinging
conclusion, he provided it: “The case
presents one of the best examples of one
of the worst menaces to American justice.
It is on that ground that I would reverse.”
With those two sentences Justice


--- PAGE 818 ---
Jackson had indicted the legal
establishment and law enforcement offices
of Lake County. Reporters scurried for
comment from county officials. While
Judge Truman Futch refused to issue any
statement on the Supreme Court’s
decision, a justice on the Florida Supreme
Court allowed that he was “not surprised”
by the ruling. Florida attorney general
Richard W. Ervin stated that he was “very
disappointed” by the decision, but “the
thing to do now is to go ahead and re-try
the case as quickly as possible and
dispose of it.” Jesse Hunter was less
restrained. For months he had been openly
critical of the NAACP’s fund-raising
efforts to “perfect this appeal,” efforts for
which there was “no reason whatever . . .


--- PAGE 819 ---
except to pay their lawyers.” Ironically, it
had been Hunter’s disingenuous attempt to
demonstrate lack of bias by handpicking
and seating a black man on the Groveland
grand jury that had provided the NAACP
lawyers and the U.S. Supreme Court the
constitutional grounds for reversal.
Sidestepping questions about Jackson’s
blistering concurring opinion, Hunter
insisted to the 
Pittsburgh Courier
 that the
case had been overturned on a
“technicality.” He also noted that he was
“very fond of Atty. Franklin H. Williams
of the NAACP.”
As for the image-obsessed sheriff of
Lake County, Willis McCall, he was
infuriated by the Supreme Court’s
decision and his bad press. In a public


--- PAGE 820 ---
statement he ranted against the Court’s
reversal and “subversive influences” like
the NAACP and the CIO Newspaper
Guild: “The fact that they did not appeal
the case of Greenlee along with the other
two is an admission of guilt. The fact is
that our U.S. Supreme Court let a few
minority groups such as the NAACP and
their eloquent and sensational lies and the
receiving of awards from the CIO
Newspaper Guild, such as received by
Ted Poston, Negro writer for the 
New
York Post
, influence them to such a
prejudiced extent that they saw fit to
reverse one of the fairest and most
impartial trials I have ever witnessed. It is
shocking to think that our Supreme Court
would bow to such subversive


--- PAGE 821 ---
influences.”
In twenty months McCall’s resentment
that black reporters and the NAACP had
descended on Lake County “to see that
justice was done” at the trial of the
Groveland Boys had hardly abated, and he
sneered at the claims made by the black
New York lawyer and the award-winning
reporter about being chased out of Lake
County after the trial: “They realized they
were meddling where they had no
business. . . . I informed them that no one
had invited them to Florida. That they
were not needed here and were only
making things more complicated. . . . I
suggested they return home or where they
could feel safe, that we could handle
things here in an orderly manner without


--- PAGE 822 ---
the interference and confusion they were
causing.”
Twenty-two months before, in mid-July,
when that angry mob was gathering
outside the Tavares jail, Willis McCall
had staved off a lynching of the Groveland
Boys. Tacitly, he had also made a pact
with the men from Bay Lake: that they
would allow the rule of law to take its
course, but if swift and electric justice did
not come to Norma Padgett’s rapists as
McCall had promised—if the law did not
do right—they would restore their white
man’s justice to Lake County. McCall was
now going to have to answer to them, and
he was going to have to contend with
another black circus, bigger than the one
before, making a mockery of lawanorder


--- PAGE 823 ---
in his county and a grandstand of the court.
He bristled at the thought of another trial.
“I have it directly from Sheriff Dave Starr
of Orange County that Sheriff McCall is
‘sweating blood’ over the Supreme Court
decision,” reporter Ormond Powers told
his former editor M. C. Thomas. McCall’s
“mental attitude . . . is difficult to
understand if his hands are clean—which I
doubt—knowing something of Florida
politics and gambling tieups.”
Alex Akerman had contacted McCall by
phone after the Groveland Boys trial.
Before the lawyer had been able even to
state his business, McCall had exploded.
In a tirade he had warned Akerman—a
“God Damn Nigger Lover”—not to return
to Lake County. Akerman was appalled,


--- PAGE 824 ---
and frightened, by the sheriff’s vitriol,
especially since Shepherd and Irvin were
at that point headed to the electric chair
and Greenlee to a chain gang. Yet McCall
was not boasting or gloating; he was
brooding. For months he brooded,
collected his press clippings, and added
new names to his enemies list. He
followed the progress of the Groveland
Boys case through the courts; he grimaced
at the names: Williams, Akerman,
Williams, Marshall, Carter, Jackson,
Williams. They’d be back. They’d be
back, he’d tell himself, and then he’d say
to himself, as he often did, “I don’t push
easy. Nope. I don’t push easy.”


--- PAGE 825 ---
T
WO DAYS AFTER
 the Supreme Court
decision in 
Shepherd v. Florida
, Walter
White sent a telegram to Franklin
Williams in San Francisco: “Our warm
appreciation for the notable part you
played in speedy victory won in Supreme
Court in Groveland case.” That same day
in April, President Harry Truman fired
General Douglas MacArthur on the
grounds that he was “unable to give his
whole support to the policies of the U.S.
Government.” Although Marshall did not
pretend that Truman’s decision had
anything to do with MacArthur’s dilatory
response to the segregation of black
servicemen in the U.S. Army, he was
pleased to note that MacArthur’s


--- PAGE 826 ---
successor, General Matthew Ridgway,
“desegregated in about three weeks.
Desegregated the whole thing.”
Marshall was determined not to be in
any way dilatory in the NAACP’s
response to the 
Shepherd v. Florida
decision; he would ensure that the defense
in the second trial of the Groveland Boys
in Tavares would have adequate time to
prepare. With Shepherd and Irvin’s
arraignment date set by State Attorney
Jesse Hunter for August 15, Marshall
immediately began putting a defense team
in place, and Jack Greenberg immediately
volunteered, not just because he felt it was
an important case but also because he
found it impossible to resist the prospect
of a criminal trial in the highly charged


--- PAGE 827 ---
racial atmosphere of the South. If “it
wasn’t very smart,” as Greenberg said of
his decision—for Franklin Williams’s
Lake County stories could be worrying—
the experience would prove to be as
heart-stopping as it was eye-opening.
Alex Akerman had moved to Virginia,
and while he would be available for the
trial, Marshall still needed an attorney in
Florida to work the case: to initiate
investigations, to pursue fresh leads (many
of them a result of Norman Bunin’s exposé
in the 
St. Petersburg Times
), to file
briefs. Paul Perkins proved to be the man.
A thirty-two-year-old black lawyer from
Orlando who had attended Howard
University Law School after serving in the
U.S. Army, Perkins seized on the


--- PAGE 828 ---
opportunity to work with Thurgood
Marshall, even at the meager $3.75 per
hour the LDF could afford to pay; he’d
grown accustomed to working long hours
for small pay or, more commonly among
his indigent clients, for “ham or oranges.”
Deep-voiced, confident, Perkins carried
himself taller and larger than his thin,
five-foot-five frame, and he shared none
of Franklin Williams’s compunctions
about driving deep into Lake County and
knocking on doors. On his trips into
Groveland, however, he would take along
with him a friend’s young son, because,
supposedly, some “strange code of ethics”
prevented the Ku Klux Klan from
accosting a black man in the company of
his children.


--- PAGE 829 ---
Part two of the Groveland Boys case
began officially on July 6, when Jesse
Hunter reindicted Samuel Shepherd and
Walter Irvin, who had been transported
from Raiford to Tavares by Sheriff Willis
McCall and his deputy James Yates. (At
the state prison, McCall had observed to
the guard, for the benefit of Shepherd and
Irvin, “You all haven’t electrocuted those
niggers yet? When you do, I want to watch
them flinch.” And Yates had added, “Wish
you all would run so that I could shoot the
damn hell out of you.”) After the
reindictment, Hunter assured reporters that
the state’s case against the defendants was
airtight and that the NAACP was just
“causing trouble” by employing a legal
technicality in an attempt to keep two


--- PAGE 830 ---
black men out of the electric chair.
Nonetheless, he was going to make certain
that this time round “plenty of Negroes”
were available for jury service, he said,
then added that he’d not mind trying the
defendants “before an all-Negro jury.”
The Lake County retrial of the
Groveland Boys case promised the
NAACP a national stage as large as that of
the Scottsboro Boys twenty years before,
and Thurgood Marshall was determined to
take every advantage of it both for the
political stature of the NAACP and for the
cause of blacks in America. Whereas a
“defense by committee” between the
NAACP and communist organizations had
complicated the Scottsboro Boys case, in
the matter of Groveland, the NAACP,


--- PAGE 831 ---
convinced of the defendants’ innocence
from the outset, had not hesitated to take
the case, thus preventing the Civil Rights
Congress or any other defense groups
from encroaching on its juridical territory.
With the new trial likely to command the
attention of a national event, Marshall
recognized that the defense required not
only an attorney with estimable
credentials and a record of success but
also one with extensive public relations
experience, a nationwide reputation, and
the fortitude to perform unflinchingly on
the unfriendly turf of Sheriff Willis
McCall. Marshall liked to say that he had
“a big yellow streak running down my
back” when traveling in the South. But not
inside courtrooms and on courthouse


--- PAGE 832 ---
steps: there he’d neither shirk his
commitment to protecting the
constitutional rights of powerless blacks
like Irvin and Shepherd nor shrink from a
fight with the Southern white
establishment in the shape of a sheriff or a
state attorney. By the summer of 1951
Thurgood Marshall had decided that he
himself would represent the Groveland
defendants, and with him to Lake County
he would bring the swagger and
confidence of the man who, just after
Brown
, would tell one newspaper
publisher, “You can say all you want, but
those white crackers are going to get tired
of having Negro lawyers beating them
every day in court.”
In advance of their first trip to Florida,


--- PAGE 833 ---
Jack Greenberg asked Marshall if he
should reserve separate rooms or a double
for the overnight train ride south. “I don’t
sleep with nobody who don’t wear lacy
drawers,” Marshall informed the eager
young lawyer, who later recorded his
impressions of their travel aboard a
Seaboard Air Line train out of
Pennsylvania Station. Although Greenberg
had heard Marshall’s stories about his
own days as a waiter in the dining car on
the B&O, he had not expected that the
porters would accord Marshall such
reverence, and privilege. No matter that
“white travelers were not yet accustomed
to seeing blacks in dining cars,” Marshall
received celebrity treatment as well as
“treats like the outside cut of the roast


--- PAGE 834 ---
beef” from the chef. Waiters kept the
bourbon flowing “even in dry states,”
while Marshall and Greenberg worked on
briefs or read trial testimony to each other
and took copious notes. They spent the
daylight hours in Marshall’s room, and at
night they’d ride in the front cars for
blacks as the train lumbered through the
South, past the ramshackle houses huddled
in the darkness.
Before he had left for the West Coast,
Franklin Williams had briefed both
Marshall and Greenberg on the Groveland
case. Williams was convinced that no
rape had occurred in the early morning
hours of July 16, 1949. “Norma Padgett
and her husband are very low class
people,” Williams said, “who live down


--- PAGE 835 ---
in this isolated little swamp area not too
far from Groveland,” an area where
Williams had conducted interviews with
people who knew the young couple. From
them he had gathered that the Padgetts had
separated prior to the alleged rape; that
because of possible spousal abuse, Norma
had gone home to live with her parents.
Willie had been trying to mend things
between them, so he’d asked Norma out to
a square dance. They’d picked up some
whiskey at Frisz’s Bar and Grill, then
headed over to Clermont, where they were
drinking and dancing until the hall closed
at 1 a.m.
What happened thereafter, in
Williams’s estimation, was that a very
drunk Willie Padgett had tried to have sex


--- PAGE 836 ---
with Norma in the car, had maybe even
gotten rough with her, and “she gets
hysterical and she jumps out of the car and
runs away,” leaving behind Willie, who’s
scared that she’s going home to “tell the
Cracker parents and brothers of hers that
he had attempted to rape her.” And that,
said Williams, would be “the end of him.”
For it was not uncommon in central
Florida for the KKK to act as an enforcer
of community morality, with night riders
arriving unannounced and ready to mete
out punishment at the home of a white man
reported to be beating his wife or at the
house of a woman who’d been cheating on
her husband or drinking and neglecting her
children. Klan informants had described
to FBI agents a “regulation strap four


--- PAGE 837 ---
inches wide and three feet long nailed to a
round wooden handle” that had been used
on more than a few occasions to correct
moral lapses in Lake County. Coy Tyson
could easily “put the finger on” Willie
Padgett if he were to learn that his
daughter Norma was having problems
again.
The rape story, Williams firmly
believed, was Willie Padgett’s idea. His
reunion with his wife in the early light of
that Saturday morning, when Willie and
Curtis Howard, on their drive back to
Okahumpka, encountered Norma in
Lawrence Burtoft’s car, was as
unremarkable as Burtoft recounted it
because the couple had yet to fix their
story. Willie had spoken of kidnapping,


--- PAGE 838 ---
rape, and black men to Howard, but
Norma had said nothing to young Burtoft
that even hinted at violence of any kind. In
Williams’s surmise, Willie Padgett had
run up to his wife and, “out of hearing
distance” of Howard and Burtoft, had said
to her, “You know, Baby, you just been
raped by four niggers. Don’t say anything
else. This is what I have told him.”
Marshall and Greenberg started a list of
people to track down and investigate, so
as to be able to counter more effectively
the prosecution’s evidence in the retrial.
Locating Lawrence Burtoft was going to
be critical to the defense; State Attorney
Jesse Hunter had essentially obliterated
the young man’s bearing on the case, and
for an obvious reason—he contradicted


--- PAGE 839 ---
Norma Padgett’s testimony. Paul Perkins
had tracked down some alibi witnesses,
including a waitress at Club Eaton, a
college girl, who recalled that Shepherd
and Irvin had tarried there until at least 2
a.m. A private detective in Miami had
recommended to Marshall an expert to
evaluate the plaster casts and tire tracks
that had roused Franklin Williams’s
suspicions. The list would grow.
So would the legwork. Once they had
gotten settled in Orlando—Marshall
among some willing black families and
Greenberg at the San Juan Hotel, because
“feelings generated by the Groveland case
still ran so high” there was no family
willing to risk a Jewish lawyer being
spotted at its address—Greenberg and


--- PAGE 840 ---
Perkins conducted investigations around
Groveland during the day, and at night
Marshall and Perkins would join
Greenberg at the hotel, which was owned
by a friend of Alex Akerman, for strategy
meetings. On one of their daytime
excursions, Greenberg and Perkins paid a
visit to the Irvins, who still lived in
Groveland, for unlike the “uppity” Henry
Shepherd, who’d deserted the citrus
groves for a farm of his own (and been
ruined for it), Cleve Irvin knew his black
man’s place. Their visit revealed that
Walter had rented his room in his parents’
“unpainted, weather-beaten” home;
moreover, the door to the room had a lock
on it. Therefore, Greenberg reasoned, the
deputies’ confiscation of Walter’s pants


--- PAGE 841 ---
and boots as evidence constituted “an
illegal search and seizure,” since Dellia
Irvin would have had no legal authority to
hand over her son’s belongings.
As Greenberg traveled around Lake
County under “battlefield tension” it
struck the young lawyer that residents who
were unwilling or afraid to voice their
opinions about the Groveland Boys case
might respond more readily to the
impersonality of a public opinion poll as
to whether the defendants could get a fair
trial in Lake County. Marshall agreed, and
the NAACP was able to hire, at cost, an
up-and-coming pollster by the name of
Louis Harris, on behalf of the Roper
Center for Public Opinion Research at
Williams College, to conduct a survey of


--- PAGE 842 ---
the Lake County population. Harris soon
discovered he had a shadow, and he
claimed that ultimately Willis McCall
chased him out of town.
Through the summer and into the fall,
Greenberg and Marshall traveled by train
back and forth between New York and
Florida. Steadily they were building a
defense for the Groveland Boys, while
Perkins continued tirelessly to comb Lake
County for potential witnesses. The
strategy, put in place by Marshall and
Williams in the first Groveland trial, had
been to “create an error in the case, so that
we could get it reversed on appeal.” Once
they’d won the appeal, it was the lawyers’
hope that with the passage of time,
“feelings would have leveled off and you


--- PAGE 843 ---
would have a chance”: a chance perhaps
to prove reasonable doubt in the second
trial; or maybe Norma Padgett would have
“a change of heart.” The lawyers’ legwork
was beginning to make of chance the
possibility of an acquittal. Time at least
appeared now to be on their side. As
Williams had reminded Greenberg and
Marshall months before, “Anything can
happen in the interim.”
L
. B. DE
 Forest was having no problems
insinuating herself into the daily life of the
Lake County communities she visited. She
had contacted the ministers at various
churches and set up meetings with church
members to discuss the abolition of


--- PAGE 844 ---
capital punishment. The Baptists and the
Methodists were especially supportive of
her cause; a Catholic priest, on the other
hand, advised her not to waste her time.
“Prisons breed criminals,” he’d averred,
and “no matter how much is done for
them, they plan for one thing, escape and
freedom. They will kill to free
themselves, if they are given the
opportunity.” She spent several hours with
Judge F. R. Brandon of Groveland, who
avouched his opposition to “chairs of
torture” and entered his signature in her
“book” petitioning support of her
abolitionist campaign. The judge also
offered some personal views on the
Groveland Boys case; he “knew one of the
boys who were arrested for rape, and


--- PAGE 845 ---
thought the punishment too severe,” and he
deemed the Tysons and Padgetts to be
“drinking, shiftless, no-account white
trash.” A newspaper editor in Leesburg
meanwhile agreed to publish her poem
“Mother Love.” And her “World Peace”
pin continued to rouse interest among the
county residents. She was making useful
connections.
Not everyone was receptive to Miss De
Forest’s cause. On August 4 in Leesburg,
she’d spoken with some of the younger
police officers and firemen who had been
quite willing to sign her book until the
chief of police, Bill Fisher, convinced
them that to do so might not be wise. On
that same occasion Miss De Forest met the
man she’d been warned to stay clear of in


--- PAGE 846 ---
Lake County. He was wearing his white
Stetson as he lumbered toward her. He
looked askance at her peace pin, and her
petition. When she voiced her disfavor of
capital punishment, enlisting names of
abolitionist supporters like Alex
Akerman, he growled that Alex Akerman
was “no good,” and as for her stance on
the death penalty, he dissented, “ ‘An eye
for an eye’ is the justice I believe in.”
Then Willis McCall showed her his back
and walked away.
More than a few whites that Miss De
Forest encountered—Harry McDonald,
for one—firmly believed that the
Groveland Boys had confessed to rape, as
the sheriff had so widely advertised. If De
Forest didn’t believe it, Harry suggested


--- PAGE 847 ---
she visit the state prison in Raiford, where
“she could hear it from their own lips.”
Sure though Harry was, on the night of the
rape, he himself, as night watchman at
Edge Mercantile, had crossed paths with
Charles Greenlee miles away from the
crime scene. In Harry’s opinion, all four
defendants “should have been shot on the
spot and not cost the state the expense of a
trial.”
Curtis Howard signed Miss De Forest’s
book. When she looked more closely at
the signature, however, De Forest
discovered that the shifty Howard had
written down the name of a coworker,
Marvin Smith. And Marvin Smith, it
turned out luckily for Miss De Forest,
knew “the Padgetts and their friends


--- PAGE 848 ---
intimately.” Newly wed, Smith and his
wife, Marian, the organist at the Baptist
church, obliged De Forest with a tour of
Groveland. As they drove past the cement
shack that had housed the Blue Flame,
Mrs. Smith noted that it had been “closed
after the rape incident but is now rented to
a negro family.” Mrs. Smith also noted
that Norma and Willie “were acquainted
with the four colored boys”—not
surprisingly, as Norma came from “poor
whites” and “did not bear a very good
reputation.” Another of Howard’s friends
and coworkers, Thomas Virgil Ferguson,
“had nothing good to say about the
Padgetts,” either. As De Forest wrote in
her report, Ferguson “was disgusted with
the Padgetts, and believes they could tell


--- PAGE 849 ---
more, if a little pressure were used.”
With her peace pin and petition book, L.
B. De Forest continued to make her way
toward Bay Lake, the clannish swampland
in the south of Lake County, an area where
she assumed most outsiders felt, and were,
unwelcome. Seemingly oblivious to
danger, and determined to find Willie
Padgett, she boarded a bus in Leesburg on
August 2. She got off the bus in Groveland
and asked the proprietor at the station
where Padgett lived. He suggested she
talk to “Ma Padgett,” who lived in a house
on Main Street. Ma Padgett invited the
pleasant young woman in for lunch. De
Forest was surprised by the hospitality.
As it happened, a son had borrowed the
family car, so Ma Padgett wasn’t able to


--- PAGE 850 ---
drive her unexpected visitor down to Bay
Lake; however, one of her neighbors, a
Mrs. Flowers Cockcroft, was willing to
help. A short while later, Miss De Forest
was traveling over a dirt road with Mrs.
Cockcroft and her young children—with
the wife and children of the man who, as
Terence McCarthy had briefed De Forest,
had led the night-riding mob in Groveland
—past the scattered bricks and charred
remains of Henry Shepherd’s home. Mrs.
Cockcroft remained silent, her eyes
focused on the road before her.
Norma and Willie were not at home.
Nearby, Norma’s aunt was, and she
introduced Miss De Forest to her “very
cordial” family and invited her to spend
the night. She met Padgetts and Tysons and


--- PAGE 851 ---
Tomlinsons, who were also related, and
she observed that they “live in a primitive
way” in Bay Lake: “No bathrooms, out-
houses a distance from the house; electric
lights and oil stoves.” On fifty acres of
Tyson property were “a horse, cow, hogs,
chickens and tractor,” as well as a smaller
house, owned by Norma’s uncle, in which
Willie and Norma were living together
again. That Betty Lou Tomlinson, Norma’s
cousin, “talked about the case quite
frankly” with the visitor did not sit well
with other of the relatives: The Joiners
especially “did not like the idea,” De
Forest wrote. Betty Lou affirmed that the
Groveland Boys had been offered liquor
“to repay them” after they’d stopped to
help Norma and Willie by the side of the


--- PAGE 852 ---
road—an important narrative detail
omitted in the trial testimony.
Late in the afternoon of August 2, on her
tenth day in Lake County, L. B. De Forest
found herself finally face-to-face with
Norma Padgett, at a prayer meeting.
Norma was holding a newborn boy in her
arms. A year after her alleged rape by the
Groveland Boys “Norma had just given
birth to a white child,” De Forest
reported, and also noted that Willie
“seems fond of his baby.” He was now
working at a nearby sawmill and
“finishing a course in farming.” Norma
and Willie took a liking to the stranger;
they, too, invited her to stay overnight and
to go fishing with them the next day. Miss
De Forest said yes, twice. In her bag


--- PAGE 853 ---
she’d been carrying around a baby gift; an
embroidered bib, should she and Norma
eventually meet. Norma accepted the bib
with a smile.
The friendliness and hospitality
emboldened De Forest. She began
circulating among the parishioners at the
prayer meeting of the Bay Lake
Missionary Baptist Church. They admired
her peace pin; they wondered about her
book. She explained that her book was a
petition to abolish capital punishment, and
the Bay Lake Baptists nodded. They
leafed through the pages, surveyed the
signatures. De Forest handed one woman
her pen. The woman turned to the last
page of signatures and penned in her
name. The book and pen were passed


--- PAGE 854 ---
from one Bay Lake resident to another,
from Tysons to Padgetts to Tomlinsons to
Joiners. “None of the Padgetts are in favor
of capital punishment,” De Forest wrote.
Miss De Forest spotted Willie Padgett.
He was standing beside Norma, Norma
with a baby in her arms. De Forest thought
that maybe “they would help to save the
two boys from the chair, and shorten the
life sentence of the youngest boy, even if
. . . they committed the alleged rape.” She
approached the young couple with a smile
on her face, with the pen and book in her
hands.
T
HURGOOD MARSHALL WAS
 in New York
on November 6, the day before


--- PAGE 855 ---
preliminary motions were scheduled to
begin in Tavares. He was planning to fly
into Orlando on the seventh. Perkins,
Greenberg, and Alex Akerman, who had
returned to Florida for the trial, would
deal with the hearings on the motions the
defense had filed. Akerman was staying at
the San Juan Hotel, as was Greenberg,
who had requested a 7 a.m. wake-up call
to allow sufficient time for him and
Akerman to drive comfortably to the
Tavares Court House with Perkins for a
10 a.m. appearance before Judge Futch.
The defense had moved for a change of
venue and for the disqualification of State
Attorney Jesse Hunter as prosecutor on
several counts, including the failure of the
prosecution to notify defense counsel of


--- PAGE 856 ---
witness Lawrence Burtoft, and its
dissemination to the press of the
defendants’ alleged confessions, which
would clearly have then become
inadmissible as evidence. The probability
of success in the removal of Hunter as
prosecutor was slim, but the possibility
for a change of venue was strong, given
the Supreme Court ruling and Justice
Robert Jackson’s concurring opinion
citing the original Lake County trial of the
case as “one of the worst menaces to
American justice.” In another county, at
the very least, the Groveland Boys would
be relieved of any further court-ordered
interactions with their greatest menace of
all, Sheriff Willis V. McCall.
Just after sundown on November 6, one


--- PAGE 857 ---
hundred fifty miles north of Orlando,
Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin were
expecting soon to be leaving the Flat Top
—the windowless, white-concrete
maximum-security facility enclosed by a
wall inside the Florida State Prison in
Raiford—where they’d spent the last two
years in their individual cells. The Flat
Top, built in 1935, housed only the most
violent offenders, and a small room in the
middle of the rectangular structure housed
the electric chair. It had been used ten
times since the two Groveland boys had
been incarcerated there. Shepherd and
Irvin could at least hope that they would
not be facing electrocution now that the
Supreme Court had overturned their
convictions and Thurgood Marshall was


--- PAGE 858 ---
handling their case. Both men were
wearing their prison-issue pants with a
dark stripe down the side. Shepherd had
thrown on a sweatshirt and a baseball cap
as well, and Irvin had put on a light jacket
for the drive down to Tavares. They
waited in their separate cells for the
prison transfer that would take them back
to Lake County for their hearing in the
morning.
That evening a black prisoner in
handcuffs had been delivered to Raiford
from Lake County by Sheriff Willis
McCall and Deputy James Yates. Killing
two birds with one stone, they’d dropped
off the new inmate and were now picking
up the two Groveland boys on death row.
They escorted the two prisoners, cuffed


--- PAGE 859 ---
together at their wrists, to McCall’s
brand-new 1951 Oldsmobile 98 with the
Rocket V8 engine. McCall ordered both
men to sit in the front seat; Irvin entered
first. Yates got in the back. Once they had
driven outside the main gate, the law
officers voiced some thinly veiled threats
and made a show of drawing and aiming
their pistols. “I am ready now for
anything,” McCall boasted, but the two
prisoners had become so accustomed to
the sheriff’s ways that “we didn’t pay
much attention to them,” Irvin said.
The sedan smoothly rode the pavement
on the long, quiet drive down U.S. 441. It
was a cool evening, and McCall had
turned on the car’s heater. He turned east
off 441, toward Weirsdale in Marion


--- PAGE 860 ---
County, and at the intersection of
Weirsdale and Umatilla roads, he pulled
up next to a car at the roadside. It was
Yates’s car; the deputy had met the sheriff
at the intersection for the drive up to
Raiford. The deputy asked McCall to wait
until he made sure his engine started, and
when it did, Yates headed east on County
Road 42, which ran through the Florida
scrub and longleaf pines of Ocala
National Forest. McCall followed slowly
behind. Several miles on, both cars turned
south on County Road 450, a little-
traveled, unlit clay road. It wasn’t the
quickest route to the Lake County jail,
Irvin knew, and he knew, too, he’d get
nowhere asking McCall questions. They
had crossed into Lake County; they were


--- PAGE 861 ---
not far from Umatilla and Willis McCall’s
house in Eustis. The sheriff knew the back
roads well.
Over the radio, McCall told Yates, “Go
on ahead.” Yates answered okay, and the
two prisoners watched the taillights of the
deputy’s car flicker as it sped away and,
taking a curve, disappeared. McCall hit
his siren briefly, then began to rattle the
steering wheel.
“Something is wrong with my left front
tire,” the sheriff said as he pulled off to
the side of the road. He reached under his
seat for a large metal flashlight with a red
band around it and got out of the car. After
checking the tires on all sides, he slid
back into the driver’s seat and continued
down the same dark road. Yates was


--- PAGE 862 ---
nowhere to be seen. The Oldsmobile had
gone maybe two miles when McCall
rattled the wheel again, and again he
stopped the car and got out. He kicked the
right front tire.
The door of the sedan swung open.
“You sons of bitches,” McCall said, “get
out and get this tire fixed.” Samuel
Shepherd set one foot down on the sandy
soil. As he stepped into the dark Florida
night, behind him, cuffed to him at the
wrist, his friend Walter Irvin stumbled out
of the car. The sheriff stepped back from
the door. He drew his gun from his
holster.
T
HURGOOD MARSHALL WAS
 sleeping


--- PAGE 863 ---
soundly at 409 Edgecombe Avenue when
the telephone awoke him early in the
November morning. It was Alex Akerman,
calling from the San Juan Hotel in
Orlando.
“Well,” he told Marshall, “we don’t
have any more case, because you don’t
have any more defendants.” Half awake,
Marshall struggled to grasp what Akerman
was telling him. “They were killed tonight
by the sheriff,” Akerman said.
The phone rang at 7 a.m. in Jack
Greenberg’s room at the San Juan. Roused
from his sleep as he’d requested, he
picked up that morning’s 
Orlando
Morning Sentinel
, which had as usual
been slid under the door. He was jolted
awake by the headline splashed across the


--- PAGE 864 ---
front page:
Lake County Sheriff Shoots Two
Negroes
Willis McCall standing before his
Oldsmobile 98. Samuel Shepherd
(
facedown
) is dead, and Walter Irvin is
critically wounded. (
Courtesy of the State
Archives of Florida
)
Greenberg tried to focus on what he


--- PAGE 865 ---
was reading. Smaller headlines jumped
out at him: “Officer Kills Suspect in
Attack Case.” “Pair Enroute to Hearing
Try Escape.” The name Sheriff Willis
McCall was everywhere on the page.
McCall had shot the Groveland boys.
Shepherd was dead. Irvin was in the
hospital, critically wounded. Tried to
escape?
Walter Irvin (
right
) survived being shot by
Sheriff Willis McCall.


--- PAGE 866 ---
( Courtesy of the State Archives of Florida )
None of it made sense to him.
Greenberg got on the phone immediately
to confirm that the paper had gotten the
story right. Yes, Shepherd was dead, but
Irvin had survived the shooting. Akerman
had already called the FBI’s Miami
office, saying he “wanted to furnish
information with regard to a murder.”
Thurgood Marshall would arrive in
Orlando later in the day. Perkins rushed
off a telegram to Governor Fuller Warren
to request an immediate investigation into
the “killing of Samuel Shepherd and
mortal wounding of Walter Irvin by
Sheriff Willis McCall.” The three lawyers
sped off to Waterman Memorial Hospital


--- PAGE 867 ---
in Eustis, where Irvin lay in critical
condition.
Greenberg, Akerman, and Perkins, as
the attorneys for Walter Irvin, were
granted permission to speak with their
client in the company of a doctor and a
nurse. They had barely glimpsed Irvin—in
a white hospital gown, his head propped
up on two pillows, strips of adhesive tape
that ran diagonally from below his left
jaw across his nose to the corner of his
right eye, a red rubber nasogastric feeding
tube inserted through his nose and ending
in his stomach—when they were
intercepted by a burly man with “the build
of a blocking back” and a shoulder holster
and pistol “draped over his 250 pound
frame.” Akerman had stepped toward


--- PAGE 868 ---
Irvin’s bedside as he’d asked his client to
tell him “exactly what happened. Just tell
the truth as you’ve always done,” but
before Irvin had been able even to attempt
a reply, the burly man ordered the three
lawyers out of the room: “You might as
well go away because I ain’t going to let
you in.”
Greenberg had heard enough of Franklin
Williams’s hair-raising stories about the
hulking, sadistic deputy James Yates to
know whom they were confronting.
Akerman explained to the deputy that they
were visiting by permission of the
patient’s doctors, and he cited specific
language from Florida Statute 901.24
allowing an attorney to meet with his
client, in private if so desired. The statute


--- PAGE 869 ---
did not convince Yates to grant the
lawyers access to their client; instead he
made them wait in the hall while he
disappeared into another room. On his
return, Yates apprised the lawyers that
they’d have to receive written permission
from Judge Truman Futch in order to get
past the deputy’s 250-pound blockade. “I
have orders not to let anyone talk to this
boy,” Yates said.
He had gotten his orders from Willis
McCall, who himself had been admitted
into the hospital. In a room down the
hallway from the man he had shot, he was,
according to the doctors, “suffering shock
and a heart condition.” Akerman attempted
to reach Judge Futch, while, as Greenberg
noted, “Yates kept us under surveillance


--- PAGE 870 ---
from a hospital window.” When reporters
began arriving at Waterman Memorial
Hospital, the lawyers could tell them only
that Deputy Yates was refusing to allow
them access to their client. Akerman
elaborated: they would see Irvin “when
the law gives us our rights,” although he
was convinced that McCall “is still in
control of Irvin and all his activities, and
it is my opinion that the only reasonable
inference that can be drawn from
McCall’s activities is that as long as he
can prevent it, he will not permit Irvin to
tell his attorneys the facts leading up to the
killing of Shepherd and the wounding of
Irvin.” It was obvious to the lawyers that
McCall and Yates were hoping Irvin
would die from his wounds before he had


--- PAGE 871 ---
the chance to give a statement.
Hours passed, and still no word from
Truman Futch. With Irvin totally under the
guard of Deputy Yates and the insidious
Sheriff McCall in a room down the hall,
the lawyers’ unease over their client,
already critically wounded by the man
responsible for his safe transfer to
Tavares, continued to grow. When they
voiced their concern to hospital officials,
one doctor, outraged at the presumption of
the sheriff’s department, simply stormed
past the unacknowledged, startled Yates to
check on Irvin’s condition. And two FBI
agents flashing shields and identification
managed to intimidate a flustered Yates
out of his post while they proceeded,
unbeknownst to the lawyers and the


--- PAGE 872 ---
reporters, to interview Irvin for forty-five
minutes, until an attending nurse
intervened because the patient “appeared
to be in pain.” Shortly thereafter rumors
were circulating around the hospital that
Irvin had told an “entirely different story”
of the events that led to Shepherd’s death
and his own injuries.
Willis McCall, meanwhile, had
barricaded himself in his room with
Assistant State Attorney A. P. “Sam”
Buie, the former University of Florida
football standout who had aided Jesse
Hunter in the prosecution of the Groveland
Boys, as well as McCall’s old friend
Judge W. Troy Hall, who also happened
to be in charge of the coroner’s inquest
into the manner of Shepherd’s death.


--- PAGE 873 ---
Together they had worked on McCall’s
statement detailing the events of the
previous evening, so that by the time the
FBI agents Wayne Swinney and Clyde
Aderhold arrived at the sheriff’s bedside,
he was ready to talk. With their notebooks
in hand, the agents followed McCall
through his tale of the prison transfer that
landed him as well as Irvin in the hospital
and Samuel Shepherd in the morgue.
McCall, Yates, and the two prisoners
had left Raiford in the early evening, the
sheriff avowed. McCall had dropped off
Yates at his car in Weirsdale, and he had
then followed the deputy across the
Ocklawaha River Bridge. He’d lost sight
of Yates’s taillights where the clay road
curved. About the same time, he’d begun


--- PAGE 874 ---
to feel a strain on the steering wheel, and
when he pulled the car over, he noticed
that the tire was “half way down.” So he
had radioed Yates and told him to send
someone from the Gulf service station in
Umatilla to fix his flat. Right then, McCall
said, Samuel Shepherd spoke up about
having to relieve himself.
“He said, ‘I will piss in my britches if
you don’t let me out.’ I said, ‘All right
damn it get out and get it over with.’
Those were my exact words, and I opened
the door, and they both got out of the car,
and just as they stepped out of the car, and
just as Shepherd was straightening up
from getting off the seat, he hit at me with
a flashlight and yelled to Irvin to ‘get his
gun’ and he hit me with the flashlight.”


--- PAGE 875 ---
The agents were busy scribbling.
McCall continued: “At that time one of the
boys, I don’t know which one, grabbed me
by the shirt . . . grabbed me by the hair of
the head and had hold of my shirt and my
hair, and then I grabbed for my gun and got
to it before either one of them did and
started shooting it. I just had to do it, it
was either me or them and I beat them to
my gun.” The sheriff had emptied his gun;
then, with Shepherd and Irvin lying in a
ditch, McCall had made another radio call
to Yates. “The niggers tried to jump me!”
he’d screamed. “I had to shoot them!”
The sheriff reenacted parts of the
shooting for the agents. He showed them
his torn shirt, his broken eyeglasses, the
powder burns on his coat. He answered


--- PAGE 876 ---
their questions. He also told them that he
was not willing to give a signed statement
at this time but added that he “might
possibly furnish a statement at a later
time.”
Deputy James Yates, who told the FBI
agents that “he knew nothing of the
shooting,” since it was all over by the
time he’d gotten back to the sheriff’s car,
also declined to make a statement. He said
that for now he “would rather think over
the matter” and would consider
“furnishing a statement to the Bureau at a
later date.”
To McCall’s dismay, agents Swinney
and Aderhold continued poking around the
hospital; they talked to physicians, nurses,
and the administrative staff. In succeeding


--- PAGE 877 ---
days they visited the scene of the shooting,
took samples of McCall’s hair, examined
the sheriff’s automobile, and attended
Samuel Shepherd’s autopsy. They were
able to verify some important facts and to
establish a chain of events that did not
seem to be in dispute.
The agents learned, too, that within an
hour of the shooting numerous automobiles
had converged at the scene, many of them
carrying friends of the sheriff. Among the
first to arrive was Spencer Rynearson
from the Gulf service station, who, despite
the fact that the bodies of two black men
were lying next to the car, had been
instructed by McCall to change the tire.
He had thrown the flat in the back of the
sheriff’s Oldsmobile; in one of the


--- PAGE 878 ---
grooves he’d noticed the nail that had
punctured the tire. Yates had interrupted a
city council meeting with news of the
shooting, and McCall’s Umatilla friends,
the town’s mayor, and members of both
the city council and local Kiwanis Club
had soon shown up at the roadside, along
with police. State Attorney Jesse Hunter
had arrived about the same time as Marie
Bolles, the editor of 
Eustis Lake Region
News
, who’d promptly begun
photographing the disheveled McCall at
the scene: He’s standing alongside his car,
his rumpled, torn shirt hanging over his
belt, a cut on his temple plainly visible;
two bodies are splayed awkwardly in the
grassy ditch behind him, the head of one
resting on the thigh of the other; blood


--- PAGE 879 ---
everywhere.
“Marie, it’s just one of those things. I
hate it that it happened,” McCall had said
to his neighbor as she, with Hunter beside
her, had moved in closer to photograph the
two dead prisoners. That was when
Hunter “saw one of them move.” Reuben
Hatcher, the jailer at Tavares, had
confirmed that one of the Negroes was
indeed still breathing, and on Yates’s car
radio he’d contacted Waterman Memorial
Hospital. There would be a delay; a Jim
Crow car was being dispatched from the
Dabney Funeral Home in Leesburg
because the hospital ambulance could not
be used to transport blacks. In the
meantime, Walter Irvin, groaning and
writhing in pain, lay unattended. Concern


--- PAGE 880 ---
centered on Sheriff McCall’s injuries.
Stetson Kennedy, a Jacksonville native
and frequent contributor to many liberal
and black newspapers, observed Jesse
Hunter eyeing McCall suspiciously at the
scene of the shooting that night. The sheriff
was hovering around his Oldsmobile,
where his trademark ten-gallon Stetson sat
crumpled on the hood; his hair mussed up,
his broken glasses perched on his nose, a
trickle of blood on his temple yet to be
wiped away, he appeared to be in a daze.
His hangdog look of exhaustion and
remorse won him no sympathy from the
state attorney, whom the sheriff could
barely look in the eye. Hunter shifted his
gaze from McCall back to Walter Irvin,
now curled on the ground with his knees


--- PAGE 881 ---
bent and his open mouth gasping for
breath. Turning again, leaning in toward
McCall, the prosecutor believed himself
to be out of anyone’s earshot when,
displeased, he spat, “You have pissed in
my whiskey.”
McCall was vocal in expressing
concern for the black man while the small
crowd of maybe thirty people waited for
the ambulances to arrive. “One of them
has a pulse—a good pulse,” McCall said.
“I hope he makes it.” At the same time,
McCall’s boyhood friend, the judge and
county coroner W. Troy Hall, was
charged with conducting the inquest. In the
glare of the headlights from the dozen and
more cars that had gathered on the clay
road, Hall had hastily assembled a jury of


--- PAGE 882 ---
six “friends of Sheriff Willis V. McCall,”
including Marie Bolles.
Once the ambulances had arrived, both
McCall and Irvin had been taken to
Waterman Memorial, just six miles away
in Eustis. Irvin, who had been given an
injection of Demerol, had arrived in
“extreme shock,” unconscious and unable
to answer any questions. Examination had
indicated “gurgling” and “sucking” sounds
emanating from two bullet wounds to his
upper body and another to his neck.
Doctors had removed a “lead pistol ball”
from his right shoulder. They had noted
that, aside from “extreme shock from
hemorrhage,” Irvin’s mental status was
normal, and within hours he’d become
“oriented as to time, person and place and


--- PAGE 883 ---
willing and apparently able to answer
questions readily.”
The next morning at the hospital,
McCall and Yates, though able, were not
willing to take any questions from the
press. Speaking on behalf of the sheriff,
Judge Hall addressed the reporters who
had gathered at Waterman Memorial, and
as if he were confirming the results of his
own coroner’s inquest—he reported that
he himself had seen “a batch of the
sheriff’s hair” in Irvin’s hand—he
delivered essentially the same statement
he’d worked out with McCall the night
before in the sheriff’s hospital room.
Some in the press corps were beginning to
wonder how a county official acting as the
sheriff’s spokesman in regard to the


--- PAGE 884 ---
shooting was also going to be able to
conduct an impartial inquest into the
shooting victim’s death.
McCall was willing to pose for a press
photograph in his hospital bed. He was
wearing dark, polka-dotted pajamas;
behind him stood his wife, Doris, and son
Malcolm while his younger son, Donnie,
sat on the bed. “I’m just happy to be here
with my arm around this boy,” McCall
told the photographer from the 
Orlando
Morning Sentinel
. As the newspapermen
were shuffling out of the room, the sheriff,
no doubt anticipating the news items he’d
be obsessively clipping over the next few
days, halted them with some parting
words. “I expect I’ll get a lot of criticism
for this,” McCall said, “but I’d rather be


--- PAGE 885 ---
criticized than dead.”
Walter Irvin’s family tried to visit him
that morning as well. Desperate to see
their son before he slipped into a coma or
died like his friend Samuel Shepherd from
gunshot wounds, Cleve and Dellia Irvin
had arrived early at Waterman Memorial
only to be denied visitation rights by
Deputy James Yates at the door to
Walter’s room. They had no recourse, it
seemed, especially since the NAACP
lawyers had left the hospital to meet
Thurgood Marshall at the airport, and
Cleve Irvin was scared and confused,
subject to rules and procedures he had
long given up trying to understand. Rights
were what white people told him to do; he
knew no law beyond that. So he would not


--- PAGE 886 ---
even think to question the authority of
Deputy Yates. Instead, with his wife he
turned and walked away.
He was spotted in the corridor by the
British reporter Terence McCarthy, who
had covered the rioting in Groveland for
the
 New Leader
 in 1949. The two men
spoke, and Cleve, his anxiety reducing his
voice to a whisper, for he did not want
Dellia to hear, implored, “Please give me
a truthful answer. . . . If my boy has to
appear to give evidence against Mr.
McCall, do you think they will kill us?
Will they kill my other children? Should I
take them away from here? You know, we
didn’t move like Mr. Shepherd [Samuel’s
father, Henry] did—because they didn’t
tell me, like they told him, that we weren’t


--- PAGE 887 ---
to come back to live here [after the
rioting]. Do you think it’s safe for us here
now?” As much as McCarthy wanted to
assure Cleve Irvin that he and his family
would be safe, especially now that
Thurgood Marshall was coming, the
reporter remained silent. “To Mr. Irvin’s
questions,” he knew, “there could be no
truthful answer.”
One man did manage to visit with
Walter Irvin that morning. He was feeling
the weight of his years; his health wasn’t
good, and it would soon take a turn for the
worse. He hadn’t much stomach for what
he had witnessed on the dark road near
Umatilla not twelve hours before.
“Visibly shaken,” he had watched the
performance of Lake County’s sheriff:


--- PAGE 888 ---
McCall stumbling around his car, feigning
concern for Irvin, telling everyone how
blessed he was to survive. Till then, either
the sheriff hadn’t known Irvin was alive
or, worse, he’d known and hadn’t wanted
anyone there to attend to the injured man
before he died. One thing was certain,
something wasn’t right.
Doubt and suspicion had followed the
old man home, and he’d telephoned his
friend Mabel Norris Reese. “Guess what.
McCall’s shot those niggers,” he’d said,
and Reese, aghast, unable to speak, had
simply let the old man tell his story while
she took notes. “Mabel,” he’d said, “I
don’t believe those boys attacked the
sheriff at all. I think it was deliberate.”
He’d said what he’d concluded.


--- PAGE 889 ---
So, the next morning, his step slow but
his direction sure, the old man was
walking down a brightly lit hallway of
Waterman Memorial Hospital. One hand
tucked into his red suspenders, he smiled
warmly back at the nurses—everybody
knew him. At the doorway to Walter
Irvin’s room he offered Deputy James
Yates a firm nod of his head, but he did
not break his deliberate pace. He paused
at the side of Irvin’s bed; he’d gotten what
he wanted, a private moment. He surveyed
the room, made sure it was the two of
them alone. He leaned forward, looked
Walter directly in the eyes. Then, in a
whisper, Jesse Hunter began to speak.


--- PAGE 890 ---
CHAPTER 16: IT’S A
FUNNY THING
Walter Irvin at Waterman Memorial
Hospital, Eustis, Florida. (
Federal Bureau
of Investigation
)
T
HIS IS WHAT
 human rights means in the


--- PAGE 891 ---
United States! This is the American way
of life,” shouted Soviet foreign minister
Andrei Vishinsky from a podium at the
United Nations to Security Council
members and the world. He was
brandishing a copy of the 
New York Post
trumpeting, in an extra edition, the latest
shocking news to come out of Lake County
about the Groveland Boys shooting. “I
think some people should look after their
own business before sticking their noses
into other people’s business,” Vishinsky
scoffed.
O
N NOVEMBER 7,
 1951, the Groveland
Boys case again exploded onto the front
pages of newspapers around the country.


--- PAGE 892 ---
Locally, the St. Petersburg Times
bannered “Lake Rape Case Negro Shot,
Killed” across the top of its front page,
and the following day, an editorial stated
that “the shooting of the Groveland
defendants was inexcusable” and called
the incident a “terrible black eye” for
Florida justice. Reporters like Stetson
Kennedy, who was covering the story for
the
 Nation
, were pouring into Lake
County, many of them checking into the
Fountain Inn in Eustis.
Amid the firestorm of publicity across
the nation and even abroad over the killing
of Samuel Shepherd and shooting of
Walter Irvin, Thurgood Marshall landed at
the airport in Orlando, where he was met
by attorneys Alex Akerman, Jack


--- PAGE 893 ---
Greenberg, and Paul Perkins. When they
arrived at Waterman Memorial Hospital,
awaiting them was a throng of journalists
eager for comment from “Mr. Civil
Rights.” Marshall’s presence amplified
the importance of the recent events in Lake
County, for sure; yet, comfortable though
the NAACP’s most public figure was with
the press, he cut the reporters short. His
first order of business that day was to talk
to his client, Walter Irvin.
About the same time, special
investigator Jefferson Jennings Elliott had
pulled into the hospital parking lot in his
1950 Ford coupe, which comprised a
“primitive mobile crime lab outfitted with
kits for identifying semen, blood, and
fingerprints; paraffin for detecting recent


--- PAGE 894 ---
gun firings; portable lights for illuminating
crime scenes; and a complete autopsy kit.”
Elliott had been sent to Eustis by
Governor Fuller Warren’s office to
“check all angles” in McCall’s shooting of
the prisoners—and to “let the chips fall
where they may.” Heavy-jowled, with a
big belly that hung over his belt and a
large fedora tipped awkwardly on his
head, Elliott might have walked out of a
hard-boiled detective novel. Adjusting his
round, horn-rimmed glasses, he told the
reporters, “Well, boys, I’m here, but that’s
all I can say.”
Hoping to keep within Lake County’s
jurisdiction any inquiries into the fatal
shooting, Willis McCall had asked Judge
Futch to have a “court-appointed elisor”


--- PAGE 895 ---
investigate the death of Samuel Shepherd,
but Futch had declined, stating, “the
Governor said he wouldn’t recognize such
a person.” Instead Elliott would be
conducting the investigation; so, on
Wednesday, November 7, with a court
stenographer in tow, the governor’s man
was leading Marshall, Akerman,
Greenberg, Perkins, Mabel Norris Reese,
seven other members of the press, and a
“special nurse” into Irvin’s hospital room.
The feeding tube was still taped to the
patient’s face; Irvin was weak but lucid.
The room grew very quiet in anticipation
of the rumored “entirely different story”
from Sheriff McCall’s version of events.
Alan Hamlin, the court reporter, steadied
his stenographic machine. Marshall stood


--- PAGE 896 ---
by Irvin’s side. J. J. Elliott had his
notebook and pen ready. Greenberg,
Perkins, and Akerman had heard the
rumors, too, but they knew no more than
anyone else what specifics might make
their client’s story “entirely different.”
Also, as Reese would report, “This was
the first time Marshall saw Irvin, so there
could be no coaching.”
“No one’s going to hurt you,” Alex
Akerman said softly to Irvin before he
began the questioning. From the outset it
was evident that despite the trauma Irvin
had suffered, he was sustaining no
memory loss. His voice was breathy,
strained, but his responses were crisp, and
he delivered his answers without mental
hesitation. He described being taken out of


--- PAGE 897 ---
Raiford at night; he recalled being
handcuffed and told to sit in the front seat.
He remembered that Sheriff McCall had
let Yates out of the car at Weirsdale and
had then followed the deputy, now in his
own car, down a clay road while talking
to him on the radio. Up to that point
Irvin’s account of the prison transfer
mirrored McCall’s, but after Yates had
driven out of sight, when the sheriff was
rattling the wheel and claiming something
was wrong with the tire, Irvin’s version
diverged. McCall had gotten out of the car
to check the tire, but, in Irvin’s account,
McCall hadn’t then radioed Yates about
contacting the Gulf service station as the
sheriff had stated.
Instead, in Irvin’s telling, the sheriff had


--- PAGE 898 ---
leaned in at the open door and yelled at
the two prisoners, “You sons of bitches,
get out and get this tire fixed.” The
problem was, Irvin “did not see any tires
in the back, but we had to obey, because
he was the Sheriff, and so we went to get
out, and [Shepherd] he taken his foot and
put it out of the car, and was getting out,
and I can’t say just how quick it was, but
he shot him, and it was quick enough, and
he turned, the Sheriff did, and he had a
pistol and shot him right quick and then
right quick he shot me, shot me right here
[indicating right upper chest] and he come
on and when he shot me, he grabbed me
somewhere by my clothes, and snatched
me . . . he snatched both of us and that
threw both of us on the ground, and then I


--- PAGE 899 ---
did not say anything.”
“Were you still in the car when he shot
you?” Akerman asked.
“I was just getting out,” Irvin said, “but
the bullet knocked me into the car, and
then he snatched me out.”
Irvin paused. The silence in the hospital
room hung heavy. You could hear the
scribbling of pens on notebook paper. The
stenograph clicked, stopped. Without
prompting Irvin continued.
“I didn’t say nothing, so . . . after he
snatched me, he shot me again, in the
shoulder, and still I didn’t say anything all
the time, and I knew that I was not dead.”
Irvin recounted that McCall had run
around the car to get to the radio. He’d
called the deputy sheriff. “I heard him say


--- PAGE 900 ---
‘I got rid of them, killed the sons of
bitches’ but I still did not say anything. . . .
I heard him say ‘Pull around here right
quick . . . these sons of bitches tried to
jump on me and I have done a damn good
job of it.’ I wondered what he meant by
that, because we hadn’t done that . . . and
then in about five or ten minutes Deputy
Yates was there.”
Irvin—twice wounded but still
conscious, though unable to move in any
case because he was cuffed to Shepherd—
had no other choice: he lay quiet and
pretended to be dead. Samuel’s hand was
pressed next to his, the two Groveland
boys linked together . . . only Sammy was
gone. McCall’s first shot had put a hole in
Shepherd’s chest; the shot that followed


--- PAGE 901 ---
right after, lodged now in the frontal lobe
of his brain, had severed his spinal
column. McCall’s next two bullets had
torn through Irvin’s chest and side.
McCall had then returned to Shepherd,
lying on the ground, and shot a .38-caliber
round straight through his heart.
Irvin lay quiet. He saw the headlights
come from the direction of Umatilla. They
lit the rear end of the sheriff’s Olds before
they dimmed. Deputy Yates got out of the
car. He and the sheriff exchanged a few
words. The deputy had a flashlight; he
shone it down on the two prisoners lying
in the ditch. Irvin closed his eyes, but he
could sense the spot of light crossing his
face, back and forth, from eye to eye, light,
then dark, then light only, for a long


--- PAGE 902 ---
moment, hurting his eye. He could feel the
blood seeping from his nose, his mouth, in
the light; he tried to hold his breath, to
keep himself lying quiet, in the light
pointed down on him. He couldn’t stop the
awful pounding of his heart when he heard
the deputy’s voice call back to the sheriff,
“This nigger is not dead. We better kill
this son of a bitch.”
The hospital room itself might have
gasped at that. Marshall’s eyes met
Greenberg’s, then Perkins’s and
Akerman’s; the horror was worse than any
that Irvin’s lawyers had imagined.
Irvin resumed, picturing himself lying
on the ground and looking up at the deputy
standing over him with a pistol in his
hand, and without a sound watching the


--- PAGE 903 ---
deputy lean down over him and slowly
aim the gun. “The Deputy Sheriff then
pointed the pistol on me and pulled the
trigger, snapped the trigger, and the gun
did not shoot, and so he took it back
around to the car lights, and looked in it
and shined the light in it, and then
something they said was about letting it
stay cocked, and so he turned it on me
again and pulled it, and that time it fired,
and went through here [indicating it went
through neck] and then I began to bleed
and bleed, out of my nose.”
“Is that Deputy Yates you say?”
Akerman asked, stunned.
“Yes, sir,” Irvin replied, his voice
fading. He paused to catch his breath. “He
shot me the third time, but I managed to


--- PAGE 904 ---
pull through OK cause I did not say
anything, and did not let them know that I
was not dead, and after all the people
came, there was lots of people came there,
and some of them predicted that I was not
dead. . . . I heard some remarks that ‘he
ought to have been dead long ago.’ ”
Realizing that Irvin’s story would be
headlined on the front page of virtually
every newspaper in America the
following day, the lawyers strove to get as
much testimony from Irvin as possible
before doctors stepped in and called a halt
to the proceedings. “I know you are tired,”
Akerman said, “but there is just one or
two questions. Had you tried to jump him?
The Sheriff?”
“No, sir,” Irvin answered.


--- PAGE 905 ---
Marshall leaned in. “Where was his
gun?” he asked. “Did he carry it on the
right hand side next to you?”
“Carried it on his left,” Irwin said.
“Did you ever try to escape that night?”
Marshall asked.
“No, sir, never.”
“And you were in the front seat of the
car?”
“Yes,” Irwin said. “He put us both on
the front seat.”
Perkins took a turn: “Walter, did you
have good hopes of coming out of this
thing alright?”
“Yes, sir,” Irvin said, “I sure did, for I
sure did have high hopes of coming out
alright, and why would I try to escape,
didn’t have no reason to.”


--- PAGE 906 ---
Akerman punctuated the hospital room
press conference with a few final, terse
questions to ensure that the reporters held
the most salient facts of the shooting in
their minds when they left to file their
stories.
“How many times did the sheriff shoot
you?”
“Two times,” Irvin told him.
“How many times did Deputy Sheriff
Yates shoot you?”
“One time.”
“You were shot three times?”
“Yes, sir.”
At that point the nurse closed the
interview. Alan Hamlin folded up his
stenograph. Marshall requested that Elliott
have Irvin removed immediately from


--- PAGE 907 ---
Sheriff Willis McCall’s custody; Elliott
replied that such action lay beyond his
authority but that he would relay the
request to the governor. Flanked by
Greenberg and Perkins, Marshall
proceeded downstairs to the hospital
entrance, where, he knew, the reporters
were expecting him to make a statement.
As Irvin was still going to stand trial if he
survived the shooting, Marshall felt it
necessary to assume an attitude of
unruffled rationality so that the recent
conduct of the renegade sheriff would
seem all the more extreme by contrast.
“We sincerely hope the good people of
Lake County will insist that the action so
obviously indicated by the sworn
statement of Walter Lee Irvin will be


--- PAGE 908 ---
taken immediately,” Marshall announced,
and when asked if the NAACP lawyers
would press for murder charges against
Willis McCall, he replied, “The good
people of Lake County should have time to
take action, but if they don’t the NAACP
will.”
Stetson Kennedy rushed off to get
further comments from hospital staff.
Mabel Norris Reese called State Attorney
Jesse Hunter to relate to him the details of
Irvin’s statement. Other reporters stuck to
the NAACP team, conspicuous among
them Marshall’s New York friend Evelyn
“Big East” Cunningham, also known as the
“Lynching Editor,” who was covering the
events in Eustis on behalf of the
Pittsburgh Courier
. “Colored men who


--- PAGE 909 ---
are accused of raping white women don’t
have a chance in this part of the world,”
she wrote. “Walter Irvin’s chances found
a thin string to hang on Saturday when
Lake County finally woke up and began to
believe that maybe he was innocent after
all.”
One reporter tracked down James Yates
at his home in Mount Dora. The deputy
appeared to be caught off guard when
asked to comment on Irvin’s claim that it
was Yates, not the sheriff, who had fired
the intended kill shot into Irvin’s neck.
“It’s a funny thing,” Yates stammered,
adding, “no comment at this time.”
Hunter, who “was visibly shaken” by
what he had witnessed on Tuesday night,
had, “since the shooting, virtually run out


--- PAGE 910 ---
on Sheriff McCall,” one reporter
observed. “This is the worst thing that
ever happened in Lake County,” Hunter
said. “It will ruin the county.”
The FBI agents returned to their district
bureau to type up their notes and file their
reports. In confidential report MM 44-267
the following notation would appear:
“IRVIN agreeable to lie detector test.
Sheriff McCALL and Deputy YATES do
not desire to take lie detector test,
McCALL claims sees no reason to take
test as he has told truth.”
B
ACK AT THE
 San Juan Hotel, the
lawyers worked on strategy. Greenberg
amended a motion for a change of venue,


--- PAGE 911 ---
citing the attempted murder of Walter
Irvin by the sheriff and his deputy as a
reason that Irvin could not get a fair trial
in Lake County. Marshall, meanwhile,
telegraphed the Justice Department; he
wanted McCall and Yates to be found in
contempt of court for defying the U.S.
Supreme Court “and the laws of this
country.” Marshall also contacted Roy
Wilkins and Walter White in New York,
to have them instruct all NAACP branches
that as of now the Groveland Boys case
was their top priority. Marshall wanted
Walter Irvin’s story to be recounted in
every black church on the upcoming
Sunday; he wanted protests staged at the
local level everywhere across America.
In response, Wilkins set up a plan


--- PAGE 912 ---
whereby every NAACP branch would
arrange a “Groveland Memorial Protest
Meeting” and engage in an organized
letter-writing campaign in newspapers
and on the radio to draw attention to the
nature of Southern justice. “We must leave
no stone unturned to see to it that the entire
Nation learns the facts about this cold-
blooded murder of a boy in shackles,”
Wilkins informed NAACP officials. “We
must bring every possible pressure to bear
to the end that these legal lynchers are
brought to justice. If we fail in this, our
whole struggle for human rights will be in
jeopardy.” Very soon—from labor unions,
from churches and synagogues, from
veterans committees and fraternal
organizations, from individual outraged


--- PAGE 913 ---
citizens across the country—Governor
Fuller Warren’s office in Tallahassee
would be inundated with letters and
telegrams condemning Sheriff McCall’s
brutality.
Marshall also sent a telegram to his old
friend Harry T. Moore: the one man in
Florida with the tenacity and fortitude to
bring pressure to bear on the men in Lake
County who were not only responsible for
the injustices in the Groveland Boys case
but also determined “to whitewash the
whole affair.” Moore, in fact, had already
wired Governor Warren to urge an
investigation into the sheriff’s shooting of
the two Groveland boys; and for years,
with no success but with perseverance
nonetheless, Moore had been pressing the


--- PAGE 914 ---
governor’s office to launch an
investigation into lynching in Florida.
Marshall wanted Moore beside him in the
Groveland Boys fight for justice, no
matter the precariousness of Moore’s
position in the NAACP. The national
office, and more particularly Gloster
Current—in Marshall’s view, a good
company man with an eye only for budgets
and membership rolls—had been building
a case against Moore’s management and
leadership in Florida’s branches, but
Marshall, by virtue of his own experience
in the South, knew more particularly the
hostile conditions that dedicated men like
Moore had to endure continually in the
regions they represented. “There isn’t a
threat known to men that they do not


--- PAGE 915 ---
receive,” Marshall said. “They’re never
out from under pressure. I don’t think I
could take it for a week. The possibility of
violent death for them and their families is
something they’ve learned to live with
like a man learns to sleep with a sore
arm.” For Marshall, Moore was one of the
heroes. In the telegram Marshall asked if
Moore could meet with him on Friday,
November 9, in Orlando. Moore said yes.
On November 8, newspapers across the
country published Walter Irvin’s version
of the shooting outside Umatilla, with
Irvin’s claim that Deputy Yates had fired
the intended coup de grâce capturing most
of the headlines, none of them as
sensational as the 
New York Post
’s:
“Blood Lust of Sheriff and Aide Bared,


--- PAGE 916 ---
Florida Anger Grows in Negro Killing.”
The 
Post
 ran the headline large and
provocatively on its front page, with a
story by Jay Nelson Tuck, who’d found
himself, like Ted Poston before him,
reporting an event of even more moment
than the trial he’d been sent to cover—it
described law enforcement officials who
were “ducking, weaving and scattering for
cover today.” The Associated Press
picked up Marie Bolles’s images of the
bloodied Groveland boys lying by the
roadside, as well as a portrait of Deputy
James Yates, which one paper published
above the caption “It’s a funny thing.”
State Attorney Jesse Hunter was
reported to have spoken on November 8
with Governor Fuller Warren, who


--- PAGE 917 ---
reportedly agreed with Hunter’s
recommendation that Sheriff McCall
either be suspended or be ordered to
resign temporarily from office. News of
the meeting apparently effected a
remarkable improvement in Sheriff
McCall’s physical condition, as he
checked himself out of the hospital and
then drove two and a half hours north to
Jacksonville, to a hotel, for a secret
meeting with Fuller Warren. In November
1951 Warren was in the midst of a
statewide barnstorming tour, replete with
stump speeches and country music
jamborees, in an attempt to recapture
some of the magic that had swept him into
office in 1948. Or at least, to rehabilitate
his reputation. Illegal gambling scandals


--- PAGE 918 ---
had put Warren in the investigative
crosshairs of his longtime nemesis,
Senator Estes Kefauver. The nationally
televised Kefauver hearings on organized
crime in 1950 not only had exposed the
involvement of numerous Florida law
enforcement officials in widespread
corruption, by which they raked in payoffs
from illegal numbers and 
bolita
 games,
but also had aired allegations that
Warren’s gubernatorial campaign had
been heavily financed by prominent
figures in organized crime. Kefauver had
invited Warren to Miami to testify, but
Warren had refused. Then, in 1951,
resolutions calling for Warren’s
impeachment had been introduced in the
Florida House of Representatives, so the


--- PAGE 919 ---
governor was now fighting for his
political life. It took Willis McCall not
much more than an hour to convince the
former Klansman and governor that he
might want to reconsider the wisdom of a
suspension or temporary resignation for
the sheriff. That done, Sheriff McCall
headed back to Eustis, where he had set
up another late-night, closed-door session,
this time with Warren’s special
investigator, J. J. Elliott, at a Lake County
hotel. Again, no doubt by extortionist
means, McCall got results, and Elliott got
a singular role in the imminent coroner’s
inquest.
Early on Friday, a young FBI informant
was riding the road to Tavares with
several Klansmen, among them Eddie


--- PAGE 920 ---
Jackson, the Exalted Cyclops of the
Orlando Klan. Jackson wanted to run a
plan by Willis McCall, and if the sheriff
okayed it, the Klan would be able to
“break you in right,” Jackson told the
young, supposed prospective Klansman.
They’d arranged to meet the sheriff in the
men’s room of the courthouse. There
Jackson explained that he’d come to Lake
County with “a couple of the boys” to do a
bit of a favor and to initiate a new member
into the Klan. Jackson then put it more
bluntly: they’d come “to kill Alex
Akerman.” To the Klansman’s
disappointment, McCall rejected the idea
summarily. “No, I’m in the clear on this
case,” the sheriff told Jackson, “and I
don’t want you to do it, it would only


--- PAGE 921 ---
cause trouble.”
McCall had not said anything about
them not scaring Akerman, though. So the
Klansmen drove to Eustis and parked their
car across the street from Waterman
Memorial Hospital, where they waited for
Akerman to arrive for a visit with his
client. Only Akerman didn’t—he was
working in Orlando that particular day—
so Jackson and his men turned their
attention to other potential targets, like that
Negro who was “a big SOB in the
NAACP.”
I
T WASN’T LIKE
 Harry T. Moore at all,
Marshall thought. Not only had Moore
failed to show up for their Friday meeting


--- PAGE 922 ---
in Orlando, but he’d failed even to notify
Marshall that he’d not be there.
Over the past twelve months the
pressure on Moore from the NAACP’s
director of branches, Gloster Current, had
been intensifying. A year earlier, the New
Orleans field secretary and former Harlem
Globetrotter Dan Byrd had been
dispatched to the Florida State Conference
in Tampa with instructions to do a
“hatchet job” on Moore, although, when
the delegates’ votes were counted, Moore
had managed to hold his position as
executive secretary in Florida. In only two
weeks, however, the regional director for
the Southeast, Ruby Hurley, along with
Walter White, would be attending, at
Current’s behest, the 1951 annual state


--- PAGE 923 ---
conference in Daytona Beach, and
Hurley’s reputation was stellar: she
“always delivered the votes.” In the past,
Marshall had kept himself distant from
Current’s branch business, as Moore
surely knew. Still, Robert Carter and other
of the NAACP lawyers were “wondering
if Moore hadn’t gotten cold feet” when he
failed to show up for the November 9
meeting, albeit Marshall had made it clear
to him that he wanted to discuss the
Groveland case.
By November, too, the cumulative
stress of the Groveland Boys trial and
appeals and the now-thwarted retrial,
from July 1949 nearly to the end of 1951,
was beginning to wear on the normally
self-possessed Moore. His commitment to


--- PAGE 924 ---
a rectification of the injustices suffered by
Shepherd, Irvin, and Greenlee had become
hazardous. A citrus grower in Moore’s
hometown of Mims had opined to an
NAACP official that Moore’s “neck ought
to be broken.” Also, recently letters had
been threatening Moore with injury, or
worse, for his work on behalf of the
Groveland Boys; he had taken to carrying
the letters on his person in the event that
harm came to him. He had confided to one
NAACP leader that he was now “afraid to
travel in the daytime.” His fears were not
unjustified; later that winter, on returning
with his wife, Harriette, to their house in
Mims for the weekend, he found the door
lock broken, their home ransacked, and his
shotgun stolen.


--- PAGE 925 ---
Nevertheless, despite the threats, and in
the face of his fear, Moore had continued
—indeed, had increased—his efforts in
the Groveland Boys’ cause. He organized
mass meetings and protests; he delivered
speeches. He helped the Shepherd family
retrieve Samuel’s body, with the
assurance that the local branch of the
NAACP would cover the cost of their
son’s funeral. He seized every twist and
turn in the Groveland case as an
opportunity to write letters to newspaper
editors like Mabel Norris Reese, who
was finding it more difficult to defend the
injustices of law enforcement in Lake
County. He remained Sheriff Willis V.
McCall’s most vocal critic. He also
continued to support and complement the


--- PAGE 926 ---
efforts of Thurgood Marshall and the LDF
in Lake County, no matter that, for
whatever reason or misunderstanding, he
had failed to appear at that meeting in
Orlando on November  9.
Late in the evening of November 9,
Judge W. Troy Hall began the official
proceedings for his coroner’s inquest with
a viewing of Samuel Shepherd’s body by
the jury in the company of special
investigator Elliott, the state attorney
Jesse Hunter, McCall, Yates, and
members of the press as well as a nurse
and a court reporter. On Saturday
morning, November 10, the inquest
resumed at Waterman Memorial Hospital,
where Irvin’s attending physician, Dr.
Rabun Williams, was scheduled to, but


--- PAGE 927 ---
did not, testify, the judge having
determined the doctor’s testimony to be
unnecessary. The jury, press, and county
officials proceeded with Judge Hall and J.
J. Elliott to Walter Irvin’s room, where
they heard the same story he’d told to his
lawyers and members of the press on
Thursday. Both Hall, as coroner, and
Elliott questioned Irvin at length, but his
recitation of the events of November 6 did
not vary in any detail from his previous
account. After forty minutes of testimony,
Irvin tired; he was wheeled from his room
to the waiting ambulance that delivered
him to the prison hospital at Raiford.
The inquest next moved to the roadside
near Umatilla, where, in the view of Judge
Hall, an attempted escape, not an


--- PAGE 928 ---
unprovoked murder, took place. Hall led
his friend Willis through the presumably
evidence-based version of events. In the
trunk of McCall’s Oldsmobile lay a tire,
the tire that another of the sheriff’s friends,
Spencer Rynearson, had changed shortly
before most of the witnesses had arrived
on the scene Tuesday night; lodged in one
of the “grooves between the tread design”
of the tire was, as Hall pointed out to the
jury and the press, a box nail. Hall then
addressed McCall: “I will ask you to
examine this nail here in the tire and ask
you to state whether or not it appears to
have been worn by contact with the
pavement.” After claiming that he’d never
noticed the nail until “someone pointed it
out to him,” the sheriff answered, “Yes, it


--- PAGE 929 ---
is worn, it looks as if it had been in the
tire while the tire was being run on; of
course, it is a little rusty now.”
Mabel Norris Reese, who had heard
Walter Irvin describe twice, and quite
believably, what had occurred at the
roadside on the night of the prison
transfer, was not convinced by the
physical evidence: “The nail on the tire
was so obviously planted that it made you
sick that people would stand there, look at
it and believe it.”


--- PAGE 930 ---
FBI photograph of the nail in Sheriff
Willis McCall’s tire. (
Federal Bureau
of Investigation
)
Hall then had McCall lead a walk-


--- PAGE 931 ---
through of the roadside incident. Noticing
that the ground was dug up where
Shepherd and Irvin had been lying after
being shot, Hall asked, “Was this ground
dug up in this manner at that time?”
McCall said no, as he surveyed the three
square feet of overturned sand and clay,
and explained, “The F.B.I. has been sifting
it, trying to find the bullets.” One bullet in
particular—the bullet, still unaccounted
for, that had passed through Irvin’s neck—
posed a significant challenge to the
credibility of McCall’s and Yates’s
rendering of the prisoners’ daring attempt
to escape. According to the sheriff, he had
fired the six rounds in his gun at the same
time as he had backed away from the two
prisoners when they’d attacked him. By


--- PAGE 932 ---
Walter Irvin’s account, however, the last
shot had been fired by Deputy Yates,
when he had stood over Irvin, who was
lying faceup on the ground, and had aimed
the gun straight down. The bullet, which
had struck mostly soft tissue and muscle as
it had cleanly penetrated Irvin’s neck,
would probably never be found if, as
McCall claimed, the prisoner had been
advancing toward him when the sheriff
had fired his last shot. If, on the other
hand, Irvin had already fallen to the
ground when the bullet coursed through
his neck, it might well have been found in
that three-foot-square patch of sand and
clay.
The jury reconvened at the Community
Building in Umatilla. Hall extracted, or


--- PAGE 933 ---
coaxed, a few more details of the shooting
from McCall—what caliber revolver he’d
carried, what time Yates arrived, whom
the sheriff spoke with over the radio—and
then produced a series of witnesses,
including Umatilla’s mayor and a town
councilman, who had appeared at the
roadside in the dead of Tuesday night in
order to establish that the sheriff had fired
in self-defense: from first to last, every
witness testified he had seen strands of
McCall’s hair clutched in Irvin’s hand.
The coroner having constructed a case
of self-defense and the judge having
essentially exculpated the self-defender,
Hall allowed the sheriff to remind the
jurors, press, and spectators that he
himself had acted as the protector of the


--- PAGE 934 ---
Groveland Boys: he had on previous
occasions safely transported Shepherd and
Irvin between Tavares and Raiford, and in
July 1949 he had even hidden them at his
home in Eustis “until I got permission to
put them in Raiford the first time in order
to protect them” from an angry mob.
“You did that to protect their lives, is
that correct?” Hall asked.
“Yes, I did,” McCall answered. “If I
was going to do something like they have
said that I have done, I would have done it
long ago. I just want to say that I am very
thankful that I am still here instead of in
my grave today.”
“Now, Sheriff,” Hall asked, “did you or
one of your deputies make a special trip to
the blood bank in Orlando on Tuesday


--- PAGE 935 ---
night in order to get whole blood from
them for the treatment of the prisoner?”
“Yes,” McCall replied, “one of my
deputies did. And I also signed a release
for his operation, because no member of
his family was here to do it, and so I
signed a release for the doctors to
operate.”
Stetson Kennedy, in his coverage of the
inquest, observed that McCall was treated
as a “guest of honor” whom neither the
judge nor the jury would dare to question
on any point that might give credence to
Irvin’s accusations. Nor did Governor
Warren’s special investigator Jefferson J.
Elliott, as it turned out. His bearing
authoritative and his manner persuasive,
Elliott presented himself as a man of


--- PAGE 936 ---
science for whom evidence comprised not
the ambiguities of eyewitness accounts or
the contradictions of oral testimony but
rather the objectivity of forensics: the kind
of evidence that he detected in his state-
of-the-art mobile crime lab; the kind of
evidence that did not lie. Evidence like
the powder burns on the coat of Sheriff
Willis V. McCall. “I believe that this is
the most important piece of evidence that
we have before this jury,” Elliott
announced solemnly to the jury as he noted
the location of the powder burns on the
left arm of the coat, thus indicating that the
sheriff’s left arm was raised at the time of
the shooting, not pointing down, and thus
supporting McCall’s claim that he was
“trying to fight somebody off or hold


--- PAGE 937 ---
somebody off . . . which indicates to me
some sort of struggle that was going on at
the time of the shooting. He certainly was
not target shooting.” Thus was the hearing
closed.
The jurors needed little more than half
an hour to find that Samuel Shepherd’s
death was “justified by reason of the fact
that Willis V. McCall was at that time
acting in line of duty and in defense of his
own life.” McCall was cleared of any
wrongdoing.
On Monday, November 12, Judge
Truman Futch issued a statement of the
court. Contrary to his previous
determination, he had decided not to
impanel a grand jury in regard to the
shooting death of Samuel Shepherd. “At


--- PAGE 938 ---
that time,” Futch wrote, “I did not know
that the Coroner’s jury could or would be
able to conclude its work; nor did I know
how thorough its work might be. Usually
the work of a Coroner’s jury is
perfunctory and superficial, but in this
instance, I am of the opinion that the
Honorable J. W. Hunter as State Attorney
and the Honorable W. Troy Hall, Jr., as
County Judge and ex officio coroner,
together with members of the Coroner’s
jury, have done a thorough job insofar as
any criminal liability of any one is
concerned in connection with the death of
the prisoner Samuel Shepherd. . . . There
is now no need for a grand jury in Lake
County, Florida, and none will be
impaneled at this time.”


--- PAGE 939 ---
The Honorable J. W. Hunter, however,
had not entirely willingly associated
himself with the inquiry into Samuel
Shepherd’s death. After the coroner’s
inquest, he issued his own cryptic
statement, on which he later refused to
elaborate, that he had participated in the
investigation “only as I have been directed
to do by [Judge Hall].” Hunter’s unease
with the verdict in Hall’s inquest and with
Futch’s decision not to impanel a grand
jury almost certainly stemmed from
information that had not reached the
coroner’s jury on November 10 and
would be withheld from the public record
by virtue of Judge Futch’s action on
November 12.
On Sunday, November 11, FBI agent


--- PAGE 940 ---
Robert Wall contacted both the state
attorney Jesse Hunter and Judge Hall to
apprise them that the FBI had located a
bullet “directly beneath a blood spot
where victim Irvin was lying after the
shooting incidents.” The agents had “dug a
hole about ten inches deep” and with their
fingers had sifted through the “sandy
loam-type soil,” in which they’d found a
.38-caliber bullet. The FBI believed that
the single slug buried in the sand directly
below the position of Irvin’s neck had
traveled at a slight angle straight
downward into the sand. Lab tests would
later reveal that the bullet’s high-speed
passage through the sand had obliterated
any markings that might identify
conclusively the specific gun from which


--- PAGE 941 ---
it had been fired.
For Hunter, the new evidence was
conclusive enough to confirm his
suspicions that Sheriff Willis McCall and
Deputy James Yates had in essence
committed murder, especially in light of
other information that the FBI had been
sharing with Hunter over the past two
days. Walter Irvin had told the two FBI
agents who’d invaded his hospital room
that after Yates had shot him, he had
watched the deputy and the sheriff as
they’d huddled in the glare from the
headlights of McCall’s Oldsmobile 98:
The sheriff “reached up and grabbed his
shirt with his hand and tore it,” and Irvin
“heard him tell Mr. Yates, we got to make
it look like they tried to escape.” Jesse


--- PAGE 942 ---
Hunter knew Willis McCall; he knew
there was more fact than fiction in tales
like those relating how the orange groves
of Lake County were “fertilized with
niggers that Willis McCall had killed”—if
need be, with Deputy James Yates at his
side. Jesse Hunter didn’t like piss in his
whiskey.
At their private get-together that
Sunday, Agent Wall had offered to make
the FBI evidence available to Hunter and
Hall “for probable use before the Grand
Jury.” When Hall had subsequently
advised Truman Futch that the FBI had
located the missing, last bullet, the two
judges came to the decision, quickly, that
there was “no need for a grand jury.” The
last bullet need never be mentioned, in or


--- PAGE 943 ---
outside a county courtroom, since the FBI
would not be releasing its report to any
other party. Disgruntled by the judges’
decision in regard to the grand jury,
Hunter wished to dissociate himself from
all the proceedings of the past few days.
He did not appreciate having his good
name used in a whitewash.
The FBI found this bullet buried in soil
directly beneath Walter Irvin’s “blood spot.”


--- PAGE 944 ---
( Federal Bureau of Investigation )
At Hunter’s urging, Governor Fuller
Warren had been prepared to suspend
Willis McCall or force him into
temporary retirement on November 8, but
by the next day the governor had changed
his mind, with some help from the sheriff
himself at their private nighttime meeting
in a Jacksonville hotel. Apparently
Warren had decided that his
administration could weather another civil
rights scandal better than it could bear
further allegations of impeachable
offenses that linked the governor to the
interests of organized crime. The former
might prove to be embarrassing to the
author of 
How to Win in Politics
, but the


--- PAGE 945 ---
latter would be ruinous to his political
future. By mid-November Warren’s office
had again been flooded with letters and
telegrams and editorials in local and
national newspapers demanding that he
intervene in the latest miscarriage of
justice by Lake County officials in the
Groveland Boys case. Governor Fuller
Warren issued a statement through his
assistant that he was “out of the city at the
present time on a statewide speaking
tour.” Aside from that, he had no
comment.
Lake County newspapers viewed the
decisions of the coroner’s jury and of
Judge Truman Futch regarding a grand
jury as a “complete vindication” of their
sheriff: his shooting of Shepherd and Irvin


--- PAGE 946 ---
had been justified as self-defense, and he
would not face any investigation of
possible charges against him by a grand
jury. Northern and urban newspapers
around the country, meanwhile, were
reporting a whitewash operation not only
at the county level but also at the highest
reaches of Florida’s state government.
Impugning everyone from Sheriff McCall
to Governor Warren, editorials in the
national press decried the lack of outrage
over the lawlessness and “fantastic
savagery” in “Florida’s Jungle.” No one
was more incensed than Thurgood
Marshall.
“Irvin’s story was so convincing,”
Marshall said, “that all who heard it are
certain that he and Shepherd were the


--- PAGE 947 ---
victims of a deliberate cold-blooded plan
to murder both of them before the retrial
ordered by the Supreme Court.” Marshall
fired off an angry telegram to Fuller
Warren, in which he first chided the
governor for meeting with Willis McCall
the night before the start of the coroner’s
inquest, then reproved the fact that “after
this conference your representative J. J.
Elliott testified in defense of McCall. All
this fits directly into new pattern which
has replaced old type of lynching. You
still have an opportunity to demonstrate
whether or not the state of Florida
believes in fair play and justice.”
Marshall requested that Warren replace
both McCall and Elliott. “The answer is
in your hands,” he wrote.


--- PAGE 948 ---
Marshall’s harshest indictment fell on
Willis McCall. In an interview with
columnist Arnold DeMille for the
Chicago Defender
, Marshall asserted,
“This is the worst case of injustice and
whitewashing I have come across in my
career. There is no question in my mind or
in the minds of others who heard Walter
Lee Irvin’s statement that he and Samuel
Shepherd were deliberately shot by
Sheriff Willis B. McCall last Tuesday.
The bullet hole in [Irvin’s] neck reminded
him with every breath and every word that
he, too, could have been dead and might
yet die. Any man in that condition is
certainly not apt to lie. In listening to Irvin
tell what happened you got the impression
that he still wondered why the Lord had


--- PAGE 949 ---
spared his life.” Marshall then raised the
obvious questions that the coroner’s
inquest did not: “Was it necessary to shoot
two men, handcuffed together, three times
in ‘self defense’? Why would not the body
of the dead man have prevented Irvin, who
was handcuffed to him, from running or
doing anything else? Why did Sheriff
McCall have only himself to guard two
persons charged with capital offense on a
road late at night? If Sheriff McCall was
that brave, why would he have to shoot
them six times? The last, and final
question, is: If Sheriff McCall was
shooting to defend himself, how could the
bullets be so well placed, that none of
them went wild?”
Willis McCall didn’t collect and clip


--- PAGE 950 ---
only local newspapers. He also culled
less flattering notices of his achievements
in office from black newspapers like the
Chicago Defender
 and the 
Pittsburgh
Courier
, which allied themselves
editorially to the civil rights platform of
the NAACP—an organization led by men
who, in McCall’s estimation, “are no
good at all.” The reversal of the verdict in
the Groveland Boys case, argued by
NAACP lawyers before the U.S. Supreme
Court, McCall took personally, as an
affront to his stature as an officer of the
law in Lake County. The fact of the
reversal and the prospect of the retrial had
fueled further the sheriff’s resentment of
the NAACP, twenty-eight months of it
toward Franklin Williams, and his


--- PAGE 951 ---
indignation at Thurgood Marshall, who
was now slandering him in the Northern
black press as a caricature of the Southern
white racist sheriff. Not that reporters like
Jay Nelson Tuck hadn’t recognized
McCall’s bigotry with no help at all from
the NAACP. In a 
New York Post
 article,
Tuck expressed abhorrence at the “sheer,
filthy offensiveness of it when Sheriff
McCall tells a public inquest that he
opened his car window in the rain
‘because the nigger smell got too strong.’
” McCall preferred to present himself as a
man who spoke the truth frankly, and if
people couldn’t handle the facts of it, the
fault was not his. “I don’t think there is
any question about it that the white race is
a superior race to the black race,” McCall


--- PAGE 952 ---
once said. “I believe that’s a proven fact.
In their native country, they’re still eating
each other. We don’t do that.”
Willis V. McCall may have been
vindicated in Lake County, and he had
dodged state criminal charges in the
shooting death of Samuel Shepherd. Still,
the need to set the record straight in the
court of public opinion—to gain
vindication by all—obsessed McCall. He
had work yet to do, and he knew just how
to do it, too.


--- PAGE 953 ---
CHAPTER 17: NO
MAN ALIVE OR TO
BE BORN


--- PAGE 954 ---
Flyer announcing Thurgood Marshall’s
appearance in Miami, Florida. (
Library of
Congress, Prints & Photographs
Division, Visual Materials from the
NAACP Records
)


--- PAGE 955 ---
A
NOTHER JOB DONE,
 special investigator
J. J. Elliott allowed himself a moment of
self-satisfaction as he headed back to his
room at the Fountain Inn in Eustis. He had
been doing well by Governor Fuller
Warren. After Senator Estes Kefauver’s
hearings had exposed the statewide
corruption in Florida on live television in
1950, Elliott had gotten some payback for
Governor Warren in Washington, D.C.,
where he’d uncovered “crap games, after-
hour whiskey sales, and prostitution
flourishing right under Kefauver’s nose.”
With an armful of newspapers
headlining McCall’s exoneration, Elliott
was fiddling with the key to his room
when Stetson Kennedy spotted him, and


--- PAGE 956 ---
joined the special investigator for a chat.
After making some small talk with Elliott
about bass fishing, Kennedy decided, on a
hunch, to “play the ace up my sleeve”:
from his wallet he pulled a “Klan Kard.”
An activist and folklorist as well as a
journalist, Kennedy had traveled across
Florida with Zora Neale Hurston during
the Great Depression, when the two of
them had collaborated on a WPA Florida
Writers’ Project chronicling the sights and
sounds of American folk life in turpentine
camps, on railroad gangs, in soup
kitchens, and the like. In the mid-1940s,
Kennedy had infiltrated the Ku Klux Klan
in Georgia as part of his research for
publications that sensationally exposed the
organization’s activities and inner


--- PAGE 957 ---
workings, its arcane rituals and “secret
codewords,” to a fascinated public. In a
1947 letter, Georgia governor Ellis Arnall
had credited Kennedy with uncovering
evidence that “has facilitated Georgia’s
prosecution of the Ku Klux Klan.” In
1951, he had not yet published
 I Rode
with the Ku Klux Klan
, a book that would
have more clearly revealed his identity to
Elliott. Kennedy handed the Klan Kard to
the special investigator.
“Well, well!” Elliott said. “I see you
know Mr. A-y-a-k [code for “Are you a
Klansman?”] . . .”
“Sure do,” Kennedy answered, “and
Mr. A-k-a-i [“A Klansman am I”], too.”
In reply, by Kennedy’s account, Elliott
disclosed that he was a member of the


--- PAGE 958 ---
East Point Klavern in Atlanta, and after a
quick exchange in which he and Kennedy
shared the names of people they both
knew, Elliott “opened up immediately” to
the reporter about the Groveland Boys
case.
“On the basis of that Kard you just
showed me,” Elliott said, “I don’t mind
telling you that when those niggers were
first delivered to the state pen they’d had
the hell beaten out of them.” Elliott
remarked, too, that Raiford officials
“were so afraid somebody might try to pin
the beatings on them,” they’d had the
Groveland Boys photographed as soon as
they’d arrived.
The conversation was interrupted when
a fellow reporter showed up, and


--- PAGE 959 ---
Kennedy excused himself, wanting to
avoid any chance of his undercover work
arising as a topic for discussion. He left
with what he thought was a major scoop,
although by then the FBI had already
documented that the deputies Yates and
Campbell had beaten the Groveland Boys.
The other, perhaps bigger story was that
Jefferson J. Elliott had admitted to being a
member of the KKK: a detail that, to
Kennedy’s mind, might point to a
conspiracy on the part of the governor,
himself a former Klansman, and his
special investigator to whitewash a cold-
blooded murder by Sheriff Willis McCall.
Stetson Kennedy didn’t even stop to
pack a toothbrush or his clothes. Bent on
flying direct to Washington, he hopped a


--- PAGE 960 ---
bus to Orlando and got to the airport,
where he found himself short of cash to
pay for the passage to D.C.—but not so
short he couldn’t buy some bar bourbon,
which he spilled down the front of his
shirt so that he was smelling, if not
entirely looking, like a common drunk. He
telephoned Thurgood Marshall, now back
at his office in New York. He offered the
NAACP a deal: in exchange for a plane
ticket to D.C., Kennedy would provide
them with information about J. J. Elliott
that directly affected the Groveland Boys
case. “Red hot information,” Kennedy
said, so hot he “had to get out of town in a
hurry.”
“What kind of information?” Marshall
asked.


--- PAGE 961 ---
“Can’t tell you over the phone,”
Kennedy answered. “Don’t know who’s
listening. Can you meet me at the airport
in Washington at 11:30 tonight?”
Kennedy also hinted to Marshall that he
was looking “for further funds to continue
further investigation.” Prepared to deal
with only one proposition at a time,
Marshall agreed to make arrangements for
Kennedy’s airline ticket.
“If the information he has can stand up,”
Marshall told the 
Defender’
s Arnold
DeMille, who was listening in, “it’ll be a
heck of a good story and will mean a lot to
the case. Let’s go down and meet the guy.
Maybe he does have something.”
Marshall booked flights for both himself
and DeMille, and at 11:30 p.m. on


--- PAGE 962 ---
November 11, he arrived in Washington
from New York. He checked into Hotel
2400, where he waited in his room with
DeMille; a local NAACP attorney, Frank
Reeves; and a special agent from the FBI.
The FBI was unimpressed by
Kennedy’s information, whereas Kennedy
was “completely surprised” by theirs: that
a grand jury had already declined to indict
Yates and Campbell on charges related to
the beatings of the Groveland Boys. To
better represent in his work the treatment
of the Groveland Boys by the Lake County
Sheriff’s Department, Kennedy suggested
that the FBI provide him with their
internal reports. Further, Kennedy outlined
for the FBI agent the nature of the
investigation that would be required to


--- PAGE 963 ---
effect a reopening of grand jury
proceedings; he also indicated that the
agents assigned to the investigation should
not be from or currently located in the
South, as the agents who had worked on
the case, he believed, had shown
“prejudice to negroes.”
The FBI agent immediately challenged
Kennedy. He wanted names, he wanted
dates, he wanted instances, he wanted
specifics to support claims of agent
prejudice. Kennedy hedged; he required
time to consult his files. Still, the FBI
would persist; on Kennedy’s return to his
home in Jacksonville, the bureau would
daily contact him by phone to demand
from him the specific information that he
had supposedly placed in his files: to


--- PAGE 964 ---
either “put-up or shut-up.” The bureau’s
internal reports on the meeting with
Kennedy in Washington, D.C., would
include the directive that if Kennedy
failed to provide specifics, agents should
“back him down completely on these
allegations.” The reports would also make
note of the writer’s leftist connections,
supported by quotes from interviews with
Kennedy’s associates who described him
as “the most dangerous Communist in the
State of Florida.” After reviewing the
reports, J. Edgar Hoover would write
across the bottom, “I would waste no
more time on Kennedy. He is just a
phony.”
On a call to the FBI the morning after
the meeting, Marshall admitted that “it


--- PAGE 965 ---
looked like Kennedy had swindled the
NAACP into paying his transportation
from Florida to Washington,” for in the
exchange the NAACP had gained no new
information vital to the Groveland case.
While Kennedy’s communist affiliations
hardly bore upon the case, they did
provide Marshall, in his dismissal of the
writer’s presumed scoops, with the
opportunity to affect solidarity with the
FBI. As always, Marshall expressed his
appreciation for the bureau’s efforts as
well as “the thoroughness of the
investigation [the FBI was] conducting.”
In return, he was thanked “for his
appreciation of confidence in the work of
this Bureau and was assured that the
Bureau is only too willing to receive any


--- PAGE 966 ---
information from him at any time.” Once
again, Hoover and Marshall performed
their private rites of cooperation.
DeMille told Marshall he didn’t want to
touch the story about Elliott being in the
Klan, as it “could result in the nicest,
fattest liable [
sic
] law suit” sure to have
“yours truly pounding the streets looking
for a new job.” However dismissive of
Kennedy’s import Marshall may have
been with the FBI, he did put the
information regarding Elliott to use in a
telegram he sent to Fuller Warren. While
Marshall did not refer explicitly to
Elliott’s possible affiliation with the Klan,
he did imply to Warren that the governor
knew exactly what outcome the special
investigator would effect on his mission in


--- PAGE 967 ---
Lake County, and to whose particular
advantage that outcome would be. Also,
Kennedy’s firm belief, however vaguely
supported, that FBI agents in the South
were “prejudiced in Civil Rights
investigations” was very much in line with
Marshall’s own thinking. (Marshall
himself had walked into the same trap
with Hoover, who had demanded agents’
names and specific incidents that Marshall
likewise had failed to provide.)
Moreover, for all the FBI’s efforts to
marginalize Stetson Kennedy as a
communist and dismiss him as a phony,
his reporting on the Groveland Boys case
had been consistent with the news stories
being published at the same time in
Northern papers. Finally, his claim


--- PAGE 968 ---
connecting Jefferson J. Elliott to the Ku
Klux Klan was one that even the FBI had
acknowledged to be “entirely possible,”
given that Elliott was “formerly on the
Investigative Staff of Governor [Eugene]
Talmadge of Georgia,” an admitted KKK
flogger and racial demagogue who
presided over a “Klan-ridden regime.”
The FBI had questioned both Warren and
Elliott in this regard, and both had denied
that Elliott was a Klansman. “Sometime
later,” however, according to FBI notes,
Elliott allowed that he was a Klansman,
describing his membership as being “part
of my job.”
T
HE HEARINGS IN
 the retrial of the now


--- PAGE 969 ---
one Groveland boy for the rape of Norma
Padgett had been postponed for thirty days
because of the shootings. Walter Irvin was
meanwhile recovering from his wounds at
Raiford. Jack Greenberg had amended the
change of venue motion. Thurgood
Marshall was preparing to return to Lake
County, where a curious item had just
appeared in local newspapers. That Judge
Truman Futch, on December 4, 1951, had
signed a confidential order instructing
Sheriff Willis McCall to (again) transport
Walter Irvin from Raiford State Prison to
Tavares for the change of venue hearing
had evidently been leaked to the press by
the incensed state attorney Jesse Hunter.
Apparently even McCall’s friend Judge
W. Troy Hall thought it a bad idea, as he


--- PAGE 970 ---
had contacted the FBI to explore the
possibility of enlisting a bureau agent to
accompany the sheriff as an escort.
Marshall contemplated the news piece
with incredulity. No matter that Governor
Warren had ignored every protest
Marshall had wired to him in regard to the
catastrophic prison transfer a month
earlier, in dismay Marshall pleaded in yet
another telegram: “In the name of human
decency and justice we urgently request
that you replace Sheriff McCall and have
Irvin transported by State officials other
than McCall. We further urge that you take
all of the necessary steps to assure that
Irvin will not be killed or wounded on this
trip.”
Hunter’s alarm spared Walter Irvin the


--- PAGE 971 ---
experience of another two-hour car ride
with the man who had shot him not a
month before; Irvin was transferred by the
state highway patrol. Willis McCall paid
a visit to Raiford, nonetheless. To date,
McCall had escaped indictment on
criminal charges by the state in the
roadside shootings near Umatilla, but the
sheriff was fully aware that the FBI had
located the telltale sixth bullet buried in
the sand where Irvin had fallen. So
McCall had located a tale-teller of his
own: Merlin James Leiby, a twenty-four-
year-old white prisoner on death row at
Raiford. The sheriff’s trip to Raiford
proved to be fruitful. Leiby, the “doomed
murderer” who had been scheduled to die
in the electric chair within days, instead


--- PAGE 972 ---
was issued a stay of execution by
Governor Warren. The governor had thus
broken his monthlong silence on the
Groveland Boys case, and he had done so
on the basis of a written request by the
sheriff of Lake County. McCall’s letter
reported that prior to the transfer of the
prisoners Shepherd and Irvin from
Raiford to Tavares by the sheriff and the
deputy Yates, Merlin James Leiby had
overheard his fellow inmates on death
row “planning to escape.” McCall then
made his point: “I believe that testimony
from him [Leiby] in person would have
great bearing in case the prejudiced
groups in New York bring enough
pressure to bear in Washington for the
Justice Department to place this case


--- PAGE 973 ---
before a Federal Grand Jury.”
Leiby soon found himself telling his tale
to two FBI agents. The night before the
transfer, Leiby told them, he’d overheard
Samuel Shepherd say to another inmate,
“I’ll be thinking of you when I’m out there
drinking that Calvert Reserve whiskey and
juking on Wednesday night.” And on the
night of the transfer itself, according to
Leiby, as Shepherd was leaving his cell,
he told another inmate, “Well boys I’ll be
a free man tonight.” On further
investigation, the agents learned that
another inmate, Robert Cecil Bell, had
overheard a conversation as well. In his
statement, Bell claimed that he’d heard
two prison employees—“free people,” in
prison argot—discussing how Leiby could


--- PAGE 974 ---
likely escape his date with the electric
chair if he had been fortunate enough to
have heard Shepherd and Irvin planning
their getaway. According to Bell, when
one of the two prison guards asked, “Why
don’t you suggest it to Leiby?” the other
replied, “It’s already been taken care of.”
In the end, the FBI found that for every
inmate who believed Leiby’s story there
was another who corroborated Bell’s
statement that the prison employees had
planted the idea for the story in the mind
of the doomed inmate. The FBI concluded
that “no action appears to be warranted.”
While the NAACP scoffed at still another
of McCall’s efforts to whitewash his
shootings—with Walter White noting that
in his experience with jailhouse stool


--- PAGE 975 ---
pigeons, “it is not the practice” for white
prisoners to be housed anywhere near
enough to black inmates so as to be able to
overhear their conversations—McCall’s
effort did result in press coverage of the
governor’s stay of execution and in the
sort of publicity the sheriff sought in his
endeavor to stave off federal charges. It
also bought Merlin James Leiby time,
until, one year later, the state of Florida
pulled the switch on him at Flat Top.
O
N THE WEEKEND
 of November 23, the
Florida State Conference of NAACP
Branches held its eleventh annual meeting
in Daytona Beach, the city in which all of
Harry T. Moore’s family had received


--- PAGE 976 ---
their bachelor’s degrees, at Bethune-
Cookman College. Harry had actually
been the last; he had been awarded his
degree only a few months earlier. For
most of those few months Harry had been
contemplating his options. The college
degree provided him with some
professional insurance, in the not unlikely
event that he should be ousted as an
executive secretary by the NAACP: a
prospect that he was still not able to fully
acknowledge. He could have opted to
resign, or he could have chosen to work
out some alternative position with the
national office. Instead he was doing what
he always did. He had chosen to come to
Daytona Beach and fight.
The first resolution on the agenda


--- PAGE 977 ---
concerned the Groveland case, with a call
for Governor Fuller Warren to “remove
Sheriff Willis B. McCall forthwith from
office” that might have been drafted by the
letter-writing, speechifying Moore
himself. It was overwhelmingly approved
in a floor vote, unlike resolution 5, which
met with more resistance than Harry might
have expected and a lot more than Gloster
Current and Ruby Hurley had anticipated.
The national branches director and
Southeast regional director, it turned out,
could not deliver the votes, and the
resolution to abolish the position of
Florida’s paid executive secretary stalled
on the floor. It proved to be no victory for
Moore, either. Rather than engage in a
protracted battle that might cripple the


--- PAGE 978 ---
NAACP branches in Florida, Moore
agreed to a compromise by which he
would receive over time all back pay due
to him—more than $2,600—on the
condition that he would continue with the
NAACP as an unpaid “state coordinator.”
Moore left Daytona disillusioned.
Current and Hurley “came in and took
over,” Moore complained, making “this
meeting . . . about the worst we ever had.”
He returned home frustrated, in large part
because his problems with Current and
Hurley stemmed from his inability to raise
more money in Florida. He told his
mother, Rosa Moore, that “he could not
understand why the colored people in
Florida did not take more interest in
NAACP work,” why they could not see


--- PAGE 979 ---
that investing time or energy or two
dollars annual dues in the NAACP was
investing in a better future for themselves
and their children. Change was coming,
but it would be coming sooner with more
support from the black community. As
Marshall would often remind the NAACP
staff and field workers, “the easy part of
the job is fighting the white folks.”
Again, Moore considered options. He
would have some income from the
NAACP and from his back pay (one could
be cynical about that); also, Harriette’s
position in the Palm Beach County school
system was secure. They owned their
house in Mims, and they were no longer
financially supporting their daughters, as
Peaches was teaching at a school in Ocala


--- PAGE 980 ---
and Evangeline was working for the U.S.
Department of Labor in Washington.
Harry himself had received a good offer
to teach, starting in February if he was
interested, and he’d also thought he might
go back to school for his master’s degree.
But again, with or without back pay, as
secretary or coordinator, Harry knew he
was, as always, in it to the end of the civil
rights fight.
In the weeks before the annual meeting
in Daytona, a wave of racial violence had
swept through the state of Florida. The
year had begun with isolated beatings of
blacks by the Klan, but the violence had
intensified in March when a Winter
Garden man was flogged and then shot to
death. In April the violence had escalated.


--- PAGE 981 ---
To the state senate’s passage of an “anti-
mask” bill, which banned the wearing of
hoods as well as unauthorized cross
burnings, the Klan responded with a rash
of “hit and run” cross burnings up and
down the state. That spring, too, in an
attempt to unite various Klan factions in
common cause, Bill Hendrix, by day a
plumbing contractor in Tallahassee and
otherwise the Grand Dragon of the
Southern Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, had
declared a war on “hate groups,” most
notably the NAACP and B’nai B’rith. In
Miami, bombings had laid waste to a
Jewish community center and a black
apartment complex; dynamite had been
discovered, but had failed to detonate, at
both a Hebrew school and a Catholic


--- PAGE 982 ---
church. In the rubble of another bombed
Jewish site had been planted a cross
bearing “anti-Semitic and anti-Negro
slogans” as well as Nazi and KKK
symbols. “The Jew has already ruined the
northern cities and wishes to invade the
South,” read one letter that had arrived at
the governor’s office. “They are teaching
communism to the colored people, and
inciting rioting through them.” By autumn,
violence by dynamite had spread to
central Florida. The Klan had flattened the
Creamette Frozen Custard Stand in
Orlando because the owner had refused to
dedicate a separate service window for
blacks. Before the year’s end the “Florida
Terror,” as it was dubbed by the press,
had resulted in a dozen disastrous


--- PAGE 983 ---
bombings and numerous failed attempts to
destroy racial and religious-based sites:
the 
Saturday Evening Post
 designated
1951 as “the worst year of minority
outrages in the history of Florida or
probably any other state in recent times.”
For Harry Moore, all the outrages of
white supremacy in Florida were
epitomized by one case and one man. On a
weekend in December, after the Daytona
conference and before the Christmas break
at Harriette’s school, Moore sat down at
his desk in the Mims house, where he
rolled a piece of stationery into his
typewriter—still fretful over his treatment
by the NAACP, he chose the Progressive
Voters League of Florida letterhead—and
with “Dear Governor” he began. Heatedly


--- PAGE 984 ---
his fingers hit the keys, no matter that the
lengthy, indignant letter would be stuck by
some assistant to the governor into the
Harry T. Moore file, already thick with
unanswered correspondence and
telegrams regarding Sheriff Willis McCall
and the case of the Groveland Boys. Two
decades of experience, twenty years of
exasperation in the battle for civil rights in
Florida informed Moore’s wrath over the
Groveland case, in which the state was
now complicit with the sheriff in murder.
McCall’s rounds of fire, beyond killing
one black man and seriously wounding
another, were, Moore wrote, “still
echoing around the world.” So he had
questions for Governor Warren, questions
that had to be asked again even though he


--- PAGE 985 ---
had been asking them of Florida governors
for twenty years, with no reply. “Is it true
that in Florida the word of a Negro means
nothing when weighed against that of a
white person?” Who will be there for
black families chased from their homes by
the bomb-throwing Klan? Who will stand
up for young Willie James Howard,
murdered in front of his father for sending
a white girl a Christmas card? Who will
demand justice when a white man rapes a
young black girl and is only levied a fine
in court? By the time he finished writing
his letter, he knew who. Harry T. Moore.
Lately he had taken to carrying a pistol.
“I’ll take a few of them with me if it
comes to that,” Moore told his two
daughters and loyal wife.


--- PAGE 986 ---
M
ARSHALL GATHERED HIS
 legal staff in
New York to discuss another fund-raising
tour. He thought “the best person would be
someone from Shepherd’s family,” but he
also had practical concerns. “Shepherd’s
father can’t go because you never can
keep him sober,” Marshall told them.
Greenberg chimed in, “We really ought
to call the Civil Rights Congress and find
out how they raised money.” But Wilkins
quashed that idea. “We do not have the
same kind of discipline as the Communists
do. The people in our branches will never
work as hard.”
“Some of the tactics are what we should
use,” Marshall said. “We ought to get the
most horrible pictures printed and out to


--- PAGE 987 ---
the public.” He finally decided to send out
“eight thousand letters to higher income
bracket people,” adding, “We can say that
Shepherd is dead and we paid for his
funeral so that we have cared for the dead.
But we must now care for the living.”
W
ALTER IRVIN, WITH
 handcuffs around
both wrists, emerged from a state highway
patrol car at the county courthouse in
Tavares, where pretrial hearings in the
Groveland Boys case were beginning on
December 6. Thurgood Marshall and Jack
Greenberg both winced at the sight of him,
for the defendants in the second trial had
been reduced to one. “As matters now
stand,” Marshall told reporters, “two


--- PAGE 988 ---
colored men have already lost their lives
as a result of this charge of attack of a
white woman; one being killed by a
sheriff’s posse and one by Sheriff McCall.
Another is serving a life sentence. The
fourth, Walter Irvin, although shot twice in
the chest and once in the neck, must still
stand trial and face the threat of the
electric chair. This is typical Southern
Justice.”
However ambiguous Jesse Hunter’s
own feelings about the sheriff of Lake
County may have been, the state attorney
was not about to rein in his fervor in the
prosecution of Walter Irvin for the rape of
Norma Padgett. First off, Hunter moved
that Marshall and Greenberg not be
admitted as counsel for the defendant, on


--- PAGE 989 ---
the grounds that the NAACP had been
responsible for the publication of
“vicious, slanderous and libelous matter”
in regard to the case. Hunter introduced
fund-raising materials that the Florida
Committee of 100 had circulated nearly
two years earlier, which included Ted
Poston’s Groveland Boys article, “The
Story of Florida’s Legal Lynching,” and
he then contended that the committee,
under the aegis of the NAACP, had set out
to “stir up scandalous and libelous matter
and material against the good people of
Lake County, Florida.” Marshall
countered that he was a lawyer
representing a client, Walter Irvin, and
that the committee “has nothing
whatsoever to do with my office.” He had


--- PAGE 990 ---
also experienced his first sting of the
hostility that had unsettled Franklin
Williams in this same courtroom.
Still, Marshall had come to Florida
prepared. The defense moved to
disqualify Jesse Hunter, not because they
held any hope that Judge Truman Futch
would so move but because they wanted
to have Hunter’s actions vis-à-vis
Lawrence Burtoft, the first person known
to have spoken with Norma Padgett after
the rape, entered on the record. They
called the state attorney to the stand.
Akerman asked, “Did you interview him
[Lawrence Burtoft] as a prospective
witness in this case?”
“Yes, I did, but I am not going to tell
you what he told me,” Hunter answered;


--- PAGE 991 ---
“he is your witness and you can find out
from him.”
Challenging Hunter, the defense pointed
out that in an interview with the reporter
from the 
St. Petersburg Times
, Burtoft
claimed he had told Hunter that Norma
Padgett had said she wasn’t hurt and had
said she could not identify her abductors.
“That statement is entirely false,”
Hunter barked in his gravelly voice. “He
made no such statement to me at any time,
and I am not going into what he did tell
me. . . . You can prove it by Mr. Burtoft,
not by me.”
“Mr. Burtoft is out of the province of
this court, he is in the armed forces of the
United States, in North Carolina,”
Akerman noted.


--- PAGE 992 ---
“Well, you will have to go further than
that before you ever get him back here to
make any such statement as that, because
he never made the statement,” Hunter
replied.
Now that Hunter had been fully engaged
in battle with the defense, he’d resorted to
old, tried-and-true tactics. He dodged and
he denied, for of course he had not had
Burtoft testify under oath in the first trial,
for the same reason he had not called Dr.
Geoffrey Binneveld as a witness: in
neither instance would the testimony have
supported the prosecution’s case. Hunter
also doled. As if he had never heard the
Supreme Court’s admonishment in regard
to the doling out of disinformation to the
press before the first trial, Hunter was


--- PAGE 993 ---
telling reporters that the FBI had
concluded that all six bullets had been
fired from the same gun, when, in fact, the
FBI had informed the state attorney that
the sixth bullet could not be positively
connected to McCall’s gun.
On the motion for change of venue,
despite Jesse Hunter’s argument that “this
whole thing has been in the hands of a
bunch of radicals . . . and it is directed to
the men who came in here from out of the
state to create race hatred,” Judge Truman
Futch had little choice but to rule in favor
of the defense. While the judge wanted a
speedy conviction no less than Hunter did,
Futch recognized that he had been clearly
mandated by the U.S. Supreme Court to
move the trial out of Lake County. Not that


--- PAGE 994 ---
the ruling would prove to be an advantage
to the defense.
Marion County shared Lake County’s
northwest border and its demographics. Its
sheriff had also been recently involved in
a shooting with a sixteen-year-old black
youth, much to the consternation of
Thurgood Marshall and the defense. For in
this case the black youth, who had been
picked up by Sheriff Edward Porter Jr. for
questioning in the theft of a coat from a
men’s store, had first attacked the sheriff
with an ice pick, then shot Porter several
times with his own gun. Sheriff Porter’s
death was a clarion call to the people of
Marion County; law and order had to be
upheld at all costs, particularly in the face
of unruly blacks. In December 1951 no


--- PAGE 995 ---
other county in Florida could have been
more predisposed to sympathy for a
sheriff who claimed that two black
prisoners had attacked him in his car.
Marshall had hoped that Judge Futch
would move the retrial to a more urban
setting like Miami or Jacksonville, and
thereby remove himself from any further
proceedings in the Groveland Boys case.
Instead Futch chose a venue within the
Fifth Judicial District, where he could
preside in the retrial. He postponed
hearings until mid-January. That done, he
“took the first step toward a legal lynching
of Walter Lee Irvin,” as one newspaper
reported: the judge barred Thurgood
Marshall and Jack Greenberg from
defending Walter Irvin, on the grounds that


--- PAGE 996 ---
they “stirred up trouble in the community.”
The decision was made, Futch said, and
as Hunter had earlier argued, “because
they represent the NAACP” and not the
client.
H
ARRY T. MOORE
 drove his blue Ford
down “the Great Black Way” of Second
Avenue, past the Lyric Theater and the
brightly lit nightclubs and dance halls, into
the heart of Overtown—or “Colored
Town,” or the “Harlem of the South,” as
the bustling, self-sustaining neighborhood
on the other side of the tracks from
downtown Miami was more commonly
known. It was a world away from the
rural communities of North Florida with


--- PAGE 997 ---
their whitewashed community centers and
tidy churches where Harry would try to
raise a few more dollars for the NAACP.
In Overtown, the churches were the
centers of the community, vibrant,
essential to the social and spiritual life of
Miami’s black population. Moore parked
his sedan not far from the Mount Zion
Baptist Church. He relished the energy in
the early evening air as he walked toward
the imposing Mediterranean Revival
building. He had expected the scores of
stylishly dressed blacks who were filing
into the church; he had not expected the
police.
Heavily armed, watchful, up and down
the sidewalk, policemen were patrolling
the streets outside the church. While


--- PAGE 998 ---
Miami had seen a rash of violence over
the past year, for the most part the
bombings had been hit-and-run, the
intention being to destroy property,
usually unoccupied churches and
synagogues, not to assault people. No
doubt, though, the mass meeting of
December 13 at Mount Zion Baptist
Church—its topic widely advertised as
“The Truth About Groveland,” its purpose
to raise money for the Groveland Boys
defense—was proving to be provocative:
anonymous telephone threats stated the
church would be bombed that night when
the featured speaker, Thurgood Marshall,
took the pulpit. Immediately upon learning
of the threat, Mount Zion’s pastor, the
Reverend Edward T. Graham, had


--- PAGE 999 ---
notified a member of the City
Commission, and shortly thereafter
Miami’s chief of police—who “believed
that the threat came from someone
interested in the Groveland case since it
was on that case that Mr. Marshall was to
speak”—had promised the church, and
Marshall, protection. Two weeks earlier,
on a similar NAACP fund-raising
occasion, Thurgood Marshall had spoken
about Groveland at the Siloam
Presbyterian Church in Brooklyn, New
York; he had not needed a band of police
guards to shield him and sweep him safely
into the church.
At Mount Zion, armed guards
surrounded the pulpit. Several white
citizens were seated on the speakers’


--- PAGE 1000 ---
platform with Marshall, and whites also
filled the first few rows in the church.
Thunderous applause greeted Marshall
when he rose to speak; the police inside
the church shuffled nervously. Moore had
never heard Marshall argue a case before
the Supreme Court, where, as Jack
Greenberg observed, he assumed a
courtroom style that was “ordinary,
conversational, and undramatic.” Mount
Zion Baptist Church was not a courtroom,
and Moore watched mostly in awe as
Marshall—fiery, impassioned, defiant—
abandoned his lawyerly measures for
preacher-like stylings in a slightly
exaggerated Southern drawl. “In a mass
meeting,” Greenberg said, “he could bring
an audience to its feet, clapping and


--- PAGE 1001 ---
stomping.” And that night in Overtown he
did.
Moore marveled at Marshall’s power in
the pulpit. Riveting his audience, eliciting
gasps of horror and murmurs of sorrow,
he unfolded the story of the Groveland
Boys and summoned plaints of outrage in
response to the questions that punctuated
his tale: the same questions that Moore
had been posing in his letters to Governor
Warren over the past two and a half years.
“Why did McCall have to remove the
prisoners at night?” Marshall’s voice
boomed, and when the rumble of
discontent in the pews began to subside,
he roused the audience again: “Why did he
have to travel on an isolated road instead
of the main highway?” And again: “And


--- PAGE 1002 ---
why didn’t he have a deputy sheriff with
him in the car with the prisoners?”
It was murder, Marshall was telling
them, a lynching by law enforcement that
had been subsequently whitewashed by
Lake County officials and the court into an
act of self-defense. But he was telling
them, too, that the Miami NAACP was
standing proud and firm against this
travesty of justice, and with their financial
support, their contributions tonight, they—
the good people of Miami, undeterred by
threats and violence—would help
Thurgood Marshall and the Legal Defense
Fund fight Lake County.
Over the crescendo of noise and
enthusiasm, Marshall’s voice rose. He had
a threat of his own to deliver: a message


--- PAGE 1003 ---
for Judge Truman Futch and anyone else
who thought Thurgood Marshall was
going to decamp or desert the Groveland
case simply because a judge in Lake
County had decided to bar him from
defending Walter Irvin. “They can keep
me from the courts of Florida,” Marshall
shouted. “But there is no man alive or to
be born who can prevent me from arguing
the Groveland case before the U.S.
Supreme Court!”
The crowd roared its approval. For
Harry T. Moore, it had been a remarkable
event to witness. In his two decades of
NAACP travels, he had heard his share of
inspirational civil rights sermons with
their biblical analogues of long desert
journeys and parting seas, but Marshall’s


--- PAGE 1004 ---
vision was grounded in constitutional law
and he drew the lineaments of his hope
from his personal experience, from battles
won and strategies mastered, from the
efforts he shared with like-minded men
and women determined not to see the
future repeat the past. The Mount Zion
Baptist parishioners reached deep into
their pockets that night—their
contributions exceeded a thousand dollars
—with the highest single donations
coming “from some of these white people
in the audience.” One of the white men in
attendance was Caxton Doggett, a minister
from Rader Memorial Methodist Church
in Miami, who later wrote to Marshall, “I
was glad of the chance to hear you the
other night in Miami. You are a very fine


--- PAGE 1005 ---
speaker. If you weren’t a lawyer, you
would make a good preacher. . . . After
hearing you, I decided to join the NAACP.
. . . You are doing great work, and I want
you to know that I am one of an increasing
number of southern white men who have
the highest respect for your professional
ability and your integrity of character.”
In common cause they found community
and communion: this was why Moore had
dedicated two decades of his life to the
NAACP. He didn’t have Thurgood
Marshall’s background in law, or Dan
Byrd’s charisma, or Franklin Williams’s
eloquence. He hadn’t the stomach for
Gloster Current’s cold-eyed practicality.
What he lacked in magnetism, though, he
made up for in persistence and


--- PAGE 1006 ---
determination, and his commitment to his
people in their struggle for justice and
equality he would match with anyone’s.
By the end of the hour in Mount Zion
Baptist Church, with the clapping and
stomping resounding in his head, and his
heart stirred by Marshall’s words, Moore
had reaffirmed his commitment to the
cause. He remembered other words, too:
ten years ago, when he’d fought at
Marshall’s side in the Florida salary
equalization lawsuits on behalf of black
teachers, Marshall had said, “This is not a
single battle, but rather a real war in
which we will lose some battles and win
others.” In the war for the Groveland
Boys, Moore was ready for the next battle.
He was driving north on U.S. 1. In two


--- PAGE 1007 ---
hours, he’d be back in Riviera Beach,
where he and Harriette rented rooms
during the school year. Classes would
soon be ending for the holidays at Lake
Park Colored School, and they would be
returning to their house in Mims.
Harriette’s brother, George Simms, a
master sergeant in the army, would be
home on leave from Korea, and with him
and their daughters, Peaches and
Evangeline, they would be celebrating not
only Christmas but also their twenty-fifth
wedding anniversary. He was looking
forward to Mims, his family, the
celebrations, the new year. He stopped, as
he usually did on his drives up the coast,
at a small grocery store in Melbourne;
he’d gotten to know the owner over the


--- PAGE 1008 ---
years. They got to talking about the
Groveland Boys case, and the man
expressed concern for his friend’s safety.
He wondered if maybe Harry wasn’t
“going too far” in his work for the
NAACP. “I’m going to keep doing it,”
Moore replied in his understated way,
“even if it costs me my life. Jesus Christ
lost his life doing what he thought was
right. And I believe the Lord intended for
me to do this work for the colored race. I
may live to be a ripe old age or I may be
killed tomorrow, or next month, or
perhaps never, but I intend to do this until
the day I die.”


--- PAGE 1009 ---
CHAPTER 18: ALL
OVER THE PLACE,
LIKE RATS
(
Federal Bureau of Investigation
)
A
T NINE O’CLOCK
 on Christmas night of


--- PAGE 1010 ---
1951, a dense ground fog had begun to
settle in the orange groves of Mims. Harry
T. Moore cranked the engine of his sedan.
The Moores—Harry; his mother, Rosa;
his wife, Harriette; and their daughter
Peaches—had enjoyed a quiet holiday
dinner with family and friends at the house
of Harriette’s brother, Arnold Simms.
Moore edged his car slowly onto Old
Dixie Highway, the headlights no help in
the fog. Still, in a few minutes, he’d
driven the short distance, several hundred
yards, home.
The Ford parked, Harry helped his
seventy-one-year-old mother out of the car
and walked her to the house; Harriette and
Peaches trailed behind. Harry lingered for
a moment, alone, on the porch, in the fog,


--- PAGE 1011 ---
his thoughts lost in the surreal atmosphere
of the night. Across the grove another man
stood quiet, too, in the fog, beneath an
orange tree, his eyes trained on a vague,
diffuse glow.
The light inside the house seemed all
the brighter when Harry joined his family
in the living room. The day had tired
Harriette, but before she went to bed, her
husband insisted, they had more than
Christmas to celebrate. It was their
twenty-fifth wedding anniversary, after
all; they should at least have some cake.
Rosa laid a fruitcake on the oak dining
table. Harry was about to cut the first slice
when Harriette gently placed her hand
over his—they shared a smile, as if posing
for a wedding portrait—and together they


--- PAGE 1012 ---
ceremoniously pressed the knife into the
cake. After the cake, when Harriette did
retire, Harry sat with his mother at the
table as he reminisced about his wedding
(a modest affair in the home of a doctor in
Cocoa, with only a handful of people in
attendance), his youth, his wife, their little
girls. Shortly after 10 p.m. Rosa, too,
retired; as she headed to the guest room at
the back of the house, she reminded Harry
to send Peaches to bed and turn off the
lights.
Peaches had fallen asleep on the settee
in the living room. Harry nudged her
awake, and with some comic books in
hand, she said good night. Harry turned off
the lights behind her.
Rosa was drifting toward sleep when


--- PAGE 1013 ---
she heard the footsteps. “Is that you,
Harry?” she asked. As he ducked into the
bathroom, Harry answered her: “Yes,
Mamma, that’s me.”
The house was nearly dark. Peaches had
given up reading for sleeping by the time
Harry had lain down beside his wife. He
switched off the bedroom light. No hazy
glow hovered any longer in the fog
outside. The man waiting beneath the
orange tree had a moment to brace himself
and steady his hands for the task. It was
10:20 p.m.
The force of the blast split the house at
its seams. It lifted the chimney into the air.
It blew out every window; it splintered
the front porch. It shredded the
floorboards in Harry and Harriette’s


--- PAGE 1014 ---
bedroom, and propelled the back of a
chair through the ceiling into the attic. The
explosion roused the town of Titusville
four miles away.
Only the chimney settled back down in
place at the Moores’ house in Mims.
Jolted by the blast, Peaches had screamed
out for her mother, to no response, and
then for her grandmother. Groggy,
disoriented, Rosa stepped into the room.
“Grandma, are you hurt?” Peaches
asked.
“No, are you?”
“No,” Peaches answered.
Then Rosa heard the groans. She and
Peaches made their way to the Moores’
bedroom at the front of the house. Peaches
fiddled with the switch of a lamp in the


--- PAGE 1015 ---
dining room; it worked, and in its light,
she and her grandmother could barely
make out, in the rubble of the bedroom, on
the floor, under the debris, the figures of
Harry and Harriette. Their bedspring and
mattress had been cast up against the wall.
“Evangeline . . . Evangeline . . .”
Harriette was mumbling repeatedly:
Evangeline who in two days was planning
to join her family for further celebrations
in Mims.
When Rosa first stepped into the room
her foot sank into the floorboard just
inside the door. She and Peaches managed
between them to pull a bookcase off
Harriette, but they lacked the physical
strength to deal with the bodies and all the
debris. Rosa sent Peaches outside to call


--- PAGE 1016 ---
to her uncles for help.
“George! Arnold! Help!” Peaches
screamed into the fog, at the Simms house
a few hundred yards down the road.
“George!”
In minutes they had arrived. The porch,
shattered into bits, evidenced the effects
of a powerful bomb: dynamite, or
nitroglycerin. Whatever it was, Harriette’s
two brothers were expecting nothing good
when they entered the ruin of a home.
Peaches was sobbing, hysterical.
“Something has happened to Daddy!” she
cried, and the two men rushed to rescue
the two bodies from the wreckage of a
bedroom.
Once they had lodged Harriette in the
front seat of George’s roomy Buick sedan


--- PAGE 1017 ---
with her sisters-in-law Ernestine and
Mabel, and Harry in the back with his
mother, they sped as much as the fog
allowed toward the Fernald-Laughton
Memorial Hospital in Sanford, thirty
miles away. The silence in the car was
taut, broken only by Harriette’s faint cries
for Evangeline or a worriedly whispered
“Harry.” He was fading fast. With his
head cradled against her shoulder, Rosa
tried to comfort him, a boy in his pajamas,
her son Harry in his pain. He “groaned
several times.”
When finally they cleared the fog,
George aggressively stepped on the gas.
He was worrying over his decision to
drive Harry and Harriette to the hospital
in Sanford, but he was certain a Jim Crow


--- PAGE 1018 ---
ambulance would not have responded
quickly to a call from Mims on Christmas
night. They had just reached the hospital
when George heard Harry’s gargled moan.
And Rosa’s stifled cry: Harry’s head had
dropped down onto his mother’s lap;
blood was seeping from his mouth onto
her clothes and into the Buick’s
upholstery.
Fernald-Laughton Memorial was not a
modern medical facility. A mansion in a
residential neighborhood of Sanford that
had been converted into a hospital, it had
a limited staff: only one nurse and no
doctors were on duty that Christmas night
when George Simms carried his brother-
in-law to a stretcher in the emergency
room. The nurse telephoned Dr. George


--- PAGE 1019 ---
Starke, one of but a few black physicians
in the area. Anxious, impatient, Simms,
who had seen enough combat injuries in
Korea to know that severe damage to the
lungs and other internal organs
characterized primary blast injuries,
considered his brother-in-law’s chances,
as it was not uncommon for victims to
initially survive an explosion before
taking a fatal turn for the worst. And still
Dr. Starke hadn’t arrived at the hospital.
The master sergeant in Simms sent him
back to his car. He himself would bring
Dr. Starke to the hospital, but his path
crossed Starke’s in the Florida night.
About the same time that Simms arrived at
Starke’s residence, the doctor was
entering the emergency room at Fernald-


--- PAGE 1020 ---
Laughton. And by the time Simms had
raced back to the hospital, Dr. Starke was
shaking his head as he stared down at the
man on the stretcher. “Cerebral
hemorrhage, internal hemorrhages and
shock,” the doctor was saying to Simms.
His words could explain cause but could
not alter effect: Harry T. Moore was dead.
“Yes, Mamma, that’s me” were the last
words Harry T. Moore was ever heard to
speak. Minutes later, in his pajamas, he’d
peeled back the covers and, as he had for
twenty-five years, settled into bed beside
his wife, already asleep . . . and in an
instant Moore’s work was done. His
words dissolved into a groan. There
would be no more speeches to his people,
no more letters to the editor, no more


--- PAGE 1021 ---
telegrams to the governor, no more words.
It was what they wanted, the men behind
the man shrouded in the fog beneath the
orange tree: no more words. The last
words Moore was known to write he had
typed in his impassioned letter of
December 2 to Governor Fuller Warren,
in which he implored the governor to hold
Sheriff Willis McCall responsible for the
cold-blooded murder of Samuel Shepherd,
and the last of the questions he posed in
that letter would resonate in the press
worldwide in the days ahead.
We seek no special favors; but
certainly we have a right to expect
justice and equal protection of the
laws even for the humblest Negro.
Shall we be disappointed again?


--- PAGE 1022 ---
Respectfully yours,
Harry T. Moore
T
HE CONDENSATION LAY
 thick over the
Moores’ orange grove when Broward
County sheriff Bill Williams turned up at
the scene of the blast with deputies and a
bloodhound. Within hours FBI agents had
arrived as well. Investigators combed
through the wreckage; they photographed
footprints in the grove; they gathered
Moore’s paperwork, which had been
scattered everywhere by the explosion. By
the time the morning sun had burned off
what remained of the fog, mourners had
begun to congregate in front of the
Moores’ cordoned-off house. They’d


--- PAGE 1023 ---
number more than a thousand by day’s
end, and many of them had traveled on
foot. They’d all known Harry T. Moore,
either through voter registration drives or
by his NAACP work. They talked; they
conjectured; they wondered why anyone
would want to harm the nigh-saintly Mr.
Moore. Deputy Clyde Bates attended to
the “general talk,” and the consensus, he
said, linked the killing of Harry Moore to
the Groveland case.
At one point, while mourners paid their
respects to Moore before a makeshift
shrine—a stack of shattered planks that
had been the front porch—a young black
boy, who had crawled under the house,
was beating the underside of the first floor
with a stick. He caught the eye, or ear, of


--- PAGE 1024 ---
Special Agent Robert Nischwitz of the
FBI, who asked the boy what he was
doing under there. “Trying to scare the
rats away” was the boy’s reply, in which
Nischwitz found an apt metaphor for the
situation in Mims. “Certain” that the Klan
was responsible for the blast when he had
arrived at the scene, the agent noted that
Klansmen, too, “were all over the place,
like rats.” Like rats, they’d have to be
beaten out of hiding.
Harriette Moore, meanwhile, remained
in shock at Fernald-Laughton. She had
begun to regain the strength to talk, but Dr.
Starke worried that she might not survive
the severe internal injuries she had
suffered. The next week would be crucial;
the doctor gave her a fifty-fifty chance of


--- PAGE 1025 ---
recovery. When Harriette was informed
that her husband was dead, however, her
mood darkened. She let go of hope.
“There isn’t much left to fight back for,”
she told a reporter from the 
Orlando
Sentinel
. “My home is wrecked. My
children are grown up. They don’t need
me. Others can carry on.” Asked her
thoughts as to who might have committed
the bombing, Harriette replied, “I have a
couple of ideas who might have done it,
but when people do those kinds of things
they have someone else do it.”
On the morning after the blast, the 
New
York Times
 ran a front-page story,
“Bombing Kills Negro Leader,” that
stated plainly what many Floridians—and
perhaps Harriette Moore—thought when it


--- PAGE 1026 ---
linked Harry Moore’s murder to Willis
McCall in its lead paragraph:
MIMS, FLA., Dec. 26—A Negro
crusader who led a campaign to
prosecute a white Sheriff for
shooting two handcuffed Negroes
was killed last night and his wife
was seriously injured by a bomb
blast beneath their bedroom. Harry
T. Moore, 46 years old, . . . was the
third Negro to die in the state by
violence believed resulting from the
1949 Groveland rape case.
The 
Washington Post
 made the link
between the killing and the sheriff even
plainer in an editorial titled “Terror in
Florida,” which stated, “When state


--- PAGE 1027 ---
officers flout the law, it can be scarcely
surprising that the lynch spirit should
spread.”
Harry T. Moore became the first civil
rights leader to be assassinated in the
United States when he was killed on
Christmas night in 1951. Shortly after the
bombing Eleanor Roosevelt warned,
“That kind of violent incident will be
spread all over every country in the
world, and the harm it will do us among
the people of the world is untold.” Indeed,
stories in newspapers as far off as Asia
and Africa reported the “violent incident,”
and editorials in the world’s most
influential newspapers condemned it.
Moore’s killing unsettled Thurgood
Marshall profoundly. In his travels across


--- PAGE 1028 ---
the South his hosts always attended to his
safety in his comings and goings to court,
on his social visits, and even in his sleep.
Although in conversation he generally
downplayed the danger and his fear, so as
not to worry his family and associates, in
a statement he made in 1951 he admitted
to the terror he felt every time he set foot
in the hostile environment of the South. “I
can testify,” he said, “there’s times when
you’re scared to death. But you can’t
admit it; you just have to lie like hell to
yourself. Otherwise, you’ll start looking
under the bed at night.” Marshall could
empathetically imagine, then, the hostility,
the menace—the “pressure”—that locals
like Harry Moore bore on a daily basis,
year in and year out, as they continued


--- PAGE 1029 ---
bravely, despite “the possibility of violent
death,” the campaign for the civil rights of
blacks in the Jim Crow South. The
governor’s office was flooded with
thousands of letters and telegrams
demanding action on behalf of the Moores,
but the telegram that Governor Warren
received from Thurgood Marshall struck a
more somber note, reminding the governor
that the Moores were “representatives of
the finest type of citizens of your state”
and that “unless they can be secure from
lawlessness no one in Florida is safe from
destruction.”
Governor Warren was aggrieved by the
press response to the Moore
assassination. Editorials nationwide
advertised “Terrorism in Florida,” which


--- PAGE 1030 ---
led to organized efforts calling for
boycotts of citrus and tourism. One op-ed
page asked, “Notice Negro Blood on Your
Grapefruit?” Another criticized the wife
of New York’s mayor Vincent Impellitteri
for vacationing in Florida: “It’s a pat on
the back to the Klan murderers.” And a
heavily circulated Associated Press story
with the headline “Terrorists Kill by
Night; Shadow of Violence Drifts Across
Sunny Vacationland” was exactly the kind
of national publicity the state of Florida
and Fuller Warren did not need.
Under the threat of drastic economic
repercussions in Florida’s tourist and
citrus industries, Warren could not simply
ignore the Moore affair—and thereby
tacitly exempt the KKK, especially as the


--- PAGE 1031 ---
Klan was now perceived by the press and
the public to be running unrestrained by
any governance in the state. Warren thus
offered a six-thousand-dollar reward for
information leading to the “arrest and
conviction of the dynamiters,” and he
promised a full investigation into Moore’s
murder, as “his assassins must be caught
and punished.” In addition, Warren
announced, he was sending his special
investigator, J. J. Elliott, to Mims.
Elliott, in his turn, declared that he
would personally attend Moore’s funeral
service, where he would be “acting as a
human shield to guarantee the church’s
safety.” He indicated, too, that he would
be willing to “ride with the family to see
that nothing happens, if they want me to.”


--- PAGE 1032 ---
The offer came with a boast: “I am the
second best pistol shot in the state.” Also,
when Walter White announced that he was
traveling to Florida “to see what can be
done to stop the reign of terror,” Elliott
proffered his services as an armed
personal escort.
As the day of Moore’s funeral
approached, the public outcry grew. So
did the reaction to it, with black-owned
homes and social clubs becoming targets
for bombings throughout the South.
Mostly, though, the nation’s attention was
fixed on Florida and the increasingly high-
profile case of the civil rights leader who
was slain in the twelfth of that state’s
bombings in 1951. The 
New York Times
continued its daily coverage of news


--- PAGE 1033 ---
related to Moore’s assassination. It
reported, for instance, that Donald
Harrington, a minister of the Community
Church of New York in midtown
Manhattan, had offered a prayer for
Florida residents “in their moment of
degradation and humiliation”—a moment
that had shamed not only Florida but all of
America in the estimation of foreign
nations: “Our whole country stands
blackened and discredited in the eyes of
the world because of Florida’s failure to
protect the lives and liberties of all her
citizens.” Harrington continued, “I am
ashamed of Florida. I am ashamed of the
white race. . . . I am ashamed of all the
churches of Florida and elsewhere that
have turned their eyes away from what has


--- PAGE 1034 ---
been going on in Lake County for these
past years, and passed by on the other side
while their fellow-Americans of a darker
skin were being denied the most basic
American and human rights and
privileges. I weep for my country’s sacred
honor.”
The NAACP, which had forced Moore
from his executive position in Florida
only weeks earlier, was now calling on
President Truman for “fast, resolute
action” inasmuch as “the killer of Harry T.
Moore is the assassin of the democratic
ideal.” On December 28, as announced,
Walter White arrived in Florida. At the
hospital in Sanford he presented a check
in the amount of $250 to Harriette Moore,
with the pledge that all the money owed to


--- PAGE 1035 ---
Harry Moore by the NAACP—the
$2,600-plus in back pay—would be paid
in full. In fact, in the coming weeks the
NAACP would raise many thousands of
dollars on the back of Moore’s death, and
White realized he could not afford the
public relations debacle that would surely
result if donors should become aware of
the NAACP’s ill treatment of its
“democratic ideal” in the months before
his murder.
With J. J. Elliott indeed as his escort,
White visited the Moore house in Mims.
There, for the press, he praised the FBI’s
investigation into the fatal bombing.
“Everything was being done that could be
done,” he told reporters, and he noted that
U.S. attorney general J. Howard McGrath


--- PAGE 1036 ---
had told him “a dozen FBI agents [were]
loose on the bombing,” because J. Edgar
Hoover “has never been so disturbed over
a case.” White finished the day at a mass
meeting in Orlando, where reporters,
echoing recent comments made by
Governor Warren, suggested to White that
communists might have been responsible
for Moore’s death. White sneered as he
replied, “I’m sure as I can be that Sheriff
McCall is not a Communist.”
Walter White left Florida two days
later, as Moore’s funeral was being
postponed in the hope that Harriette might
soon recover sufficiently to attend.
White’s flight home was hastily arranged,
and unpublicized. Although there had been
no threats on the NAACP leader’s life


--- PAGE 1037 ---
during his stay in Florida, tensions had
been running high throughout his visit. A
police spokesman in Orlando owned to
reporters that it was “a relief to know that
he’s gone.”
Against Dr. Starke’s wishes, Harriette
Moore visited her husband’s body at
Burton’s Funeral Parlor. Weeping
uncontrollably, she reached out to hold her
Harry one last time. She did not make it to
the funeral. On the morning of the service
her blood pressure dropped precipitously
and the doctor forbade her to leave the
hospital.
Early that morning, too, George Simms
and J. J. Elliott arrived at St. James
Missionary Baptist Church. Wearing
mechanics’ jumpsuits and armed with


--- PAGE 1038 ---
flashlights, the master sergeant and the
special investigator crawled under the
church to search for hidden explosives.
They found nothing. They then inspected
the church interior wall to wall, pew by
pew. Satisfied that the church was secure,
they allowed the service to proceed.
More than six hundred people attended
the funeral of Harry T. Moore on New
Year’s Day of 1952, most of them in the
yard outside the small church. Evangeline
and Peaches took their places beside their
grandmother, Rosa Moore, in the front
pew, and to the strains of “Rock of Ages,”
played on a phonograph, their father’s
plain casket adorned with a wilting floral
arrangement was borne up the aisle to the
pulpit. Among the mourners were


--- PAGE 1039 ---
representatives from the Civil Rights
Congress who circulated a petition—some
of it written by Stetson Kennedy—
accusing the U.S. government of black
genocide. A dozen men and women
eulogized Moore, and from New York
Walter White issued a statement on behalf
of the NAACP’s national office.
Following the service, mourners joined
the mile-long procession from the church
and along Old Dixie Highway to
LaGrange Cemetery. Solemn-faced, in
dark suits and Sunday dresses, they
gathered near a cluster of live oaks
cloaked in Spanish moss, at the segregated
section of plots for blacks. A final prayer
was spoken to take the soul of Harry T.
Moore beyond the grave into which his


--- PAGE 1040 ---
body was lowered. The casket sank
slowly, then paused, obstructed in its
progress, as had been Harry Moore in his
life’s work. Peaches and Evangeline
gazed helplessly down at the wilted
flowers atop the casket—they’d had to
have the flowers brought in from Miami
because local florists refused to deliver
arrangements to Negro funerals—until,
finally dislodged, the casket continued its
descent.
The next day Harriette Moore continued
hers. J. J. Elliott and a state attorney
rushed to her hospital bedside in the hope
of getting a final statement, but the fading
widow of Harry T. Moore was adamant.
She would not speak a word to them
“even if they had a pistol on them.”


--- PAGE 1041 ---
Harriette Vyda Simms Moore passed
away on January 3. Her two grieving
daughters braved the burial of a beloved
parent for the second time within a week.
Thurgood Marshall was out on the
NAACP circuit, delivering addresses at
memorial services for Harry T. Moore
and his wife. At Mount Olivet Baptist
Church in Harlem, where two thousand
people packed the pews, Marshall shared
the speakers’ platform with the likes of
Jackie Robinson as well as Walter White,
who announced that the NAACP was
considering a nationwide work stoppage
if Florida failed to bring the parties
responsible for Moore’s death to justice
—even so, White continued to express his
confidence in the FBI. Marshall’s more


--- PAGE 1042 ---
fiery rhetoric, however, was not at all
likely to please J. Edgar Hoover. Indeed,
Marshall assumed a style that recalled the
protests against lynching that he and his
friend Moore had organized in Florida’s
postwar forties, except that now he
protested not with but on behalf of his
friend. “You can pick up a newspaper or
tune in on your radio set any time and
learn where the FBI has out-witted some
of the cleverest criminals in the world,”
Marshall declaimed at Pittsburgh’s
Central Baptist Church. “Yet when it
comes to mob violence against Negroes,
all you can get is, ‘We’re investigating.’
It’s time we got up off our plush seats and
did something about it.”
The FBI did continue to investigate the


--- PAGE 1043 ---
case, as did Fuller Warren’s man, J. J.
Elliott, but neither made any significant
progress in the weeks following the
bombing. Tracking down a source for the
explosives was next to impossible, for, as
FBI special agent Frank Meech noted in
his reports, “Getting dynamite all over
central Florida was like buying chewing
gum.” Even more frustrating to the agents,
and more obstructive to their
investigation, was the interview process,
on which the FBI heavily relied. County
sheriff departments and known Klan
members were hardly forthcoming, and in
central Florida the line between law
enforcement and the KKK had often been
indistinct. By the end of the 1940s it was
completely blurred. “We’d go in and talk


--- PAGE 1044 ---
to someone in law enforcement,” Meech
reported, “and they’d say, ‘what the hell
are you investigating that for?’ He was
only a nigger.”
With the intensification of FBI activity
after the Moore bombing in Florida
creating considerable anxiety in the
Klaverns of Lake County, Sheriff Willis
V. McCall, despite his denial of any
affiliation with the KKK, showed up at a
local Klan meeting near Groveland.
There, according to Special Agent Meech,
he lectured the nervous Klansmen on how
to deal with FBI agents and their
questions. “We had informants that were
already in the Klan,” Meech said. “Our
informants identified McCall as the man
who told Klan members: ‘You don’t talk


--- PAGE 1045 ---
to the FBI. Don’t tell them anything. Don’t
even tell them your name.’ ”


--- PAGE 1046 ---
CHAPTER 19:
PRIVATE PARTS


--- PAGE 1047 ---
The NAACP raised tens of thousands of
dollars in donations for the Groveland
defense following the killings of Harry
and Harriette Moore. (
Library of
Congress, Prints & Photographs


--- PAGE 1048 ---
Division, Visual Materials from the
NAACP Records
)
S
PECIAL AGENT WAYNE
 Swinney of the
FBI had been assigned the task of
escorting Thurgood Marshall around
central Florida. Tensions were still
running high after the Moore bombing, and
when Marshall had informed the young
FBI agent that Eastern Air Lines was
“booked solid” and therefore unable to
provide a seat for him on a return flight,
Swinney had exploded. “I don’t care how
booked you are,” he told the Eastern
reservation agent. “You better find a seat
for this guy so he can get out of here.”
By no means was he underestimating the


--- PAGE 1049 ---
threat to Marshall in Florida. Swinney,
along with nearly two dozen other agents
committed to the Moore case “to ensure
that the FBI was doing a thorough
investigation,” had recently been looking
into the shootings of Samuel Shepherd and
Walter Irvin. In fact, he had just spent
three days interviewing Willis McCall
and local Klansmen in connection with
Groveland and its aftermath, although he
had not yet concluded, as he would
eventually, that in regard to Harry Moore
and his wife, “Klan members and some
law enforcement officers were behind
these murders.” They were also hell-bent
on obstructing the FBI, no matter what the
case, not to mention hobbling the NAACP.
Orange County sheriff Dave Starr,


--- PAGE 1050 ---
McCall’s friend and a known member of
the KKK, had, according to Swinney,
“continually impeded the FBI’s
investigation,” and the bureau was
“worried that physical harm might come to
Marshall” when he was in the area.
With Marshall standing beside him,
Swinney picked up the phone on the
reservation desk and made a couple of
calls of his own. Visits to Florida by high-
profile NAACP executives like Marshall
created security concerns and logistic
headaches for FBI agents, who were more
familiar than most with the menace the
KKK presented. The young agent finally
breathed a sigh of relief as he watched
Marshall climb the steps and board the
plane headed back to New York.


--- PAGE 1051 ---
I
N EARLY FEBRUARY
 1952, Jack
Greenberg boarded a train for Orlando.
He was traveling with a representative
from the Elmo Roper research firm and
Arnold DeMille, a columnist for the
Chicago Defender
. They were joined in
Alexandria, Virginia, by Alex Akerman.
While Greenberg was understandably
preoccupied with the upcoming
resumption of hearings in the retrial of
Walter Irvin, Akerman’s thoughts kept
drifting back to the first trial, when he and
Franklin Williams were defending three
Groveland boys as much against the white
justice of Lake County as in a case of
rape. He tried to prepare his traveling
companions for the hazards that awaited


--- PAGE 1052 ---
them in Willis McCall country. Greenberg
had of course heard Williams’s unsettling
tales, and he’d had some firsthand
experience of the law according to Hunter
and Futch, so the discussions between the
two defense attorneys tended frequently to
favor gallows humor, as DeMille noted
when, after one exchange about the county
thugs on both sides of the law, Akerman
turned to Greenberg and asked, “How you
want your body shipped back?”
They arrived in Orlando on the
afternoon of Saturday, February 9, which
gave them more than a full day to prepare
for the hearings that were scheduled to
begin at the Marion County courthouse on
Monday. Jack Greenberg checked into the
downtown San Juan Hotel.


--- PAGE 1053 ---
About the same time that Greenberg was
settling in at his hotel room, Grand Dragon
Bill Hendrix was riling up his troops at a
rally in Orlando. Alarmed at the progress
of the NAACP in general, and more
particularly of Thurgood Marshall, in the
fight against Jim Crow, Hendrix had
formed, by his claim, an “American
Confederate Army” of ninety-seven
cohorts in thirty-one states, all of them
prepared to bear arms in the event that the
Supreme Court outlawed segregation. At
the rally that evening, Hendrix’s “rebel
army” voted in support of three measures
in its avowed purpose to forestall justice
for all:
1. denounce the NAACP and Anti-Defamation
League as “hate groups”;


--- PAGE 1054 ---
2. retain the hood, robe, and mask as official
uniform; and
3. keep the fiery cross as a religious symbol.
“Florida must have a few lynchings if
its law enforcement officers don’t enforce
100 percent segregation in the state,”
Hendrix reportedly proclaimed, after
marching his army through the downtown
streets of Orlando.
Greenberg heard it before he saw it. A
terrific roar arose at nightfall: engines
revving, horns honking, the din of male
voices. In the streets beneath his window
Greenberg counted “at least 25 cars”
circling the San Juan Hotel as he
witnessed the procession of Klansmen in
full regalia, “with confederate flags flying,
some carrying blazing torches,” and for


--- PAGE 1055 ---
months Greenberg’s sleep would be
haunted by the “white-hooded, sheeted
figure [who] sat on the outsized hood of a
Nash Ambassador, waving as it drove
by.” Only seven years before, Greenberg
had been among the first landing of U.S.
forces that stormed Iwo Jima in 1945, and
aboard ship he had battled Japanese
kamikaze attack planes in Okinawa
Harbor: “It was frightening, it was
exciting. . . . There wasn’t any point in
being afraid,” had said the twenty-year-
old Greenberg, who then had an
“unthinking belief in his own
immortality.” At twenty-seven, the
survivor of one of the deadliest battles
America fought in the Pacific campaign of
World War II had less faith in his


--- PAGE 1056 ---
immortality. With the Klan parading
outside his hotel, Greenberg “took the
vain precaution of putting a night table
against the door” before he tried to sleep.
The site of Hendrix’s KKK rally on
February 9 had supposedly been
“patrolled” by Sheriff Dave Starr and his
deputies. Newspapers reported that
neither Starr nor his officers had observed
any illegal hoods or masks because they
were “too busy with traffic accidents.”
Hendrix, who had recently declared his
candidacy for Florida governor, told
reporters that he had been “misquoted”
with regard to his “few hangings” speech.
He was indicted on February 11 for
violating postal laws by mailing “libelous
and defamatory” postcards to journalists


--- PAGE 1057 ---
and politicians.
The Klan had dispersed less than an
hour before the Florida attorney Paul
Perkins and journalist Arnold DeMille
met Thurgood Marshall at Orlando’s
airport. The rally site was quiet when they
drove by. “Your boys, the KKKs were
here to greet you,” DeMille told
Thurgood. “But they couldn’t wait any
longer and left. They’ll see you at the trial
in Ocala.”
On the morning of February 11,
Marshall and his team of lawyers were
chauffeured the eighty miles to Ocala, and
to their jaw-dropping surprise, the car
was a “beautiful shiny Cadillac.” They’d
arranged for a car, but Marshall would
have preferred not to alight at Marion


--- PAGE 1058 ---
County’s Court House in a late-model
hearse.
Built in 1907, the Marion County Court
House, a stately building with a facade of
Indiana limestone, commanded Ocala’s
Public Square. Reporters were waiting
outside when Marshall arrived. They
wondered what Marshall had thought of
the Klan’s “rip-roaring welcome parade”
for him, but he dismissively replied,
“We’re going to trial.” More pertinently
they wondered how Marshall planned to
deal with Judge Truman Futch, who had
barred the NAACP lawyers from
representing the defendant, on the grounds
that they “stirred up trouble in the
community.” Marshall’s response was
terse. “The charge is without foundation in


--- PAGE 1059 ---
facts,” he said, and stated that he’d be
filing a motion in court: “If the motion is
denied, I will appeal and keep appealing
until I reach the Supreme Court, if
necessary.” Marshall hinted, too, that a
“sensational new trial element” would be
introduced, but when he was pressed by
reporters for more details, as he knew he
would be, he gave them only one word,
and a wry smile. “Witness,” he said. And
walked on.
As the retrial had been moved to
Marion County, Walter Irvin had at least
escaped the custody of Sheriff Willis
McCall. He had not escaped the painful
reminders of their November encounter,
however. “My shoulder worries me
frequently,” he told reporters at the


--- PAGE 1060 ---
courthouse in Ocala, “and my hand is
numb and I get a buzz through my body
when I move. For two weeks I begged
them to let me see a doctor and when I did
I got two pills supposed to be for my
nerves. Once they took me to the hospital
at Eustis and the doc there says I have a
bullet in me near my kidney.”
Except for the time he had been
hospitalized in Eustis and at the prison,
Irvin had spent the last thirty-one months
in the death house at Raiford. He
complained to reporters that the guards
wouldn’t give him anything to read, and
they “blew up when they heard I was
getting a new trial. . . . Sammy was getting
Life
 and 
Time
 and used to let me read
them, but they gave out and lately there’s


--- PAGE 1061 ---
been nothing. I get nothing unless
somebody arranged to send the magazine
to me, and nobody has.”
Reporters commented on the thin
mustache that Irvin had apparently been
permitted to grow since his last
appearance before the press. “The captain
of the prison say he going to make me
shave it off after this trial,” said Irvin,
“like he must be expecting me back.”
Irvin’s irony prompted a reporter to ask if,
then, he was innocent. Irvin seemed to be
momentarily stunned by the question,
perhaps because to him that had never
been a question. Still, he answered it.
“Am I innocent? . . . Sure I’m innocent.”


--- PAGE 1062 ---
C
OURT WILL COME
 to order. No
smoking!”
From the balcony down, the courtroom
went quiet. Like the balcony in the Lake
County Court House, this one seated
blacks, and it was “packed to the ceiling.”
Blacks had “come from all directions with
their paper bags.” At the midday break
they’d gather outside the courthouse and
talk together over their bag lunches, for
the segregated eateries of downtown
Ocala allowed them “no other place to
go.”
The first order of business for the
defense was to petition Judge Futch to
rule, contrary to his prior decision, that
the NAACP attorneys Marshall and


--- PAGE 1063 ---
Greenberg be permitted to represent
Walter Irvin. Marshall approached the
bench with confidence; he doubted that
Judge Futch would risk the possibility of
another reversal at the Supreme Court
were the defendant denied the legal
representation of his choice in a capital
case. Marshall was also secretly hoping
that the feature story in the current issue of
Collier’s
 magazine, which named him
“our greatest civil liberties lawyer,” might
win him some measure of respect, even in
a Southern court. Earlier in his career,
when Marshall had been arguing a motion
before a Louisiana judge who was “no
friend,” the opposing counsel had asked
the court for more time in order to check
the accuracy of Marshall’s citations. In


--- PAGE 1064 ---
open court, the judge had declared, “You
don’t have to worry about that. If Mr.
Marshall puts his signature on it, you don’t
have to check it.” Marshall owed that to
Charlie Houston’s influence.
Evidently State Attorney Jesse Hunter
did not subscribe to 
Collier’s
. He rose
from his chair and was prepared to fight
the defense motion. Futch, however, had
reconsidered; he allowed the motion, and
the two NAACP attorneys resumed as
counsel for the defendant. Not
unexpectedly, Futch denied the defense
motion to disqualify Hunter.
The defense next, and again, raised the
change of venue issue. Marshall argued
that the results from the Elmo Roper poll,
which the NAACP had commissioned,


--- PAGE 1065 ---
showed clearly that the majority of
Marion County residents believed that
Walter Irvin could not receive a fair trial
in Ocala. Marshall had confidence in the
value of qualified, credentialed witnesses
whose academic research and statistical
analysis could be employed to illustrate
systematic discrimination against blacks.
Thus, in the school segregation case
Briggs v. Elliott
, he had used the
testimony of Dr. Kenneth Clark, who had
studied children’s reactions to the “good”
and “bad” qualities of black and white
dolls, to bolster his argument that black
children were stigmatized by being
educated in segregated schools. In the
hearings preceding Irvin’s retrial,
Marshall called to the stand the Roper


--- PAGE 1066 ---
poll research executive, formerly a
professor of sociology at Cornell
University, and led him through a detailed
explanation of the survey he had
conducted. The survey showed that “not
one of 518 whites questioned here in
Marion County thinks Irvin is innocent.
One percent were found to believe he may
not be guilty,” testified the Roper
executive. Moreover, his research
indicated that the farther away Florida’s
trial venues were from Lake and Marion
counties, the more likely they were to
“place the trial in a more neutral
atmosphere.”
Throughout the testimony Hunter mostly
lounged in the empty jury box, “chewed
occasionally on his teeth and gums,” and


--- PAGE 1067 ---
affected disinterest. In his cross-
examination he disparaged the research
and ridiculed the witness. “How much did
they pay you?” Hunter asked the
executive, who quoted seven thousand
dollars as the cost of the survey.
“Now, as a matter of fact, your firm
predicted the elections of 1948, is that not
correct?” Hunter inquired, referring to the
famously inaccurate front-page headline
“Dewey Defeats Truman” that the
Chicago Daily Tribune
, in its eagerness
to go to press early, had run on the basis
of polls.
“Yes it did,” the researcher admitted,
but any amusement elicited in the court
was unintentional, because he added, “We
predicted it wrong, but we did predict it.”


--- PAGE 1068 ---
Once the laughter in the courtroom had
died down, no one doubted that Hunter’s
objection to use of the survey would be
supported by the bench.
Hunter proceeded to counter the defense
claim that Marion County’s prejudice
disallowed the possibility of a fair trial
for Walter Irvin, by calling his own
witnesses, among them L. R. Hampton, a
sixty-three-year-old black dentist. He was
stirring. He extolled the love and respect
that blacks and whites alike accorded
each other in Marion County; he declared
Judge Futch to be “one of the best friends
of me and my race I have ever known.” He
praised a county that historically had
produced a Negro city councilman and a
Negro county treasurer, and he expressed


--- PAGE 1069 ---
concern that the retrial of the Groveland
Boys case in Ocala might harm the “good
feeling that has existed all of these years”
between the races.
“Now, Dr. Hampton,” Marshall asked,
as he began his cross-examination, “when
were these Negroes Mayors and City
Commissioners, like you have testified
about?”
“Well,” Dr. Hampton replied, “it’s so
far back that I can hardly remember.”
“About how far back was it?”
“Well, it was something like sixty years
ago.”
“Then what you mean to say,” Marshall
said, “is that there were Negroes who
held those kind of offices back
immediately after the Civil War, don’t


--- PAGE 1070 ---
you?”
“Well, it was a long time ago.”
Marshall’s final question for Dr.
Hampton addressed the more immediate
issue of jury selection and composition.
“Would you have considered it proper to
have Negroes on the jury?”
“Well,” the dentist answered, “I don’t
know whether they were intellectually
equipped enough to be on the juries.”
Another of Hunter’s black witnesses
stated, “I would put this county up against
Jerusalem itself, and this is where I am
going to stay until I die.” His sentiments
were echoed by a sixty-four-year-old
retired black man who had likewise spent
his entire life in the county. Still, in his
entire lifetime, as he admitted to Marshall


--- PAGE 1071 ---
under cross-examination, he had never
before been inside a courtroom because
he had never been called for jury duty.
Marshall then asked, “You are head of
the American Legion here, aren’t you?”
“Yes, I am.”
“Are there any white members of your
American Legion post?”
“No, sir, there aren’t, we have our own
post,” the man answered. “We are all
colored people, we have our own post to
ourselves, because that is the way we
want it.” Marshall’s lips were pursed, but
he allowed Hunter’s witness to keep
talking.
“It could be the other way if we wanted
to, I think,” the man stammered. “The only
reason is we have one to ourselves like


--- PAGE 1072 ---
we have always wanted to have, and I am
head of our post, and . . . what else do you
want to know about it?”
“That is all,” Marshall said, and turned
his back to the witness.
A “gentleman of the frock,” who, in the
balcony, had attended to the testimonies of
the elderly black men on Hunter’s witness
list, remarked to a reporter, “Such folks
I’d take great pleasure and dignity in
sprinkling the dust over their remains.”
Judge Truman Futch needed maybe five
seconds to rule on Hunter’s objection to
the admissibility of the Elmo Roper
survey. “The objection is sustained,”
Futch said. “The affidavit and the report is
rejected.”
Marshall was crushed, not only by the


--- PAGE 1073 ---
expenditure of seven thousand dollars for
naught but also by the man-hours his team
had spent in processing the research into
evidence. Sheriff Willis McCall had run
Roper researcher Louis Harris out of Lake
County, and now Judge Futch had
disposed of the research itself.
During the lunch recess Marshall and
the defense team assessed the damage. To
their disadvantage, the trial was going
forward in Marion County. It was a loss,
for sure, but, as Akerman reminded
Marshall, they could not reasonably
expect very many wins, either with
objections or in evidentiary rulings, with
Judge Futch presiding. He and Hunter
performed effectively as a team, and once
the court had seated a jury mostly of the


--- PAGE 1074 ---
state’s choosing, a verdict against Irvin
was almost assured. So, the best strategy
for the defense was, as in the first trial, to
establish on the record every possible
grounds for reversal and wait for the court
to err.
In the hallway, before returning to the
courtroom, Marshall was taking note of
the numerous state troopers and deputies
posted around the courthouse when the
portly Jefferson J. Elliott came bounding
toward him. Marshall had of course not
forgotten Elliott’s role in the coroner’s
inquest, and whitewash, following the
shooting of the Groveland defendants, or
Stetson Kennedy’s claim that the
governor’s special investigator was a
Klansman.


--- PAGE 1075 ---
“I’m here at the wish of the governor,”
Elliott told Marshall as the two shook
hands. Then, leaning in conspiratorially
toward the NAACP special counsel,
Elliott warned, “First thing is, you look
out.” He had gotten Marshall’s attention.
“You’ll see each guy that’s got this kind
of a pin.” Elliott showed Marshall the pin
in question, and explained, “They’re
trying to get you.”
“Who?” Marshall asked. “Willis
McCall?”
Elliott paused before he answered, his
voice low. “No, the deputy is going to get
you.”
Marshall allowed himself a moment to
absorb Elliott’s words. Four murders
linked to Lake County law enforcement


--- PAGE 1076 ---
had already been committed since the
Groveland Boys case had begun, not to
mention the occurrences of death threats,
beatings, a bombing, posses, and a high-
speed car chase. Marshall did not doubt
that his life might be in danger, and he
could see that the governor might find it
politically inconvenient if “our greatest
civil rights lawyer” were to be
assassinated in Florida. He had no reason
not to take the special investigator’s
warning seriously.
“So go toward them, but not from them,”
Elliott advised. Marshall expressed his
appreciation for the words of caution.
“Second,” Elliott said, after he’d
walked Marshall out of anyone’s earshot,
“the judge and the governor have been on


--- PAGE 1077 ---
the telephone” and a deal, approved by
Fuller Warren, was on the table: if Irvin
were to plead guilty, the governor would
ensure that the defendant would receive a
life sentence.
“Well,” Marshall said, “I can’t decide
that. Irvin will have to decide it.” Elliott
agreed.
To Marshall and Greenberg—in light of
their own dispiriting assessment of the
defense’s chances given the venue, the
judge, and the state attorney in the case—a
deal that guaranteed to spare Irvin’s life
sounded like a good one. It was also
exactly the “cautious” kind of approach
that disgusted Franklin Williams. “It
shocked me,” Williams later commented,
that Marshall had even considered such a


--- PAGE 1078 ---
deal. “I would never have discussed it
with them. It struck me whether Thurgood
himself was not sure whether they were
innocent or guilty. I would never have told
them that. I would have said, ‘No way you
will plead guilty. We will fight this thing
to the end.’ ”
Marshall, in fact, was beyond cautious.
He was fearful. Just one year before, the
Martinsville Seven had eaten their last
meals at the Virginia State Penitentiary.
The NAACP had won the battle against
the Civil Rights Congress—and Marshall
against his communist adversary, William
Patterson—to appeal the case of the seven
young black men who had been convicted
of raping a white woman. The win left
nothing to be savored; every appeal had


--- PAGE 1079 ---
failed. On February 2, 1951, the first four
of the Martinsville Seven were executed
at fifteen-minute intervals in Virginia
state’s electric chair. The remaining three
were electrocuted over the next forty-eight
hours. Marshall had no doubt that as sure
as the state of Virginia had killed seven
men on a rape conviction, and as sure as
Willis McCall had shot dead the alleged
rapist Ernest Thomas and convicted rapist
Samuel Shepherd before they’d had a
chance to explore all the legal avenues
open to them, the state of Florida would
sentence Walter Irvin to death. Franklin
Williams might indeed be shocked by
Thurgood’s willingness to place the deal
before Irvin and his family, but Marshall
had lost too many clients to the electric


--- PAGE 1080 ---
chair to deny a defendant, even one who
clearly was not guilty, the rare opportunity
to spare his life with a guilty plea.
Marshall and Greenberg discussed
Elliott’s proposition further with Akerman
and Perkins, and the four lawyers decided
to take up the matter with Jesse Hunter.
The state attorney confirmed both that the
deal was legitimate and that Truman Futch
was prepared to honor it. Marshall sent
for Irvin’s family.
Present at the courthouse were Irvin’s
brother-in-law, James Shepherd
(Samuel’s brother), and his mother,
Dellia, “a heavy woman in a dark dress,
green scarf and run-down brown shoes,”
who had hitchhiked the sixty miles from
Groveland to Ocala that morning. As much


--- PAGE 1081 ---
to them as to Walter, Marshall explained
the governor’s offer, which, he noted, had
been acknowledged and agreed to by the
prosecutor and trial judge. The room fell
silent.
Then: “Well, you got the case reversed
once,” Irvin said.
“Yeah, but eventually they can’t find
that . . . ” Marshall let his voice trail off.
“Odds are,” he resumed, “that they’ll
convict you. And Futch the judge, he sure
as hell will give you the death penalty, so
it’s up to you.”
The decision was Irvin’s, but both
Marshall and Greenberg “clearly implied
that [they] hoped he’d accept the deal,”
because “something might turn up
someday to win his freedom.”


--- PAGE 1082 ---
Irvin set his eyes on Marshall, then his
mother. He considered the back of his
hand. “Well,” he said, “I guess I’ve got to
make up my mind.”
He drew his mother and James over to
the side of the room. The three of them
spoke in hushed tones. Greenberg and
Marshall remained silent. It wasn’t much
more than a minute before Irvin, then his
mother and James, turned to face
Marshall.
“I guess this is the only way out,” Irvin
said.
Marshall shrugged. “Well, it’s up to
you.”
“What do I have to do?”
“Nothing. Just stand up there and when
they say, ‘Are you guilty or not guilty,’


--- PAGE 1083 ---
you say, I’m guilty.” To clarify, to make
certain that Irvin knew exactly what his
guilty plea would mean, Marshall added,
“That you raped that woman.”
“That I raped that whore?” Irvin was
shaking his head. “I didn’t. And I’m not
going to say so.” He had made his
decision.
Dellia Irvin was holding her chin high.
Marshall recalled how she, too, could
have lied—in the first trial, on the witness
stand—and tried to save her son’s life by
testifying that Walter had come home that
fateful July night at 2 a.m. Instead she’d
stated that he’d come home but she didn’t
know the time.
“Won’t say it on myself,” Irvin insisted.
Marshall and Greenberg tried to impress


--- PAGE 1084 ---
upon their client and his family that they
were not going to win this trial in Marion
County; they also emphasized that there
were no guarantees at the Supreme Court.
But Walter Irvin was adamant. He would
not admit to rape. They’d have to say that
for him, he told his lawyers, who pointed
out that the judge would accept a guilty
plea only from the defendant’s own lips.
Greenberg was dumbfounded by the
decision of the steadfast, young defendant
“who wouldn’t confess after brutal
beatings, and who wouldn’t die after
having been shot three times.” Marshall,
too, was at a loss for words, though in that
moment he knew “damn well that man was
innocent.”
Irvin reiterated, “I’ll take a life sentence


--- PAGE 1085 ---
right now because that’s better than the
chair, but if I have to say I had anything to
do with that lady I’m not going to do it.
I’m not guilty.”
Clutching a well-worn Bible, Dellia
Irvin gave her son a hug. “All right, now,”
she comforted the boy in him, and told him
he’d be back home with her soon.
After the recess the defense attorneys
returned with Irvin to their table in the
courtroom. To Marshall, menace seemed
to hover in the atmosphere of the room,
perhaps because his gaze had fallen on
Willis McCall. A bear of a man, he stood
tall in his cowboy boots; one hand was
resting on the butt of his holstered gun, the
gun he’d used to shoot down two of the
Groveland boys—and maybe to fire a few


--- PAGE 1086 ---
of the slugs in Ernest Thomas, too.
Marshall’s eyes had drifted to the sullen,
dull-faced presence of Willie Padgett
among some spectators when, with a loud
crash, Jesse Hunter’s chair broke under
him and landed the state attorney,
sprawling, on the floor.
It was Hunter’s galluses that captured
Marshall’s eye. Red galluses. Like the
ones Herman Talmadge of Georgia wore
to honor his father, the former governor
Eugene Talmadge. Four years earlier,
Herman had honored his father’s racial
prejudices as well. In his own
gubernatorial campaign Herman made
fame out of hate with his signal, one-word
stump speeches. He’d stand on a stage, tug
on his red suspenders, and shout


--- PAGE 1087 ---
“Nigger!” over and over until he’d
whipped the crowd into a frenzy. “You
tell ’em, Hummon,” his redneck
constituents would holler back, their
tobacco juice spattering their “red
Talmadge neckties.” An epithet and
suspenders won young Herman Talmadge
the 1948 special election decisively. If
segregation and white supremacy wanted
a symbol in the South, it was found in red
galluses.
Hunter got resettled in another chair,
and Judge Futch took his seat on the
bench, where he had laid out sticks for his
whittling. With the permission of Futch, if
not of the court attendant, Arnold DeMille
snapped a photo of the Whittlin’ Judge,
who asked the 
Chicago Defender


--- PAGE 1088 ---
columnist if he might “see it when it was
made up.”
The last pretrial motion to be heard
concerned the admission of Walter Irvin’s
pants as evidence, which the defense was
challenging on the grounds that Deputy
James Yates had entered the Irvins’ house
on the morning following the alleged rape
and had collected the evidence—the pants
Walter had been wearing the night before
—without a search warrant.
Attorney Paul Perkins asked the defense
witness Dellia Irvin who arrived at her
house on the morning of July 16, 1949,
and she replied, “Well, this Deputy
Sheriff, he came up to the house and said
that he ‘came for that little black nigger
boy’s clothes.’ ”


--- PAGE 1089 ---
Perkins established that the “boy” was
her son, Walter, and then asked, “What
did you give him?”
“Well, I gave him a pair of brown
trousers and a pair of brown shoes, and a
white colored shirt.”
“Now, Dellia, were you afraid?”
“Yes, sir, I was because he was the
law.”
Dellia had asked Yates the likely date
of the trial, and, as she told Perkins, the
deputy had barked at her that “there might
not be any damned trial.”
The defense argued that because Walter
Irvin paid rent to his parents for a
bedroom with a lock on its door, Dellia
Irvin was not obliged by law to enter her
son’s private room to gather evidence for


--- PAGE 1090 ---
a deputy without a search warrant.
Further, they argued, Dellia Irvin had not
voluntarily surrendered her son’s pants to
the deputy but rather had been intimidated
into doing so by Yates when he stepped
into her house. Not until 1961 would the
Supreme Court rule, in 
Mapp v. Ohio
, that
evidence obtained in an illegal search was
inadmissible in state courts.
Judge Futch closed the day’s
proceedings with Dellia Irvin’s testimony,
but it was no surprise to Marshall the next
morning, when court resumed on Tuesday,
February 12, at 9:30 a.m., that Futch, in
his first order of business, allowed Walter
Irvin’s pants into evidence. That was not
the worst of it for the defense. Marshall
had also learned that Irvin’s alibi witness


--- PAGE 1091 ---
—Carol Alexander, the waitress who
remembered seeing Irvin and Shepherd at
Club Eaton until two or three o’clock in
the morning—had not returned to Florida
for the trial, despite the fact that she was
willing to testify and had already accepted
travel expense money. Instead, she
remained at Clark University in Atlanta.
Her family was unconvinced that the
NAACP could guarantee her safety. Of
even more concern to Marshall was the
possibility that his surprise witness,
Lawrence Burtoft, might not get back to
Florida in time to testify. He was in the
army, at Fort Jackson in South Carolina.
The defense’s witness list was in worse
shape now than it had been two and a half
years earlier, in September 1949, when


--- PAGE 1092 ---
Irvin was convicted in the Lake County
trial.
Jury selection was no better, either. Of
the seven blacks on the panel, four were
disqualified because they did not believe
in capital punishment. (One of them,
Hunter confided to Marshall, was the
“best colored man on the panel. Sorry he
was excused”—and to his defense team,
Marshall confided, “If he says the boy is
good then we don’t want him.”) With the
state’s peremptory challenges Hunter
disposed of the remaining three blacks.
Walter Irvin’s fate would be decided by
twelve white Marion County men, and
again Marshall was hardly surprised. He
might have been flattered by a comment
made by Jesse Hunter after the jury had


--- PAGE 1093 ---
been sworn in; pointing at Thurgood
Marshall, the state attorney said to a guest
of the court, “An ingenious man. Knows
more law than any man in the United
States.” Hunter liked to take down a
proper adversary.
With trial testimony about to begin,
spectators packed the courtroom, blacks
upstairs in the balcony, whites downstairs
on the main floor. Reporters crowded the
press area: Jay Nelson Tuck from the 
New
York Post
, Richard H. Parke of the 
New
York Times
, Richard Carter with the 
New
York Compass
. Carter, who had recently
won the prestigious Polk Award for
outstanding metropolitan reporting, had
been researching a feature story on
Groveland in 1949 when he discovered


--- PAGE 1094 ---
Ernest Thomas’s attempt to tap into the
Lake County 
bolita
 rackets, which raised
the possibility that Thomas’s death had
nothing to do with Norma Padgett. Also
covering the trial were the Associated
Press and the 
Saturday Evening Post
 as
well as, of course, reporters from the
Florida papers, including Ormond Powers
of the 
Orlando Sentinel
 and Mabel Norris
Reese of the 
Mount Dora Topic
. A
separate press table accommodated black
journalists covering the trial, such as
Robert M. Ratcliffe from the 
Pittsburgh
Courier
 and Arnold DeMille of the
Chicago Defender
.
The indictment in the matter of Walter
Irvin was read in court, and Jesse Hunter
called his first witness. The slight but


--- PAGE 1095 ---
muscular figure of Willie Padgett trudged
to the stand, his face “remarkable,”
according to one reporter, with teeth “so
large that they stretch the mouth into an
expression of perpetual agony. His mouth
seems most comfortable when he allows it
to hang open, and he seems to do most of
his breathing through it.” Padgett related
essentially the same story he’d presented
in the first trial. His car was stuck; four
blacks happened along and offered to help
him but then began roughing him up. He
picked up a stick, “hit quite a few licks”
on them, until they overpowered him and
threw him down on the roadside, near a
fence, where he lost consciousness. He
came to in time to see their car drive
away, apparently with Norma inside. He


--- PAGE 1096 ---
waited approximately thirty minutes till
another car finally appeared; it gave him a
push, but he couldn’t remember the car’s
make or model or, for that matter, the
driver who’d come to his aid. He then
drove close to ten miles, past quiet homes
and several storefront businesses that
were still open, and even past the police
station, to Dean’s filling station on the east
side of Leesburg.
In cross-examination by Akerman,
Padgett acknowledged that he and Norma
were not living together in July 1949 and
that they had been drinking whiskey the
evening of July 15. Akerman noted, too,
that Padgett had previously testified that
the car driven by Samuel Shepherd and
Walter Irvin was a ’46 or ’48 black


--- PAGE 1097 ---
Mercury. Later, Padgett claimed the car
was “light green.” Akerman, however,
failed to address some questionable, key
details in Padgett’s story: After an assault
and suspected abduction, why had Padgett
passed by a police station and stopped
instead at Dean’s filling station? How was
it that he could identify with such certainty
the black men in the Mercury and recall,
in detail, their conversations, but could
not remember a single detail about the car
or the driver and anyone with him who
actually got Willie back on the road?
A baby was crying. Jesse Hunter had
called his next witness, and Thurgood
Marshall turned his head to find the source
of the noise. Norma Padgett was passing a
three-week-old infant, her second son, to


--- PAGE 1098 ---
the outstretched hands of her sister or a
cousin.
“Dressed for a party,” Jack Greenberg
thought as Norma smoothed the front of
her cotton dress, white with a floral print,
and tugged at her “coral-colored cardigan
sweater.” The two and a half years since
Norma had testified in Lake County—
when one reporter had wondered, “Why
would a ‘rape victim’ strut and prance and
pose like another Victoria Price of
Scottsboro notoriety?”—had not been kind
to her. Now nineteen, “bone-poor” and
living rent-free on her uncle’s farm, she
was, relatives said, trapped in a marriage
to a man who “neglects” her and “spends
his wages recklessly.” She walked up to
the witness stand; she was not strutting or


--- PAGE 1099 ---
prancing: She “has the bent carriage and
the shuffling walk of a woman three times
her age,” one newspaper reported. Her
blond hair, bobbed and curled at the first
trial, was hanging lank and lifeless. Her
eyes were puffy. Her arms “ricket-thin”
and her shoulder blades poking at her tight
dress, she raised her right hand and swore
to tell the whole truth.
Jesse Hunter treated Norma gently, his
voice nearly as soft and low as hers,
“which often could not be heard above the
sounds of the traffic outside the open
windows of the court.” So solicitously—
so strategically solicitously, the defense
lawyers opined—did the state attorney
lead his witness through her testimony that
any antagonism in cross-examination was


--- PAGE 1100 ---
bound to seem harsh, even barbaric, by
comparison.
Norma’s rendering of the roadside
encounter did not diverge from Willie’s.
After the fight, which left Willie
unconscious, the story became Norma’s
own. One of the black men, she said, told
the others, “Grab the lady,” and the five of
them—Ernest Thomas at the wheel,
Charles Greenlee in the passenger seat,
and Norma sandwiched between Samuel
Shepherd and Walter Irvin in the back—
drove to “a little ole side road” near the
Sumter County line. The car stopped, “and
then this nigger by the name of Thomas got
in the back seat.”
Asked if Thomas did anything to her,
Norma replied, “Yes, sir, Thomas he


--- PAGE 1101 ---
jerked up my dress, and I jerked it back
down, and he told me to leave it alone,
and pulled it back up, and he made me
take off my pants . . . and Thomas raped
me first, Thomas did.”
“All right,” Hunter said, “which one
raped you next?”
“Then Irvin raped me next, he was the
second one, and I don’t know which one
was next after that.”
“And all four of them raped you out
there on that side road?”
“Yes, sir, they did.”
Hunter paused, to allow Norma time to
elaborate. Yet the fire she had brought to
her testimony in the first trial was gone;
she neither craved nor basked in the
court’s attention, as she had in Lake


--- PAGE 1102 ---
County. She exhibited no anger or shame,
but not out of apparent indifference; she
seemed simply to be tired and worn down.
She hardly called the Groveland Boys
niggers anymore.
So Hunter prompted: “Do you mean that
they put their private parts into your
private parts?”
“Yes, sir, they did.”
“All four of them did.”
“Yes, sir, they did,” said Norma,
confirming the taction of private parts. She
need not have said anything more. A white
Southern reporter whispered to a Northern
newsman, “That’s all, brother. The next
move is up to the U.S. Supreme Court.
This Irvin is convicted here and now.”
Hunter proceeded to what occurred


--- PAGE 1103 ---
after the rape, when, Norma said, the
black men were trying to decide what to
do with her. “One of them said to me,
which would I rather do, ride on down the
road with them and be killed or get out
and walk, and I said that I would get out
and walk, so they got me out of the car.
. . .” And Norma ran. She hid in the
woods, she said, “until almost daylight,”
then walked to Okahumpka, where she
waited until Lawrence Burtoft opened up
the café.
Glossing over any words that Norma
may have exchanged with Lawrence
Burtoft, the state attorney returned to
details of the rape. “Now, Norma,” Hunter
asked, “did you fight those Negroes in that
car?”


--- PAGE 1104 ---
“No, sir, I didn’t.”
“Why didn’t you fight them?”
“Because I was scared to.”
“Did they threaten you?”
“Yes, sir,” Norma said.
“In what way?”
“They said if I made any noise or
screamed or hollered or tried to do
anything, they would shoot me.”
“Did they have a gun?”
“Yes, they did.”
Frustrated by Norma’s reluctance or
refusal to forward her story, Hunter led
her further. “Now, Norma, you submitted
to those Negroes because you were afraid
of them?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And you say they had a gun and made


--- PAGE 1105 ---
threats to you?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And you say this defendant sitting here
in the courtroom is one of those men?”
“Yes, sir.”
“That is Walter Irvin?” Hunter
practically pleaded.
“Yes, sir.”
“Will you point him out to the jury?”
Norma Padgett pointed vaguely in the
direction of Walter Irvin. That two of the
Groveland Boys were now dead and
another was doing hard labor on a chain
gang in South Florida no doubt robbed the
moment of some of its drama, but Norma’s
limp gesture held not a lick of the
electricity she’d generated when she had
risen in the witness box at the Lake County


--- PAGE 1106 ---
courthouse and with her finger extended
had pointed at each defendant in
succession.
“The nigger Shepherd . . . the nigger
Irvin . . . the nigger Greenlee.”
Jesse Hunter’s case for the prosecution
rested almost singly, and strongly, on his
certainty that no jury in Lake or Marion
counties would ever accept the word of a
black man over the testimony of a young
blond farm girl who had accused him of
rape. So he had Norma accuse her alleged
rapist again, then again and again.
“Now, Norma, this is a very important
thing,” Hunter stated with emphasis. “I
want you to tell this court and jury
whether or not that is one of the Negro
men that raped you that night in the back


--- PAGE 1107 ---
seat of that automobile.”
“Yes, sir, it is.”
“Are you sure about that?”
“Yes, sir, I am sure.”
“You are positive he is one of the ones
who raped you that night.”
“Yes, sir,” Norma said, and five times
more she said she was sure when five
times more Hunter asked her, for he
wanted to be absolutely sure that the jury
was sure that Walter Irvin was one of the
four black men who had raped her.
Marshall had decided, and announced,
that neither he nor any other black attorney
would be cross-examining Norma Padgett
before a white, male jury in Marion
County. Mabel Norris Reese saw wisdom
in the decision. “You had a farmer jury, a


--- PAGE 1108 ---
white woman had been raped by negroes
and this was in their minds,” Reese said.
“There was no question at all. They
weren’t considering evidence. They had
their eyes fastened on Hunter . . . it would
have been suicide for Marshall to get up
and argue anything in the jury.”
Careful not to display any antagonism
toward the state attorney’s witness,
Akerman had Norma review her account
of the events that culminated in Willie’s
fight with the four black men. Then, barely
acknowledging the alleged rape—for the
defense strategy was not to question the
allegation of the rape but to raise
reasonable doubt as to Irvin’s
involvement in it—Akerman focused on
Norma’s arrival in Okahumpka, on foot,


--- PAGE 1109 ---
outside Burtoft’s Café. In the first trial,
because Hunter had chosen not to call
Lawrence Burtoft as a witness, the
prosecution’s narrative had omitted
Norma’s conversation with the owners’
son in the café. To Akerman, Norma
responded that she knew Lawrence
Burtoft, the young man who’d let her
inside the café, and she testified that she
had asked him for a ride to the roadside
spot a few miles away where she had left
her husband. She could not, however,
recall anything further about their
conversation, she said.
“What did you tell him?” Akerman
asked.
“I don’t remember what I told him,”
Norma replied. “I was crying. I don’t


--- PAGE 1110 ---
remember now what I did tell him.”
Not convinced, Akerman tried to probe
further. He wanted to establish that Norma
had told Burtoft she’d been “taken off by
four Negroes”: “You did not tell him
that?” he asked.
“No, I did not.”
“You did not discuss with him whether
or not those things happened to you?”
“No, I didn’t tell him anything about it, I
was just getting him to take me down
there,” Norma answered.
“That is all,” said Akerman, resigned. It
was beginning to appear that the only hope
for the defense lay with Lawrence Burtoft,
if they could get him to court in time to
testify.
Of Norma Padgett’s moment in the


--- PAGE 1111 ---
retrial of Walter Irvin, the award-winning
journalist Richard Carter wrote, “You
watch her on the witness stand. You listen
to her story. You note the righteous
ferocity with which the prosecution
defends that story. You note the timidity
with which the defense challenges it. You
count the dead . . . Ernest Thomas . . .
Sammy Shepherd . . . maybe Walter Irvin
. . . and you realize that it’s perfectly all
right to starve a Southern white woman
and deprive her of education and make her
old before her time, but by God, no
damned outsider is going to dare question
the sanctity of her private parts, the
incontrovertibility of her spoken word.”
The state attorney called Deputy James
Yates, and Marshall studied the “gum-


--- PAGE 1112 ---
chewing husky in a red corduroy jacket”:
the officer who had tried to bar the
NAACP special counsel’s hospital visit
with his client; the sheriff’s man who
found it a “funny thing” and offered “no
comment” when asked by a reporter if
he’d shot Irvin; the law enforcer who had
so badly beaten the Groveland Boys that
even the FBI pressed for his indictment;
the deputy who, special investigator J. J.
Elliott warned Marshall, “is going to get
you.”
As he had in the first trial, Hunter led
Yates through his testimony, and as he had
before, the deputy stated that the plaster
casts he’d made of tire tracks and
footprints at the rape scene “exactly”
matched the soles of Irvin’s shoes and the


--- PAGE 1113 ---
tread of tires on James Shepherd’s
Mercury. On cross-examination, again as
before, Yates admitted to Akerman that
he’d had no formal training in making
casts, nor had he made the casts until
hours after the alleged rape, by which time
Irvin had been arrested and both the shoes
and the car had been placed in the
sheriff’s custody. Asked if he was familiar
with the scientific devices used in
“protecting the integrity” of the tracks,
Yates replied, “No, I don’t know what you
mean.” Furthermore, Yates noted, he had
not been able to deal with footprints and
tire tracks in a more timely manner
because he’d had to attend to “that
woman,” Norma Padgett, who “was hurt
and I had to get her back to the doctor, and


--- PAGE 1114 ---
I came on out there later, and poured the
tire casts.”
An irritated state attorney rose for
redirect examination. Hunter did not
appreciate Akerman’s belittlement of the
deputy’s expertise in crime scene
techniques. To rehabilitate his witness in
the eyes of the “farmer” jury, Hunter
offered some plainspoken down-home
common sense as opposed to the
highfalutin language of scientific
expertise. “Now, Mr. Yates,” Hunter
began, “did you ever hear of what he calls
‘integrity’ of those tracks? Did you ever
hear of that before?”
“No, sir, I never have,” Yates said. “I
don’t know anything about it.”
“You were not looking for integrity of


--- PAGE 1115 ---
tracks, were you?”
“No, sir.”
“You were looking for the tracks, were
you not?”
“Yes, sir.”
“That was your business, was it not?”
“Yes, sir,” Yates agreed.
“And you just looked and saw that those
were the same tracks that fitted those
shoes, did you not?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And as to whether or not those tracks
had integrity, you were not interested in
that, were you?”
“No, sir,” Yates replied.
“And you know those shoes made those
tracks, do you not?”
“Yes, sir.”


--- PAGE 1116 ---
“And that is the old common Florida
way of putting it, is it not?”
“Yes, sir.”
Then the state attorney introduced
Walter Irvin’s pants, which Yates had
obtained from Dellia Irvin without a
warrant not long after he and Campbell
had beaten the man unconscious in jail.
Holding up the evidence, Hunter asked,
“Now, Mr. Yates, are there any smears on
the front of these pants?”
“Yes, sir, there are,” Yates said.
“There are smears all down the side?”
Hunter asked.
“Yes, sir, there are.”
Hunter passed the pants to the jury.
Marshall’s incredulity at Hunter’s
country-boy performance about “integrity”


--- PAGE 1117 ---
for the jurors now yielded to fury. The
pants had not only been admitted into
evidence by Judge Futch against the
motion of the defense but had also been
admitted without laboratory examination.
Scientific analysis of the evidence—a free
service provided by the FBI to local law
enforcement—would have almost
certainly determined whether or not the
stains on Irvin’s pants derived from the
defendant’s “emission of seed,” but
Hunter had apparently decided, as he had
with Norma Padgett’s medical
examination, not to take the chance that
science might not support the
prosecution’s narrative. Not when he
could have the jurors eye the evidence in
“the old common Florida way.”


--- PAGE 1118 ---
Hunter retired to the prosecution’s
table. For the defense, again, as in the
Lake County trial of the Groveland Boys
and in the coroner’s inquest into Samuel
Shepherd’s death, even the evidence
seemed to be prejudiced and the verdict
predetermined. Frustrated, Marshall and
Akerman whispered to each other; enough
was enough, they decided. Akerman
approached Yates.
“Now, Mr. Yates, is it true that the
defendant Walter Irvin has accused you
and the sheriff of Lake County, Florida, of
attempting to murder him?”
Hunter leapt to his feet in objection.
Futch sustained.
“May it please the court,” Akerman
said. “It shows bias on the part of this


--- PAGE 1119 ---
witness toward the defendant.”
Alex Akerman didn’t wait for a ruling.
He returned to his seat beside Marshall.


--- PAGE 1120 ---
CHAPTER 20: A
GENIUS HERE
BEFORE US
From left to right:
 Paul Perkins, Jack
Greenberg, Walter Irvin, and Thurgood
Marshall. (
© Bettmann/CORBIS
)


--- PAGE 1121 ---
N
ORMA PADGETT LEFT
 any strutting to be
done in the courtroom to the fourth witness
for the prosecution. Tall, dark-haired, and
movie-star handsome, the twenty-three-
year-old Curtis Howard, wearing “a
spread collar and a sharply-cut suit,”
swaggered with an athlete’s confidence to
the front of the courtroom. And vowed to
tell the whole truth, so help him God.
Howard would break his share of vows
over the next few years, as countless
affairs and sexual indiscretions with
young ladies up and down Lake County
would land him three times in divorce
suits—all three of them with the same
wife: his high school sweetheart, and
Leesburg High cheerleader, Libby Dean.


--- PAGE 1122 ---
No question, the sweet-talking Howard
did have charm.
With all his charisma and his slightly
crooked, mischievous smile, Howard had
come back to Ocala for the trial from
Montgomery, Alabama, where he’d been
stationed after his enlistment in the army.
Three questions into his testimony on
Wednesday, February 13, Howard began
breaking his vow to tell the whole truth.
The Leesburg native told State Attorney
Jesse Hunter that he was currently living
in Montgomery with his wife, but, in fact,
Howard had run out on Libby in 1950,
after she became pregnant with twins, and
he had left her in Florida when he’d
moved to Alabama. He and Libby were
presently in the process of getting their


--- PAGE 1123 ---
first divorce.
As in the first Groveland Boys trial, the
state attorney took Howard through the
events of the early morning hours on July
16, 1949, and, as before, Howard related
that he had been working the overnight
shift at Dean’s filling station, which was
owned by Libby’s father, when, at about
2:30 or 3 a.m., Willie Padgett pulled into
the station in his 1940 Ford. Willie looked
like he’d been hit above the eye; blood
had dried on the side of his face. He told
Howard he’d had some trouble.
“Just tell what happened,” Hunter
coached his witness.
“Well, he gave me information that his
wife had been raped,” said Howard.
Hunter immediately addressed the


--- PAGE 1124 ---
“mistake” in Howard’s response, and the
witness corrected himself, saying that the
wife had been “kidnapped and carried
away” instead of “raped.” For, by Willie
Padgett’s own testimony, he at that point
knew only that four black men had
abducted his wife, not that they had raped
her. It was because of slips like these,
which could produce contradictions and
inconsistencies in the prosecution’s
narrative, that Hunter pressed Lake
County’s law enforcement personnel to
allow the FBI only written statements
(which Hunter helped prepare) and to
refuse the agents any oral interviews.
Hunter could not wield the same control
over Walter Irvin, who told FBI agents
that in the early hours of Saturday


--- PAGE 1125 ---
morning, July 16, before Norma Padgett
had been found, Deputy Yates asked him,
“Why did you rape that white woman?”
Also, a Florida highway patrolman, who,
on that same Saturday morning, had driven
Irvin and Shepherd from the Irvins’ house
to the scene of the alleged robbery and
kidnapping, told the FBI that he had heard
the two suspects being questioned by
deputies Yates and Campbell about the
“rape.”
In the retrial, as in the first trial, Hunter,
of course, took every precaution to
forestall any impression that a “story” had
been put in place by the prosecution. Still,
he could not prevent every slip, especially
as he wasn’t always working with the
quickest of witnesses. Curtis Howard,


--- PAGE 1126 ---
however, came across as a model citizen
who had gone out of his way to help a man
in difficulty. Continuing his narrative,
Howard recounted for the court how, after
finishing his shift at the filling station, he
had seen a young girl by the side of the
road but had thought nothing of it, and had
driven on to Groveland, where, as it had
happened, he had run into Yates and
Campbell, as well as Willie Padgett. He
had then driven Padgett to Bay Lake, so he
could change his shirt, and it wasn’t until
Willie’s sister showed a picture of Norma
to Howard that he had connected Willie’s
missing wife with the girl he’d seen in the
roadside grass back in Okahumpka.
“Did you tell them that you thought the
woman you saw was his wife?” Hunter


--- PAGE 1127 ---
asked.
“Well, I told them that I thought I knew
where she was,” Howard said, “and so
we went and got in my car and went back
down there to the intersection, and she
was in another car with another boy by the
time we got there, and I supposed that it
was someone that she had gotten from that
dining hall or dancing place.” Howard did
not refer to “another boy” by name, nor
did he give any indication that he’d
recognized the “someone” with Norma.
Yet they were not strangers, Howard and
Lawrence Burtoft. They had been
classmates at Leesburg High, where they
had played together on the baseball and
football teams.
Hunter asked what happened next with


--- PAGE 1128 ---
Norma. Akerman objected on the grounds
of hearsay. Futch overruled. Howard
responded: “Well, I asked her if she was
hurt in any way, and she said that her legs
were hurt and bleeding, and said that her
clothes were torn, and she was all messed
up and dirty, and I asked her if the men did
anything to her, and she said that ‘all four
of them attacked me,’ and she described
what had happened from that time.”
“What was the condition of her
clothes?” Hunter asked.
“Well, they were torn and messed up,
and as I remember it, some of her
underclothes were hanging down beneath
her dress, and her dress was torn.”
As one reporter observed of Howard
during his testimony, he was “as smooth


--- PAGE 1129 ---
as Willie is bucolic.” Leroy Campbell’s
nephew was also providing Jesse Hunter
with splendid testimony for the state’s
case in the event that Lawrence Burtoft
should take the witness stand for the
defense.
Hunter excused the witness, and in what
was surely the missed opportunity of the
trial, Alex Akerman declined to cross-
examine. The state rested its case. Curtis
Howard returned therewith to Alabama.
The first trial might have won Curtis
Howard some commendation in the
communities of Lake County; in his own
household, at least, he might have been
seen as a hero of sorts. But he wasn’t. The
Groveland case was never mentioned in
the Howards’ home, and shortly after the


--- PAGE 1130 ---
trial Curtis and Libby’s marriage began to
crumble into divorce. First married at the
age of twenty, Curtis and Libby would
remarry and divorce two more times, but
at no time in the wobbly course of their
relationship would they speak of the role
that Curtis Howard played in the
conviction of Norma Padgett’s alleged
rapists. Kim Howard, Curtis and Libby’s
daughter, would remember the contention
in the household over her father’s
carousing and womanizing and lying but
nothing of Curtis Howard’s testimony
about the girl in the roadside grass when
he appeared in the most illustrious trial to
take place in central Florida.
“My mother was a saint to put up with
him,” Kim Howard said, for Libby was


--- PAGE 1131 ---
fully aware that her husband was
committing serial adultery. “There were
just so many young girls that he would go
off with. He was indiscriminate, and so
charming and charismatic that there was
no end to the girls. He couldn’t stop. My
parents’ second divorce involved my
father getting our babysitter pregnant.”
Her father was also an unapologetic
racist, Kim Howard claimed: “He and
Uncle Leroy were very close. He would
do anything for him.” So, when for the
first time she learned about the Groveland
Boys trial, Kim Howard said, “My first
thought was, ‘Curt, what did you do now?
What did you get yourself mixed up in?’
My father didn’t drive past Norma
Padgett. He wasn’t stupid. Knowing my


--- PAGE 1132 ---
father, he had something to do with that
girl. He’d gotten himself mixed up in
something. If he was really a hero, and my
mother believed it, we would have heard
about it.”
T
WELVE YEARS EARLIER,
 in the case of the
black butler Joseph Spell, who stood
accused of raping socialite Eleanor
Strubing, Marshall had refused a plea
offer from prosecutors and elected to go
forward with a trial because he believed
that in Connecticut a white woman’s claim
of rape would not, by force of cultural
necessity, be accepted as unassailable
fact. Marshall correctly gauged the jury’s
disinclination to convict on the basis of


--- PAGE 1133 ---
race and won an acquittal for Joseph
Spell. No less correctly Marshall
concluded it could never happen in central
Florida.
In declining to cross-examine Curtis
Howard, the defense was passing up the
chance perhaps to lay bare the very heart
of the Groveland Boys case. But because
this was an interracial rape case in the
South, the defense team had to tread
lightly. As one reporter noted, “The
absence of medical proof  . . . could only
be alluded to in passing.” That Norma and
Willie, having shared a pint of whiskey,
were no doubt drunk, that they had not
been living together, or that Willie had
passed a number of houses and even a
police station after his wife’s alleged


--- PAGE 1134 ---
abduction “could only be hinted at in the
most discreet and obscure terms.” Another
reporter covering the trial had wondered
if Norma might have concocted the rape
story to “extricate herself from an
embarrassing or compromising position”
or if the story had been invented “to
extricate husband, wife and third party
from the trouble that might attend
disclosure of a fight which involved the
eternal triangle.” No matter how
“demonstrably true” any such scenarios
might prove to be, none of them, the
reporter wrote, could “be entered as
evidence in a Southern trial of this kind.”
The defense dared not to question in any
way either the purity of the Flower of
Southern Womanhood, however


--- PAGE 1135 ---
indelicately she might be represented by
Norma Lee Padgett, or her probity in the
“contention that she [had] been ravished”
by four savage blacks. Should the defense
dare to tread upon a white Southern
woman’s honor, not only would the jury
fail to acquit a black man of a rape charge,
but they would also most surely deliver
him a death sentence. So the only
practicable strategy for the defense in the
Groveland Boys case was to raise
reasonable doubt by showing that the state
of Florida had arrested the wrong men.
Marshall had to scramble to bring
Lawrence Burtoft to Ocala. He had
minister S. Ralph Harlow, a member of
the Committee of 100, write to Burtoft in
Fort Jackson, South Carolina: “We need


--- PAGE 1136 ---
you very much if that trial is to be fair. . . .
This boy’s life is at stake and the honor of
Florida is at stake. Only a fair trial can
free Florida from a blot that can never be
cleaned. You can do much to make that
trial fair. I pray that you may have the
courage, the sense of justice, the spirit of
Christ, to bear witness to the truth.”
The testimony of Lawrence Burtoft,
which outright challenged the truth of
Norma Padgett’s tale, was indeed “as far
as the defense dared to go.” Burtoft had
been flown to Ocala from Fort Jackson,
South Carolina, on a plane chartered by
the NAACP. Still in his uniform, he took
the stand as the first witness for the
defense. The Okahumpka native testified
that on the morning of July 16, when


--- PAGE 1137 ---
Norma Padgett showed up at his father’s
café (the local “dining hall or dancing
place,” as Curtis Howard identified it),
she told Burtoft that her husband had been
“hit over the head and she thought maybe
that he had been killed.” She also said that
she had been kidnapped by four Negroes
but made no mention of being raped.
“Did she make any statement to you as
to her ability to identify those men?”
Akerman asked for the defense.
“She told me that she could not identify
them, that one was light, and one was
extremely dark and that’s all she knew
about them,” Burtoft replied.
Burtoft was the only defense witness
who worried Hunter, because the state
attorney knew that the testimony of the


--- PAGE 1138 ---
café owner’s son would not corroborate
the story that the state’s witnesses were
spinning. Hunter’s aim in cross-
examination, then, was to destroy
Burtoft’s credibility as a witness.
“Are you prejudiced against the state of
Florida?” Hunter asked.
“No, sir, I am not prejudiced against
anybody.”
Despite Akerman’s objections, which
Futch overruled, Hunter implied that
Burtoft was in “bad standing” with the
sheriff’s department of Lake County: an
implication that the soldier calmly denied.
Hunter then insinuated that Burtoft had
changed his story since his interview with
the state attorney two and a half years
back, shortly after the alleged rape:


--- PAGE 1139 ---
“Didn’t you tell me the first time when I
talked to you about this case that you had
heard a woman pass by your place in an
automobile screaming for help that night?”
“No, I didn’t,” Burtoft said
emphatically. “I don’t even know when
they went by.”
“Didn’t you tell me you heard a woman
screaming for help going by your place?”
“No, sir, I did, I did not hear anything of
the kind, and I don’t know where you got
any such information as that.”
Hunter pressed harder. He told Burtoft
that he had decided not to call the
Okahumpka boy as a witness for the state
in the first trial because he knew the boy’s
testimony was not true, and he repeated
what he had said to Burtoft in their 1949


--- PAGE 1140 ---
interview, that “we were not going to use
any liars in that trial,” so as to ask, “You
don’t remember me telling you that?”
“No, I don’t,” Burtoft answered,
unwavering. “You did not say that. You
cannot fool me. I know what you said.”
Hunter then addressed again Burtoft’s
supposed prejudice by suggesting that he
“was trying to get even” with the state of
Florida for its occasioning of a rift within
the Burtoft family. At this point, as at any
number of others in the state attorney’s
cross-examination, Marshall and Akerman
could have objected, but they were thus
far pleased, and surprised, by the
equanimity Burtoft was displaying in
response to Hunter’s questions. And
Burtoft remained unrattled by Hunter’s


--- PAGE 1141 ---
suggestion, even though young Lawrence,
according to one reporter, had struggled
with the fact that there was “at least one
Ku Klux Klan member in the Burtoft
circle” and that “regional tradition” might
dictate adverse actions against his father’s
business if Lawrence were to testify for
the defense of a black man charged with a
white woman’s rape. Charlotte Burtoft,
Lawrence’s mother, had a “genuine fear of
reprisals from some of the extremists
around Groveland” were her son to
testify. Her other children did not want
Lawrence to return. But Mrs. Burtoft also
believed that Walter Irvin was innocent,
and she supported her son’s desire to tell
the truth under oath. Lawrence had
discussed his concerns at length with his


--- PAGE 1142 ---
family, who had ultimately “wanted him to
let his conscience be his guide”—
whereupon he had applied to the Pentagon
for a special pass so that he could travel
to Ocala and testify.
Hunter proceeded to Burtoft’s
testimony, which he strove to discredit.
“Now, as a matter of fact, Mr. Burtoft, that
girl was hurt when you saw her, was she
not?”
“No, she was not hurt,” Burtoft
answered.
“And you took your own time about
getting a car, did you not?”
“Well, I was not going to carry her on
my back,” Burtoft noted. “The car was up
at the house.”
“Was there any reason why she would


--- PAGE 1143 ---
put any confidence in you?”
“I didn’t ask. It was not my place to ask
her. I just asked her if she thought she
would recognize them, and she told me
she didn’t think she could,” Burtoft said.
“She just told me the rest of her story
voluntarily, and she just told me that she
had been kidnapped by four Negroes, and
I asked her if she thought she could
identify them, and she said no.”
“You did not think that amounted to
anything?” Hunter asked.
“Well, I helped her.”
“Don’t you think you would be helping
her more if you told the truth for once in
your life?” Hunter shouted with
vehemence. To this, Akerman did object.
And Judge Futch did not pause in his


--- PAGE 1144 ---
whittling to overrule; in sustaining the
state’s objections and overruling those of
the defense the judge could not be faulted
for inconsistency.
Hunter continued to grill Burtoft, but
after forty-five minutes the state attorney
had proved to be unable to shake the
young man in his testimony. One last time
Hunter implied that Burtoft’s account of
Norma Padgett’s presence at Burtoft’s
Café early that Saturday morning in July
was tantamount to a lie, but Burtoft stood
firm. He recalled for the attorney a
particular conversation the two of them
had shared: “I have told you once before,”
Burtoft said, “that she looked to be in
pretty calm condition for her husband to
be lying down dead beside the road, and


--- PAGE 1145 ---
you told me . . . that she was not the type
of girl to be showing her emotions.”
Hunter dismissed the witness.
For all his attempts to diminish
Burtoft’s credibility, Hunter knew better
than most that the defense’s surprise
witness had not been fiddling with the
truth. Under oath, Norma Padgett had
denied telling Burtoft that she’d been
taken away by four black men at gunpoint,
and had denied telling him even that her
husband had been in a fight with four
Negroes. By her account, she had
persuaded Lawrence Burtoft, with no
explanation, to drive her to a random spot
“down there” by the side of the road
where her husband had been. It was
preposterous. Furthermore, it was


--- PAGE 1146 ---
contrary to her own written statement to
the FBI—a statement that Hunter himself
had helped to prepare only days after the
alleged rape—in which Norma avowed
that she had shown up at the Burtofts’
place and “reported to a man who runs a
store there what had happened to me.”
Fortunately for the state’s case, the proof
of Norma Padgett’s perjury lay buried in
an FBI file, which was not in 1949 and
would not in 1952 be introduced as
evidence in the trial of the Groveland
Boys, or boy. The U.S. attorney’s office
had quashed subpoenas served by the
defense to have FBI agents testify, citing
the “confidential nature of the FBI’s
investigation.”
The testimony of Lawrence Burtoft had,


--- PAGE 1147 ---
without qualification, been brave, given
that his parents not only resided but also
owned and operated a business in the
county run by Sheriff Willis McCall.
Before the retrial, McCall had made it
clear to Burtoft that because of his
military commitment he did not have to
accept a subpoena. Yet Burtoft had
returned to Florida, and done so for one
reason alone: “To tell what I knew.” In
Justice Robert Jackson’s opinion
concurring with the Supreme Court
decision to reverse the verdict in the
Groveland Boys case he addressed the
issue of justice beyond the “theoretical
importance” of jury selection, for in light
of the “prejudicial influence” in the court
before and during the trial, he wrote, “The


--- PAGE 1148 ---
only chance these Negroes had of acquittal
would have been in the courage and
decency of some sturdy and forthright
white person of sufficient standing to face
and live down the odium among his white
neighbors that such a vote, if required,
would have brought.” Though not a juror,
such a “white person” was Lawrence
Burtoft, and in his testimony as a witness
lay perhaps Walter Irvin’s “only chance.”
In the September 1949 trial, when
Walter Irvin had last sat in the witness
box, he had been able to share the
experience silently, in a look or a glance
across the courtroom at the defense table,
with his best friend, Samuel Shepherd.
They had grown up together in Groveland;
as kids they’d played together; in their


--- PAGE 1149 ---
teens they’d picked citrus together. On the
same day, at the same time, they had
enlisted in the army, and they’d served
together in the same outfit in the
Philippines. The last moment that the two
of them shared with each other they were,
as they had long been, inseparable: joined
in spirit, if also linked hand to hand by
steel cuffs as they took bullets not from
some enemy lurking in an Asian forest, but
from two Lake County law enforcement
officers. Since then and before, Irvin had
presented his version of the events on the
roadside outside Okahumpka countless
times: to a grand jury, a trial jury, a
coroner’s jury; to FBI agents, to
newspaper reporters, to doctors—to white
people. And none of them, it seemed to


--- PAGE 1150 ---
Irvin, had believed him, or if they had,
they hadn’t cared, and their indifference
was going to cost him his life. Walter
Irvin glanced across the courtroom; he
knew the look he saw in the eyes of the
men in the jury box, the look that saw a
guilty black man sitting on the witness
stand. They’d wanted to lynch him at the
jail or on the road, and they had settled for
a conviction and the electric chair. They’d
accept no less this time round. Those eyes
meant business.
Irvin was fighting for his life, but he had
no ammunition beyond the truth that he had
recited all those times before. Akerman
guided him through his testimony, and
again he denied that he had kidnapped and
raped Norma Padgett. He denied, too, that


--- PAGE 1151 ---
the stains on the legs of the pants in
evidence had been present when he had
taken them off on the morning of July 16.
Akerman then turned the witness over to
the state attorney. Hunter’s cross-
examination focused largely upon where
Irvin was on that Friday night in July, so
as to place him at the scene of the crime
squarely in the time frame of the state’s
narrative. The fact that the defense had
been unable to produce any alibi
witnesses allowed Hunter the opportunity
to plot Irvin’s movements in the state’s
story more freely. Irvin’s denials in regard
to the kidnapping and raping of Norma
Padgett concerned Hunter little. Even
without the state’s evidence to put Irvin at
the scene—the tire tracks, the footprints,


--- PAGE 1152 ---
the stained pants—the decision for the
jury would still come down to Norma’s
word against the Negro’s. He had no
doubt which way the scales of justice
would tilt on that.
The last witness for the defense landed
the bombshell that Marshall felt their case
needed. Between two criminal trials, the
appeals, and a Supreme Court case in the
matter of Groveland Boys, the NAACP
had spent nearly fifty thousand dollars on
lawyer fees, travel expenses, research
polls, and chartered flights. In that, the
eight hundred dollars paid to the Miami-
based criminologist Herman Bennett was
a serious bargain. The defense established
his impeccable credentials: thirty years of
experience in the field of criminology;


--- PAGE 1153 ---
stints with the FBI, the Secret Service
Division, the Internal Revenue Service,
the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, and the
U.S. Navy; consultation on high-profile
criminal cases, including the kidnapping
of the Lindbergh baby. As an expert
witness, Herman Bennett more than
adequately fulfilled Thurgood Marshall’s
expectations. He was no disappointment
to Jesse Hunter, either.
The state attorney sized up Bennett
quickly. If the defense saw in him an
impressively credentialed criminologist
whose testimony would call into question
the integrity of the state’s physical
evidence, Jesse Hunter saw an elitist big-
city windbag, who might not play too well
before a “farmer jury.”


--- PAGE 1154 ---
So, just after Bennett had begun
recounting his visit to the Lake County
Court House in Tavares in the company of
defense attorney Paul Perkins, where, by
virtue of a court order, he was examining
the state’s plaster casts, Hunter
interrupted. “Just a minute, please, are you
referring to any casts that are in evidence
in this case?” Hunter asked.
Bennett replied, “I am not in a position
to answer that question.” But Hunter was;
he knew that the only casts that had been
entered into evidence had been
accidentally broken after Deputy Yates’s
examination of them.
“May it please the court,” Hunter
objected. “These casts are not in evidence
in this case, we have not introduced them


--- PAGE 1155 ---
in evidence, and even though I would like
to hear this tremendously important man—
we seem to have a genius here before us, I
would like to hear it—I wish to point out
that these casts are not in evidence.”
Futch of course found the objection
good, and it was sustained, to Akerman’s
disbelief. Futch had earlier disallowed
use of the Roper poll research as
evidence, and now he was limiting the
defense to an examination only of broken
plaster casts on the basis of which Deputy
Yates had already presented his findings
to the jury.
Akerman was livid. “If the court please!
The defendant at this time—”
Hunter cut him off. “Just a moment, I am
going to withdraw my objection. I want to


--- PAGE 1156 ---
hear all of this learned testimony from this
expert.”
It was a calculated risk, but Hunter was
odds-on certain that “all of this learned
testimony” was going to work in the
state’s favor. For Akerman, it was a
strange turn in the proceedings, and he
hadn’t seen it coming—nor did he see
where it was going. Not without self-
importance, and slightly arrogant in his
courtroom manner, Akerman resumed his
conversation with Bennett, both of them
discussing with intelligence scientific
protocols in the witness’s work
worldwide. They might as well have been
speaking Polish as far as the farmers and
citrus workers on the jury were
concerned, and as Hunter and his


--- PAGE 1157 ---
assistant, Sam Buie, recognized. The state
would thus allow the witness for the
defense to talk his way expertly into
ineffectuality.
Bennett had begun to elaborate on his
findings in regard to the stains on Irvin’s
clothing when Buie broke in. “Will you
please let him indicate how long he has
been doing that particular phase of this
work?” Buie asked. “He is setting himself
up to be an expert, and he has only given
us a general background.”
Akerman relaxed: at last, a civil
exchange instead of an objection. “All
right, Mr. Bennett,” Akerman said. “Will
you please explain what you know and
what your experience has been in regard
to stains on clothing and so forth?”


--- PAGE 1158 ---
“Well, the subject of stains on clothing
is a scientific question, and is something
that can be microscopically and
scientifically determined, that is to
distinguish between stains, and of course
in the field of scientific criminology you
have to have a broad general knowledge
of every department. There are several
different methods in which stains are
examined, and the principal and proper
manner to examine them in the field of
criminology is to examine them by
microscope. . . .”
Akerman, apparently taking his cue from
the loquacious Bennett, in long-winded
fashion posed a question about semen
stains, which prompted another of
Bennett’s erudite elucidations, this one on


--- PAGE 1159 ---
“certain fluorescent quantities.” Again,
Buie interrupted. “Name that fluorescent
quality and tell what it is!” he demanded.
And gladly Bennett obliged. “Well, it is
a fluorescent substance, and when a
garment is placed under an ultra-violet ray
light, these little articles of fluorescent
material will show up under that light;
however, I will say this, that that is not a
conclusive test, because of the fact that
other foreign matter may have gotten into
or on the material, or the cloth, and these
other foreign materials might exude a
fluorescent fire when exposed to the ultra-
violet light, but would enable the
investigator to localize that portion. . . .”
And his disquisition on stains and cottons
and textiles and the specifics of chemical


--- PAGE 1160 ---
analysis comprehensible to criminologists
like himself continued on.
Hunter and Buie had dispensed with the
formality of objections; they simply
interposed into Bennett’s testimony their
questions and snide requests for
reiteration or further explanation. Futch
meanwhile whittled, like a substitute
teacher tolerating an unruly class. At one
point Hunter even meandered among the
spectators, and while laughing and
“cracking wise to his friends,” he heckled
the defense from the floor. When Akerman
finally realized the state attorney’s intent,
he demanded that the judge “stop the
prosecutor from heckling and laughing.”
The judge told the witness to “get on with
the testimony.”


--- PAGE 1161 ---
What nearly got lost in the courtroom
circus was the criminologist’s testimony
that the plaster casts made by Deputy
James Yates 
had been faked
. “After
carefully studying these shoes and casts,”
Bennett concluded that in his opinion
“there was no foot in the shoe at the time
the impression was made.” Whereas a
normal footprint would leave a concave
impression, Bennett explained, the
impression made by an empty shoe or one
with a shoe tree inside it would be
convex. The impressions in Deputy
Yates’s casts of Irvin’s shoes, Bennett
declared, were patently convex.
In cross-examination, for the benefit of
the jury, Hunter feigned incredulity at the
claim made by the defense’s expert


--- PAGE 1162 ---
witness—and skewed by the state attorney
—that all people wear out their shoes the
same way, for surely such a proposition
must defy good old Florida common
sense. To Bennett, he addressed the
question: “Then it is your contention that
all these twelve gentlemen on the jury
wear out the soles of their shoes in exactly
the same manner, each one of them?”
“Well, a shoe is never completely
[worn] out,” Bennett answered, as baffled
by Hunter’s question as the jurors had
been by the criminologist’s confoundingly
technical answers.
“Do you mean to say that they are worn
exactly alike and that all these men walk
exactly alike?”
Bennett offered a detailed analysis of


--- PAGE 1163 ---
shoe construction and weight distribution,
from which Hunter wrenched the false
conclusion he had been using to sway the
jury with his more plainspoken common
sense. “Well,” he said, “I am going to let
the jury be the judges of that fact
themselves, as to whether or not they all
wear their shoes at the same rate and in
the same way.” As Hunter had done from
the minute that Bennett had so solidly
taken the stand, he had again, as
Greenberg noted, “ridiculed the
testimony.”
The state attorney ended his cross-
examination by obliging Bennett to reveal
his $150-per-day fee. “Then, as a matter
of fact,” reported Hunter, his voice
booming, “you are getting from seven to


--- PAGE 1164 ---
eight hundred dollars to testify as an
expert in this case about this stuff you
have testified about?” Bennett answered
yes, and with that, Hunter dismissed the
witness. “That is all,” he said and, with
some undisguised disgust, added, “That is
enough.”
With the day’s proceedings ended,
Marshall, Perkins, and DeMille repaired
to the home of a local family that had
agreed to accomodate some of the black
reporters and lawyers. Greenberg had
moved to a hotel in downtown Ocala
where most of the out-of-town whites with
an interest in the trial were staying. That
evening Greenberg was eating by himself
in the hotel dining room when Jesse
Hunter asked if he might join the opposing


--- PAGE 1165 ---
counsel. Unable to “chew anything
substantial,” Hunter ordered cornbread
and milk, which dribbled down his chin
onto his shirt as he made desultory small
talk—and Greenberg listened patiently to
Hunter’s tale of a recent trip up north to
his nephew’s graduation, after which the
young people did not want to be seen
eating with Uncle Jesse. Mostly, though,
the two men ate in silence. Hunter had
maybe a spoonful of soppy cornbread left
when he looked up from the bowl and for
a few seconds considered Greenberg’s
patient mien before he spoke. “McCall’s a
brute,” he said, then scooped up the last of
the cornbread and bade Greenberg good
night, leaving the dazed young lawyer with
the check.


--- PAGE 1166 ---
W
HEN TESTIMONY RESUMED
 on Thursday
morning, February 14, the prosecution
opened with an unusual maneuver. Sam
Buie requested permission to return
Walter Irvin to the stand for further cross-
examination. To no one’s surprise,
Akerman objected, reminding counsel that
they were in the state’s rebuttal.
“We do not insist on it,” Buie replied,
“we just have one question to ask him, but
it is within this court’s discretion.”
The impropriety of the request did not
warrant even the brief second of
consideration Futch gave it before ruling,
“The objection is good I think and is
sustained.”
“All right,” said Buie, smiling toward


--- PAGE 1167 ---
the jury as he withdrew, “we don’t insist
on it. If they don’t want him back on the
stand, it’s all right.”
Fuming, Marshall and Akerman
requested that Futch excuse the jurors so
that they could make a motion. In the
absence of the jury, the defense moved for
a mistrial on the grounds that under the
Constitution a defendant is not required to
take the stand and “no comment can be
made before the court or the jury as to the
failure of the defendant to take the stand”:
which, Akerman pointed out, the state had
just done twice. Futch denied the motion
nonetheless. The jury returned, the
prosecution resumed.
Bennett’s assertion that Deputy James
Yates had faked the footprints on the


--- PAGE 1168 ---
plaster casts had gnawed at Hunter all
night. To vouch for Yates’s forensic
aptitude and thereby validate further the
conclusions in his testimony, the state
called Leroy Campbell, the former Lake
County deputy who was now employed by
the police department in the city of
Leesburg. Campbell testified that he had
been present with Yates the entire time the
footprints were being cast in plaster. It
was solid evidence, he assured the jury.
Having buttressed Yates’s credibility,
Hunter set out next to blemish Lawrence
Burtoft’s character. For that, the state
attorney knew whom he could trust. He
called Willis V. McCall, sheriff of Lake
County, who affirmed only that he was
“pretty well acquainted with the people of


--- PAGE 1169 ---
Lake County,” because at that juncture
Akerman objected. For reason of being a
member of law enforcement, McCall was
excused by Futch.
The court proceeded to closing
statements, with Sam Buie beginning the
arguments for the state. The young attorney
first took the jurors through the evening of
July 15, 1949, as it had been experienced
by seventeen-year-old Norma Padgett:
how she had been ravished by four black
men but had had the presence of mind to
get good looks at all four of them as well
as to take note of the car they were
driving. “Gentlemen,” he told the jury, “in
this case the only thing you have to
consider is which testimony you are going
to believe. Are you going to believe this


--- PAGE 1170 ---
girl, or are you going to believe that
defendant? They are the only two persons
living who were present at that thing to
know anything about it. . . .”
Buie next addressed, and deprecated,
the testimony by “crazy” Herman Bennett
in regard to the plaster-cast footprint
evidence. “Now, gentlemen, if you
believe the testimony from that man from
Miami, then please God turn the boy
loose,” Buie implored. “Turn him loose,
that’s what you’ve got to do if you believe
that man, turn that boy loose. And no
matter what that poor country girl Norma
Padgett said to you, if you believe what
that man says for God’s sake, turn the boy
loose. . . . I submit to you gentlemen that
the statements that he made is the most


--- PAGE 1171 ---
asinine statement that I have ever heard
before any competent court in the state of
Florida, and yet he sits up here and
expects you to believe any such junk as
that, I tell you gentlemen, that is an insult
to your intelligence.”
In closing, Buie reminded the jurors that
the officers and deputies of Lake County
had solemnly sworn to uphold the law.
“Now, are all these men liars? Have they
any reason whatsoever, under God’s
name, and has either Yates . . . or
Campbell or any of the rest of them any
reason to lie? No, gentlemen, I don’t
believe they would, and I know that you
do not believe it either.”
Marshall knew that he really had no
choice; he would address the jury.


--- PAGE 1172 ---
“They’re probably wondering what that
big Negro is sitting at the defense table
for,” he’d told reporters outside the Ocala
court. Inside the courtroom, when he rose,
Marshall could sense, as he often did
when trying cases in the South, that neither
the spectators nor the jurors knew quite
what to expect from him. He stood “in a
difficult spot,” as one reporter observed,
for, “if he didn’t speak, the jury might
regard him as some sort of sinister puller
of strings for Akerman,” but, “if he did
speak, he had to avoid seeming ‘uppity’ to
the white jury.” He was of course going to
speak, because it wasn’t a matter of
choice; it was an obligation, not only to
his client but also to the community.
Blacks had crowded into the balcony in


--- PAGE 1173 ---
large part to hear and see Mr. Civil
Rights, and to witness possibility; and in
“that big Negro” the whites on the main
floor might see something of the future. He
surveyed the jurors. The older men among
them looked vaguely stunned, “as if they
never knew a Negro could ‘stand right up
there and talk.’ ” On the other hand, a
young juryman with an “honest face”
regarded the special counsel as attentively
as he had followed the entire trial. He
“seemed to listen with respect” as
Marshall delivered his address to the jury.
“Gentlemen of the jury,” Marshall
began, “if you will bear with me for a
moment, I will please explain to you who
I am and where I am from. I am Thurgood
Marshall, chief counsel for the National


--- PAGE 1174 ---
Association for the Advancement of
Colored People, and I am from Baltimore,
Maryland, and am associated in this case
as defending counsel, and Mr. Paul
Perkins is from Orlando, and he is also
associated in this case and is a member of
the bar of the state of Florida, and
gentlemen, I want to tell you that I think
we understand the problem we have here,
and insofar as I do understand it, I would
like to discuss it with you for a few
moments.”
Irvin sat erect in his chair, “drumming
his fingers together, listening the way a
man listens when his life depends on what
he’s listening to,” one newspaper
reported. Another noted that off to the
side, Willis McCall “listened intently,


--- PAGE 1175 ---
gritting his teeth.”
“Now, in cases of this type,” Marshall
continued, “we are all of us up against a
pretty tough proposition, but the guarantee
of a fair and impartial trial to every man
accused of crime stands just as securely in
this case and cases of this type as it does
in every other case. But there are times
when violent crimes are committed, when
all good Americans are shocked and
revolted, and resent such crimes, and
criminals of the type who commit such
crimes. . . . And when the crime of rape
involves a white lady and a colored man,
then there is a great amount of ill feeling
and ill will against the alleged defendant.”
Marshall explained that the Constitution
and further statutes appertaining to the


--- PAGE 1176 ---
rights of individuals as defendants “fill up
pages and pages of law books, but they
can easily be summed up to this one thing,
that every defendant is assured and
guaranteed a fair and impartial trial, and
is assured and guaranteed equal justice
under the law, equally . . . no matter
whether or not he is white, black or
yellow, and our government is the finest
Government in the world . . . and our great
United States government is built on that
principle . . . and that is the reason that our
government has survived through the ages.
. . .”
First glorifying the law as being derived
from “basic precepts set down by God
himself in heaven” and “written lovingly
and painstakingly, through the hundreds of


--- PAGE 1177 ---
years,” Marshall then brought law as a
divine abstraction into the concrete reality
of the Marion County courtroom, where
constitutional safeguards continued to
protect the rule of courts and the power of
juries, as in the matter of the defendant
seated before them. “Walter Lee Irvin is
charged with the crime of rape and he is
now on trial before you gentlemen as his
jurymen, and in cases of this kind, I have
heard judges make the remark, that cases
of this kind are the kind that will try the
souls of men.” Yet by their tried souls
would the soul of Walter Lee Irvin be
tried, and by them would his life or death
be determined, for, as Marshall reminded
them, “when this government was
founded, and the old Magna Carta says


--- PAGE 1178 ---
that the final say of whether a man is to
live or die is left solely in the hands of
twelve representative fellow men of the
area where the case is being tried, and that
is why you are here today.”
Marshall’s objective, however, was
less to inspire the jurors with awe at their
mission than to appeal to their common
sense in its execution. “Now I will tell
you that I myself have never been on a
jury, but to my mind there are certain
things that strike me about the testimony in
this case . . . and the thing that struck me
the most, and still is in my mind, is this.
When they carried Walter Irvin out there
to the scene of where this thing is
supposed to have happened, and when
they were tracking his footsteps there in


--- PAGE 1179 ---
the ground, and they asked Irvin if those
were the shoes he had on the night before,
and he told them no. He told them that his
shoes he had on the night before were at
home. Now, gentlemen, if those were
Irvin’s footprints out there on that ground,
and Irvin knew what a serious charge was
hanging over his head, and when Mr.
Yates asked him if those shoes he had on
the night before, now, remember
gentlemen, Walter Irvin is an intelligent
young boy. Now he understood what Mr.
Yates was charging him with . . . and what
did Irvin tell him? He told him, no, that
they were at home. . . . Now, gentlemen, it
seems to me that if Walter Irvin had been
guilty of that crime, when he realized that
the shoes that he had on were not fitting in


--- PAGE 1180 ---
those imprints there on that ground, that
any guilty man would have instantly said
to Mr. Yates, ‘Yes, these are the shoes I
had on last night.’ He would not have told
Mr. Yates that the shoes were at home.”
Outmatching the masterly Jesse Hunter
in the arena of common sense, Marshall
asked the jurors to consider, too, if Irvin’s
actions the morning after the alleged rape
suggested those of a guilty man. “I don’t
believe that anybody who has just
committed such a crime as that would be
willing and able to go to work the next
morning and to lead a perfectly normal
life.” Indeed, even in the face of his arrest,
he demonstrated no hint of guilt; he was
“not even nervous or excited” and “when
his mother told him the police were there


--- PAGE 1181 ---
looking for him, he told her to tell them to
come right on in, that he had not done
anything.”
Marshall reasoned with the jurors in
conversational tones; he spoke “patiently,
politely, softly, but fluently and with
dignity,” as one reporter noted. For years
Marshall had been honing his approach to
all-white juries in courtrooms across the
South, and his reasonableness was
difficult to resist. “With Marshall, you
really got the impression that what he was
saying had to be right,” a fellow lawyer
observed. “That no honest person could
really avoid the thrust of what he was
arguing. That he really, really believed in
this cause. And that made him very
effective.”


--- PAGE 1182 ---
Marshall touched briefly on the matter
of Deputy James Yates’s plaster casts, or
rather on the question that the state had
raised as to the bias in Howard Bennett’s
testimony, for which the reputedly expert
witness had been handsomely paid by the
defense. Alex Akerman would argue the
evidence itself in his closing statement,
but what Marshall wished to make clear,
he explained to the jurors, was that it was
the defense’s duty to offer the court the
“best evidence we could find” just as it
was the state’s obligation to present their
best evidence. “It is awfully hard to get
the best evidence in the world without
paying for it,” Marshall told them.
To a significant degree, the money
expended on expert testimony indicated


--- PAGE 1183 ---
the importance that the NAACP attached
to the Groveland Boys case and to the life
of the defendant. Marshall emphasized to
the jury “that this is an extremely
important case, and it is an extremely
important case to Walter Lee Irvin. There
is a man’s life involved here, his life is at
stake, and gentlemen, I urge you, when you
are considering this case, and making up
your verdict in this case, to keep in the
foremost part of your mind this fact. That
every man, no matter what his color or
race or creed might be, and no matter what
the crime that he is charged with, each
man in those circumstances is entitled to
the fairest treatment that anybody can
possibly give him. . . . You are the sole
judges of the evidence and the testimony


--- PAGE 1184 ---
in the case, and it is your responsibility to
reach this verdict. . . .” Marshall finished
with a nod and “thank you for your
patience and attention.”
Futch called a recess for lunch. As the
jurors were filing out, Jack Greenberg, at
the end of the defense table, heard one of
them say to another, “Damn, that nigger
was good. Sure looks like it’ll be close.”


--- PAGE 1185 ---
CHAPTER 21: THE
COLORED WAY
State Attorney Jesse Hunter questions
Lawrence Burtoft in July 1949, while
Sheriff Willis McCall and Deputy James
Yates glare. (
Photo by Wallace
Kirkland/Time & Life Pictures/Getty
Images
)


--- PAGE 1186 ---
B
OY, THAT’S A
 great man,” Hunter said,
speaking of Marshall.
Mabel Norris Reese had had ample
opportunity to observe the two opposing
counsel in court, and in the course of the
trial they had seemed to grow quite
“buddy-buddy.” During breaks in the
proceedings, Hunter had on occasion sat
down with his coffee at the defense table
to engage Marshall in conversation, to
make the NAACP lawyer from New York
feel more at ease in Marion County.
Willis McCall might not have been
impressed by Thurgood Marshall’s
closing argument on behalf of Walter
Irvin, but the state attorney from Lake
County—“a terrible racist,” though he was


--- PAGE 1187 ---
known to be, according to Reese—
unquestionably was. Reese had detected a
change in Hunter’s attitudes toward race
as well as toward the sheriff ever since
the shooting of the two Groveland boys
that November night on a dark road near
Umatilla: a change that was reflected
when Marshall’s name came up at a lunch
with Hunter during the court recess on the
Thursday of the trial, and Reese noted,
“You could just see the respect all over
[Hunter’s] face for that man. It was such a
shame they could never have lunch
together, but at the time no restaurant in
Florida would have permitted it.”
Reese’s own attitudes had been shifting,
too. Before the first trial, she later
admitted, she had been “conned into


--- PAGE 1188 ---
believing that these boys were guilty. . . .
In the beginning, I just felt the evidence
was there, and I admit I tried them before
they’d been given a chance to be tried.”
After the trial, and the appeals, and the
reversal of the verdict by the Supreme
Court, which was in essence an indictment
of the prejudicial system of justice in Lake
County, Hunter had been “his usual blunt
self and didn’t like it one bit,” Reese
recalled, and Willis McCall had “raved
and raved.” Reese also recognized,
however, that as a reporter and columnist
for the 
Mount Dora Topic
, she had
collaborated with Lake County’s officers
of the law and the court. “I was probably
prejudicing minds by my pipeline
information [from Hunter] without thinking


--- PAGE 1189 ---
about it too much. I probably needed to be
stepped on.” The reversal of verdict
subjected Reese to criticism along with
Hunter and McCall; it also chastened her.
Certainly, by the time of the retrial, her
hostility toward the NAACP and the LDF
lawyers had abated. Early in the
proceedings she had suggested to
Marshall that he attend a “Lake County
NAACP conference” where whites and
blacks could air their opinions about the
Groveland Boys case and its
ramifications. Marshall’s answer had
surprised her; he said that he would be
very pleased to attend “because of its
possible good effects upon race relations
and the United States’ world-wide fight
against communist propaganda which


--- PAGE 1190 ---
seeks to blacken us through our race
difficulties.” His positive response even
prompted Reese to praise Marshall in a
letter to J. Edgar Hoover. (Reese’s letter
requested that the results of the FBI’s
investigation be released. Hoover replied
that the investigations were confidential.)
After Reese’s lunch with Hunter, at the
end of the recess, she accompanied the
state attorney back to the courthouse,
where he would be presenting his closing
argument that afternoon. In the hallway,
just outside the courtroom, they spotted
Deputy James Yates. Reese felt Hunter’s
hold on her elbow tighten; they broke their
pace, and he leaned in toward her. “Stay
away from that man as far as you can,”
Hunter whispered. “He just like to hurt


--- PAGE 1191 ---
people.”
Court reconvened. Alex Akerman
approached the jury. He argued the
evidence, or lack of it, by which the state
was attempting to reconvict Walter Irvin.
Addressing first the alleged rape itself, he
made clear that the defense was
questioning not what Norma Padgett had
said had happened to her on the night of
July 15 but whom she had identified as her
assaulters. “We don’t say that she was not
raped or ravished in that place, but we do
say that this defendant knows nothing
about it.” While Akerman did point out the
state’s failure to produce medical
evidence in support of Norma’s
ravishment—“I understand she was taken
to a medical doctor by the deputy sheriffs,


--- PAGE 1192 ---
and I submit to you gentlemen that there
should have been medical testimony in
this case, and none was introduced to
show whether or not this young lady was
actually raped or ravished”—he kept the
jury focused on the issue of identity. As
had Marshall before the recess for lunch,
Akerman argued after it in terms of the
folksy Florida common sense that Jesse
Hunter so valued. “Now I think most of
you have had the experience of identifying
Negroes. I know it is true with me, and I
believe it is true with just about every one
of you gentlemen, that the first time you
see a Negro, you see nothing but a Negro,
and if you see him again the next day, you
probably would not recognize him as
being anything but a Negro, and after he


--- PAGE 1193 ---
has worked for you say two or three or
four or five or six days, then you finally
begin to recognize him, and distinguish
him as Jim or Joe or Jack or George. But
as a matter of fact, if you have never seen
a Negro but one time and it was in the
dark, on a dark night, such as this alleged
case was, then I submit to you gentlemen
that you would not be able to recognize
him again, so positively as Norma Padgett
did.”
Akerman then proceeded to the failure
on the part of the state to send physical
evidence to the FBI for analysis and to its
reliance instead on the forensic skills of
the less qualified deputy James Yates.
Furthermore, Akerman clarified, the
defense had paid the expert witness


--- PAGE 1194 ---
Herman Bennett to analyze the deputy’s
plaster casts; they had not paid him, as the
state had implied, to falsely claim that the
evidence had been compromised, or
faked. If the defense had indeed been
paying Bennett for false testimony, they
would have had him testify simply that the
plaster-cast footprints did not match the
soles of Walter Irvin’s shoes. In fact, the
prints did match, but the impression was
not convex. “Now, we don’t want to say,
and we do not know, and we do not
contend that the Deputy Sheriff put a shoe
tree in them, and made a false impression,
we don’t contend that at all, and we don’t
contend that Sheriff McCall did it,”
Akerman maintained. “We are not casting
any dispersions [
sic
] or


--- PAGE 1195 ---
misrepresentations against any persons
whatsoever. But we do say this . . . we
believe we have proved it. . . .”
State Attorney Jesse Hunter rose. He
was not only closing the argument for the
prosecution; he was also capping a career
in law that had spanned four decades, in
which time he had argued no case as
controversial or as consequential as the
Groveland Boys. He surveyed the packed
courtroom; he eyed the press tables, the
reporters, many of whom he had known
for years. The case, the public, the court,
his vanity—they demanded a virtuoso
performance. He turned his attention to the
gentlemen of the jury.
Hunter started on an accordant note. He
agreed, he said, with Marshall’s assertion


--- PAGE 1196 ---
that every man, black or white, was
entitled to a fair trial, and as state attorney
he had built his career on that principle.
“Gentlemen, although I am not trying to
brag about it, I wish to tell you that in any
case where I sincerely believed that the
defendant charged with the crime was
innocent . . . there was nothing in the
world that I could do but tell the court to
dismiss him. I have done that many times.
. . . I have never prosecuted a man in my
career who I believed to be innocent of
the crime with which he was charged. I
have never prosecuted a man that I did not
think was guilty. Now, gentlemen, I tell
you this, I don’t want on my soul or my
conscience the prosecution of an innocent
man, and I am always careful about that


--- PAGE 1197 ---
thing.”
It was Hunter’s reprise of the testimony
of Lawrence Burtoft under his lengthy
cross-examination by the state attorney
that brought the proceedings to a
momentary standstill. “My friend
criticized me for some of the questions I
asked Mr. Burtoft,” Hunter began,
“because I asked him if he did not have it
in for the law enforcement agencies of
Florida and Lake County, and by a
technicality he stopped me from proving
it.” Hunter was convinced that Willis
McCall would have been able to discredit
Burtoft had Judge Futch allowed the
sheriff to testify.
Akerman shot to his feet. “May it please
the court!” he shouted. “We ask that the


--- PAGE 1198 ---
jury be withdrawn.”
“For what purpose?” Futch asked.
“For the purpose of making a motion to
the court out of the presence of the jury.”
Futch had the jury withdraw. As
Akerman and Marshall were approaching
the bench, Marshall noticed that Hunter,
standing off to the side, was sending hand
signals to the jurors as they exited the
courtroom. Marshall might have thought
that Futch was ringmastering a circus
rather than presiding over a trial, except
that the judge’s attention seemed to be
commanded solely by cedar sticks while
his longtime friend, the state attorney,
committed one improper offense after
another. Futch did pause in his whittlin’ to
deny Akerman’s motion for a mistrial on


--- PAGE 1199 ---
grounds of the state’s “technicality”
remark. Then he denied the defense
request that the remark be stricken from
the record. Then he had the jury brought
back.
Hunter resumed. He recalled for the
jury the testimony of Herman Bennett,
“who sat here and told you for over thirty
minutes what a wonderful man he was. It
was awfully funny to me. He struck me as
being afraid that Hoover was going to call
him up to take over Hoover’s job.”
Having subjected the criminologist’s
testimony again to ridicule, Hunter
elevated the reputation of James Yates by
personally vouching for the deputy
sheriff’s honesty, so that he, the state
attorney, could not “believe that you


--- PAGE 1200 ---
gentlemen for one instant believe that any
man in a responsible position like that, of
a deputy sheriff, would try in any way to
fake tracks on anybody. I don’t believe
that you gentlemen believe that any such
foolishness took place.”
Hunter tightened his bond with the
jurymen by offering them a joke, in
dialect, about “two colored men walking
down the street,” and after that bit of
cracker humor he opened the cracker soul
of the case. “Here is this young girl,
Norma Padgett,” Hunter said. “You saw
her here on the stand. She was an honest
old cracker girl, born and raised up in
Lake County, Florida. She was a poor
honest girl and had never even probably
been out of Lake County and had never


--- PAGE 1201 ---
been in any trouble in her life. . . . She
was just an old common Florida country
girl, and came from an old common
Florida family, and I ask you which are
you going to believe?”
As he described the rape, one reporter
observed, he “whooped and hollered,
waved his arms and then crooned as to a
babe in arms.” That his voice was
strained by a cold and he was battling
laryngitis seemed only to heighten the
alarm he infused into his depiction. “Now,
gentlemen, she sat there in that car being
held prisoner, and she told you that she
was afraid. She was afraid for her life,
and oh, my God, why should she not be?
. . . A woman’s chastity is the greatest
thing on earth to her, and nothing in the


--- PAGE 1202 ---
world compares to it.” So it was that the
crime committed in the car that night was
a violation not just of Norma Lee Padgett
but also of Southern womanhood, and so,
too, the jurors’ verdict would be
punishing the accused for a crime against
not one woman but all women, against
their own wives and daughters. “You have
a right to sit on this jury for the protection
of your women-folk, and I would like to
tell you this example, on one historical
occasion, there was a good woman, from
a good family, on the eve of her wedding,
and she was caught in the back yard and
savagely raped, and she walked over to
the edge of the cliff and hurled herself into
eternity, rather than sacrifice that which to
her was dearer than life itself. That,


--- PAGE 1203 ---
gentlemen, was her chastity. Now,
gentlemen, Norma Padgett, this simple
country girl, chose to live, and she has
suffered the greatest tragedy that can
befall any woman, and she will suffer for
it for the rest of her life. She has lived to
tell the story, and don’t you gentlemen
forget that that thing, that horrible thing,
will never be erased from her mind.”
Hunter paused to catch his breath. His
rhetoric hung in the air: “savagely,”
“greatest tragedy,” “protection of your
women-folk”—he was sparing the jury no
drama, or fear. After a moment, Hunter
drew himself up and moved in closer to
the jury. A downcast look crossed his
face. He was solemn. His voice sank
lower. “Now, gentlemen, I am about to


--- PAGE 1204 ---
conclude my argument to you in this case.
I have tried to do a good job. That is my
sacred duty. Gentlemen, I have been
seriously ill, and this is probably the last
capital case I will try in this county. . . . I
have been stricken with what may be a
fatal disease.”
His words were lost on no one in the
courtroom. Mabel Norris Reese,
Thurgood Marshall, the defense team, Sam
Buie, everyone’s ears pricked up. For a
second Judge Futch even forsook his
cedar sticks.
“Gentlemen, I don’t want to do any man,
whether he be black, white, or colored, an
injustice, and I have come to the
realization that I may soon have to meet
the Almighty, and I don’t want to meet the


--- PAGE 1205 ---
Almighty with any innocent blood on my
soul. Gentlemen, I don’t believe that I will
ever do so, but I do want to leave this
county in such condition, that you and your
wives and your daughters and your sisters
and your sweethearts can walk and ride
the streets of this county and this state in
perfect safety, as you should do. I want to
leave this county and this state in such a
condition that no bunch of men can come
in and snatch up your wife or your
daughter and carry her out in the woods
and rape her.”
Marshall had lost count (though
Greenberg had not) of Hunter’s instances
of prosecutorial misconduct in his closing
argument, but his revelation of a “fatal
disease” was clearly a ploy to gain jurors’


--- PAGE 1206 ---
sympathies and, again, grounds for a
mistrial (another for Greenberg to record
in the event of an appeal). Still, the
defense did not object, as Hunter was
wrapping up his summation, and the judge
would surely have overruled in any case.
Testimony and arguments had been
completed. Walter Irvin did not meet his
gaze as the special counsel reminded him,
as Marshall had been reminded by the
state attorney, that the governor’s plea
offer was “open up until the case went to
the jury.” Once the jury withdrew for its
deliberation, though, the defendant’s last
chance to ensure himself a life sentence
rather than the death penalty, in the event
of his conviction, would be forfeit. And
again, Marshall reminded Irvin that he


--- PAGE 1207 ---
would in all likelihood be facing the
electric chair.
Stoic, staring into the distance beyond
the defense table, Irvin had listened to his
counsel. His silence was heavy. Then his
eyes met Marshall’s. “I didn’t do it,” Irvin
said, and said he would not plead guilty to
what he didn’t do. Marshall nodded, and
clasped the resolute Irvin’s shoulder.
Judge Truman Futch charged the jury.
As the twelve white men exited the
courtroom, the NAACP attorney
approached the bench, where the judge,
his everyday brown tropical business suit
dappled with cedar shavings, remained
slumped in his swivel chair. He wore a
Masonic signet ring; so did Marshall, and
earlier in the trial the judge and the lawyer


--- PAGE 1208 ---
had compared their rings and amicably
shared some of their experiences in
Freemasonry. At the moment, however,
Marshall was feeling neither cordial nor
fraternal. He was livid with Jesse Hunter.
“Judge Futch, I’m quite serious about
this,” Marshall said. “I’m going to make
him lose. Every one of those jurors has got
a Shriner’s pin, did you notice that?”
“Sure, I noticed it,” Futch replied.
“Did you also notice that the state’s
attorney, three different times gave the
Masonic distress signal to that jury?”
“Yeah,” Futch said, “as a matter of fact,
it was four.”
“Well, I’m going to make an objection,”
Marshall told him.
“I wouldn’t do it,” Futch answered.


--- PAGE 1209 ---
“Why not?”
“There’s nothing racial about that,”
Futch said. “He does it all the time
whether you’re white, black, or green. He
gives the distress signal all the time.”
Greenberg, Akerman, and Perkins felt
no better about the prospects for the
defendant than did Marshall. The whole
trial, it seemed, had proceeded by the
ordainment of the state, which apparently
enjoyed the grace of Judge Futch.
Predetermined though the verdict
appeared to be, Marshall had Akerman
request that the court submit additional
instructions to the jury, urging that
deliberations not be influenced by public
sentiment and that the testimony of Norma
Padgett be “rigidly scrutinized,” since


--- PAGE 1210 ---
there were no other witnesses to the
alleged act. Futch refused.
Marshall retreated to the hallway for a
cigarette. He kept a wary eye out for
Deputy Yates; he had no inclination to be
chased out of Marion County by a band of
Klan riders after the verdict—not in a
hearse, anyway. The Marion County
Sheriff’s Department was well
represented at the courthouse, but even in
their Stetsons, with their guns holstered on
their hips, they projected none of the
menace of their Lake County counterparts.
A white man sidled over to Marshall.
“How long’s the jury going to be out?” he
asked.
“Damned if I know,” Marshall said. “I
can’t tell.”


--- PAGE 1211 ---
Both men puffed on their cigarettes in
silence, the white man staring down the
corridor. “I can tell,” he said.
Marshall waited for an explanation. The
man was pleased to offer one. “You see
that man over there just lit up a cigar?”
Marshall spotted him, said yeah, and the
man remarked, it seemed to Marshall,
with undue confidence, “When he’s
finished that cigar, the jury will come
back.”
Marshall furrowed his brow. “What the
hell you talking about?” the lawyer asked.
When the man pointed out that the cigar
smoker was a juror, Marshall recognized
him, as well as a second juryman who
appeared and also lit up a cigar.
“They’re not gonna waste that cigar,”


--- PAGE 1212 ---
the man told Marshall. “They’re going to
finish the cigar before they come in.”
Marshall observed the two jurors. He
detected no nervousness in their gestures,
no tension in their body language, as they
casually smoked their cigars. It was not a
good sign. Marshall would have preferred
to be seeing them uneasy, on edge, ready
to skip the courthouse as soon as they had,
contrary to popular demand, acquitted
Walter Irvin. Instead, the two jurymen
looked as if they might have been passing
time outside a barbershop on a lazy
Saturday afternoon. Not a good sign at all.
Marshall lit another cigarette.
The cigar smoke billowed around the
heads of the two jurors. A few more
minutes ticked slowly by. Then, one juror


--- PAGE 1213 ---
stamped out his cigar; he lingered for a
moment, and with a nod to his companion,
he disappeared from the hallway. With no
apparent urgency, the second juror
followed. Marshall butted his cigarette.
He was just stepping toward the
courtroom when word came out that the
jury had reached a verdict, after one hour
and twenty-three minutes of deliberation.
Marshall’s team gathered at the defense
table. Walter Irvin was brought back from
his cell. His family along with the black
spectators, curious and hopeful, packed
themselves into the balcony. The main
floor buzzed. The press corps waited,
alert. Jesse Hunter took a seat next to Sam
Buie at the prosecutor’s table. Judge Futch
returned to the bench.


--- PAGE 1214 ---
A cigarette in his hand, Judge Futch
addressed the spectators. “Now when the
jury gives its verdict, I don’t want a man
to move in this room until the sheriff takes
the defendant out.”
And what happens if he’s not guilty?
Marshall thought. The conclusion
appeared to be foregone.
Just before 4 p.m., the twelve jurors
filed into the courtroom, their eyes giving
nothing away. The room settled into a
hush. The verdict was read.
“We the jury find the defendant guilty.”
There was no recommendation of mercy.
Irvin betrayed no emotion. He sat,
unmoving, except for the twitch of muscle
in the hollows of his cheeks. Walter’s
mother swallowed her wail as she broke


--- PAGE 1215 ---
down in tears. Around her in the Jim
Crow gallery sobs accompanied Dellia
Irvin’s grief.
Marion County sheriff Don McLeod
patted Irvin on the shoulder. “Like a man
stunned,” the defendant stepped before
Judge Futch for sentencing. His senses
numb, he barely heard the words that
would echo inside his head for months: “
. . . electrocuted until you are dead and
may God have mercy on your soul.”
Immediately, Marshall made a motion
for a mistrial on the basis of Hunter’s
prosecutorial misfeasance in his
summation before the jury. Futch denied
the motion, and borrowing a pen, after
fumbling in his pockets in an unsuccessful
attempt to find one, he sealed Irvin’s


--- PAGE 1216 ---
doom with his signature. Reporters raced
to telephones and their typewriters. The
jury was dismissed, and Walter Irvin,
again in handcuffs, was escorted by
Sheriff McLeod, in a suit and fedora, from
the courtroom to a waiting patrol car.
Richard Carter, reporter for the
Compass
, lingered at the courthouse. He
wanted to get some quotes from the
prosecutor, but he settled for Sam Buie,
whom he asked for a clarification of a
remark made by the state attorney in his
closing argument. Addressing a point
raised by the defense as to why Walter
Irvin, if he were guilty, had not simply
fled after raping Norma Padgett, Hunter
had scoffed at the logic and told the jurors
what he knew they’d know, “Don’t you


--- PAGE 1217 ---
know that is the colored  way of thinking?”
Buie explained to the inquisitive reporter
that Hunter had in fact meant to use the
word 
criminal
, not 
colored
. Carter, who
had that very day been named the 1951
recipient of the George Polk Award, given
to “the reporter who was faithful to the
best tenets of his profession even at the
risk of life itself,” was not convinced. He
would later write, “Could this be another
of the ‘rape’ cases which Southern
authorities have been known to whomp up
as an afterthought in order to keep the
Negro in his ‘place’?”
Once Carter had walked out of earshot,
Assistant State Attorney Sam Buie asked
some other reporters who were standing
close by, “Say, is that Carter a nigger?


--- PAGE 1218 ---
He’s got awful curly hair. You sure he’s
no nigger?”
Dellia Irvin caught up with Thurgood
Marshall as he was leaving the courtroom.
Tears formed ragged trails down her
cheeks. “She had the most impressive face
I’ve ever seen on a woman,” Marshall
said later. “Real high cheekbones and a
whole lot of red in that black. A whole lot
of red, and a lot of Indian. And she just
had these piercing eyes. . . .”
“Lawyer, don’t you let my boy die, you
understand that?” Dellia Irvin enjoined
him. “She said it four times,” Marshall
recalled. “Don’t you let my boy die. I
could hardly go to sleep. I could see this
face, and boy, it really . . .”
Overcome himself, Marshall took the


--- PAGE 1219 ---
inconsolable woman into his arms; her
body was trembling. “Don’t worry,
honey.” Marshall tried to comfort her.
“With the faith of our people and the grace
of God, we’ll be back.” Tears welling in
his eyes, too, Marshall assured her,
“We’re going to stick by you. . . . We are
going to keep on fighting.”
On Monday he would be filing a motion
for a new trial in Tavares, Marshall told
the reporters outside the courthouse,
before he climbed into the hearse. With
Paul Perkins, Arnold DeMille of the
Defender
, Robert Ratcliffe of the 
Courier
,
and Milton “Buddy” Lonesome of the
Baltimore
 
Afro-American
, he rode to the
small hotel in Parramore, where some of
the black news correspondents picked up


--- PAGE 1220 ---
their luggage, and then dashed on to the
airport in Orlando.
Mabel Norris Reese was waiting in the
courthouse lobby. The sun was beginning
to set, and she had a long drive back to
Lake County, but something had to be said.
What, she wasn’t sure, but something,
even though she knew that he was ill. So
she was waiting, and when she saw him
ambling toward her, all the words she
sought got lost in tears. Jesse Hunter
gently clasped her arm; he tried to console
her, suggested they might get something to
eat.
“Get away,” Reese said, pulling her
arm away from him.
The vehemence, restrained but
unexpected, left Hunter aghast.


--- PAGE 1221 ---
“How could you do that?” she asked
him, tears spilling from her eyes.
Hunter swallowed. “I just had to,” he
said.
Reese shook her head, unable even to
look at him.
“It was my duty,” he said, his hoarse
voice failing him. “As a prosecutor.”


--- PAGE 1222 ---
CHAPTER 22: A
PLACE IN THE SUN
LeRoy Collins is sworn in as Florida’s
governor on January 4, 1955. (
Courtesy of
the State Archives of Florida
)


--- PAGE 1223 ---
I
DON’T SEE HOW
 in the name of God
anybody could subject that boy to any
more inhuman punishment. Florida is a
bad place to live,” observed 
Baltimore
Afro-American
 reporter Buddy Lonesome,
dumbstruck by the cruelty he had
witnessed both at Irvin’s trial and outside
the courtroom. He was sitting next to
Marshall, scribbling down notes for the
next day’s paper, as their hired car sped
toward the Orlando airport on Thursday
night, February 14.
The verdict made front-page news
across the country on February 15. The
reporters who’d covered the trial had
hardly been surprised that Walter Irvin
was found guilty; that Lake County justice


--- PAGE 1224 ---
had not been tempered by mercy,
however, did confound many of them.
Newspapers shouted outrage in boldface
type, but even less inflammatory headlines
noted the want of clemency, like that of
Friday’s 
New York Times
, which read:
“All-White Jury in 3-Day Retrial of ’49
Groveland Rape Case Fails to Urge
Mercy.” The national press expressed its
expectation that in view of the beatings
and shooting that Irvin had endured, Judge
Truman Futch might exhibit some restraint,
even in the absence of a recommendation
from the jury, and sentence the retried and
reconvicted Groveland boy to life
imprisonment.
Local newspapers praised the
“tranquillity” of the trial atmosphere in


--- PAGE 1225 ---
Marion County, but editorials in the
North’s leftist and black presses were
unforgiving of white justice in central
Florida. “Brutal and cynical white
supremacy Florida has again announced
its intentions of smearing the Constitution
and the Bill of Rights with the blood of a
Negro,” declared an editorial in the left-
wing 
Daily Worker
. “A lynch court
presided over by a lynch judge has gone
through a lynch trial of the 24-year-old
Walter Lee Irvin before an all-white
citizenry, 99 percent of which believed
the defendant guilty. This court differed
only in form from a white-supremacist
mob. Instead of the savage whoops, there
were the prejudiced appeals of Prosecutor
Jesse Hunter.” The newspaper called on


--- PAGE 1226 ---
citizens to swamp Governor Fuller
Warren’s office “with demands for a
pardon to Irvin” and to protest the court’s
action with work stoppages and
demonstrations. The editorial noted, too,
that “not one of the more than 14 bombings
in Florida has produced a defendant.”
After the “lynch trial” in Ocala, Walter
Irvin had been returned by the Marion
County sheriff to Raiford, and to death
row. A 
New York Post
 reporter
interviewed Irvin at the state prison,
where he again wore the gray coveralls
issued to condemned prisoners. Irvin
admitted to no regrets for having refused
the plea deal proposed by the governor.
“I’m not sorry, not even now,” he said.
“Naturally, I would rather have a life


--- PAGE 1227 ---
sentence than the electric chair, but I
thought it wouldn’t be right for me to
plead guilty when I’m not guilty.” The
decision had been his alone, he told the
reporter—“my attorneys didn’t tell me
what to do. They left it up to me”—
although he did ask them “why the state
made that offer. They didn’t know. They
knew the case had lots of publicity and
maybe that was why.” Irvin himself
“thought the state probably thought I was
innocent. I was happy about that, but I told
my attorneys I didn’t think it would be fair
to plead guilty. I would have been telling
a lie on myself.” Even though, as Marshall
had told him, he might be free in eight to
ten years, barring bad behavior, if he
accepted the deal, and despite the fact


--- PAGE 1228 ---
that, if he didn’t, his attorneys “couldn’t
make me a definite promise about what
would happen,” Irvin hadn’t needed time
to think about it. “I knew I was taking a
chance,” he told the 
Post
 reporter, “but if I
had gotten justice like I should have . . .”
Irvin’s voice faded. He did not complete
the thought, but before he was led back to
his cell, he added, “What can I say? I’m
not guilty. And I still believe I have a
chance.” That chance did not materialize
for weeks, for months, as he waited for
word from the NAACP.
By March 6, Florida law enforcement
had made little progress in the
investigation into the murders of Harry T.
Moore and his wife, but in New York City
the “NAACP’s Great Night” benefit to


--- PAGE 1229 ---
honor them was drawing fifteen thousand
people into Madison Square Garden.
Cohosted by Lena Horne and Oscar
Hammerstein II, the gala featured some of
the greatest names in the 1950s
entertainment industry, among them Henry
Fonda, Harry Belafonte, Tallulah
Bankhead, Ed Sullivan, and Jimmy
Durante as well as the NAACP’s own
great Thurgood Marshall. Among the
performances in the program were a
dramatic sketch, “Toll the Liberty Bell,”
which included a piece celebrating
Moore’s life, and “The Ballad of Harry
Moore,” a poem written by Langston
Hughes and set to music by Sammy
Heyward. During the intermission, with
charisma and rhetoric, Franklin Williams,


--- PAGE 1230 ---
who had been flown in from the West
Coast for the occasion, made a dramatic
appeal for funds. The show raised more
than fifty thousand dollars for the NAACP.
Later in the year, Rosa Moore accepted
the 1952 Spingarn Medal, which was
being awarded posthumously to her son,
Harry.
March 1952 also took Thurgood
Marshall back to the South, this time to
Clarendon County in South Carolina,
where he was continuing the battle against
school segregation in 
Briggs v. Elliott
.
The case—built upon the fact that public
spending on the education of white
children totaled four times the amount
allocated to blacks—had already been
argued by Marshall in the U.S. Supreme


--- PAGE 1231 ---
Court, where it had been vacated and
remanded to a three-judge panel in federal
district court in South Carolina. It was
progressing much the way Charlie
Houston had said it would, and the
possibility of public school integration in
the South was moving closer to becoming
a reality. Marshall, as Houston’s disciple
and successor in the education cases that
would ultimately constitute 
Brown v.
Board
, was feeling pressure from within
his own ranks and, more negatively, from
his opponents. For Clarendon County
afforded Marshall no escape from the
atmosphere of menace he had experienced
the month before in the counties of central
Florida. In the postwar forties in the
Clarendon County courthouse, the NAACP


--- PAGE 1232 ---
had tried unsuccessfully to prevent the
state of South Carolina from executing
George Stinney Jr., a ninety-pound
fourteen-year-old boy convicted of
murder. Rushed to the electric chair
within months of his conviction, Stinney
became the youngest person ever to be
executed in the United States in the
twentieth century. Racist sentiment had
scarcely abated by 1952; at the end of the
Briggs
 proceedings in the same county
courthouse Marshall was delivered a stern
warning by one of the opposing white
lawyers: “If you show your black ass in
Clarendon County ever again, you’re a
dead man.”
In April, the executive board of the
NAACP appointed Marshall head of the


--- PAGE 1233 ---
Legal Defense Fund, and the position of
special counsel became director-counsel.
With the change in Marshall’s title came a
change in status for the LDF, which was
established as a subsidiary corporation;
so Walter White was no longer Thurgood
Marshall’s boss. In the summer the LDF
moved into its own offices three blocks
away from NAACP headquarters in
midtown Manhattan. The Times Square
building offered the LDF lawyers more
space, if also a seedy foyer and gated
elevator that reeked of urine. The building
apparently did not provide much security;
on more than one occasion, the staff found
themselves without typewriters, as with
little difficulty burglars could scale the
fire escapes and pry open the windows


--- PAGE 1234 ---
under the cover of night.
Despite its tax-exempt status, the LDF
was always short on funds. As Marshall
said, “We could only move when we had
the money,” and to raise money, the
lawyers frequently went on the road on
speaking tours. Jack Greenberg attributed
the success of this funding program largely
to Marshall’s “charisma,” which the
director-counsel wedded to the charity of
the audiences at the LDF speaking
engagements. Greenberg himself delivered
between ten and twenty fund-raising
speeches every month in the two years
leading up to 
Brown
 in 1954, and
Marshall did more. Apparent to them, as
they prepared the appeals on behalf of
Walter Irvin, was the especial “fund-


--- PAGE 1235 ---
raising and organizing potential” of the
Groveland case. The story of Walter Irvin
and the Groveland Boys riveted audiences
across the country. On one occasion, in
Richmond, Virginia, Greenberg simply
read the statement given by Irvin from his
hospital bed after he’d been shot by
Sheriff McCall and his deputy; it was
punctuated by gasps and sobs among the
fifteen hundred people in the audience.
That Greenberg had to ad-lib when he
realized a page was missing from the text
hardly mattered. The audience was in
every way generous. Ultimately, the
Groveland Boys story accounted for the
LDF’s recovery of a thirty-nine-thousand-
dollar shortfall, but not from the usual
wealthy donors like Marshall Field III or


--- PAGE 1236 ---
from the significant annual donations that
Thurgood was able to garner from
associations like the black Masonic order,
the Prince Hall Masons. Rather, it was
collected from “black people of no great
means” moved by a tale of cumulative
injustice and heroic perseverance.
Throughout the summer and fall of
1952, legal setbacks would continue to
impede LDF progress on Walter Irvin’s
case; his situation would become more
desperate. Marshall had counted more
than twenty errors in the prosecution of the
second Groveland trial, and he had
retained Alex Akerman and Paul Perkins
to handle the appeals. Marshall and his
team of lawyers had decided first to ask
an established, well-connected


--- PAGE 1237 ---
Jacksonville lawyer to file an amicus, or
friend-of-the-court, petition to explore the
legality of procedure when a law
enforcement officer kills a witness for a
defendant in a capital case. In November
1952, the Florida Supreme Court denied
the petition. Greenberg continued
preparing the appeals while at the same
time writing the first draft of the 
Brown
brief.
After the Thanksgiving weekend,
Marshall checked into Washington’s
Statler Hotel; it was the first time that he
had visited the nation’s capital and not
been required by law to stay in Jim Crow
accommodations. He turned his suite into
a war room in advance of his sixteenth
appearance before the Supreme Court.


--- PAGE 1238 ---
Over the next ten days the most prominent
black lawyers in the nation would be
marching in and out of Marshall’s suite as
they helped him prepare for battle in
Briggs v. Elliott
. He was edgy, irritable;
he had been for months. “He’s aged so in
the past five years,” his wife, Buster, had
noted around the time he was working on
the retrial in the Groveland Boys case.
“His disposition’s changed—he’s nervous
now where he used to be calm. This work
is taking its toll of him. You know, it’s a
discouraging job he’s set himself.”
William Hastie, who had hosted the
Marshalls in the Virgin Islands when
Thurgood was recovering from his
mysterious “Virus X” in 1946, noticed that
the lawyer, once again, appeared to be


--- PAGE 1239 ---
exhausted “beyond the limits of the human
anatomy.”
On December 9, Marshall argued
Briggs v. Elliott
 before the U.S. Supreme
Court. Near the end of his argument—to
Greenberg’s surprise, for in Florida he
had seen Jesse Hunter use the same ploy
—Marshall flashed the secret Masonic
distress signal to his fellow Mason,
Justice Robert Jackson, who responded in
kind. Marshall returned to his seat with a
grin.
That same December day, in South
Florida, regarding the Carver Village
bombings in Miami, a federal grand jury
indicted three Ku Klux Klan members for
lying under oath to both the FBI and the
grand jury. Having previously also


--- PAGE 1240 ---
indicted seven Klansmen for perjury in the
matter of the high-speed chase that ran two
NAACP lawyers and two black reporters
out of Lake County, the FBI claimed to be
making progress against KKK violence in
Florida. The murders of Harry T. Moore
and his wife, however, remained
unsolved.
The months had passed into another
year for Walter Irvin on death row.
Depressed as he was for a want of reading
material and a radio in his cell, he still
believed in the chance that lay with
Thurgood Marshall working on his
appeal. Fellow inmates on death row
meanwhile continued to take their last
walk down the corridor to the electric
chair. In June 1953, as Marshall had


--- PAGE 1241 ---
expected, the Florida Supreme Court
reaffirmed the Marion County verdict of
February 14, 1952. While the justices
cited several of Judge Futch’s lax rulings
on prosecutor Jesse Hunter’s “irregular”
and “improper” remarks, they deemed
them to be essentially harmless errors;
they thus did not find them significant
enough to warrant reversal. One month
later, Paul Perkins argued before the
Florida Supreme Court for a stay of
execution, and that, too, was denied,
although the state court did grant the
defense a ninety-day stay in which to
appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The defense team in New York was
otherwise swamped that summer. The
justices of the U.S. Supreme Court were


--- PAGE 1242 ---
requiring more clarity in the five school
segregation cases now included in 
Brown
v. Board
, and had ordered all five of them
to be reargued in terms of the authors’
intent in drafting the equal protection
clause in the Fourteenth Amendment, so as
to determine whether the abolishment of
segregation in public schools fell under
the powers of Congress or indeed of any
federal agency. To build the case,
Marshall enlisted more than two hundred
lawyers and historians nationwide. He
traveled up, down, and across the country
to consult with them in marathon
conferences, and when he returned to New
York, where he met in seminar-style
discussions with his LDF team of lawyers,
prominent associates, and scholarly


--- PAGE 1243 ---
experts, he strove to keep the out-of-town
attorneys and historians abreast of
developments by telephone and telegraph.
No one on Marshall’s legal staff took a
vacation day that summer, or fall;
secretaries not only worked double shifts
but worked them six and seven days a
week—everyone in the LDF offices was
busy making history. Marshall himself
seemed never to leave his desk.
Disheveled, his tie loosened and top shirt
buttons undone, a cigarette dangling from
his lips, he might suggest, come the middle
of the night, “Why don’t we take a fifteen
minute break.” So the scholar John Hope
Franklin, then of Howard University,
remembered on one occasion when they
had worked into the hours of the early


--- PAGE 1244 ---
morning, except that Franklin had left
Marshall to his fifteen minutes in the
office while he stole back to his room at
the Algonquin Hotel and slept through
what was left of the night. He found
Marshall still at his desk the next morning.
Marshall was relying upon historians
like John Hope Franklin and C. Vann
Woodward of Johns Hopkins University
to address the Supreme Court’s concerns
about desegregation and congressional
powers by placing the rationale for 
Brown
convincingly in a social and political
context. The task, Marshall repeatedly
reminded the historians, who were
sometimes given to academic speculation
regarding possible Court opinions, was
solely to “present a case so persuasive


--- PAGE 1245 ---
that the Court would be compelled to rule
in our favor.” To that end, Marshall had
his LDF team introduce research from
psychologist Kenneth Clark’s study of the
effects of segregation on the mental
attitudes of black children, as in his “doll
test,” into the 
Brown v. Board of
Education
 brief and summation. (Clark’s
research confirmed what Marshall had
himself concluded from conversations
with black children, as when he’d ask
boys what they wanted to be when they
grew up and—heartbreakingly, to
Marshall—even the brightest among them
would reply, “I’m going to be a good
butler” or “I hope I might be able to get in
the post office.”) For months Marshall’s
team worked and reworked the 
Brown


--- PAGE 1246 ---
brief. They incorporated the results of
their legal research with those of the
historians’ examination of political and
social issues germane to the case; they
supported arguments with sociological
data and the evidence of Clark’s
psychological studies. They produced, in
235 pages, a manifesto for equality, its
language, depth, and persuasiveness
exceeding all expectations, said Franklin.
Another historian noted, “It deserves a
place in the literature of advocacy.”
Hours before day dawned on December
7, 1953, blacks were lining up outside the
Supreme Court in the hope of witnessing
history being made. The morning had
broken cold when Thurgood Marshall
arrived with his wife and mother, Buster


--- PAGE 1247 ---
and Norma, who were escorted to their
reserved seats. Marshall sat in the well of
the court. Before oral arguments began, he
glanced over the team of NAACP lawyers
who for months, for years, had worked
assiduously on the five education cases in
Brown v. Board of Education
, and: “I
realized there wasn’t a single one of them
who hadn’t been touched by Charlie
Houston. Either taught by him, or friendly
with him, or guided in their careers by
him. Every one of them, including me.” To
Charlie Houston, his mentor and friend,
Marshall might have dedicated this day—
their day—in court.
For three days Marshall and his lawyers
argued 
Brown
; they were not expecting a
decision until the spring. In January 1954,


--- PAGE 1248 ---
however, they did have word from the
Supreme Court regarding another matter:
Walter Irvin’s appeal had been denied; the
Court had declined to hear the Groveland
case. Jack Greenberg had thought the
illegal search and seizure of Irvin’s pants
and shoes might have supported a reversal
of the verdict (it would have seven years
later, when the Court determined that a
defendant could not be convicted by
illegally obtained evidence), had not
Dellia Irvin testified that she had retrieved
the evidence in question and given it to
Deputy James Yates. Greenberg filed a
petition for rehearing the Groveland case
,
which the Court also denied. Irvin’s
lawyers had no further judicial recourse to
pursue. They could only focus now on


--- PAGE 1249 ---
staying the date of Walter Irvin’s
execution.
The Supreme Court, Marshall knew
better than most, could be wildly
unpredictable, especially in criminal
cases. He had argued thirty-two cases
before the Court, and though he had lost
only three decisions over his career, two
of them had been death penalty cases. The
third had been the 1944 
Lyons v.
Oklahoma
 case, in which the black
sharecropper W. D. Lyons confessed to
murder after being repeatedly beaten and
then presented with a pan of the infant
victim’s charred bones. Marshall had
prepared the brief for the case with
William Hastie, and Marshall himself had
established the precedent regarding


--- PAGE 1250 ---
coerced confessions in criminal trials four
years earlier, when he had argued
Chambers v. Florida
 before the Supreme
Court. He had every reason to believe he
stood on solid ground for a reversal. Yet
the Court had upheld Lyons’s conviction.
There was speculation that Justice
William O. Douglas, who had till then
consistently voted to reverse in coerced
confession cases, might have cast his vote
to let the conviction stand because it was
possible that he might be chosen to be
Franklin D. Roosevelt’s vice presidential
running mate and he wanted, therefore, not
to offend the Southern wing of the
Democratic Party. Or, as the Supreme
Court had done in cases before 
Lyons
, it
might have upheld the Oklahoma court’s


--- PAGE 1251 ---
decision to credit the state for the progress
it had made in the conduct of criminal
trials involving race. After all, the
defendant had not been rushed to trial, he
had not been sentenced to death, and he
had certainly been represented by
competent counsel. Nonetheless, Marshall
found the Court’s decision to be
wrongheaded. Over the next decade, he
continued to pressure the state for Lyons’s
early parole. He also corresponded with
Lyons in prison and sent Lyons money
from his own wallet.
On May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court
announced its unanimous decision in the
most important civil rights case of the
twentieth century. The Court had found,
just as Charles Hamilton Houston and


--- PAGE 1252 ---
Thurgood Marshall had observed on their
tour of the South twenty years earlier, that
“separate educational facilities are
inherently unequal.” State laws that
established separate public schools for
blacks and whites were thus ruled
unconstitutional, in violation of the equal
protection clause in the Fourteenth
Amendment.
The ruling was just cause for
celebration in the LDF’s New York
offices. Champagne flowed. The staff was
boisterous; the din and laughter were
thunderous. Marshall playfully chided
Walter White for taking the credit for the
abolishment of segregation in public
schools. The party moved on to the Blue
Ribbon, where lawyers and staff and


--- PAGE 1253 ---
consultants toasted each other and
Marshall with dark beer as they shared
platters of pigs’ knuckles with their
director-counsel. Thurgood’s wife did not
attend—she’d been ill and sometimes
bedridden the past few months with chest
pains and a persistent viral infection in the
lungs—and in the early morning hours,
when the party was breaking up, more than
one of Marshall’s colleagues noticed that
he had left the Blue Ribbon with Cecilia
Suyat, Gloster Current’s secretary.
“Thurgood was very discreet about his
affairs,” said John Aubrey Davis, an
academic researcher who had worked on
Brown
. “There was never an example of it
except at the victory celebration. He was
leaving with Cissy. . . . That was the first


--- PAGE 1254 ---
time I’d ever seen any indication that she
wasn’t just another worker there.”
The victory was not celebrated in the
South. The 
Brown
 ruling triggered a
resurgence of Ku Klux Klan activity and
White Citizens’ Council activism,
whereby “respectable citizens” joined
together to exert economic pressures
against local individuals and
organizations that either supported
desegregation or did not openly oppose it.
In Lake County, an editorial by Mabel
Norris Reese praising Thurgood Marshall
and the Supreme Court’s decision was not
inconsequential. The opposition planted a
burning cross on her front lawn, smeared
“KKK” in red paint across her office
windows, and poisoned the family dog


--- PAGE 1255 ---
with strychnine.
Ironically, for all the briefs that the LDF
lawyers had filed on the Groveland case
over the past five years and for all the
appearances Marshall had made in the
Supreme Court as well as in Florida
county courthouses in the attempt of the
NAACP to save the life of Walter Irvin, it
was Marshall’s 
Brown
 victory in
Washington that incidentally set in motion
a sequence of events in Florida, which, as
it happened, gave the Groveland boy his
best chance of escaping the electric chair.
For the
 Brown
 decision infuriated Willis
McCall, both in itself and all the more
because the case’s celebrated, winning
lawyers were the very same who had
descended on Lake County and had as


--- PAGE 1256 ---
much as called its sheriff a cold-blooded
murderer. Not that he’d allow them to
intimidate him, or their Supreme Court
decision to determine how he would
maintain law and order in his domain.
Streams were going dry and farms to
ruin in the South Carolina drought of
1954, so in the spring Allan Platt decided
to move his family south, to Mount Dora
in Lake County, Florida, where his brother
helped him find work picking oranges. He
and his wife, Laura, enrolled their five
children in the white public school, only
to discover they were not white enough.
The school did not ignore the complaints
of parents expressing concerns that the
brown-skinned Platt children might be
Negroes; instead, the principal reported


--- PAGE 1257 ---
the complaints to the county sheriff. So it
happened that Sheriff Willis McCall,
accompanied by the school principal, paid
a visit to the Platts’ residence, where he
conducted his own anthropological
investigation. He lined the five children
up against the wall, and peering down
over his glasses, one by one, he studied
them. “You know, he favors a nigger,” he
decided, thus dispensing with seventeen-
year-old Denzell; as for thirteen-year-old
Laura Belle, “I don’t like the shape of that
one’s nose”—and in as many minutes as
children he determined that all five
children were indeed Negroes. Despite
Allan Platt’s claims to Irish and American
Indian descent, and unconvinced by birth
certificates as well as a marriage license


--- PAGE 1258 ---
which designated the Platts as “white,”
McCall ordered the children to be kept out
of school, pending further investigation.
Platt’s objections fell on deaf ears. If
there was one thing Willis McCall could
do, he bragged, it was identify both
“Black Angus cattle and mulattoes.”
“The sheriff is the law here,” school
officials responded when the Platts
protested the sheriff’s dictum. So, too,
Mabel Norris Reese reported in a series
of articles that would ultimately earn her a
Pulitzer Prize nomination and continuing
coverage in 
Time
 magazine. Taking up the
Platts’ cause, Reese also renewed her old
feud with Sheriff McCall. “If the children
never see the inside of another school,
they will not go to a Negro school,” Allan


--- PAGE 1259 ---
Platt told Reese. For his family had no
association with blacks; they had attended
only white churches, and his grandfather
had fought for the Confederacy in the Civil
War. Furthermore, the Platts were legally
designated as “white,” though some
documents indicated, too, a Croatan Indian
ancestry—which, McCall was quick to
point out, was defined by Webster’s
dictionary as a line of “people of mixed
Indian, white and Negro ancestry.”
McCall spouted, and Reese’s articles
spurred sixty-five pupils at the Mount
Dora school to sign a petition stating that
the Platt children’s “right to an education
has been taken away because of the
opinions and prejudice of one man.” The
next day, when school opened, the


--- PAGE 1260 ---
children found a chalk line running down
the middle of the sidewalk; one side was
marked “White People,” the other “Nigger
Lovers.” One child who had signed the
petition was stoned with pebbles. A
deputy meanwhile visited the Platts with a
message from the sheriff’s office “that if
they weren’t out by that night, their house
would be burned down.”
In the summer of 1954, the outspoken
Willis V. McCall was named a director of
the National Association for the
Advancement of White People, which
devoted itself primarily to the advocacy of
racial segregation. At a rally in Delaware
organized by NAAWP founder Bryant
Bowles, the sheriff from Lake County was
introduced to a crowd of five thousand


--- PAGE 1261 ---
segregationists as an “expert” in race
relations and “a man who knows how to
handle Negroes.” Decrying the 
Brown
decision, McCall urged everyone in
attendance to “go to it” in their opposition
to integration. On his return to Lake
County he told one newspaper, “I for one,
am going to do all I can to forestall such a
movement. I am one who, instead of sitting
around grumbling about these agitators,
goes into action. We need more action and
not so much wishie-washie grumbling.”
News of the sheriff’s call for “action”
soon reached Thurgood Marshall in New
York, and immediately the NAACP fired
off a telegram to Florida’s acting
governor, Charley Johns, requesting that
he remove McCall from office. Johns


--- PAGE 1262 ---
responded by telling reporters that
McCall’s speech was “ill-advised” but
adding that “I have no grounds to remove
him.” The partners may have changed, but
for fifteen years the dance Marshall had
been stepping with Florida governors had
remained the same, and they were still
stepping on his toes. Only Charley Johns
stomped. Johns had become Florida’s
acting governor when Dan McCarty died
suddenly of a heart attack in September
1953, and Johns had since lost in the
Democratic primary to LeRoy Collins,
who was running unopposed in the 1954
special election. On November 1, the eve
of that election, the acting governor, the
“hog and hominy” segregationist from
North Florida, with two months more to


--- PAGE 1263 ---
serve, attended to what for him was a
more pressing matter of business. He
signed the death warrant of Walter Irvin.
The execution was set for Monday
morning, November 8.
The NAACP at once petitioned the
Florida Supreme Court for a stay of
execution in light of “new evidence,”
specifically that Dr. Geoffrey Binneveld,
the physician who had examined Norma
Padgett after the alleged rape, would have
testified, had he been called as a witness,
that Padgett “had not been” assaulted.
Florida assistant attorney general Reeves
Bowen scoffed at the request; he accused
the NAACP of sitting idly by “till the last
tick of the clock” before bringing the
appeal to Tallahassee. The court refused


--- PAGE 1264 ---
to grant a stay.
Thurgood Marshall had no other
options; he knew what he had to do. He’d
done it before, stopped an execution at a
last, heart-in-the-throat moment. Except
that he had been unable to locate Chief
Justice Fred Vinson anywhere—not at
home or at any of his haunts around
Washington. Then he got a tip: a room
number at the Statler Hilton, two blocks
from the White House. He busted in. The
chief justice was playing cards, Vinson v.
Truman.
“How did you find me?” Vinson asked.
“I can’t tell you,” Marshall said, sliding
the brief toward the justice.
Vinson’s eyes skimmed the pages; time
mattered. He waved the brief at Marshall.


--- PAGE 1265 ---
“Can you vouch for this being true?”
“Yes, sir. I wrote it,” Marshall replied.
President Truman watched in silence.
Marshall waited, his breath held. Vinson
lowered the brief to the table; he picked
up his pen.
“I’ll tell you one thing, if you’ve got
guts enough to break in on this, I’ve got
guts enough to sign it,” said Vinson,
passing the brief back to Marshall.
It was late in the evening, Saturday,
November 6, three years to the day since
Walter Irvin had been lying in a ditch with
a gun pressed at his neck—
“This nigger
is not dead”
—not yet—but in less than
two days he would be taking his last walk,
down the corridor of Flat Top to Florida’s
Old Sparky, unless . . .


--- PAGE 1266 ---
Marshall managed to track down Justice
Hugo Black, who submitted the signed
brief to the Court at a conference of
justices. The last-minute stay gave
Marshall twelve days to prepare for the
meeting of the Supreme Court on
November 20, when the justices would
again decide whether or not to grant a
review of Irvin’s conviction. In the forty-
five days between then and January 4,
when Governor-elect LeRoy Collins took
office, Marshall had no doubt that
Governor Charley Johns would deliver
Irvin to the electric chair the first chance
he got. Nor did Marshall doubt that if he
could somehow stretch out the judicial
process until Johns had vacated the
statehouse in Tallahassee, the likelihood


--- PAGE 1267 ---
that he could rescue Irvin from execution
would increase significantly.
An affable man at forty-five, the
Tallahassee lawyer LeRoy Collins came
from “Old Florida,” and like most
Southern politicians, he condemned the
Brown
 decision. Even though Marshall
did not yet know what to expect from
Collins, he knew too well where Johns
stood. On November 20, Marshall made a
fourth appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court,
which agreed to review Irvin’s
conviction. Florida had thirty days to
reply, at which time the Court would
decide whether to hear the case for
argument and opinion. Marshall had reset
the clock ticking off the time between
Irvin and the electric chair. Better yet, he


--- PAGE 1268 ---
had gotten Charley Johns’s hand off the
switch.
Another clock was ticking at 409
Edgecombe. Buster came home from the
hospital for Thanksgiving. She and the
doctors had kept the bad news from
Thurgood, but time now was short. The
chest pains, the virus: it was cancer.
Remorseful, reproaching himself for the
constant travel, the cases, the endless
hours at the LDF offices, the indiscretions,
Marshall took a leave of absence from the
NAACP. He barricaded himself in the
apartment, and at Buster’s bedside,
attentive and tender, Thurgood spent the
final weeks in the quarter century of their
marriage: a marriage that may have years
ago lost its intimacy but that had never


--- PAGE 1269 ---
wanted for love. Suffering with her, as if
he could suffer for her, Thurgood pined.
His body seemed to be mirroring hers.
“He had become cadaverous,” Jack
Greenberg observed on one of Marshall’s
rare visits at the office. In midwinter, on
February 11, 1955, her forty-fourth
birthday, Vivian “Buster” Burey left
Marshall. It had been nearly ten years ago
that she had traveled with Thurgood to the
Virgin Islands when he was recuperating
from his mysterious illness. Marshall had
not taken a vacation since. The NAACP
sent him on a cruise, all expenses paid,
and Marshall—“morose and unhappy . . .
in very bad shape,” as Greenberg noted—
sailed sadly off to Mexico.


--- PAGE 1270 ---
U
NLIKE ANY OTHER
 state in the Deep
South, Florida was undergoing a large-
scale, transformative demographic shift in
the mid-fifties. From the end of World
War II until LeRoy Collins took office in
January 1955, industrial activity in the
United States had increased by nearly 11
percent; in Florida it was up more than 50
percent. During Collins’s first year as
governor, more than five million tourists
would visit the Sunshine State, and from
1950 to 1960 Florida’s population would
grow by almost 80 percent. The state was
enjoying an economic boom that stood, as
Collins said, on “three sturdy legs.
Tourism. Industry. Agriculture.”
At Collins’s inauguration on January 4,


--- PAGE 1271 ---
thousands gathered at Capital Park in
Tallahassee to hear the address of the
newly sworn-in thirty-third governor of
Florida. Conservative politicians shifted
uncomfortably in their seats under the
bright sun when Collins adopted a
combative tone and promised that the days
of a “ward-heeling, back-scratching, self-
promoting political system” were over.
“Government, too, must have qualities of
the spirit,” Collins told the crowd. “Truth
and justice and fairness and unselfish
service are some of these. Without these
qualities there is no worthwhile
leadership, and we grapple and grope in a
moral wilderness.”
Marshall took notice. He made sure that
a new host of letters and telegrams,


--- PAGE 1272 ---
thousands of them, brought the case of
Walter Irvin to the new governor’s
attention when he took up his post.
Marshall had also enlisted Tom Harris,
the executive editor of the 
St. Petersburg
Times
, in the cause. The 
Times
’s coverage
of the original Groveland Boys trial had
drawn the ire of Willis McCall for having
the gall to question the evidence against
the defendants, and once again the
newspaper began publishing articles and
editorials questioning procedures and
protocol in the court. 
Times
 reporters who
had worked diligently on the case, the
paper noted, “were never convinced of the
guilt of the four defendants” and indeed
believed that the defense had shown more
than enough reasonable doubt. Thus, the


--- PAGE 1273 ---
Times  argued, the situation now called for
“compassion and calm judgment,” and in
the event that the courts should in time
discover the four defendants not to have
been guilty of rape, the best way to ensure
justice would be to commute Irvin’s
sentence to life imprisonment.
One week after LeRoy Collins took
office, the U.S. Supreme Court declined
Marshall’s fourth appeal on behalf of
Walter Lee Irvin. Among the letters that
continued to pour into the governor’s
office in support of Irvin were two letters
from the prosecution in the case. A letter
from Sam Buie, the assistant state
attorney, urged the governor, now that he
was free to issue a death warrant, to “get
rid of this case once and for all.” It was


--- PAGE 1274 ---
not the first time Buie had attempted to
influence the case outside the courtroom.
In November 1951, only weeks after
McCall had shot the two Groveland boys,
Buie had a shocking story to tell, and he
chose a high-ranking NAACP officer in
Ocala to tell it to. Jesse Hunter, Buie told
the officer, was so livid with Marshall
after the lawyer attempted to disqualify
him from prosecuting the second
Groveland Boys trial that Hunter entered
into a conspiracy with Willis McCall to
kill Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin. It
was Hunter’s pride, Buie said of his boss,
that “caused him to plot this killing with
McCall.”
Marshall was immediately notified of
the alleged conspiracy and saw right


--- PAGE 1275 ---
through Buie’s ploy. He suspected that by
tipping off the NAACP, Buie was doing
the bidding of his friend Willis McCall,
who was “trying to drag Hunter into this
killing.” Marshall was convinced that
Hunter was not involved in such a plot
because by that time, Hunter had himself,
through Mabel Norris Reese, been
keeping the NAACP informed on the
FBI’s investigation into McCall’s
shooting of the Groveland Boys.
Unlike Sam Buie, State Attorney Jesse
Hunter made no argument for speedy
execution. Hunter’s letter to Collins
focused instead on the chaos that had
erupted in Lake County, with the KKK and
members of the National Association for
the Advancement of White People


--- PAGE 1276 ---
breaking into targeted homes and
threatening the occupants while their mobs
huddled menacingly outside the door, all
under the permissive eye of Sheriff Willis
McCall.
Hunter’s health had worsened since the
last Groveland trial. Still, leukemia had
not taken the battle entirely out of him. It
was Mabel Norris Reese who reported to
her seventy-five-year-old friend the recent
plight of Allan Platt. While Platt and his
family had managed to resist the bullying
of Sheriff McCall and his deputy’s threat
of arson, their landlady had not. A visit
from the sheriff had convinced her to evict
the Platts, out of concern, as she told Platt,
that the “house might catch fire.” Hunter
decided that Sheriff McCall was “out of


--- PAGE 1277 ---
control,” and on behalf of the Platts, the
former prosecutor sued the Lake County
School Board. On his own money he
traveled to South Carolina to obtain
documents necessary to support the Platts’
claims, and in court, demanding that the
board produce evidence to prove
conclusively that the Platt children had
Negro blood, he left the school board’s
unsupported and insupportable case in
shreds. “Much as I hate it,” said the judge,
Truman Futch, he had no choice but to rule
in favor of the Platts, who in October
1955 won the right to return to the white
public school. “The Lord be praised,”
said Allan Platt, near tears. “I knew it
couldn’t be any other way.”
The verdict did not please Sheriff


--- PAGE 1278 ---
McCall any more than did Jesse Hunter’s
apparently blossoming friendship with the
“Communist” reporter for the 
Mount Dora
Topic
. “I have no comment to make
whatsoever,” McCall told reporters.
“Absolutely no comment.” He did have a
comment for Allan Platt, though, a few
days later when a band of “night-riding
terrorists” firebombed the Platts’ home.
McCall’s investigation turned up
footprints at the scene that, the sheriff
informed Platt, could have been made by
some high school boys who “didn’t want
to go to school with burrheads.” McCall
then placed the blame for all harassment,
threats, and violence aimed at the Platts,
not to mention the embarrassment brought
upon the Lake County School Board, on


--- PAGE 1279 ---
Platt himself, as he had instigated the
whole series of events by contacting
Mabel Norris Reese. “I’ve got more
justice from Mrs. Reese than I have from
you,” Platt told the sheriff.
Again the Platt family had been forced
from their home, and the children from
their school; eventually they were invited
to enroll in a private school in Mount
Dora. Jesse Hunter publicly and strongly
criticized McCall not only for failing to
protect the Platts but also for telling
reporters that the Lake County Sheriff’s
Department had no cause or intent to
protect them. The former prosecutor also,
and again, contacted Governor Collins.
“Disturbed” by reports like Hunter’s, the
governor issued a statement:


--- PAGE 1280 ---
“Lawlessness of this kind in Lake County
has just got to stop. Not only are the rights
of the individuals involved but the good
name of this fine county and of the state is
put in jeopardy.” Sheriff McCall remained
undeterred. At a meeting of the Lions Club
not long after the firebombing of the
Platts’ house, he announced, “In my book,
they’re still mulattoes. This only proves
that there are some people who will stoop
to integrate our schools.”
In New York Marshall had been
following the press coverage of the Platt
case, and he took particular interest in the
coverage by Mabel Norris Reese. That
Reese had once called for honor to be
avenged in the rape of Norma Padgett and
declared Lake County a racial paradise,


--- PAGE 1281 ---
and that she had lost all regard for the
sheriff of that county, attested to the human
capacity to change. No longer able, after
the sheriff’s shooting of the two
Groveland defendants, to turn a blind eye
to the racism and white supremacy in her
own backyard, she had tipped off the
NAACP about the last bullet found in the
sand, and she had since kept the New
York office informed, through
intermediaries, of what she learned further
about the case from Jesse Hunter. Hunter
himself, it appeared, had begun to rethink
the entire Groveland Boys matter, “due
chiefly to the influence of Thurgood
Marshall,” according to Reese. Hunter
may have even begun to regret the “sacred
duty” that compelled him, a man stricken


--- PAGE 1282 ---
with a fatal disease, to win his last capital
case in Lake County at the cost of Walter
Irvin’s life.
I
N HIS FIRST
 year as governor, LeRoy
Collins took countless “Florida selling”
trips to New York, where he chased
manufacturing deals, the construction of
atomic energy plants, and insurance
company relocations. He was, as 
Time
magazine observed, “an indefatigable
salesman of his state boom.” The last thing
Collins wanted to see, then, was a New
York newspaper headline asking, “Is
There Negro Blood on Your Grapefruit?”
Not only would bad press cost the state a
tremendous loss in agricultural and


--- PAGE 1283 ---
manufacturing dollars; it would also stem
the flow of money from Northern tourists
and winter residents, whose seasonal
migrations had prompted a boom in
housing and construction. Neither an
advertisement nor an asset for the
Sunshine State were trigger-happy sheriffs
and bomb-planting, torch-wielding mobs
in white robes and hoods.
With letter-writing campaigns and
newspaper stories rekindling interest in
the Groveland Boys case and the plight of
Walter Irvin, Thurgood Marshall turned to
a friend, a former president of the
NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund, Allan
Knight Chalmers, for additional purchase.
A highly respected white minister who
had chaired the Scottsboro Defense


--- PAGE 1284 ---
Committee in the 1930s, for seventeen
years Chalmers had negotiated tirelessly
with the state of Alabama until all nine
defendants had gained their freedom. At
the time of the first Groveland Boys trial,
Chalmers had participated in the
investigation into the case by the
Committee of 100, and he had come away
convinced that the defendants were
innocent. In 1955, when Marshall
contacted him in regard to the fate of
Walter Irvin, Chalmers was teaching at
Boston University, where he was
mentoring a young student named Martin
Luther King Jr. In Chalmers, Marshall saw
the kind of man by whom LeRoy Collins
might be persuaded to favorably address
Walter Irvin’s situation, as Collins


--- PAGE 1285 ---
appeared to be a man moved by words
and ideas. Moreover, Chalmers’s 1951
book, 
They Shall Be Free
, struck chords
that Collins had also touched upon in his
inaugural address, as in Chalmers’s call
for “effective action” in what Collins
would name a “moral wilderness”:
There are enough staid people in the
world holding things as they are. We
need no more of them. What we need
is people caught by the truth that no
one is free when anyone is bound.
That is not an easy idea to have get
a hold on you. It has to be applied
person by person, not just in the
pious generalities of the resolutions
good people pass when they gather
for a moment and separate without


--- PAGE 1286 ---
effective action.
Marshall’s request produced a letter to
clergymen in which Chalmers called for
their support of clemency in the case of
Walter Irvin: what Chalmers described as
a “desperate situation.” In the letter, too,
he cited a Florida newspaper that, in the
same day’s edition, covered Irvin’s
impending date with death in one article
and in another reported that a thirty-year-
old white man had been fined a hundred
dollars in the rape of a fourteen-year-old
black girl. The coincidence hardly spoke
to the “truth and justice and fairness”
Collins espoused in his inaugural address.
The governor did act upon the case, if
without fanfare or even an inside-page
notice in the newspaper. Shortly after


--- PAGE 1287 ---
taking office, Collins initiated a secret
investigation into the Groveland Boys
case by his personal friend Bill Harris, a
Tallahassee lawyer. What Collins wanted
was an objective, detailed, fact-based
report; so, to obviate any social or
political fallout for either Harris or the
governor’s office, Collins assured Harris,
who would be acting only in an advisory
capacity, without a fee, that the report
would not be made public. A thorough
review of the evidence and the testimony
left Harris unconvinced that the Padgetts
had been able to positively identify the
Groveland boys. More apparent was the
failure of the state to utilize procedures
available for valid scientific analysis of
the pants stains, footprints, and tire tracks


--- PAGE 1288 ---
that “could have nailed this case down
and removed any reasonable doubt.” At
issue, too, was the lack of any medical
evidence to support the rape charges.
Harris more than doubted the validity of
the prosecution’s time line; he rejected it,
for how could the gun in Charles
Greenlee’s possession have been used in
the crime when Greenlee was already in
custody nearly twenty miles away from the
scene of the alleged rape? Neither did
Harris accept the findings of the coroner’s
jury, which concluded that Sheriff Willis
McCall was justified in the shooting of
Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin. In his
report Harris stated that the shooting was
“in its best light an act of gross and willful
negligence, and in its possible


--- PAGE 1289 ---
interpretation an act of criminal
negligence.”
Seeded further by the likes of Chalmers
and the Committee of 100, the storm of
letters and telegrams to the governor’s
office did not abate. Clergymen pleaded
for clemency. Tourists vowed never to
spend another penny in the Sunshine State.
Florida residents expressed shame at the
sanctioned inhumanity of Irvin’s case. But
other voices decried any attempt by
committees or agencies or associations to
alter the status quo either in Florida or in
the case of Walter Irvin. In a letter to
Governor Collins from U.S. Attorney
Herbert Phillips, who had angered the
U.S. Justice Department and the FBI in
1950 when he failed to take action,


--- PAGE 1290 ---
despite “substantial evidence . . . that the
victims were beaten and tortured” by
members of the Lake County Sheriff’s
Department, the avowed segregationist—
Phillips bristled at the mere mention of
Thurgood Marshall’s name—wrote:
“Since I am your personal friend and
desire that the NAACP shall not prove
itself more powerful than our courts . . . I
see no reason why the leaders of the
NAACP and those who follow their
leadership should expect you . . . [to be]
setting aside the verdict of guilt of two
juries, the judgment and sentence of the
Circuit Judge, the two decisions of the
Supreme Court of Florida, and the
decision of the U.S. Supreme Court,
upholding and affirming the death sentence


--- PAGE 1291 ---
imposed on Irvin.”
Inhumanity, shame, virulence,
segregationism—none of it aligned with
the governor’s personal vision for his
state. Within months of each other, LeRoy
Collins and Thurgood Marshall appeared
on the cover of 
Time
 magazine in 1955,
but the two men had more in common than
political celebrity. Collins, who stood
among the first of the “New South”
politicians, and Marshall, who was
emerging as the architect of a new
America, both championed the cause of
racial justice, no matter its political
inexpediency, and both men would
become leading, outspoken opponents of
the death penalty in the United States.
Marshall would later say, “In recognizing


--- PAGE 1292 ---
the humanity of our fellow beings, we pay
ourselves the highest tribute.” More
bluntly, Collins would declare the death
penalty to be “Florida’s gutter of shame.”
He might have said the same of the racial
injustices that had for too long defined the
social tenor of the conservative Old
South, although in his gubernatorial
campaign he himself had opposed
desegregation. “I realized we had to
change,” Collins said after he had read
those letters and telegrams, for without
change he could not achieve the new
Florida that he had envisioned in his
inaugural address: a Florida that could
“offer to the people of the world the finest
investment on earth—a place in the sun.”
Memorable among the thousands of


--- PAGE 1293 ---
letters, and moving as well as suasive,
was one that Collins received from Jesse
Hunter. The prosecutor of the Groveland
Boys related how he and Thurgood
Marshall had reached an agreement
whereby Irvin would receive a life
sentence in exchange for a guilty plead,
but subsequently, after a lengthy
conference, Marshall had informed the
state attorney that the defendant insisted he
was innocent and refused to plead
otherwise. Hunter then recounted for the
governor the details of the private meeting
he’d had three months before the retrial,
on the morning of November 7, 1951,
when he had slipped past Deputy James
Yates at Waterman Memorial Hospital
and stepped into the guarded room. In the


--- PAGE 1294 ---
hospital bed, barely conscious, with a red
tube taped to his face, lay Walter Irvin, the
defendant he had already once sent to the
electric chair and the man whom Hunter
had noticed was still alive the night
before. The man’s chances of recovery
were uncertain, as Hunter had suspected
—that was why he had driven to the
hospital at the crack of dawn. The two
men briefly discussed Irvin’s condition,
and Irvin told the prosecutor he believed
that he was going to die. Hunter sensed an
opportunity: “Confess to the rape,” he
whispered, promising Irvin that anything
he said would be confidential and not ever
be used against him. “For my satisfaction
alone,” Hunter added. And waited, until:
“No . . . I’m not guilty,” Irvin rasped.


--- PAGE 1295 ---
To Collins, Hunter’s intent in the letter
was clear. After his bedside conversation
with Irvin, the ailing state attorney had
confided to Mabel Norris Reese that he
had doubts concerning Irvin’s guilt. Yet
the prosecutor in him would not allow him
to quit on the case and the chance of a
second conviction. Now, seventy-six
years old, leukemic, his health failing, the
former prosecutor was striving to clear
his conscience, to do what was right—to
persuade Governor LeRoy Collins to
commute Walter Irvin’s death sentence.
Hunter’s intent was clear to Willis
McCall as well, and it rankled the sheriff
even more than the Supreme Court’s
reversal of the first Groveland Boys
verdict. After meeting with the governor,


--- PAGE 1296 ---
McCall sent Collins a letter of his own, in
which he tried to explain away the former
prosecutor’s change of heart as “a
demonstration of senility . . . greatly
influenced by a radical female editor who
in the opinion of many citizens in this
county has pink leaning in her editorials.”
In the letter McCall argued further, with
a parting shot at Thurgood Marshall and
his New York lawyers, that commutation
of Irvin’s sentence to life “would only be
a victory for NAACP who has set out to
destroy the authority of our courts, as it is
an undisputable fact that they are the ones
behind this movement. Should they
accomplish this goal, it would mean one
thing. That all a Negro criminal would
need to do would be to pick out some


--- PAGE 1297 ---
innocent helpless white woman as a target
to satisfy his ravishing sexual desires,
keep his mouth shut, proclaim his
innocence and let NAACP furnish the
money and lawyers to beat the rap.
Governor, at this time I have great
confidence in you as a deep thinking man,
I am praying that you will see fit to let the
verdict of the Court stand and keep our
great State safe for our fair womanhood.
This obligation we owe to our children.”
The sheriff’s argument might have
persuaded Collins’s predecessors, Fuller
Warren and Charley Johns, but the New
South governor had no ear for still more
racially motivated cries for blood and
vengeance. Collins was persuaded more
soundly by Bill Harris’s less biased


--- PAGE 1298 ---
report, which by the way showed Willis
McCall’s fingerprints to be all over the
Groveland Boys case. From the start,
McCall had wanted the four Groveland
boys dead, and he had proved himself
ready to execute them himself if the state
of Florida hadn’t the stomach for it.
Mabel Norris Reese had no stomach for
it, or for the renegade sheriff of Lake
County. Neither did Jesse Hunter any
longer. Eventually in the matter of
Groveland, and in the Platt case, both
Reese and Hunter had stood up to McCall
at the risk of their families and their
property, as had Harry T. Moore, whose
protests of injustice had cost him and his
wife their lives. Like Collins himself,
Reese and Hunter had been willfully blind


--- PAGE 1299 ---
to the issues of race in Florida, and
Collins, like them, had “realized we had
to change.”
Governor Collins was close to his
decision on the Irvin matter when, on
September 21, 1955, a petition came
across his desk. It came bound in a well-
traveled book that apparently had made its
way around Lake County about five years
before, when a young woman had
circulated it. A poet, an activist, a
supporter of world peace, an opponent of
capital punishment (and a private
investigator with the Owens Detective
Agency in Miami)—she’d roused some
curiosity and no alarm. No one knew quite
what to make of her, with her peace pin
and her farm dresses. She was friendly


--- PAGE 1300 ---
enough, a harmless sort of girl and maybe
a little naïve, and she seemed to know the
Bible. She talked a lot about justice and
the death penalty. She was collecting
signatures in her book, “to abolish capital
punishment.” She’d gotten hundreds of
them—it wasn’t many, she knew—no
matter that people like Willis McCall
tried to shoo her away. Most people,
though, listened to what she had to say.
Simple people, hardworking farmers and
housewives, they invited her into their
weatherworn shacks scattered around the
Bay Lake swampland; they offered her
meals and a place to stay. They might feel
strongly against the blacks, but they firmly
believed, and said so, that capital
punishment was wrong. God-fearing


--- PAGE 1301 ---
country Baptists, they knew that by their
deeds and tenets they, too, would be
judged someday. The girl believed that
every signature was important, that each
could make a difference, and that
collectively the signatures could change a
mind or bestow mercy or realize a truth
that people had not yet dared to speak: the
pen was a mighty instrument.
The book lay open on the governor’s
desk. It had come to Collins from the
well-known Reverend Ben F. Wyland, the
leader of a group of fifty churches in the
state of Florida. Idly the governor flipped
through the pages of the petition as he
pondered whether to spare the life of
Walter Irvin. A signature caught his eye.
There, on the page before him, among the


--- PAGE 1302 ---
hundreds of Lake County residents
declaring in the strokes of a pen their
opposition to capital punishment, he read:
“Norma Tyson Padgett.”


--- PAGE 1303 ---
Epilogue
(Library of Congress, Prints &
Photographs Division, Visual Materials
from the NAACP Records)


--- PAGE 1304 ---
T
HE STATE,”
 
Governor
 LeRoy Collins
said, “did not walk that extra mile—did
not establish the guilt of Walter Lee Irvin
in an absolute and conclusive manner.”
Collins’s 
decision
 to commute Irvin’s
sentence, he told reporters, had been
weighted heavily by a letter from former
state attorney Jesse Hunter, which had
reinforced the governor’s own feelings
about the case. He explained, “My
conscience told me it was a bad case,
badly handled, badly tried and now, on
this bad performance, I was asked to take
a man’s life. My conscience would not let
me do it.” On the basis of Hunter’s letter
and the findings in Bill Harris’s
investigation, not to discount the presence


--- PAGE 1305 ---
of Norma Lee Padgett’s signature on a
petition proposing the abolition of capital
punishment, Collins had led the State
Pardon Board to a unanimous approval of
the Groveland boy’s “long-pending plea
for clemency.”
Probably in an effort to offset the
inevitable political consequences of his
decision, Collins, who had that week been
featured on the cover of 
Time
, also
impugned the NAACP for its involvement
in the case, which was “prompted by the
bare fact that the defendant is a colored
man rather than by careful evaluation of
the circumstances of his guilt or
innocence.” The censure infuriated
Thurgood Marshall, however pleased he
may have been by the action taken by the


--- PAGE 1306 ---
governor and the pardon board to end the
long battle for Walter Irvin’s life. In
response, Marshall declared that Collins’s
commutation in fact vindicated the
NAACP’s position that Irvin had been
“the victim of a gross miscarriage of
justice.” Marshall also, in turn,
reproached the governor, whose “every
statement” regarding the NAACP had been
“completely in error,” for following “the
pattern of other southern officials in using
the NAACP as the whipping boy for the
repeated injustices against Negroes in the
south.” Had the NAACP not intervened,
Marshall asserted, all four Groveland
boys would be dead, and Collins “would
not have had to request the pardon board
to commute Irvin’s sentence.” One thing


--- PAGE 1307 ---
Marshall had to concede, however, was
that, as one newspaper stated, “it took far
more political courage [for Collins] to
spare the life of this Negro than it would
have taken to let him go to the electric
chair.”
For Walter Irvin, the play of politics in
the commutation was superseded by
gratitude and relief, and hope. “I want you
to know that, as long as I live I must, and I
will, with all sincere, look to you as my
earthly god,” Irvin wrote to Governor
Collins. “Now that my health is failing, I
do hope and pray that I will be able to go
free someday because I feel, as I have,
and I did for a lifetime, live a clean and
law abiding life, Sir!”
Lake County did not take the news of


--- PAGE 1308 ---
Irvin’s commutation well. Judge Truman
Futch presided over a grand jury called to
investigate the State Pardon Board’s
action on the grounds that Collins had
been influenced by “Communist pressure
tactics.” The judge did allow, though, that
the governor may have been “the innocent
victim of a clever deception,” apparently
implemented by a communist agent. For,
Futch claimed, “startling documents”—
like a petition protesting capital
punishment, it would appear—had come
into his possession to prove that “at least
one person suspected of being a
Communist agent had been sent into Lake
County” and that efforts “to gather
information on this case . . . have
transgressed both the law of God and


--- PAGE 1309 ---
man.” Sheriff McCall enlisted two of the
signatories to the petition, Norma Padgett
and her aunt, to testify before the grand
jury that any signature of theirs on any
petition had to have been obtained by a
“ruse,” as they had not knowingly ever
signed any such document. The governor
refused to testify. Being “accountable only
to his conscience,” Collins stated that he
would not participate in any secret grand
jury proceedings, although he was
perfectly willing, he said, to answer any
questions “in the Cabinet room with the
press and public present.”
Truman Futch’s special and
unprecedented grand jury investigation
elicited negative editorial comment from
Mabel Norris Reese in the 
Mount Dora


--- PAGE 1310 ---
Topic.  Her protest won her, first, the load
of dead fish that was dumped into her
front yard. Second came the hand grenade
that was tossed at her house; the explosion
was heard five miles away, but fortunately
neither she nor her family was home at the
time. Sheriff McCall was “investigating.”
In the end, the Lake County grand jury
found that Collins and the State Pardon
Board had acted within their legal rights
to commute Irvin’s sentence. The jury did,
however, rebuke the “smearing of the
good people of Lake County and its law
enforcement officers” by Tom Harris of
the 
St. Petersburg Times
 as well as
Reverend Ben F. Wyland’s “obtaining and
circulating a petition seeking clemency for
Irvin.” Wyland had also written to


--- PAGE 1311 ---
Collins, stating that both Norma and
Willie had signed the petition at a time
“when feelings ran high,” and emphasizing
the “victim’s” compassion. “If this woman
who suffered most could show mercy and
forgive her enemies surely we could
follow such a worthy example.”
No fan of the governor, Sheriff McCall
was not satisfied by the outcome of the
grand jury’s investigation, not with his
friend Fuller Warren planning another run
at the governorship in the next election. So
McCall hatched a plan to embarrass the
sitting governor outside the grand jury
room, and again he enlisted the aid of
Norma Padgett. At a Washington’s
Birthday parade in McCall’s hometown of
Eustis, just as Collins was leaving the


--- PAGE 1312 ---
Grandview Hotel, two Lake County
deputies escorted a “neatly dressed” and
not so forgiving Norma Padgett over to
him, and in front of hundreds of parade-
goers, she accosted the governor,
screaming, “You’re the one who let out
the nigger that raped me! How would you
have felt if that had been your wife or
daughter?”
H
IS BODY ILL,
 betraying him, but his
conscience finally clear, Jesse Hunter
lived long enough to see Irvin’s sentence
commuted. He passed away in February
1956.
I
N MARCH 1960
 Deputy James Yates found


--- PAGE 1313 ---
himself in strangely familiar
circumstances. A middle-aged white
woman claimed she had been raped in the
city of Fruitland Park. She was fuzzy as to
details of the crime, except that maybe one
of her attackers was in his forties or
fifties, and the other was about seventeen
years old. So Yates picked up two black
citrus workers, no matter that they were in
their early twenties, and after they
confessed to the crime under interrogation,
the deputy confiscated their shoes. The
victim, who had been ruled incompetent
by the court and committed to a mental
institution shortly after the attack, did not
take the stand for the prosecution. The
alleged rapists were convicted and
sentenced to die in the electric chair,


--- PAGE 1314 ---
almost solely on the basis of footprint
evidence.
The NAACP got involved, and this time
got lucky. A week before the scheduled
execution of the two men, Noel Griffin,
one of McCall’s deputies who had
worked on the Fruitland Park rape case,
disclosed to a Florida NAACP lawyer
that the defendants had been framed by the
Lake County Sheriff’s Department.
According to Griffin, Deputy Yates had
used the defendants’ confiscated shoes to
make plaster casts of their footprints not at
the crime scene but in another deputy’s
backyard. Griffin’s allegations were
confirmed by the FBI, whose analysis
showed the soil mixed in the plaster casts
to be consistent with that of the deputy’s


--- PAGE 1315 ---
backyard. Furthermore, the FBI concluded
—as had Thurgood Marshall’s expert
witness, Herman Bennett, in the
Groveland rape case ten years before—
that when the defendants’ footprints had
supposedly been left, their feet had not
been in their shoes. The fact of the
falsified evidence enabled the NAACP to
rescue both men from electrocution; a
federal judge overturned their convictions.
In December 1962, the two deputies,
James Yates and his accomplice, were
suspended and indicted by an Orange
County grand jury on charges of perjury
and conspiracy. Convictions would have
carried life sentences for both, if James
Yates and his deputy accomplice had ever
made it to court, but the case was so long


--- PAGE 1316 ---
delayed that the statute of limitations
expired. Both deputies were reinstated by
Willis McCall, with back pay.
F
ULLER WARREN’S SPECIAL
 investigator J.
J. Elliott was off by twelve years when he
forecast that McCall’s shooting of
Shepherd and Irvin would guarantee the
sheriff three more terms in office. In fact,
McCall served seven consecutive terms as
sheriff of Lake County. In his twenty-
eight-year tenure, on various charges of
misconduct, McCall was the subject of
dozens of investigations. Not a single
charge stuck. The sheriff’s personal reign
of terror ended in 1972, when he was
indicted and suspended from office by


--- PAGE 1317 ---
Governor Reubin Askew: the sixty-two-
year-old McCall had kicked to death a
mentally retarded black prisoner in his
cell. Although McCall was acquitted of
the charges, the time he’d spent defending
himself in court had prevented him from
campaigning effectively enough to win that
year’s election. Still, he was only barely
defeated in his bid for an eighth
consecutive term.
Willis McCall’s name surfaced often in
the ongoing FBI investigation into the
murder of Harry T. Moore and his wife.
For four decades and more McCall denied
any involvement or knowledge. Not long
before his death in 1994, he avouched, “I
never hurt anyone . . . or killed anyone
who didn’t deserve killing.” The FBI


--- PAGE 1318 ---
ultimately laid responsibility for the
bombing in Mims on the KKK and named
four likely suspects, two of whom, Earl
Brooklyn and Tillman “Curly” Belvin,
belonged to the Apopka Klavern, as did
McCall, and both men had participated,
according to FBI informants, in the
Groveland riots. Seven KKK members
were indicted for perjury in regard to their
whereabouts that Christmas night when
Moore was murdered. Frank Meech, an
FBI agent who investigated the Moore
killings, was critical of the Department of
Justice for having the seven “indictments
quashed for the ‘Tranquility of the South.’
”
The case remains unsolved, though not
for want of Stetson Kennedy’s efforts. In


--- PAGE 1319 ---
the sixty years since the explosion beneath
that modest wooden house in an orange
grove, Kennedy never stopped trying to
solve the murder of Harry T. Moore. He
filed Freedom of Information Act requests
to access FBI cases files, he hunted down
witnesses, he continued to pressure
Florida attorneys general and the state’s
governors for action, and he lived to see
the Moore case reopened three times: in
1978, 1991, and 2005. Stetson Kennedy
died in Florida in 2011 at the age of
ninety-four.
I
N THE EIGHT YEARS
 Charles Greenlee had
been serving at Belle Glade State Prison
Farm, he’d been a model inmate. He had


--- PAGE 1320 ---
worked his way off a chain gang and onto
a road construction crew. He liked his
new responsibilities; he enjoyed having
more freedom. So much so that one day in
1957 he simply walked away from the
work farm, and eighty miles to the north,
in Fort Pierce, he found a job and in six
weeks had settled into a “model life.”
That’s when he was apprehended, and
returned to Belle Glade. In July 1960
Greenlee was awarded parole. He
married, raised a family, and built a
successful heating and cooling
maintenance business in Tennessee, where
he lives today.
Norma and Willie Padgett’s marriage
did not last; they finalized their divorce in
July 1958. Norma remarried, but is now a


--- PAGE 1321 ---
widow living in Georgia.
Miss L. B. De Forest . . . vanished.
In 1961 Jack Greenberg succeeded his
mentor as the LDF’s director-counsel at
the NAACP when President John F.
Kennedy appointed Thurgood Marshall to
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit. Greenberg is the former dean of
Columbia College and is currently the
Alphonse Fletcher Jr. Professor of Law at
Columbia Law School in New York.
Franklin Williams was appointed by the
Kennedy administration in 1961 to assist
Sargent Shriver in organizing the Peace
Corps. President Lyndon Johnson later
appointed him ambassador to Ghana, but
not before first consulting his friend
Thurgood Marshall. “I would put Frank


--- PAGE 1322 ---
there without any hesitation,” Marshall
told the president. In 1985, Williams
returned to Florida to give an interview on
the Groveland Boys case for the
University of Florida’s Oral History
Project. When the talk turned to Sheriff
Willis McCall, Williams bristled. “This
man is a, is a vicious killer,” Williams
stammered. “Is he still alive?” he asked,
and was answered yes. “I would not
doubt,” Williams averred, “if he knew I
were here today speaking. I would not
doubt that he would come and try to kill
me. I do not want to cross him.” Franklin
Williams died in New York in 1990.
Mabel Norris Reese shared Williams’s
opinions of Willis McCall. Her fears
fueled by dead fish and hand grenades, she


--- PAGE 1323 ---
left Lake County shortly after Governor
Collins commuted Walter Irvin’s
sentence. She divorced and remarried, and
Mabel Norris Chesley, who counted
Martin Luther King Jr. and other
prominent black activists among her
friends, committed herself as a reporter
and columnist for the 
Daytona Beach
Morning Journal
 to the advancement of
the civil rights movement in Florida. She
wrote regularly to Walter Irvin, and took
occasion to visit him, throughout the years
that he remained in prison at Raiford.
January 1968 brought Walter Irvin his
parole, with the stipulation that he not
return to Lake County. Now forty, he had
spent nearly half his life in prison. In
Miami, where he lived with his sister


--- PAGE 1324 ---
Henrietta, he found work in construction,
even with his impaired health, and tried to
lead something like what people called a
normal life. In February 1969, Irvin
received permission from his parole
officer to attend the funeral of an uncle in
Lake County. He had been back in Willis
McCall country for but a few hours when
friends and relatives found him apparently
sleeping in a car after the drive north; but
he wasn’t sleeping. Walter Irvin was
dead.
Mabel Norris Chesley was suspicious.
She did not doubt the depth of Willis
McCall’s resolve to visit his county
justice upon the Groveland boy,
especially as he had failed to do so on that
dark country road eighteen years before.


--- PAGE 1325 ---
The Lake County Sheriff’s Department
report on Walter Irvin’s death stated that
the forty-one-year-old black male had
died of natural causes. A 
St. Petersburg
Times
 reporter told Mabel that he had
tried to speak to the doctor who’d
pronounced Irvin dead. The doctor had
hung up on him.
E
NCLOSED WITH THE
 letter to Justice
Thurgood Marshall was the newspaper
article by Mabel Norris Chesley on
Walter Irvin’s death in Groveland,
reportedly of natural causes. Marshall had
by then been a sitting associate justice on
the U.S. Supreme Court for about a year
and a half, and Walter Irvin had been free


--- PAGE 1326 ---
on parole four months less than that. For
eighteen years Irvin had been imprisoned
at Raiford, but Marshall had at least been
able to keep his promise to Dellia Irvin—
he’d kept her boy out of the electric chair.
The day before the letter arrived,
Marshall had voted with his fellow
justices at the Court to overturn a
conviction of another sort, in
Brandenburg v. Ohio
. Ku Klux Klan
leader Clarence Brandenburg’s speech
against “dirty niggers” and “Jews” at a
Klan rally had been captured vividly on
film, on which evidence he’d been
charged with advocating violence,
convicted in a state court, and sentenced
to ten years in prison. In a unanimous
decision, the Supreme Court had ruled that


--- PAGE 1327 ---
on First Amendment grounds the
government could not punish abstract
inflammatory speech. The Constitution
was the Constitution, and Justice Marshall
did not struggle with his vote.
For a quarter century the younger
Thurgood Marshall had fought in lower
courts and argued in the highest one for
constitutional rights, though not ever for
white supremacists. At the NAACP the
special counsel had championed
politically disenfranchised and socially
oppressed—and like Irvin, falsely
accused—blacks in Oklahoma, Georgia,
Alabama, Florida. The train rides south,
the stifling courtrooms with their Jim
Crow balconies, the vanes of fans rotating
slowly overhead, the iron gates clanging,


--- PAGE 1328 ---
black men in shackles, men like Irvin,
with bumps on their heads, welts on their
arms, as they shamble shoeless to the
defense table—with an article and a letter
and a name, Walter Irvin, the past comes
back: a sheriff and his deputies share a
joke and a laugh with the judge as they
turn their squinty eyes toward the no-good
NAACP lawyers from up north.
It all changed—and in his way, with the
Groveland Boys, Marshall had helped to
change it. “There is very little truth to the
old refrain that one cannot legislate
equality,” Marshall posited in a 1966
White House conference on civil rights.
“Laws not only provide concrete benefits,
they can even change the hearts of men—
some men, anyhow—for good or evil.” In


--- PAGE 1329 ---
Groveland, Mabel Norris Reese had come
round. So had Jesse Hunter. Governor
LeRoy Collins had done the right thing.
Maybe, too, that young juror with an
honest face, the one who’d been listening
so intently to Marshall’s summation at the
retrial in Ocala, had fixed his mind on a
different kind of future for the South.
Marshall’s civil cases, the long battles for
voting rights and school desegregation,
unquestionably effected lasting social
changes, but the criminal cases more
immediately brought justice. They “did the
most immediate good, because they saved
people’s lives,” Marshall said.
Mabel’s article did more than stir
Thurgood’s memories. He picked up the
phone, and just as he had done twenty


--- PAGE 1330 ---
years before, when the Groveland Boys
story and the name Walter Irvin first
crossed his desk at the NAACP in New
York, he called the director of the FBI.
From J. Edgar Hoover he learned that at
the present time, no, the bureau was not
conducting an investigation into Irvin’s
death, presumably of natural causes, but
the director would have all the materials
relevant to the case delivered
straightaway to the Civil Rights Division
of the U.S. Department of Justice.
Marshall thanked the director and hung up
the phone. Willis McCall would soon be
hearing from Hoover’s men, again.
Natural causes. There was room enough
in that conclusion for reasonable doubt.
When it came to the sheriff whom


--- PAGE 1331 ---
Marshall had long referred to as “the
sonofabitch,” nothing would surprise him,
least of all the murder of a Groveland boy.
Marshall set aside Mabel’s article on
Walter Irvin’s death for his files. Before
he clipped the letter to it, he read the
carefully handwritten words again. They
were dated March 7, 1969.
My dear Mr. Justice,
Enclosed please find clipping
which I believe needs checking.
I have thought of this poor man
often over the years. I was shocked
to read this over my morning coffee.
McCall is a disgrace to the law of
this wonderful country of ours.
I have lived in Holly Hill, Florida
for 18 years. I am Catholic, I am


--- PAGE 1332 ---
white, married and have a son 16
years of age.
I am proud of you.
Sincerely,
Mrs. Ruth N. Starr


--- PAGE 1333 ---
A NOTE ON SOURCES
There were many excellent works that
were especially valuable in my research
into the life of Thurgood Marshall. Jack
Greenberg’s 
Crusaders in the Courts
(1994) is highly engaging, and provided
an indispensable firsthand account of his
years spent working for Thurgood
Marshall and the Legal Defense Fund. I
made considerable use of Juan Williams’s
authoritative biography, 
Thurgood
Marshall,
 
American Revolutionary
(1998), in my research. Williams did an
extraordinary amount of legwork, and his
interviews with Marshall helped shed a


--- PAGE 1334 ---
bright light on the life and career of the
civil rights lawyer.
Carl Rowan’s 
Dream Makers, Dream
Breakers: The World of Justice
Thurgood Marshall
 (1993), Mark
Tushnet’s 
Making Civil Rights Law
(1994), and Richard Kluger’s 
Simple
Justice
 (1975) were also exceptionally
useful in helping me put the pieces of
Thurgood Marshall’s life together. There
were two other books that were most
valuable companions to have at my side.
Gary Corsair’s exhaustively researched
book, 
The Groveland Four
 (2004), was
most helpful, and anyone interested in
learning more about the Groveland Boys
would be well served to read Corsair’s
thorough account of the case. And Ben


--- PAGE 1335 ---
Green’s Before His Time : The Untold
Story of Harry T. Moore, America’s First
Civil Rights Martyr
 (1999) is an
engrossing and highly readable biography
of Moore that deservedly spotlights one of
the forgotten heroes of the pre–civil rights
movement.
Helpful to me in its own way was 
An
Autobiography of Willis V. McCall,
Sheriff of Lake County
, published by
Willis V. McCall, a copy of which I
received from the University of Florida
Libraries, P. K. Yonge Library of Florida
History.
The majority of the research for this
book was compiled from the vast and
unredacted Groveland FBI case files,
which were released to me following my


--- PAGE 1336 ---
filing of a Freedom of Information Act
request. These files had been sealed for
sixty years, and their content provided an
abundance of rich material and interviews
that were essential to my understanding of
the case. When former Florida attorney
general Charlie Crist released the results
of the state’s investigation into the murder
of Harry and Harriette Moore in 2006, the
FBI files from that case revealed further
interviews and bureau reports relating to
the Groveland case and the Ku Klux Klan
that were most enlightening.
I relied heavily on the personal papers
of Franklin Williams at the Schomburg
Center for Research in Black Culture, as
well as the papers of the NAACP and the
papers of Thurgood Marshall, both at the


--- PAGE 1337 ---
Library of Congress. The Workers
Defense League Collection at the Walter
P. Reuther Library at Wayne State
University provided much insight into the
relationship between the NAACP and the
WDL, and was where I discovered the
journal entries of Miss L. B. De Forest.
Gaining access to the NAACP’s Legal
Defense Fund files at the Library of
Congress was by far the most challenging
part of this research, and I continue to be
grateful to Ted Wells, Debo Adegbile,
and especially Jeffrey Robinson at the
LDF, who went above and beyond his call
of duty to carefully vet this material so
that I would be able to examine it.


--- PAGE 1338 ---
SELECTED
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aberjhani and S. L. West. 
Encyclopedia
of the Harlem Renaissance
. New York:
Facts on File, 2003.
Andrews, M., and J. Robison.
Flashbacks: The Story of Central
Florida’s Past.
 Orlando, FL: The
Orlando Sentinel, 1995.
Arsenault, R. 
Freedom Riders: 1961 and
the Struggle for Racial Justice
. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Ball, H. 
A Defiant Life: Thurgood
Marshall and the Persistence of Racism


--- PAGE 1339 ---
in America.  New York: Crown
Publishers, 1998.
—
—
—
. “ ‘Thurgood’s Coming’: Tale of a
Hero Lawyer.” 
Jackson Free Press
,
May 13, 2004.
Barnes, J. 
Florida’s Hurricane History
.
Chapel Hill: The University of North
Carolina Press, 2007.
Bedau, H. A., C. E. Putnam, and M. L.
Radelet. 
In Spite of Innocence: The
Ordeal of 400 Americans Wrongly
Convicted by Crimes Punishable by
Death.
 Boston: Northeastern University
Press, 1992.
Berg, M. 
“The Ticket to Freedom”: The
NAACP and the Struggle for Black
Political Integration.
 Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 2005.


--- PAGE 1340 ---
Berry, B. Almost White.  London: Collier-
Macmillan, 1969.
Black, Elizabeth, and Hugo L. Black. 
Mr.
Justice and Mrs. Black: The Memoirs
of Hugo L. Black and Elizabeth Black.
New York: Random House, 1986.
Blackmon, D. A. 
Slavery by Another
Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black
Americans from the Civil War to World
War II
. New York: Anchor Books, 2008.
Bloodsworth, D. 
Images of America:
Groveland
. Charleston, SC: Arcadia
Publishing, 2009.
Carson, C., et al. 
Reporting Civil Rights,
Part One: American Journalism 1941–
1963
 
(Library of America).
 New York:
Library of America, 2003.
Cash, W. J. 
The Mind of the South
. New


--- PAGE 1341 ---
York: Vintage/Random House, 1991.
Chalmers, A. K. 
They Shall Be Free.
 New
York: Doubleday, 1951.
Clark, H. R., and M. D. Davis. 
Thurgood
Marshall: Warrior at the Bar, Rebel on
the Bench.
 New York: Birch Lane Press,
1992.
Clark, K. B. 
Toward Humanity and
Justice: The Writings of Kenneth B.
Clark, Scholar of the 1954
 Brown v.
Board of Education 
Decision.
 Westport,
CT: Praeger Publishers, 2004.
Corsair, G. 
The Groveland Four: The
Sad Saga of a Legal Lynching
.
Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse, 2004.
Dance, D. C. 
From My People: 400 years
of African American Folklore.
 New
York: W.W. Norton, 2002.


--- PAGE 1342 ---
Dickerson, J. W. Remembering Orlando:
Tales from Elvis to Disney
. Charleston,
SC: The History Press, 2006.
Dray, P. 
At the Hands of Persons
Unknown: The Lynching of Black
America.
 New York: Modern Library,
2003.
DuBois, W. E. B. “The Talented Tenth,”
in B. T. Washington et al., 
The Negro
Problem.
 Charleston, SC: CreateSpace,
2008.
Fairclough, A. 
Race & Democracy: The
Civil Rights Struggle in Louisiana
1915–1972
. Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1999.
Flores, I. M. 
Justice Gone Wrong: A
Sheriff’s Power of Fear
. New York:
iUniverse, 2009.


--- PAGE 1343 ---
Franklin, J. H. Mirror to America: The
Autobiography of John Hope Franklin
.
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
2005.
Gallen, D., and R. Goldman. 
Thurgood
Marshall: Justice for All.
 New York:
Carroll and Graf Publishers, 1993.
Green, B. 
Before His Time: The Untold
Story of Harry T. Moore, America’s
First Civil Rights Martyr.
 Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 2005.
Green, V. H. 
The Negro Motorist Green
Book: An International Travel Guide.
New York: Victor H. Green, 1949.
Greenberg, J. 
Crusaders in the Courts:
How a Dedicated Band of Lawyers
Fought for the Civil Rights Revolution.
New York: Basic Books, 1994.


--- PAGE 1344 ---
Hahamovitch, C. The Fruits of Their
Labor: Atlantic Coast Farmworkers
and the Making of Migrant Poverty,
1870–1945.
 Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1997.
Hauke, K. A. 
Ted Poston: Pioneer
American Journalist.
 Athens: University
of Georgia Press, 1998.
Hekkanen, E., and E. Roy. 
Good Ol’ Boy:
Willis V. McCall
. Vancouver, BC: New
Orphic Publishers, 1999.
Hobbs, Tameka Bradley. “Hitler Is Here:
Lynching in Florida During the Era of
World War II.” Dissertation, Florida
State University, Department of History,
2004.
Hurston, Z. N. 
Dust Tracks on a Road: An
Autobiography.
 New York:


--- PAGE 1345 ---
HarperPerennial, 2006.
—
—
—
. 
Mules and Men
. New York:
HarperPerennial, 2008.
—
—
—
. 
Their Eyes Were Watching God:
A Novel.
 New York: HarperPerennial,
2006.
Ikard, R. W. 
No More Social Lynchings.
Franklin, TN: Hillsboro Press, 1997.
Jackson, K. T., and D. Dunbar. 
Empire
City: New York Through the Centuries
.
New York: Columbia University Press,
2002.
James, R., Jr. 
Root and Branch: Charles
Hamilton Houston, Thurgood Marshall,
and the Struggle to End Segregation.
New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2010.
Janken, K. R. 
Walter White: Mr. NAACP.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North


--- PAGE 1346 ---
Carolina Press, 2006.
Jonas, G. 
Freedom’s Sword: The NAACP
and the Struggle Against Racism in
America, 1909–1969
. New York:
Routledge, 2005.
Jordan, V. E., Jr. 
Make It Plain: Standing
Up and Speaking Out.
 New York:
Public Affairs, 2008.
—
—
—
. 
Vernon Can Read! A Memoir
.
New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2001.
Kennedy, S. 
The Klan Unmasked
.
Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama
Press, 1990.
—
—
—
. 
Southern Exposure.
 Kila, MT:
Kessinger Publishing, 2007.
Kluger, R. 
Simple Justice: The History of
Brown v. Board of Education
 and Black
America’s Struggle for Equality.
 New


--- PAGE 1347 ---
York: Vintage Books, 2004.
Lavergne, G. M. 
Before Brown: Heman
Marion Sweatt, Thurgood Marshall,
and the Long Road to Justice
. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 2010.
Lawson, S. F. 
To Secure These Rights:
The Report of President Harry S.
Truman’s Committee on Civil Rights.
New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2003.
Lewis, D. L, ed. 
The Portable Harlem
Renaissance Reader.
 New York:
Penguin Books, 1995.
Long, M. G. 
Marshalling Justice: The
Early Civil Rights Letters of Thurgood
Marshall.
 New York: Amistad, 2011.
Martin, W. E., Jr. Brown v. Board of
Education: 
A Brief History
 
with
Documents
. New York: Bedford/St.


--- PAGE 1348 ---
Martin’s, 1998.
McCall, W. V. 
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff
of Lake County: An Autobiography.
Umatilla, FL: Willis V. McCall, 1988.
McCarthy, S. C. 
Lay That Trumpet into
Our Hands
. New York: Bantam Books,
2003.
McNeil, G. R. 
Groundwork: Charles
Hamilton Houston and the Struggle for
Civil Rights
. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1983.
Miller, C. C. 
Roy Wilkins: Leader of the
NAACP
. Greensboro, NC: Morgan
Reynolds Publishing, 2005.
Minor, R. 
Lynching and Frame-Up in
Tennessee.
 New York: New Century
Publishers, 1946.
Motley, C. B. 
Equal Justice Under Law
:


--- PAGE 1349 ---
An Autobiography . New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1998.
National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People. 
NAACP: Celebrating
a Century, 100 Years in Pictures.
Layton, UT: Gibbs Smith, 2009.
Newton, M. 
The Invisible Empire: The
Ku Klux Klan in Florida
. Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 2001.
—
—
—
. 
The Ku Klux Klan: History,
Organization, Language, Influence, and
Activities of America’s Most Secret
Society.
 Jefferson, NC: McFarland &
Company, 2007.
Nieman, D. G. “Black Southerners and the
Law, 1865–1900,” in A. Hornsby, Jr.,
African Americans in the Post-
Emancipation South.
 Lanham, MD:


--- PAGE 1350 ---
University Press of America, 2010.
O’Brien, G. W. 
The Color of the Law:
Race, Violence, and Justice in the Post–
World War II South
. Chapel Hill: The
University of North Carolina Press,
1999.
O’Reilly, K. 
Black Americans: The FBI
Files
. New York: Carroll and Graf
Publishers, 1994.
Rampersad, A. 
The Life of Langston
Hughes, Volume I: 1902–1941, I, Too,
Sing America.
 New York: Oxford
University Press, 2002.
Rise, E. W. 
The Martinsville Seven:
Race, Rape, and Capital Punishment
.
Charlottesville: The University Press of
Virginia, 1995.
Robeson, P., Jr. 
The Undiscovered Paul


--- PAGE 1351 ---
Robeson: Quest for Freedom, 1939–
1976.
 Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2010.
Robinson, Timothy Brandt. “Law and
Order, by Any Means Necessary: The
Life and Times of Willis V. McCall,
Sheriff of Lake County, Florida.”
Master’s Thesis, Florida State
University, 1997.
Rowan, C. T. 
Dream Makers, Dream
Breakers: The World of Justice
Thurgood Marshall
. New York:
Welcome Rain, 1993.
Saunders, R. W., Sr. 
Bridging the Gap:
Continuing the Florida NAACP Legacy
of Harry T. Moore
. Tampa, FL:
University of Tampa Press, 2000.
Sullivan, P. 
Lift Every Voice: The NAACP
and the Making of the Civil Rights


--- PAGE 1352 ---
Movement . New York: The New Press,
2009.
Tushnet, M. V. 
Making Civil Rights Law:
Thurgood Marshall and the Supreme
Court, 1936–1961.
 New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994.
—
—
—
. 
Making Constitutional Law:
Thurgood Marshall and the Supreme
Court, 1961–1991.
 New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997.
—
—
—
. 
The NAACP’s Legal Strategy
Against Segregated Education, 1925–
1950
. Chapel Hill: The University of
North Carolina Press, 1987.
—
—
—
. ed. 
Thurgood Marshall: His
Speeches, Writings, Arguments,
Opinions, and Reminiscences.
 Chicago:
Lawrence Hill Books, 2001.


--- PAGE 1353 ---
Wald, E. Josh White: Society Blues . New
York: Routledge, 2002.
Wexler, L. 
Fire in a Canebrake: The Last
Mass Lynching in America
. New York:
Scribner, 2003.
White, W. 
A Man Called White
: 
The
Autobiography of Walter White.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1970.
Wilkerson, I. 
The Warmth of Other Suns:
The Epic Story of America’s Great
Migration
. New York: Random House,
2010.
Williams, J. 
Thurgood Marshall:
American Revolutionary.
 New York:
Times Books, 1998.
Wilson, S. K. 
Meet Me at the Theresa:
The Story of Harlem’s Most Famous


--- PAGE 1354 ---
Hotel . New York: Atria Books, 2004.
Wormser, R. 
The Rise and Fall of Jim
Crow: The African-American Struggle
Against Discrimination, 1865–1954.
London: Franklin Watts, 1999.


--- PAGE 1355 ---
INDEX
The pagination of this electronic edition
does not match the edition from which it
was created. To locate a specific passage,
please use the search feature of your e-
book reader.
 
Italicized numbers refer to photographic
illustrations
Aderhold, Agent (FBI agent), 236
Akerman, Alex, Jr. (attorney)
Groveland Boys rape trial and work of,
143–44, 162, 172–73, 174, 
210


--- PAGE 1356 ---
Groveland Boys (W. Irvin) retrial and
role of, 222, 230, 232, 267–68, 292,
296, 299–302, 307–8, 311–13, 323–24,
335
life threatened by KKK, 248
post-Groveland Boys trial appeal to
Florida Supreme Court and role of, 190,
194
post-Groveland Boys trial appeal to U.S.
Supreme Court and role of, 216
pre-Groveland Boys trial motions made
by, 146–47
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and, 232, 233–34, 241, 242
tense relations between W. McCall and,
221–22, 227
writes 
Brown v. Board of Education
briefs, 335


--- PAGE 1357 ---
Alexander, Carol, failure to testify in W.
Irvin’s retrial, 295
Allison, Bill (prison camp warden), 62
Altamonte Springs, Florida, 37
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU),
204
Anderson, Marian, 28
Appeals process, T. Marshall’s strategy
of establishing precedent in, 48–49, 123
Archer, Roy (judge), 187
Armstrong, Louis, 23, 24, 29
Arnall, Ellis (Georgia governor), 259
Askew, Reubin (Florida governor), 357
Assaults on blacks by law enforcement
officers, 53, 55–56. 
See also
 Lynchings
of blacks
beating and blinding of Isaac Woodard,
21
, 111, 120–23


--- PAGE 1358 ---
beatings of Groveland Boys Shepherd,
Irvin, and Greenlee, 73–74, 127–32,
135, 138–42, 147, 184–85, 259–62
manhunt and killing of E. Thomas, 113–
14, 115–19, 126, 131
shooting of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin (
see
Groveland Boys, shootings of S.
Shepherd and W. Irvin)
Associated Press, 295
Association of Georgia Klans, 86, 91
Axilrod, Eric (labor organizer), 80–81
Baker, Constance. 
See
 Motley, Constance
Baker
Baltimore African American
, 330, 331
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, 2
Bates, Clyde (deputy sheriff, Broward
County, FL), 277
Baya, Harry (National Guard Lt. Colonel),


--- PAGE 1359 ---
Groveland mob violence and, 93, 98–99
Bay Lake, Florida, 34, 36
Bell, Robert Cecil, 263
Belvin, Tillman “Curly,” 357
Bennett, Herman (criminologist)
prosecutor’s attack on credibility of, 316
testimony in trial of W. Irvin, 311–14,
315, 323, 325, 356
Biddle, Francis (U.S. Attorney General),
30–31, 104
Binneveld, Geoffrey (physician)
appeal for W. Irvin stay of execution and,
341–42
examination of and report on Norma
Padgett, 142–43, 150–52, 162
J. Hunter’s failure to call to testify, 268
Black, Hugo (Supreme Court Justice), 53–
54, 70, 196, 342


--- PAGE 1360 ---
Black, Lucille (NAACP official), 201
Black migratory labor, citrus industry and,
77–81
Black-owned property, white mob
violence and destruction of, 92–93, 95–
97, 108
Blair, Collis (Methodist clergyman),
doubts about N. Padgett rape story, 161–
62
Blair, Julius, 11–12
Blair, Sol, 13, 20
Blue Flame (club), 73, 114, 149
Blue Moon (club), 114
B’nai B’rith, Ku Klux Klan attacks on,
265
Bogar, William “Bill” Jackson, 91, 93,
173
as FBI informant from within KKK, 184


--- PAGE 1361 ---
Bolita  lottery game, 78–79, 247
Ernest Thomas as peddler of, 114–15
Henry Singleton and Sheriff W. McCall’s
control of Lake County, 78–79, 114,
167
Bolles, Marie (newspaper editor), 236,
237
Bowen, Reeves (Florida assistant attorney
general), 216, 218, 342
Bowles, Bryant, 341
Branch, Bobbie (NAACP office manager),
198
Brandenberg, Clarence, 359
Brandenburg v. Ohio
, 359
Brandon, F. R. (judge), 227
Briggs v. Elliott
, 203, 288, 333–34, 335
Brooklyn, Earl, 357
Brown v. Board of Education
, 4, 203,


--- PAGE 1362 ---
333, 335, 336–40
Buie, A. P. “Sam” (Florida assistant state
attorney), 235
claims conspiracy between J. Hunter and
W. McCall to kill Groveland Boys,
344–45
role as prosecutor in W. Irvin retrial,
312–14, 315, 316, 330
Bullets as evidence in shootings of S.
Shepherd and W. Irvin, 251–52, 
255,
263, 268
Bumpus, Paul F. (Tennessee district
attorney general), Columbia Race Riot
trial and, 7–9
Bunin, Norman (news reporter), his
investigation of Groveland Boys case,
and exposé in 
St. Petersburg Times
,
199–200, 204, 222


--- PAGE 1363 ---
Burtoft, Charlotte (mother of Lawrence
Burtoft), 212–13, 309
Burtoft, Lawrence, 
321
attempt to remove J. Hunter from retrial
of W. Irvin for failure to include
testimony of, 267–68
as critical witness in Groveland Boys
retrial, 225, 230, 295, 299–300, 307
encounter with N. Padgett following
alleged rape, 59–60, 212–13
interviewed by reporter N. Bunin, 199
N. Padgett’s testimony on, 298
prosecutor J. Hunter’s attack on character
of, 316
relationship of, with C. Howard, 305
testimony in W. Irvin retrial, 307–10, 324
Byrd, Daniel Ellis (NAACP field
secretary), 47, 201, 249, 272


--- PAGE 1364 ---
Caldwell, Millard (Florida governor), 79,
108
Campbell, Alexander (assistant attorney
general), 142–43
Campbell, Leroy (deputy sheriff, Lake
County, FL), 62, 88, 304
beating of C. Greenlee by, 73–75, 130–
31, 135, 138–42, 184–85
beating of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin by,
124–25, 127–30, 135, 138–42, 184–85,
259–62
FBI investigation of, 138–42, 194–95
grand jury fails to indict, for Groveland
Boys beatings, 194–95
first questioning of C. Greenlee by, 65–
68
testimony of, in W. Irvin retrial, 315–16
Cannon, Poppy, 68–69


--- PAGE 1365 ---
Capital punishment program, NAACP, 5
Carter, Richard (news reporter), 295,
300, 329–30
on 
bolita
 business and Groveland Boys
case, 114–15
Carter, Robert (NAACP attorney), 195,
203, 
210
Groveland Boys appeal to U.S. Supreme
Court and role of, 215–17, 219–20
Cash, W. J., 51–52
Cassell v. Texas
, 205, 220
Chalmers, Allan Knight (clergyman), 347,
348
Chambers v. Florida
, 53–54, 338
Cheatwood, Vernon (special investigator),
Lyons murder trial, 53, 55–56
Cheek, Cordie, 12
Chesley, Mabel Norris, 358, 359. 
See


--- PAGE 1366 ---
also  Reese, Mabel Norris
Chicago Defender
 (newspaper), 28, 152,
159–60, 256, 257, 260, 294, 330
Christian Science Monitor
 (newspaper),
152
Citrus industry
black labor needed by central Florida,
76–81, 86–88, 94, 96–97, 132–33
hurricane effects on, 148
Civilian Conservation Corp (CCC), 76
Civil Rights Congress (CRC), 26–27,
152–55, 181, 223, 281, 291
Clarendon County, South Carolina, school
desegregation case 
Briggs v. Elliott
 in,
203, 288, 333–34
Clark, Kenneth, 288, 337
Clark, Tom C. (U.S attorney general,
Supreme Court justice), 20, 82–83, 111,


--- PAGE 1367 ---
126, 196, 218
Cockcroft, Flowers, mob violence and
role of, 63, 64, 68, 73, 91–93, 184
Cockroft, Mrs. (wife of Flowers
Cockroft), 228
Colclasure, E. O., 57
Coleman, Bill, 191
Collier’s
 (periodical), 287, 288
Collins, LeRoy (Florida governor), 
331
,
341, 342–43, 344, 346–51, 360
commutation of W. Irvin’s sentence, 344,
348–55
on death penalty, 349, 351
orders investigation of Groveland Boys
case, 348, 350, 353
Columbia (Tennessee) Race Riot and
trial (1946), 7–20, 29, 30
threats to T. Marshall following, 15–20


--- PAGE 1368 ---
trial proceedings, 7–11, 14–15
white mob violence in, 
7
, 11–14
Commission on Civil Rights, President’s,
110
Committee of 100, 267, 307, 347, 348
Communism
T. Marshall’s efforts to dissociate
NAACP from, 26–27, 110–12, 153–55,
206–7
Red Scare and national fear of, 34, 82,
153
Confessions, cases involving coerced,
53–55
Groveland Boys and, 128–29, 131, 134,
178–80
Congress of Industrial Organizations
(CIO), 80–81, 221
Connie’s Inn (Harlem club), 23


--- PAGE 1369 ---
Constitution, U.S.
equal protection clause of 14th
Amendment, 107
T. Marshall on establishing civil rights
precedents and reform of, 2, 48–49
Cooperative groceries, Harlem, 24
Cotton Club (Harlem club), 23
Crawford, George, NAACP defense of,
42
Criminal justice system, Thurgood
Marshall and reform of, 2–3
Crisis
 (NAACP periodical), 69, 192
Cunningham, Evelyn “Big East” (news
reporter), 47
coverage of lynchings by, 40–41
coverage of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
shootings, 245
Current, Gloster B. (NAACP official),


--- PAGE 1370 ---
104–5, 201, 264–65, 272, 339
criticism of Harry T. Moore by, 246–47,
248
Daily Compass
 (newspaper), 114
Daily Worker
 (newspaper), 15, 20, 332
Davis, Benjamin O., 29
Davis, Jack E., 108
Davis, John Aubrey, 339
Daytona Beach Morning Journal
, 358
Dean, Libby (wife of Curtis Howard),
303, 306
Death penalty, 227, 229, 349, 351
De Forest, L. B. (detective), undercover
private investigation of N. Padgett by,
204, 210–14, 227–29, 358
anti-death penalty petition book of, 227,
229, 351, 354, 355
DeMille, Arnold (newspaper columnist),


--- PAGE 1371 ---
256, 286, 294, 330
on S. Kennedy’s information about
Groveland Boys beatings from J. J.
Elliott, 259–62
Democratic Party in Florida, 82–83
Denton, C. Hayes, 20
Dixiecrat Party, 83
Dodson, Denmedia “Medi” and Clarence
“Boots” (T. Marshall’s aunt and uncle),
22–23
Doggett, Caxton (Methodist clergyman),
271
Douglas, Aaron, 25–26
Douglas, William O. (Supreme Court
justice), 338
Driver, J. E., 165
Driver, Lois, 165
DuBois, W. E. B., 26, 28, 44


--- PAGE 1372 ---
Earp, Curtis (county judge), 117
Eatonville, Florida, 37
Ebony
 (magazine), 26, 28
Economic interests of central Florida
citrus industry, black labor and, 76–81,
93–94, 96–97, 132–33
Groveland disturbances detrimental to,
86–87, 93–94
Edge, L. Day, 87, 93–94, 140, 141
Education
NAACP challenge to inequalities in
teacher pay, 107
NAACP challenge to segregated, 43–44,
143, 185–91, 203, 205, 333, 335–40
NAACP study of school inequalities, 42–
43
Ellington, Duke, 25
Elliott, Jefferson Jennings, 357


--- PAGE 1373 ---
on beatings of Groveland Boys, 259–60
investigation of shootings of S. Shepherd
and W. Irvin by, 241, 244–45, 256
investigation of Washington, D.C.
gambling, 258–59
Klan membership of, 259, 261, 262
response of, to H. T. Moore
assassination, 279, 280, 281, 282
warns T. Marshall about threats, 290–91
Ellison, Ralph, 25
Equal pay, NAACP lawsuit for teacher,
107
Ervin, Richard W. (Florida attorney
general), response to U.S. Supreme
Court decision on Groveland Boys case,
220
Eustis Lake Region News
, 236
Evans, Wesley, 91, 129, 184


--- PAGE 1374 ---
FBI investigation of, 138–42
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 27
criticized for failure to investigate
lynchings, 110–11
finds physician who examined Norma
Padgett, 151
informants for, 184, 248
investigation of civil rights violations by
Sheriff W. McCall, 80, 141–42, 184,
284
investigation of Groveland Boys
beatings, 138–42, 184, 194–95, 260–62
investigation of H. T. Moore
assassination, 277, 280, 282, 284, 357
investigation of shootings of S. Shepherd
and W. Irvin, 234–35, 236, 254, 263–
64, 268, 284
protection of Thurgood Marshall


--- PAGE 1375 ---
provided by, 283–84
Feminism, Thurgood Marshall’s, 46–47
Ferguson, Thomas Virgil, 228
Field, Marshall, III, 335
Fisher, Bill (chief of police), 227
Fleming, Billy, 11
Florida
demographic shift in, during mid-1950s,
and resulting social and economic
changes, 343–44
effect of H. T. Moore assassination on
economy of, 279
lynchings in, 3, 100–105, 108
peonage system in citrus industry, and
black labor, 76–81, 96–97, 132–33,
212
Florida Foods Corporation, 76
Florida State prison. 
See
 Raiford, Florida


--- PAGE 1376 ---
State Prison at
Florida Supreme Court, Groveland Boys
trial verdicts and appeals to, 191, 194,
335, 336, 341–42
Florida Writers’ Project, 259
Fordham, William (attorney), 127
Frankfurter, Felix (Supreme Court
justice), 190, 191, 217
Franklin, John Hope, 336–37
Fruitland Park rape case, 356
Fryar, Mack, 79–80
Futch, Truman G. (judge), 109, 145 174,
213
access to W. Irvin in hospital limited by,
234–35, 238
Groveland Boys rape trial and role of,
137, 143, 146, 148, 156–57, 162, 167,
169, 173, 180, 183


--- PAGE 1377 ---
Groveland Boys (W. Irvin) retrial and
role of, 267–69, 286, 287–302, 308,
312, 314–16, 320, 324, 327, 332
orders W. McCall to transport W. Irvin to
court following shooting, 262–63
presides over grand jury investigation of
clemency for W. Irvin, 354–55
removes T. Marshall and J. Greenberg
from Irvin defense team, 269, 270–71
response to U.S. Supreme Court decision,
220
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin,
and response of, 241, 253, 254, 255
Gambling
bolita
 lottery game in Lake County, FL,
78–79, 114–15
Florida Governor F. Warren and, 247–48
in Harlem, 26, 28


--- PAGE 1378 ---
in Washington, D.C., 258–59
Gilbert, Leon, 208
Goff, Cynthia, 101–2
Goff, Phil, lynching of W. Howard and,
102, 104
Graham, Edward T. (Baptist clergyman),
270
Graham, Jimmie, 173
Green, Samuel, 86
Greenberg, Jack (Legal Defense Fund
attorney), 49, 181, 182, 186, 202, 203,
210
, 230, 
303
, 358
fund-raising speeches made by, 334
Groveland Boys case and trial, and role
of, 194, 205, 215, 222, 224, 226, 246,
262
Groveland Boys retrial (W. Irvin) and
role of, 270–71, 284–88, 292, 293, 296,


--- PAGE 1379 ---
327, 338
interaction with J. Hunter about W.
McCall, 315
McLaurin and 
Sweatt
 cases and work of,
189, 190, 198
removed from defending W. Irvin, 269
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and work of, 232–34, 241, 246
witnesses Ku Klux Klan rally, 285–86
Greenlee, Charles (Groveland Boy), 64–
68, 
72
, 73, 167
appeal to Florida Supreme Court, 193
beating of, by law enforcement officers,
73–75, 127, 130–31, 135, 138–42,
184–85
coerced confession from, 179–80
friendship with E. Thomas, 64–65
indictment against, 109


--- PAGE 1380 ---
interviewed by F. Williams, 130–31
jailed by Groveland police, 65–68
Legal Defense Fund decision not to
include in appeal, 182–83
life after prison sentence, 357–58
moved to prevent lynching, 88
sentencing of, 180
trial testimony, 169–71
Griffin, Noel (deputy sheriff, Lake County,
FL), 356
Groveland, Florida, 34
white mob violence in, following N.
Padgett rape report, 62–68, 72–73, 84–
99, 108–9, 161
Groveland Boys, 3, 
72
. 
See also
Greenlee, Charles; Groveland Boys rape
case and trial; Irvin, Walter; Shepherd,
Samuel; Thomas, Ernest


--- PAGE 1381 ---
beatings of, by law enforcement, 73–74,
127–32, 135, 138–42, 147, 184–85,
259–62
indictments against, 109
initial encounter with Padgetts, 36–39
physician’s examination of, following
beatings, 135–36
removal from Tavares jail to Raiford
prison to prevent lynching of, 62–68
shootings of (
see
 Groveland Boys,
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin)
trial appeal of (
see
 Groveland Boys
appeal to U.S. Supreme Court)
Groveland Boys appeals to U.S. Supreme
Court, 202, 
210
, 215–20
Court agrees to hear case, 205
W. Irvin retrial and, 336, 338
T. Marshall’s work on, 215–18


--- PAGE 1382 ---
S. Shepherd and W. Irvin convictions
overturned, 219–20
Groveland Boys rape case and trial, 3–4
N. Bunin investigation of, and exposé in
St. Petersburg Times
, 199–200, 204,
222
confessions in, 128–29, 131, 134, 178–
80
connection to citrus industry, black labor,
and returning black veterans, 132–33
convictions overturned, 219–20
evidence in, 156, 166, 312–14, 315
Governor Collins’s secret investigation
into, 348
indictments, 97–98
jury selection for, 155, 162–63, 216–18,
219–20
posttrial appeal to Florida Supreme


--- PAGE 1383 ---
Court, 191, 193–94
posttrial appeals strategy, 180–83
posttrial motions rejected, 180
posttrial threats to black attorneys and
reporter, 174–77
press coverage, 98, 142, 152, 157–61,
163, 164, 171–74, 180–81, 183–84
pretrial hearings, pretrial motions, and
defense strategy in, 146–49, 155–56
pretrial investigation by F. Williams,
125–37, 160–62
retrial [
see
 Irvin, Walter (Groveland
Boys), retrial of]
search for Florida attorney for trial by F.
Williams, 126–27, 136, 143–44
S. Shepherd and W. Irwin encounter with
Padgetts and fight with Willie Padgett,
36–39


--- PAGE 1384 ---
testimony during trial, 163–73, 213–15
C. and E. Twiss’s and L. Burtoft’s
encounters with N. Padgett following
alleged rape, 58–60
verdict and sentencing, 173–74, 180
Groveland Boys, shootings of S. Shepherd
and W. Irvin, 230–45, 284
access to W. Irvin limited by Judge
Futch, 334–35, 238
alleged conspiracy between J. Hunter and
W. McCall, 344–45
coroner’s inquest into S. Shepherd’s
death, 249–53
Deputy J. Yates’s role in, 230–31, 234–
36, 237, 238, 243–44, 245, 247
J. J. Elliott investigation of, 241
J. Hunter’s response to, 247–48
W. Irvin’s statements on, 242–45, 247,


--- PAGE 1385 ---
250, 254
M. J. Leiby claims Shepherd and Irvin
planned escape, 263–64
T. Marshall’s response to, 241–47
physical evidence in, 250, 
251
, 252, 253,
255
, 263, 268
press coverage of, 241, 245, 247, 255–56
Sheriff W. McCall’s version of 235–38,
250–53
Soviet criticism of, 240
Guthrie, Woody, 121
Hall, W. Troy Jr. (judge, coroner), 235,
262
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and, 237–38, 249–53
Hamlin, Alan (court reporter), questioning
of W. Irvin after shooting and, 242–44
Hammerstein, Oscar, II, 333


--- PAGE 1386 ---
Hampton, L. R., 289
Happy Rhone’s Paradise (Harlem club),
26
Harlem, New York City, 22–28
cooperative groceries in, 24
rent parties in, 23–24
Sugar Hill neighborhood of, 24–28
Harlem Hospital, 30
Harlem Renaissance, 22, 23, 24, 26, 37
Harlow, S. Ralph (clergyman), 307
Harrington, Donald (clergyman), 279–80
Harris, Bill, Governor L. Collins orders
investigation into Groveland Boys case
by, 348, 350, 353–54
Harris, Louis (pollster), 226, 290
Harris, Tom (news editor), 344, 355
Hastie, William H. (judge), 32, 120, 196–
97, 205, 335, 338


--- PAGE 1387 ---
Hatcher, Reuben (jailer, Lake County,
FL), 61, 
72
, 236
beating of C. Greenlee and, 74, 75
Hawkins, Virgil, 143
Hendrix, Bill (KKK official), 265, 285
Henry, Tom (sheriff), 104
Herlong, James (National Guard
lieutenant), 87, 91–92, 184
Heyward, Sammy, 333
Hill, Horace (attorney), 127, 130, 142,
174–77
Holland, Howard (physician), 151
Holland, Spessard (Florida governor),
103
Holland, Spessard L, Jr. (attorney), 136–
37
Hoover, J. Edgar, 4, 27, 134, 142, 282.
See also
 Federal Bureau of Investigation


--- PAGE 1388 ---
(FBI)
relationship with T. Marshall, 110–12,
206, 261, 360
response to H. T. Moore assassination,
280
Horne, Lena, 25, 333
Hotel Theresa, Harlem, 28
House Un-American Activities Committee
(HUAC), 34, 153
Housing discrimination, 137–38
Houston, Bo (son of C. H. Houston), 195,
196
Houston, Charles Hamilton (NAACP
attorney), 24–25, 
40
, 106, 107, 189–90,
337
illness and death of, 185, 195–97
invites T. Marshall to work for NAACP,
42–43


--- PAGE 1389 ---
as mentor to T. Marshall, 8, 22, 197
school inequalities study by, 42–43
works with T. Marshall on cases, 42–43
Houston, Henrietta (wife of C. H.
Houston), 195
Howard, Curtis (filling station attendant),
165, 193,
 212
, 228
defense declines to cross-examine in W.
Irvin retrial, 306–7
suspicions about trial testimony of, 212,
213–15, 225, 304
testimony in retrial of W. Irvin, 303–6
Howard, James (father of Willie
Howard), 100, 102, 103, 104
Howard, Kim (daughter of Curtis
Howard), 306
Howard, Lula (mother of Willie Howard),
102, 103


--- PAGE 1390 ---
Howard, Willie James (lynching victim),
100–105
Hughes, Langston, 25, 26, 333
Hunter, Jesse (Florida state attorney), 
84
,
85, 87, 
124
, 144–45, 
321
alleged conspiracy of, with W. McCall,
to kill Groveland Boys, 344–45
attacks Bunin’s investigative report of
Groveland Boys case, 200
change in attitude toward T. Marshall and
rape cases, 321–22, 360
changes plan for W. McCall to transport
W. Irvin to court for retrial, 262–63
death of Ernest Thomas and, 117
doubts W. Irvin’s guilt, 350, 353
Groveland Boys case and trial and role
of, as prosecutor, 97, 109, 134, 145–46,
148, 149, 157, 164–74, 225


--- PAGE 1391 ---
Groveland Boys (W. Irvin) retrial and
role of, as prosecutor, 223, 267–68,
288, 289, 292–302, 304–5, 308–10,
313–16, 324–26, 330, 332
illness and death of, 345, 356
investigation of prisoner beatings and,
195
motion to disqualify, for Groveland Boys
retrial, 230–31
reindictments of S. Shepherd and W.
Irvin by, 223
relationship with M. N. Reese, 345, 350
response of, to shootings of S. Shepherd
and W. Irvin, and concern about W.
McCall, 236, 237, 239, 315
response of, to Supreme Court decision
on Groveland Boys case, 220
secret meeting with W. Irvin and request


--- PAGE 1392 ---
for confession, 349–50
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and, 245, 247, 253–55
supports Platt family against W.
McCall’s actions, 345–46
takes Padgetts to Raiford prison to
identify suspects, 131
wears red galluses (symbol of
segregation), 293–94
Hurley, Ruby (NAACP official), 249,
264–65
Hurston, Zora Neale, 37, 259
Illegal search, 294–95
Irvin, Cleve (father of Walter Irvin), 140,
226, 238
Irvin, Dellia (mother of Walter Irvin),
238, 292, 293, 329–30
testimony on removal of son’s pants by


--- PAGE 1393 ---
Deputy J. Yates, 294–95
Irvin, Walter (Groveland Boys), 36–39,
72
, 
233
. 
See also
 Groveland Boys;
Groveland Boys rape case and trial
arrest of, 124–25
beatings of, by law enforcement officers,
67, 124–25, 127–31, 135, 138–42,
184–85, 259–62
clemency for, 344, 347–51, 354
commutation of sentence by Governor L.
Collins, 344, 348–55
conviction overturned by U.S. Supreme
Court, 218–20
death, suspicious nature of, 359, 360
on death row, 336
death warrants signed for, 341
fight with Willie Padgett, 38–39
indictments against, 109


--- PAGE 1394 ---
interviewed by F. Williams, 128–30
ninety-day stay of execution for, 194
parole, 358–59
refuses to confess to rape, 130, 134, 178,
349–50
relationship of, with S. Shepherd, 310–11
removed from Tavares jail to prevent
lynching of, 62–68, 130
retrial of [
see
 Irwin, Walter (Groveland
Boys), retrial of]
as returning military veteran, 132–33
shooting of [
see
 Irvin, Walter (Groveland
Boys), shooting of]
stay of execution granted for, 341–43
trial testimony, 169
trial verdict, 173–74
Irvin, Walter (Groveland Boys), retrial of,
284–333


--- PAGE 1395 ---
appeals of verdict in, 335, 336, 338
attorney preparation for, 222–26
call for prosecutorial misconduct in,
326–27
change of venue motions, 268–69, 288
closing arguments in, 316–20, 321–26
commutation of sentence given at, 348–55
defense calls for mistrial, 315
evidence in, 294–95, 301–2, 311–14,
319, 323–24, 338
fund-raising for Legal Defense Fund
based on, 334–35
J. Hunter’s role as prosecutor in, 267–68
jury instructions in, 327–28
jury selection in, 295
life on death row, 287
T. Marshall and J. Greenberg removed
from defense team, then reinstated in,


--- PAGE 1396 ---
269, 270–71, 287–88
T. Marshall’s closing argument in, 316–
20
Masonic distress signal given during, 327
mistrial motion in, 329
motion for new trial, 330
motion to remove J. Hunter for failure to
include L. Burtoft testimony, 268
offered and refuses plea deal, 291–93,
332–33
press coverage of, 295–96, 300, 332
pretrial hearing and motions made, 230,
262, 266–69, 284, 287–95
protest of W. McCall’s transport of W.
Irvin to court, 262–63
public opinion poll on fairness of, 226,
288, 289
reindictments, 223


--- PAGE 1397 ---
shootings of defendants prior to [ see
Irvin, Walter (Groveland Boys),
shooting of]
trial testimony, 295–316
trial testimony, W. Irvin’s, 310–11, 315
undercover investigation of N. Padgett
story and, 204, 210–14, 227–29
verdict and sentencing, 328–30, 331–32
Irvin, Walter (Groveland Boys), shooting
of, 
240
M. J. Leiby claims escape was planned,
263–64
W. McCall’s version of, 230–39
pain following, 286–87
Soviet official’s criticism of, 240
statements about, from hospital bed, 242–
45, 247, 250, 254
Jackson, Eddie (KKK informant), 248


--- PAGE 1398 ---
Jackson, Robert (Supreme Court justice),
217, 220, 335
Jews, Ku Klux Klan attacks on, 265–66
Johns, Charley (acting Florida governor),
341, 342
Johns, Oscar, 96
Johnson, Bumpy, 28
Johnson, James Weldon, 28
Johnson, Lyndon B. (U.S. president), 358
Jones, Charles, 45
Jury selection process, exclusion of
blacks in, 9, 205
as argument in Groveland Boys appeal to
U.S. Supreme Court, 216–18, 219–20
in Groveland Boys (W. Irvin) retrial, 295
in Groveland Boys trial, 155, 162–63
Justice Department, U.S., 31
Civil Rights Division, 360


--- PAGE 1399 ---
investigation of Groveland Boys
beatings, 138, 184
investigation of I. Woodard blinding, 121
investigation of W. Howard lynching,
104
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and, 246
KKK. 
See
 Ku Klux Klan
Kefauver, Estes (senator), 247–48, 259
Kennedy, John F. (U.S. president), 358
Kennedy, “Papa” Lloyd, 13, 14
Kennedy, Stetson (news reporter), 237,
241, 245, 252–53, 281, 357
infiltration of Klan by, 259–60, 290
interaction with J. J. Elliott about
beatings of Groveland Boys, 259–62
Kimbrough, James, 91
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 347, 358


--- PAGE 1400 ---
Kirkland, Wallace, 124
Korean War, 207
Ku Klux Klan (KKK), 3, 72, 83, 105,
141–42, 158, 223
assassination of H. T. Moore and, 284
Brandenberg v. Ohio
 and, 359
community morality enforcement by, 225
J. J. Elliott as member of, 259, 261–62
Groveland, FL, white mob violence and
role of, 85–86, 89–93, 161
indictments for Florida members,
regarding violent incidents, 335–36
infiltration of, by S. Kennedy, 259–60
informants in, 184, 248
law enforcement officers as members of,
17, 91, 109, 139, 141, 282
plan to kill Alex Akerman, 248
racial violence perpetrated by, in


--- PAGE 1401 ---
Florida, 265–66
rally of, witnessed by J. Greenberg, 285–
86
resurgence of violence by, in response to
Brown
 ruling, 339–41
suspected in assassination of H. T.
Moore by members of, 277, 279, 282,
357
Labor, central Florida citrus industry and
black, 76–81, 88, 94, 96–97, 212
Labor unions, citrus industry and
organizing by, 80–81
Law enforcement officers
assaults on, and beatings of blacks by, 
21
,
53, 55–56, 73–75, 111, 120–23, 127–
32, 135, 138–42, 147, 184–85, 259–62
Ku Klux Klan pressure on white, 86–87
Ku Klux Klan relationship with, 17, 91,


--- PAGE 1402 ---
139, 141, 282
Lee, Harper, 3
Leesburg Commercial
 (newspaper), 78
Legal Defense Fund (LDF) of NAACP, 5,
32
financial problems and fund-raising for,
334–35
Groveland Boys case and [
see
 Groveland
Boys rape case and trial; Williams,
Franklin (NAACP attorney)]
guidelines on taking criminal cases, 48–
49
lawsuits by, challenging inequalities, 44,
49, 70, 82
T. Marshall appointed head of, 334
Leiby, Merlin James, claims prison
escape was planned by S. Shepherd and
W. Irvin, 263–64


--- PAGE 1403 ---
Liebman, Joshua Loth, 196
Looby, Zephaniah Alexander (NAACP
attorney), Columbia Race Riot trial and,
9–10, 14–20, 30, 32
Lonesome, Milton “Buddy” (news
reporter), 330, 331
Louis, Joe, 26, 28, 122, 126, 137
Lowe, Ramona (news reporter)
coverage of Groveland Boys case, 159–
60, 163
posttrial high-speed chase and threat to,
174–77
Lynchings of blacks, 
1
, 3, 100–105, 111
of black military veterans, 133
NAACP definition of, 86
Lyons, W. D., murder case/trial of, 52–57,
338
Lyons v. Oklahoma
, 338


--- PAGE 1404 ---
MacArthur, Douglas (U.S. general), 207–
9, 222
McCall, Doris Daley (wife of Willis
McCall), 76
McCall, Willis (sheriff, Lake County, FL),
72
, 75–81, 
84
, 
100
, 110, 194, 
219
, 
232
,
310, 
321
, 322, 356
alleged conspiracy of, with J. Hunter, to
kill Groveland Boys, 344–45
beatings of black laborers by, 79–81
beatings of Groveland Boys by, 130–31,
135, 138–42, 147, 259–62
bolita
 gambling and role of, 78–79, 114–
15
calls to remove from office, 255–56, 264,
266
central Florida citrus industry’s need for
black labor, and role of, 76–81, 133


--- PAGE 1405 ---
credited for preventing mob lynching of
Groveland Boys, 61–68
denies education to children of A. Platt,
340–41, 345–46
as director of National Association for
the Advancement of White People, 341
elections of, 77–78, 357
FBI investigation of, 138–43, 284
finds prisoner who claims Groveland
Boys planned escape, 263–64
C. Greenlee confession and, 178–80
Groveland Boys trial and, 147–49, 167,
169, 173
high-speed chase following Groveland
Boys trial and role of, 174–77, 184
indictment and suspension of, by
Governor Reubin Askew, 357
link to assassination of H. T. Moore, 278,


--- PAGE 1406 ---
357
opposition to commutation of W. Irvin
sentence, 350
protest and change of plan for, to
transport W. Irvin to retrial, 262–63
response to clemency and commutation of
W. Irvin’s sentence, 355
response to Supreme Court decision on
Groveland Boys case, 220–22, 227
response to Supreme Court ruling on
Brown v. Board of Education
, 339–40,
341
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin by
(
see
 Groveland Boys, shootings of S.
Shepherd and W. Irvin)
relationship with Ku Klux Klan, 248, 282
E. Thomas manhunt and murder, and role
of, 113–14, 115–20


--- PAGE 1407 ---
threat to F. Williams from, 168–69
unhappy with press coverage, 183–84,
256–57
white mob violence, black exodus from
Groveland, and role of, 85–93, 97–99,
108–9
McCarthy, Joseph, 153
McCarthy, Terence (news reporter)
on Groveland Boys case, 132–33, 161,
204
on shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin,
238
on southern peonage system, 96–97
McCarty, Dan (Florida governor), 341
McCready, Esther, desegregation case of,
185–86
McDonald, Harry, 227–28
McGrath, J. Howard (U.S. attorney


--- PAGE 1408 ---
general), 280
McKinney, Leroy, connection to Lake
County 
bolita
 operations, 114
McLaurin, George, desegregation case
involving, 187–90, 198
McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents
,
187–90, 198
McLeod, Don (sheriff, Marion County,
FL), 329
Manhattan Project, 34
Mapp v. Ohio
, 294
Margold, Nathan Ross (NAACP attorney),
106–7
Margold Report, 106–7, 198
Marion County, Florida, W. Irvin retrial
moved to, 269, 286–87
Marshall, Aubrey (brother of Thurgood
Marshall), 46


--- PAGE 1409 ---
Marshall, Fearless (uncle of Thurgood
Marshall), 2
Marshall, George C. (U.S. general), 206
Marshall, Norma (mother of Thurgood
Marshall), 46, 337
Marshall, Thorney Good (grandfather of
Thurgood Marshall), 2
Marshall, Thurgood (NAACP attorney)
appeals process, and his strategy of
establishing precedent in, 48–49, 123,
210
, 
303
appointed head of NAACP Legal Defense
Fund, 334
appointed to U.S. Court of Appeals, 358
becomes attorney for NAACP, 22–23
career in law, 359–61
cares for dying wife, 343
casual office manner and humor of, 44–


--- PAGE 1410 ---
45
Columbia Race Riot trial and, 7–11, 14–
20, 29, 30
defense of black American soldiers
serving during Korean War, 207–9
effect of H. T. Moore assassination on,
278, 281–82
efforts to dissociate NAACP from
communism, 26–27, 110–12, 153–55,
206–7
fails to get indictment of J. Yates and L.
Campbell for prison beatings, 194–95
family of, 2, 46
Groveland Boys appeals to Florida
Supreme Court and role of, 191, 193–
94, 335
Groveland Boys appeal to U.S. Supreme
Court and role of, 194, 204, 215–18,


--- PAGE 1411 ---
219, 336
Groveland Boys case/trial and role of, 3–
5, 110, 126, 134, 138, 142, 151
Groveland Boys retrial (W. Irvin) and
role of, 222–26, 230, 260, 262, 267–69,
270–71, 286–95, 299, 306–7, 315–20,
326–30, 335, 342–51
Groveland Boys, shootings of S.
Shepherd and W. Irvin, and role of, 232,
233, 241, 244–45, 246, 256
Harlem home of, 22–28
health of, 10, 29–32
hiring practices of, at NAACP, 46–47
hospitality provided to, 5, 47
C. H. Houston as mentor to, 8, 22, 197
W. Howard lynching case and, 101, 103,
104
legal strategies of, 2, 48–49, 50–51, 53,


--- PAGE 1412 ---
56, 123
letters to, 45–46, 361
Lyons murder case, 52–57
oratorical skills, 270, 334
principle of not using race as excuse, 209
professional reputation of, 5, 45–46, 47,
224
relationship with J. Edgar Hoover, 110–
12, 206, 261
relationship with wife, 41–42
relationships with women, 41, 47, 338
removed from defending W. Irvin in
retrial, 269, 270–71
salary, 181, 206
school desegregation cases, 43–44, 185–
91, 203, 205, 333, 335–40
speaking engagements, 
258
, 269–71, 
353
Spell rape case, 50–52, 306


--- PAGE 1413 ---
stops W. Irvin’s execution, 341–43
as Supreme Court associate justice, 359–
60
Supreme Court cases argued by, 2, 4, 5,
28–29, 53–54, 69–70, 82–83, 335–39
tensions between W. White and, 69–70
tensions between F. Williams and, 202–4
threats to, 4, 15–20, 283–84, 290–91,
333–34
train travel by, 1–2, 21–22, 224
trip to Caribbean, 31–32
university desegregation cases, 185–91,
198
voting rights case, 82–83
wife (
see
 Marshall, Vivian Burey
“Buster”)
work with Harry T. Moore, 107–8
Marshall, Vivian Burey “Buster” (wife of


--- PAGE 1414 ---
Thurgood Marshall), 2, 31, 52, 335, 337
childlessness of, 22, 27
Harlem home, 23, 24, 27
last days and death of, 343
relationship with husband, 41–42, 343
Marshall, Willie (father of Thurgood
Marshall), 2
Marshall Plan, 206
Martin, D. D. (colonel), 208
Martin, John W. (Florida governor), 145
Martinsville Seven, Virginia, 153–54, 291
Masonic distress signal, 327, 335
Matthews, Tobias E. (FBI agent), 138–42,
162
Mays, Benjamin, 201
Mays, George (chief of police,
Groveland, FL), 141, 161
jailing of C. Greenlee by, 65–68


--- PAGE 1415 ---
Maxwell, Joe, 90
Mazique, Edward (physician), 195, 196
Meech, Frank (FBI agent), 282, 357
Merritt, Curtis, 91, 140
The Metropolitan
 (newspaper), 
21
Miami, Florida, NAACP fund-raising in,
269–71
Miami Herald
 (newspaper), 68
Military, desegregation of U.S., 207
Military veterans, black, 11, 12, 36–37,
90, 96, 111, 120–21
connection of Groveland Boys case to
citrus industry, labor, and returning,
132–33
lynchings of, 133
Miller, Loren (attorney), 47
The Mind of the South
 (Cash), 51–52
Mink Slide, Columbia, Tennessee, 12, 13


--- PAGE 1416 ---
Mob violence by whites
in Columbia, TN, 
7
, 11–14
damage to black-owned property caused
by, 92–93, 95–97, 108
in Groveland, FL, following reports of
Padgett rape, 62–68, 72–73, 84–99,
108–9, 161
Moore, Evangeline (daughter of H. T.
Moore), 105–6
Moore, Harriette Vyda Simms (wife of H.
T. Moore), 105, 106, 273, 275, 277–78,
280–81, 
283
, 333
Moore, Harry Tyson (NAACP official),
103–8, 248–49, 264–66, 273–82, 
283
G. Current’s criticism of NAACP work
of, 246–47, 248
disillusionment of, 264–65
events following assassination of, 283–


--- PAGE 1417 ---
84
funeral, 279–81
house bombing and assassination of,
273–76
investigations of assassination of, 277,
280, 281, 282, 357
T. Marshall seeks support of, in
Groveland Boys case, 246–47
NAACP benefit in honor of, 333
press coverage and responses to death of,
277–82
threats made to, 249
visits Miami to hear T. Marshall speak,
269–72
work on Groveland Boys case, 108–9,
127, 134–35, 142, 201–2, 249, 266,
276
work on W. Howard lynching case, 103–


--- PAGE 1418 ---
05
work on NAACP causes, 105–8, 201–2,
271–72
voter registration efforts by, 83
Moore, Peaches (daughter of H. T.
Moore), 273, 275
Moore, Rosa (mother of H. T. Moore),
265, 273, 274, 275, 281
Moore, Simmie (sheriff, Madison County,
FL), 116, 118
Morton, Mary, 13
Morton Funeral Home, Columbia, TN,
vandalism of, 
7, 13
Motley, Constance Baker (NAACP
attorney), 44, 46, 89, 110, 120, 186, 189,
190
Mount Dora Topic
 (newspaper), 81, 84,
98, 135. 
See also
 Reese, Mabel Norris


--- PAGE 1419 ---
(news reporter)
Mt. Zion Baptist Church, Miami, T.
Marshall speaks at, 
258
, 269–72
Murphy, Frank (Supreme Court Justice),
82
Murray, Donald Gaines, 185
NAACP. 
See
 National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
Nabrit, James, Jr., 
210
Nail in tire as evidence in shootings of S.
Shepherd and W. Irvin, 251
Nation
 (periodical), 183, 241
National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People (NAACP). 
See also
Legal Defense Fund (LDF) of NAACP
call for investigation of W. McCall by,
80
capital punishment program, 5


--- PAGE 1420 ---
cases on desegregation of universities,
185–91
challenge to “separate but equal”
doctrine by, 43–44, 186–91 (see also
Brown v.
 
Board of Education
; School
desegregation)
Columbia Race Riot trial and, 7–11, 14–
20
educational/school inequalities
addressed by, 42–43, 106–7
fund-raising for Groveland Boys case,
269–71, 
283
,
lynching flags displayed by, 
1
, 3
Ku Klux Klan attacks on, 265–66
T. Marshall becomes attorney for, 22–23
membership decline and financial
problems of, 201–2
New York offices, 
1
, 44–47, 186


--- PAGE 1421 ---
threats to lawyers working for, 4, 9, 15–
20, 168–69, 174–77, 182–84, 248,
283–84, 290–91, 333–34
National Association for the Advancement
of White People, 341
National Guard, in Groveland, FL, to stop
white mob violence, 87, 89–93, 97–99,
100
, 109
National Research Corporation, 76
New Leader
 (newspaper), 132, 204
Newspaper Guild, CIO, 221
New York City, Harlem, 22–28
New York Compass
, 295, 329
New York Daily News
 (newspaper), 50
New York Post
 (newspaper), 126, 
150
,
158, 173, 183, 221, 240, 257, 295, 332
New York Times
 (newspaper), 68, 198,
295, 332


--- PAGE 1422 ---
on assassination of H. T. Moore, 277–78,
279–80
Nischwitz, Robert (FBI agent), 277
Ocala Star-Banner
 (newspaper), 135
Oklahoma State University
,
desegregation of, 187–90
Orlando Sentinel
 (newspaper), 68, 212,
232, 238, 277, 295
call for death penalty in Groveland Boys
case, 98, 
113
Ernest Thomas death and, 118–19
Owens, Buck (detective), 204
Padgett, Norma Lee Tyson (alleged rape
victim), 3, 33–36, 85, 
150
confronts Governor Collins about W.
Irvin’s clemency, 355
defense strategy toward, in W. Irvin
retrial, 306–7


--- PAGE 1423 ---
divorce from W. Padgett, 358
given bullet from body of Ernest Thomas
by W. McCall, 119–20
identifies alleged rapists, 66
identifies body of Ernest Thomas, 117
initial encounter with S. Shepherd and W.
Irvin, 36–38
interviewed by reporter N. Bunin, 200
physician’s examination of, 142–43,
150–52, 162, 268
questions and doubts about rape claims
and testimony of, 160–62, 172, 193–94,
204, 212–14, 224–26
relationship with husband Willie, 33–36
reputation, 35, 161
signature in anti–death penalty petition
book, 229, 351, 354, 355
testimony in Groveland Boys (W. Irvin)


--- PAGE 1424 ---
retrial, 296–300
testimony in Groveland Boys trial, 165–
66
C. Twiss and L. Burtoft encounters with,
following alleged rape, 58–60
undercover private investigation of, 204,
210–14, 227–29
Padgett, Willie Haven (husband of Norma
Padgett), 
33
–36, 60, 64, 85, 117, 
124
divorce from Norma Padgett, 358
fight with S. Shepherd and W. Irvin, 38–
39
identifies S. Shepherd and W. Irvin, 124–
25
as suspected originator of rape
accusation, 224–25
testifies in Groveland Boys (W. Irvin)
retrial, 296


--- PAGE 1425 ---
testifies in Groveland Boys trial, 164–65
unable to identify C. Greenlee, 66, 67
Parke, Richard H. (news reporter), 295
Patterson, William (communist activist,
lawyer), 152–55, 291
Peace of Mind
 (Liebman), 196
Peonage, Florida citrus industry and black
labor as, 76–81, 96–97, 132–33, 212
Pepper, Claude (senator), 103, 200, 212
Perkins, Paul (Florida attorney), 
303
retrial of Groveland Boy W. Irvin, and
work of, 222–23, 225, 226, 230, 286,
292, 294, 312, 314, 317, 330, 335, 336
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and, 233, 241
Perry, Marian Wynn (attorney), 46, 48
Peyser, Annette (NAACP sociologist), 44
Phillips, Alexander (U.S. attorney


--- PAGE 1426 ---
general’s office), 184–85
Phillips, Herbert (U.S. attorney), files
charges against J. Yates and L. Campbell
for prisoner beatings, 194–95, 348
Phillips, Leon Chase (Oklahoma
governor), 52, 54
Physician examination and report on
Norma Padgett, 142–43, 150–52, 162,
268
Pillow, “Rooster Bill,” 13, 14
Pillsbury, W. H., 94
Pittsburgh Courier
 (newspaper), 9, 40–
41, 152, 160, 220, 245, 257, 330
Plaster casts as evidence in Groveland
Boys trials, 156, 166, 180, 312–14, 315,
319, 325, 356
Platt, Allan, and family
children denied access to public schools


--- PAGE 1427 ---
by W. McCall, 340–41
home firebombed, 345–46
Plessy v. Ferguson
, 43, 44, 187, 189,
198, 203, 338
Pogue, Jim “Buck,” 19
Pollack, Louis H., 186
Porter, Edward, Jr. (sheriff, Marion
County, FL), 269
Porter, Gilbert, 107
Poston, Ted (news reporter)
coverage of Groveland Boys trial by,
158–59, 160, 167, 171–74, 221, 267
posttrial high-speed chase and subsequent
report on, 174–77, 181–84
Powers, Ormond (news reporter), 221,
295
on Sheriff W. McCall’s testimony in
Ernest Thomas death, 18–19


--- PAGE 1428 ---
suspicions about testimony of Curtis
Howard, 212–15
Press. 
See also names of individual
reporters
coverage of Columbia Race Riot trial,
14–16, 19, 20
coverage of Groveland Boys rape case
and trial, 98, 142, 152, 157–61, 163,
164, 167, 171–74, 180–81, 183, 212
coverage of Groveland mob violence by,
88–92
coverage of Groveland Boys (W. Irvin)
retrial, 295–96, 300, 329, 332
coverage of H. T. Moore assassination,
277–80
coverage of shootings of S. Shepherd and
W. Irvin, 232, 236–39, 241, 247, 255–
56


--- PAGE 1429 ---
posttrial coverage of Groveland Boys
case by N. Bunin, 199–200, 204
Sheriff W. McCall credited for
preventing lynching by, 68
threats to reporters, 92, 158, 174–77
Progressive Voters League, 83, 202, 266
Puryear, Elma Lee (mayor of Groveland,
FL), 66–67, 87, 93, 94, 139–40, 141
Quigley, John I. (FBI agent), 138–42, 162
Racial violence in Florida, 265–66. 
See
also
 Assaults on blacks by law
enforcement officers; Lynchings of
blacks
Raiford, Florida State prison at, 
178
Groveland Boys removed from jail to, in
order to prevent lynching, 62–68, 88,
130
W. Irvin returned to, following retrial,


--- PAGE 1430 ---
332–33
W. McCall visits death-row prisoners at,
263–64
physician examination of Groveland Boys
in, 135–36
F. Williams interviews Groveland Boys
in, 127–32
Rangel, Charles, 40
Rape cases, 50–52, 70, 86, 153–54, 356.
See also
 Groveland Boys rape case and
trial
Rape complex, southern, 51–52
Ratcliffe, Robert (news reporter), 330
Raymond, Harry (news reporter), 14–16,
19, 20
Red Scare, 34, 82, 153
Reese, Mabel Norris (news reporter),
124
, 135, 202, 38, 359. 
See also


--- PAGE 1431 ---
Chelsey, Mabel Norris
on blacks fleeing Groveland at white mob
violence, 84–85
changing attitudes of, 321–22, 330, 339,
360
coverage of Groveland Boys (W. Irvin)
retrial, 296, 299
coverage of Groveland Boys trial by, and
strained relationship with F. Williams,
109, 156, 157–58, 163, 164, 171, 174,
180–81, 182, 183
coverage of Platt children being denied
access to education, and resulting
Pulitzer Prize nomination, 340–41, 345
on Deputy J. Yates, 180
divorce and remarriage, 358
on T. Poston, 183
praises T. Marshall and 
Brown v. Board


--- PAGE 1432 ---
of Education  ruling, 339
present at questioning of W. Irvin
following shooting, 241–45
protest against grand jury investigation of
W. Irvin’s commutation, and violence
directed at, 355
relationship with J. Hunter, 345, 350
on Sheriff W. McCall, 81, 98
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and response of, 239, 245, 250
support for civil rights movement, 358
Reeves, Frank (NAACP attorney), 260
Rent parties, Harlem, 23–24
Report of the President’s Committee on
Civil Rights
, 134
Rickey, Branch, 27
Ridgway, Matthew (U.S. general), 222
Robeson, Paul, 25, 28, 34, 152–53


--- PAGE 1433 ---
Robinson, Jackie, 27, 282
Rogers, Elmer and Mrs., and son Elvie
Dean, murder of, 52–53
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 30, 31, 70, 278
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano (U.S.
president), 30–31, 76, 338
Roper Center for Public Opinion
Research at Williams College, 226
Roper Survey, 226, 288–90
Rosewood Massacre, Florida (1923), 94
Roxborough, Mildred (NAACP
secretary), 44, 46
Rutledge, Wiley (Supreme Court Justice),
186, 188–89
Rynearson, Spencer, 236, 250
St. Clair, Stephanie “Queenie,” 26, 28
St. Petersburg Times
, 241, 344, 355, 359
reporter N. Bunin’s investigation of


--- PAGE 1434 ---
Groveland Boys case, and exposé in,
199–200, 204, 222, 267
Samuels, Gloria (NAACP secretary), 46
Saturday Evening Post
 (periodical), 266,
295
School desegregation, NAACP legal work
on behalf of, 43–44, 143, 185–91, 203,
205, 333, 335–40
School inequalities, 42–43, 107. 
See also
Education
Scott, Julia, 28
Scottsboro Boys case, Alabama, 86, 152,
347
Scottsboro Defense Committee, 347
Scully, Vincent, 22
“Separate but equal” standard, 43, 44, 43–
44, 198, 338
Shelley v. Kraemer
, 137


--- PAGE 1435 ---
Shepherd, Charlie Mae (wife of Henry
Shepherd), 95, 96, 149
Shepherd, Henry (father of Samuel
Shepherd), white mob destruction of
property owned by, 84, 95–97, 132, 149,
226
Shepherd, James (brother of Samuel
Shepherd), 37, 96, 148–49, 292
Shepherd, Samuel (Groveland Boy), 36–
39, 
72
, 
233
. 
See also
 Groveland Boys;
Groveland Boys rape case and trial
arrest of, 124–25
beatings of, by law enforcement officers,
67, 124–25, 127–30, 135, 138–42, 147,
184–85, 259–62
confession, 129, 134, 178
conviction overturned by U.S. Supreme
Court, 219–20


--- PAGE 1436 ---
fight with Willie Padgett, 38–39
gives warning to lawyer F. Williams,
168–69
home destroyed by white mob, 92
indictments against, 109
interviewed by F. Williams, 127–30
ninety-day stay of execution for, 194
relationship of, with W. Irvin, 310–11
removed from Tavares jail to prevent
lynching of, 62–68, 130
as returning military veteran, 132–33
shooting and death of, 230–39, 242–43,
249–53, 263–64
trial testimony, 168–69
trial verdict, 173–74
Shepherd v. Florida
, 215–18, 219–20,
222
Shull, Linwood (police officer), beating


--- PAGE 1437 ---
of Isaac Woodard and trial of, 121
Simms, George (brother-in-law of H. T.
Moore), 275, 276, 281
Singleton, Henry
bolita
 operation run by, and relationship
with Sheriff W. McCall, 114–15, 167
as witness in Groveland Boys trial, 149,
167, 172
Sipuel v. Board of Regents of Univ. of
Okla.,
 187–89
Small’s Paradise (Harlem club), 23
Smith, Marvin, 228
Smith v. Allwright
, 28–29, 82–83
Spaulding, Nelson (physician),
examination of Groveland Boys’
injuries, 135–36
Spell, Joseph, rape case and trial, 50–52,
306


--- PAGE 1438 ---
Spingarn, Stephen, 155
Spingarn Medal, 26, 28, 29, 197, 333
Stacy, Rubin (lynching victim), 3
Starke, George (physician), 276, 277, 280
Starr, Ruth N., 361
Starr, Dave (sheriff, Orange County, FL),
221, 284, 286
State of Florida v. Samuel Shepherd,
Walter Irvin, Ernest E. Thomas
, 163.
See also
 Groveland Boys rape case and
trial
Stephenson, Gladys, 11, 12, 30
Stephenson, James, 11, 12
Stevens, John Paul (Supreme Court
justice), 188
Stinney, George, Jr., murder case of, 334
Stovall, Alice (NAACP secretary), 5, 27
Strubing, Eleanor, rape case, 50–52, 306


--- PAGE 1439 ---
Stuckey Still, white mob violence in, 87,
89–93, 95–97, 108–9
Sugar Hill neighborhood of Harlem, 25–
28
Sullins, C. E., 91
Supreme Court, U.S.
Groveland Boys appeals to, 202, 205,
210,
 215–20, 336, 338, 342, 344
T. Marshall cases argued before, 2, 4, 5,
28–29, 53–54, 69–70, 82–83, 120,
186–91, 198, 335, 336–39
Suyat, Cecilia (NAACP secretary), 339
Sweatt, Heman Marion, desegregation
case involving, 186–91, 198
Sweatt v. Painter
, 186–88, 189, 190, 198
Swinney, Wayne (FBI agent), 236, 283–
84
Talmadge, Herman, 293–94


--- PAGE 1440 ---
Tampa Tribune  (newspaper), 79
Tennessee State Guard, 13
Texas Primary Case, 28–29
They Shall Be Free
 (Chalmers), 347
Thomas, Ernest (Groveland Boy), 89
as 
bolita
 lottery game peddler, 114–15
death ruled justifiable homicide, 119–20
flees Groveland at reports of mob
violence, 73, 85
friendship with C. Greenlee, 64–65, 114
manhunt and killing of, 113–14, 115–19,
126, 131
Thomas, Ethel (mother of Ernest Thomas),
73, 114, 149
testimony in Groveland Boys trial, 167
Thomas, Luther (father of Ernest Thomas),
149
Thomas, Milton C. (editor), 118, 221


--- PAGE 1441 ---
suspicions about Groveland Boys trial
testimony, 212–15
Thomas, Ruby Lee (wife of Ernest
Thomas), 115
Thurmond, Strom, 83
Till, Emmett (lynching victim), 100–101
Time
 (periodical), 340, 344, 349 354
To Kill a Mockingbird
 (Lee), 3
Tomlinson, Betty Lou (cousin of Norma
Padgett), 229
Trains, Thurgood Marshall on segregated,
1–2, 3, 21–22
Truman, Harry (U.S. president), 34, 121,
134, 196, 280, 341
desegregation of U.S. military by, 207,
208, 222
Tuck, Jay Nelson (news reporter), 257,
295


--- PAGE 1442 ---
Tureaud, A. P. (attorney), 47–48
Twiss, Clifton and Ethel, encounter with
N. Padgett following alleged rape, 58–
59, 213, 215
Tyson, Coy (father of Norma Padgett), 34,
35, 64, 69, 73, 93, 99, 200
United States Supreme Court (
see
Supreme Court, U.S.)
University of Florida Oral History
Project, 358
University of Maryland School of
Nursing, desegregation of, 185–86
University of Texas Law School,
desegregation of, 186–91, 197
Valree, George, 
bolita
 operations and
connection to Ernest Thomas, 114–15
Valree, Mary Hunter “Little,” 92–93
Veterans (
see
 Military veterans, black)


--- PAGE 1443 ---
Vinson, Fred (Supreme Court justice), 342
Violence (
see
 Assaults on blacks by law
enforcement officers; Lynchings of
blacks; Mob violence by whites)
Vishinsky, Andrei (Soviet minister), 240
Voter registration campaigns, 83
Voting rights, 28–29, 82–83
Waddy, Joseph, 195
Wall, Robert (FBI agent), 254
Waller, Fats, 23
Wann, M. L., 86
Waring, Julius Waties (judge), 203
Warren, Fuller (Florida governor), 87, 99,
108–9, 126, 233, 246, 276, 355
appoints investigator J. J. Elliott to
Groveland Boys shootings, 241–42
calls to, for pardon of W. Irvin, 332
calls to, for removal of W. McCall, 264


--- PAGE 1444 ---
concern about press coverage of H. T.
Moore assassination for Florida
economy, 279
fails to remove Sheriff McCall after
shootings, 255–56
offers plea deal to W. Irvin, 291–93
political problems related to gambling,
247–48, 258–59
sends warning about threats to T.
Marshall, 290–91
Washington, D.C., gambling in, 258–59
Washington Post
, 278
Watts, Roland, 204
investigation of Groveland Boys trial
testimony and, 211–15
Watts v. Indiana
, 120, 191, 202
Weaver, Maurice (NAACP attorney),
Columbia Race Riot trial and, 10, 14–


--- PAGE 1445 ---
20, 30
Weaver, Virginia (wife of Maurice
Weaver), 10
Welles, Orson, 121
White, Gladys, 26
White, Walter (NAACP executive
secretary), 9, 15, 20, 25, 26, 28, 29, 32,
42, 111–12, 120, 222, 338
attends H. T. Moore’s funeral, 280, 281
criticism of, and leave of absence, 68–71
returns to NAACP after leave, 201
salary, 206
tensions between T. Marshall and, 69–70
F. Williams alignment with, 191–92,
202–4
White Citizens Council, 339
Wilkins, Norton, 86–87, 93–94, 140, 141,
153, 202


--- PAGE 1446 ---
Wilkins, Roy (acting secretary, NAACP),
69, 181
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin,
and response of, 246
Williams, Bill (sheriff, Broward County,
FL), 277
Williams, Franklin (NAACP attorney),
21
, 71, 110, 120–23, 125–37, 153, 186,
189, 190, 
210
, 333
alignment with W. White, 191–92, 202–4
ambition of, to argue before U.S.
Supreme Court, 190
appointed ambassador to Ghana, 358
on N. Bunin’s investigative report on
Groveland Boys case, 200
concerns about personal physical safety,
137, 168–69, 174–77
on Florida State Attorney Jesse Hunter,


--- PAGE 1447 ---
145–46
Groveland Boys appeal to Florida
Supreme Court and role of, 190–91,
193–94
Groveland Boys appeal to U.S. Supreme
Court and role of, 215–17, 222
Groveland Boys retrial and role of, 224–
25
housing and transportation issues while in
Florida, 126
joins NAACP legal staff, 120
oratorical skills, 182
post-Groveland Boys trial high-speed
chase, and threat to, 174–77, 183–85
pretrial hearings, pretrial motions, and
defense strategy in Groveland Boys
case handled by, 142–49, 155–56
pretrial investigation of Groveland Boys


--- PAGE 1448 ---
case by, 125–37, 142, 152, 160–62
search for Florida attorney for Groveland
case, 126–27, 136, 143–44
tensions between T. Marshall and, 202–4
trial proceedings in Groveland Boys case
and work of, 155–74
work on Isaac Woodard legal case, and
speaking tour, 121–23, 181
Williams, Rabun (physician), 250
Woodard, C. Van, 337
Woodard, Isaac, police assault on,
blinding of, trial, and speaking tour with
Franklin Williams, 
21
, 111, 120–23,
181, 201
Workers Defense League, 204, 211
investigation into forced labor in Florida
citrus industry, 212
Wright, Louis T., 31–32


--- PAGE 1449 ---
Wright, Richard, 26, 28
Wyland, Ben F. (clergyman), 355
Yates, James (deputy sheriff, Lake County,
FL), 33, 
84
, 
100
, 180, 304, 
321
, 322
beating of C. Greenlee by, 74–75, 130–
31, 135, 138–42, 184–85
beating of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin by,
124–25, 127–30, 259–62
beatings of black laborers by, 82
FBI investigation of, 138–42, 194–95
first questioning of C. Greenlee by, 65–
66, 213
Fruitland Park rape case and, 356
grand jury fails to indict, for Groveland
Boys beatings, 194–95
perjury and conspiracy indictment
against, 356
plaster casts made by, 156, 166, 180,


--- PAGE 1450 ---
312–14, 315, 319, 323–25, 356
removes Groveland Boys to prevent
lynching, 62, 88, 130
shootings of S. Shepherd and W. Irvin
and role of, 230–31, 234–36, 237, 238,
243–44, 245, 247
testimony at Groveland Boys (W. Irvin)
retrial, 300–302
testimony at Groveland Boys trial, 166
testimony on his removal of W. Irvin’s
pants as evidence, 156, 294–95, 301–2
Yde, Emil, 78


--- PAGE 1451 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
M
Y MOST SINCERE
 thanks go to Jack
Greenberg, the Legal Defense Fund
attorney who served as Thurgood
Marshall’s right-hand man throughout the
Groveland Boys case. Professor
Greenberg’s assistance was invaluable to
me, as he patiently explained, clarified,
and otherwise pointed me in the right
direction with regard to the many
questions I had in the research and writing
of this book. I could not be more
appreciative of his generosity, candor, and
willingness to help me tell this story.


--- PAGE 1452 ---
I am eternally grateful and forever
indebted to Ted Wells, Jeffrey Robinson,
and Debo Adegbile at the NAACP Legal
Defense and Educational Fund for all that
they did to arrange my access to the LDF
files. Adrienne Cannon in the Manuscript
Division at the Library of Congress was
instrumental in this process, too, and I’m
thankful for her help and guidance along
the way.
There were a great many people who
were kind enough to spend time talking to
me; sharing notes, memories, clippings,
photographs, and records; and helping me
to better understand this story, this time in
American history, and Thurgood Marshall.
In particular I would like to thank Cecilia
“Cissy” Marshall, Evangeline Moore, the


--- PAGE 1453 ---
late Stetson Kennedy, Vernon Jordan, the
late Norman Bunin, Gloria Samuels, Kim
Howard Turner, Gary Corsair, Ben Green,
Mark Tushnet, Daniel Richman,
Alexander Tureaud, Rachel Emanuel,
Isaac Flores, Susan C. McCarthy, Caxton
Doggett, Ernest Hekkanen, Robin Bridges,
Kathleen Eckelt, and Marvin Dunn. I count
each and every one of these conversations
as a gift, and I am most thankful for their
kindness and their generosity. I was also
fortunate to speak with several people
who, for various reasons, have asked me
not to identify them. But their insights and
contributions to this story were important,
and I’m thankful they were willing to
share a painful part of the past with me.
This book benefits tremendously from


--- PAGE 1454 ---
the research and counsel of the brilliant
Matthew J. Boylan of the ASK NYPL
division of the New York Public Library,
who is in a category all by himself, and an
indispensable source on history, political
science, law, and journalism, to name but
a few.
Early versions of my manuscript were
turned over to a number of trusted friends
who were charitable enough to read and
offer valuable advice and encouragement.
Karen Abbott lent her sharp eyes and
well-honed storytelling instincts, and Jim
Wohl his astute judgment and big-picture
sensibilities. Both brought their sense of
humor (in the margins and comments) to
the most grinding of work—the rewrites.
Carlo DeVito is, as always, an optimistic


--- PAGE 1455 ---
force of nature, spurring me on whenever I
got stuck (often), while attorney
extraordinaire Tom Burka was always
there with the answers to my strange and
perplexing legal questions. Betsy West
gave me sage journalistic advice, and
Anita Kimberly Sower and Dorothy King
were trusty researchers who helped me
track down material across the country.
Boyd Murphree, archivist at the State
Archives of Florida, and William Lefevre
at the Walter P. Reuther Library at Wayne
State University helped me get my hands
on files and information that were
essential to this book, and Judi Mackey
came through for me in a very big way.
I’m also grateful to the staffs of the
National Archives, the Library of


--- PAGE 1456 ---
Congress, the University of South Florida
Libraries Special Collections, the
Schomburg Center for Research in Black
Culture, the Moorland Spingarn Research
Center, Howard University, the Rare
Books and Manuscript Library, Butler
Library, Columbia University, and the
New York Public Library.
I don’t know what I would do without
the discerning Peter Skutches in my
corner, looking over my manuscript.
Patient, reassuring, and indefatigable, he’s
a godsend of a friend and a devil with a
green pencil.
I’m grateful to my longtime friend Joe
Hamilla and his family (Cheryl, Hanna,
and Jonathan), who were kind enough to
put me up, and put up with me, over


--- PAGE 1457 ---
several research trips to Lake County, as
well as to Janet, Jack, and Chase Wohl for
their Southern hospitality. And to another
longtime friend, Tom Schmidt, whose
good company and comfortable couch kept
me well rested during my stays in
Washington, D.C., despite all the
caffeinated beverages. For love and
support, profound gratitude to the upstate
Kings, Ed, Janette, Emily, Eileen, and
Jimmy, as well as Dorothy King, Mary
Jane Miles, and the ever-present Poppy.
Special thanks to my former editor,
Julia Cheiffetz, whose passion for this
story from the very beginning was
inspiring, and to Gail Winston, my current
editor, who enthusiastically took over the
reins of this book and expertly guided it to


--- PAGE 1458 ---
completion. I couldn’t be more grateful for
Gail’s composure and calm assurances on
an entirely smooth transition. Also at
Harper, Maya Ziv and Katie Salisbury
were immensely helpful and efficient,
Tom Pitoniak was ever alert and
meticulous, and Melanie Jones showed
great diligence in her legal read of the
manuscript.
I’m extraordinarily lucky to have Farley
Chase as my agent—always encouraging,
clearheaded, and sharp as they come. It’s
a pleasure to acknowledge my respect and
admiration for him.
Finally, there are only a few words that
matter for the three girls who matter most,
Lorna, Maddie, and Liv. I love you.


--- PAGE 1459 ---
About the Author
Gilbert King has written about U.S.
Supreme Court history and capital
punishment for the 
New York Times
 and
the 
Washington Post
, and is a featured
contributor to 
Smithsonian
 magazine’s
history blog, 
Past Imperfect.
 He is the
author of 
The Execution of Willie
Francis: Race, Murder, and the Search
for Justice in the American South
. He
lives in New York City with his wife and
two daughters.
Visit 
www.AuthorTracker.com
 for


--- PAGE 1460 ---
exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins authors.


--- PAGE 1461 ---
Also by Gilbert King
The Execution of Willie Francis


--- PAGE 1462 ---
(Courtesy of Cecil Williams)


--- PAGE 1463 ---
Credits
Cover photography courtesy of
the State Archives of Florida
Cover design by Chris Sergio


--- PAGE 1464 ---
Copyright
DEVIL IN THE GROVE
. Copyright © 2012 by Gilbert
King. All rights reserved under International and
Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been
granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to
access and read the text of this e-book on-screen.
No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any
information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or
mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented,
without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST EDITION


--- PAGE 1465 ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication
Data
   King, Gilbert.
      Devil in the grove: Thurgood Marshall, the
Groveland Boys, and the dawn of a new America /
Gilbert King.—1st ed.
         p. cm.
   ISBN 978-0-06-179228-1 (hardback)
   1. Discrimination in criminal justice
administration—Florida—Groveland.
2. Groveland (Fla.)—Race relations. 3. Rape—
Florida—Groveland. 4. African Americans—
Civil rights. 5. Marshall, Thurgood, 1908–1993.
6. National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People. I. Title.
HV9956.G76K56 2012
305.896'073075922—dc23
2011033757
EPub Edition © MARCH 2012 ISBN:


--- PAGE 1466 ---
9780062097712
 
12  13  14  15  16  OV/RRD  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1


--- PAGE 1467 ---
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty.
Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (P.O. Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollins.ca


--- PAGE 1468 ---
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand)
Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street


--- PAGE 1469 ---
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollins.com


--- PAGE 1470 ---
NOTES
The pagination of this electronic edition
does not match the edition from which it
was created. To locate a specific passage,
please use the search feature of your e-
book reader.
 
Prologue
2  “nigger briefs”:
 Greenberg, 
Crusaders
in the Courts
, p. 71.
2  “inherent defects”:
 Remarks of
Thurgood Marshall at the Annual Seminar
of the San Francisco Patent and
Trademark Law Association, Maui,


--- PAGE 1471 ---
Hawaii, May 6, 1987; commonly referred
to as Marshall’s “Bicentennial Speech.”
Thurgood Marshall Papers, Manuscript
Division, Library of Congress.
2  the Founding Father of the New
America:
 
Jet
, February 22, 1983. On the
naming of the Thurgood Marshall Federal
Judiciary Building in 1993, Georgia
representative John Lewis praised
Marshall, stating, “Supreme Court Justice
Thurgood Marshall laid the foundation, in
the legal sense, of the modern Civil Rights
Movement. I would go far enough to say
that he must be considered the founding
father of the New America. . . . We would
not have made the progress we have
made, without the leadership and ability
of a man like Thurgood Marshall.”


--- PAGE 1472 ---
3  “I could see my dead body”:
Columbia University Oral History Project,
Thurgood Marshall with Ed Erwin,
Columbia Center for Oral History,
Columbia University, Butler Library, New
York, NY (hereafter cited as COHP,
Marshall).
3  “
the nigger Shepherd
”:
 Samuel
Proctor Oral History Project, Franklin
Williams, interview by David Colburn
and Steve Lawson, University of Florida,
Gainesville (hereafter cited as FOHP,
Williams).
4  “battle fatigue”:
 Clark, 
Toward
Humanity and Justice
, p. 107.
4  “You know,” Marshall said:
 Ibid.
4  “suicidal crusader”:
 Rowan, 
Dream


--- PAGE 1473 ---
Makers, Dream Breakers , p. 7.
4  “Thurgood says he needs me,”:
 Ibid.
4  “There is very little truth”:
Marshall’s speech, 1966 White House
conference on civil rights, 
Thurgood
Marshall: Justice for All
, A&E
Biography, 2005.
5  It also became the impetus:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 93.
5  “glued together”:
 Ball, “ ‘Thurgood’s
Coming’: Tale of a Hero Lawyer.”
5  “Men are needed to sit”:
 Clark and
Davis, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 107.
5  “They came in their jalopy”:
Williams, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 201.


--- PAGE 1474 ---
5  “a lawyer that a white man”:  Janis
Johnson, “A Tense Time in Tennessee,”
Humanities
, Vol. 25, No. 2, March/April
2004,
http://www.neh.gov/news/humanities/2004-
03/tennessee.
5  “Thurgood’s coming”:
 The original
source of this phrase is unknown, but the
phrase “Thurgood’s coming,” or “the
lawyer’s coming,” has been repeated
countless times in stories by Marshall’s
former Supreme Court clerks and quoted
in articles, books, and law journals.
Chapter 1: Mink Slide
7  “If that son of a bitch”:
 Dray, 
At the
Hands of Persons Unknown
, p. 373.
8  soda fountains:
 O’Brien, 
The Color of


--- PAGE 1475 ---
the Law , p. 66.
8  “spit-spangled”:
 Leon A. Ransom to
Daisy Lampkin, Library of Congress,
Manuscript Division, NAACP Papers,
November 14, 1946 (NAACP).
8  “those niggers up there”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 137.
8  “the first major racial”:
 Stephen
Smith and Kate Ellis, 
American
RadioWorks: Thurgood Marshall Before
the Court
,
http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/marshall/.
8  “Lose your head”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 41.
9  “law enforcement would”:
 
Daily
Worker
, November, 20, 1946.
9  “the situation in”:
 Walter White to


--- PAGE 1476 ---
Robert Carter et al., NAACP, June 8,
1946.
9  “no telephone calls”:
 Ibid.
9  “create a nation-wide”:
 White to
Thurgood Marshall, NAACP, June 12,
1946.
10  “broke and bedraggled”:
 O’Brien,
The Color of the Law
, p. 224.
10  “You almost started”:
 Janis Johnson,
“A Tense Time in Tennessee,”
Humanities
, Vol. 25, No. 2, March/April
2004,
http://www.neh.gov/news/humanities/2004-
03/tennessee.html.
10  “terrible summer of 1946”:
 White, 
A
Man Called White
, p. 325.
11  “The Columbia case,” he said:


--- PAGE 1477 ---
Marshall to Ransom, NAACP, undated.
11  “What you stop”:
 Ikerd, 
No More
Social Lynchings
, p. 14.
11  “Kill the bastards!”:
 Minor,
Lynching and Frame-Up in Tennessee
,
p. 48.
11  “Stephenson niggers”:
 O’Brien, 
The
Color of the Law
, p. 11.
12  “Let us have them”:
 Ibid., p. 12.
12  “We fought for freedom”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 133.
12  “blankets over their”:
 Ibid.
12  “Uptown, they are”:
 Ikard, 
No More
Social Lynchings
, p. 19.
12  “Here they come!”:
 O’Brien, 
The
Color of the Law
, p. 18.


--- PAGE 1478 ---
13  “burn them out”:  Ikard, No More
Social Lynchings
, p. 33.
13  “You black sons”:
 O’Brien, 
The
Color of the Law
, p. 24. O’Brien cites the
testimony in 
State of Tennessee v.
William A. Pillow and Lloyd Kennedy,
with Kennedy recalling a patrolman
shouting, “You black sons of so and so . . .
” I took the liberty of using instead “You
black sons of bitches,” since the testimony
is rife with that expression elsewhere, and
Kennedy was no doubt self-censoring in
the formal setting of the court.
14  “blood running in the gutters”:
Williams, 
American Revolutionary
,
p. 134.
14  “situation is in the”:
 
Columbia Daily


--- PAGE 1479 ---
Herald , February 26, 1946.
14  “This makes me proud”:
 Notes on
telephone conversations between Ollie
Harrington and Walter White from
Nashville, TN, NAACP, October 5, 1946.
14  “shut up”:
 Ikerd, 
No More Social
Lynchings
, p. 109.
15  “something serious”:
 
Daily Worker
,
November 20, 1946.
15  “wind up in Duck River”:
 White, 
A
Man Called White
, p. 314.
15  “I just sold the last”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 132.
15  NIGGER READ AND RUN:
NAACP, undated.
15  “Take care of yourself”:
 White to


--- PAGE 1480 ---
Marshall, NAACP, June 12, 1946.
16  “Thurgood, Looby said”:
 The
dialogue and details in this scene are
culled from several sources: COHP,
Marshall; Marshall’s letter to Assistant
Attorney General Theron I. Caudle,
December 4, 1946; the “Five Star Final”
Radio Broadcast, November 20, 1946,
from the NAACP Papers, the script of
which Marshall approved; Carl Rowan’s
Dream Makers, Dream Breakers
, p. 109;
Daily Worker
, November 20, 1946; and
Stephen Smith and Kate Ellis, 
American
RadioWorks: Thurgood Marshall Before
the Court
,
http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/marshall/.
17  “Master Race preachments”:
Miscellaneous Columbia, TN, reports,


--- PAGE 1481 ---
NAACP.
17  It was under a cedar tree:
 The
Cordie Cheek incident is largely derived
from Minor, 
Lynching and Frame-Up in
Tennessee
, pp. 31–34.
18  “the famous Duck River”:
 Marshall
to Caudle, NAACP, December 4, 1946.
19  “You go over there”:
 The dialogue
and details in this scene are derived from
the following sources: COHP, Marshall;
Williams, 
Thurgood Marshall
, pp. 140–
41; 
Daily Worker
, November 20, 1946.
20  “the pattern of all”:
 
Daily Worker
,
November 20, 1946.
20  “Well, Thurgood”:
 Rowan, 
Dream
Makers, Dream Breakers
, p. 109.
20  “they beat the driver”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1482 ---
20  “I am certain”:  Daily Worker ,
November 20, 1946.
20  “would never have been”:
 White, 
A
Man Called White
, p. 321.
20  “Drunken driving?”:
 The dialogue in
this scene was derived from COHP,
Marshall.
Chapter 2: Sugar Hill
21  “Nigger boy, what”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 107.
22  “So I wrapped”:
 Kluger, 
Simple
Justice
, p. 224.
22  “One entered the city”:
 Jackson and
Dunbar, 
Empire City
, p. 687.
Architectural historian Vincent Scully was
critical of the 1963 destruction of


--- PAGE 1483 ---
Pennsylvania Station, noting,“One entered
the city like a god. One scuttles in now
like a rat.”
22  “Ride the Surface Way”:
 Schomburg
Center for Research in Black Culture,
Photographs and Prints Division, New
York Public Library.
23  “Put that gun away!”:
 Janaya
Williams, “Jason Moran Takes Fat Waller
Back to the Club,” NPR Music, May 13,
2011,
http://www.npr.org/2011/05/13/136274480/jason-
moran-takes-fats-waller-back-to-the-club.
23  “We got yellow girls”:
 Dance, 
From
My People
, p. 170.
24  “was so busy arguing”:
 Ted Poston,
“On Appeal to the Supreme Court,” 
The


--- PAGE 1484 ---
Survey , January 1949.
24  “How much is that”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 99.
25  “You know how much”:
 Ibid., p. 100.
25  “To Be Demolished”:
 Schomburg
Photographs and Prints Division.
25  “perhaps the most modern”:
 Wald,
Josh White
, p. 48.
25  “live on that attractive”:
 “Down
Under in Harlem,” 
New Republic
, March
27, 1944.
26  “father of black American”:
 “In
Sugar Hill, a Street Nurtured Black Talent
When the World Wouldn’t,” 
New York
Times
, January 22, 2010.
26  “that legend, only”:
 Kurt Thometz,


--- PAGE 1485 ---
“The Harlem Revue,” Jumel Terrace
Books,
http://harlemrevue.wordpress.com/on-
harlems-heights/.
26  “talented tenth”:
 W.E.B. Du Bois,
“The Talented Tenth,” in 
The Negro
Problem
.
26  “the White House of Harlem”:
Aberjhani and West, 
Encyclopedia of the
Harlem Renaissance
, p. 320.
26  At one of White’s parties:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 32.
26  “NAACP’s unofficial”:
 Clark and
Davis, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 101.
27  They called their little group:
 Ibid.
27  “Buster had a weak”:
 Williams,


--- PAGE 1486 ---
Thurgood Marshall , p. 163.
28  “social capital of Negro America”:
Ebony
, undated article from 1946.
28  “Good Luck, Joe.”:
 Schomburg
Photographs and Prints Division.
28  “they treated him like”:
 Wilson,
Meet Me at the Theresa
, p. 104.
28  “distinguished service”:
 NAACP
Bulletin, May 1946.
28  “cannot be legally”:
 
Crisis
, May
1944.
29  “brought about the most”:
 NAACP
bulletin, May 1946.
29  “Lest you think”:
 White to Marshall,
NAACP, May 8, 1946.
29  “Oh, yeah”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1487 ---
29  “very reasonable rates”:  Marshall to
staff, NAACP, June 13, 1946.
29  “an award coming”:
 
Crisis
, August
1946.
30  “carrying around a fever”:
 Marshall
to Ransom, NAACP, undated.
30  “callous and inadequate”:
 White, 
A
Man Called White
, pp. 63–64.
30  “Citing red tape”:
 White to Louis T.
Wright and Dr. Ernst P. Boss, NAACP,
undated, 1946.
30  “cancer of the lung”:
 Marshall to
George Slaff, NAACP, undated.
30  “due solely to the fact”:
 White to
Board, NAACP, September 9, 1946.
31  “I warned you not”:
 Rowan, 
Dream


--- PAGE 1488 ---
Makers, Dream Breakers , p. 132.
31  “The President only”:
 Ibid.
31  “You know,” the deliveryman:
COHP, Marshall.
31  “twenty-pound”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 137.
31  “Virus X”:
 COHP, Marshall.
31  “not more than three”:
 White to
Board, NAACP, September 9, 1946.
31  “far from out of”:
 White to staff.
NAACP, July 12, 1946.
31  “Give them the bad news”:
 Ibid.
32  “taking it more than easy”:
 Marshall
to White, NAACP, October 1, 1946.
32  “I will have a difficult job”:
 Ibid.
32  “It is doubtful”:
 White, 
A Man


--- PAGE 1489 ---
Called White , p. 314.
Chapter 3: Get to Pushin’
34  “top Cabinet, military”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, July 15, 1949.
34  “ambitious to become”:
 Ibid.
34  “certain secret work”:
 Ibid.
34  scattered wooden shacks:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, April 9, 1950.
35  Rumors around town:
 FOHP,
Williams.
35  Her reputation around:
 Unredacted
FBI File 44-2722, (Groveland) Boxes
156–157; Unredacted FBI File 44-4055,
(Civil Rights, Irvin, Shepherd, Greenlee)
Boxes 222–229, National Archives and
Records Administration, College Park,


--- PAGE 1490 ---
MD. This was based on several sources,
among them the reports of FBI field agents
who interviewed Lake County residents,
as well as Groveland Police Chief George
Mays, in July and August 1949. Reporter
Ormond Powers of the 
Orlando Sentinel
investigated the alleged crime and
reported his findings on Padgett’s
reputation to Milton C. Thomas, who
provided a summary of Powers’s
statements to Rowland Watts. Workers
Defense League Records, Wayne State
University, Walter P. Reuther Library,
Detroit, MI., The Groveland Case 1950–
1952, Box 192, (hereafter cited as WDL).
Terence McCarthy of the 
New Leader
 also
spoke with Mays, who referred to Padgett
as a “bad egg.” Also, Corsair, 
The


--- PAGE 1491 ---
Groveland Four , p. 233.
35  “get it pushed off”:
 
State of Florida,
Plaintiff, v. Samuel Shepherd, Walter L.
Irvin, Charles Greenlee, Ernest E.
Thomas, Defendants
, Transcript of
Testimony, Florida State Archives,
Tallahassee, August–September, 1949.
Much of the detail about the Padgetts’
movements on the evening of July 15,
1949, was derived from both Willie’s and
Norma’s testimony (
Fl. v. Shepherd
).
36  “dine-and-dance”:
 
St. Petersburg
Times
, April 9, 1949.
36  “Haven”:
 Ibid.
36
  
Samuel Shepherd was having:
Likewise, most of Shepherd’s and Irvin’s
movements on the evening of July 15,


--- PAGE 1492 ---
1949, are based on both Shepherd’s and
Irvin’s testimony in 
Fl. v. Shepherd
.
37  “a pure Negro town”:
 Hurston, 
Dust
Tracks on a Road
, p. 1.
37  “a city of five lakes”:
 Hurston,
Mules and Men
, Introduction.
38  It was long past midnight:
 The
dialogue in this scene is mostly based on
the trial testimony of Norma and Willie
Padgett in 
Fl. v. Shepherd
. Neither
Shepherd nor Irvin testified about
encountering the Padgetts in the early
morning hours of July 16, 1949. But
Franklin Williams (FHOP, Williams)
stated that Shepherd and Irvin did stop
their car to help the Padgetts. And despite
the fact that the Padgetts did not admit to


--- PAGE 1493 ---
sharing any whiskey with the two black
men, Norma’s relatives indicated to L. B.
De Forest that whiskey was indeed
offered to Shepherd and Irvin. WDL.
38  “Do you think I’m”:
 Corsair,
 The
Groveland Four
, p
.
 190.
Chapter 4: Nigger in a Pit
40  Her nickname was “Big East”:
Congressional Record
, Charles B.
Rangel, June 25, 1998.
40  “When Evelyn Cunningham
entered”:
 Ibid.
41  “I wanted to do hard news”:
National Visionary Leadership Project,
Oral History Interviews: Evelyn
Cunningham,
http://www.visionaryproject.org/cunninghamevelyn/.


--- PAGE 1494 ---
41  “I think I did my”:  Ibid.
41  “I said, ‘You know’ ”:
 Ibid.
41  “not particularly savory”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 191–92.
41  “You can’t arrest”:
 Ibid.
41  “I would like to defend”:
 Ibid.
41  “Time to go home”:
 Ibid.
41  “become distant and”:
 Ibid., p. 191.
42  “lanky, brash”:
 White, 
A Man Called
White
, p. 154.
42  “Amazed at [Marshall’s]”:
 Ibid.
42  “You’ve won”:
 Williams, 
Thurgood
Marshall
, p. 59.
42  They’d been living:
 Ibid., p. 65.
42  Having packed Houston’s:
 James,


--- PAGE 1495 ---
Root and Branch , p. 56.
43  “Motion pictures”:
 McNeil,
Groundwork
, p. 140.
43  “Conditions,” Marshall wrote:
Williams, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 60.
43  “evil results of discrimination”:
McNeil, 
Groundwork
, p. 140.
43  “A lawyer’s either”:
 Ibid., p. 84.
44  “the only executive”:
 Marshall to
White, NAACP, January 21, 1947.
44  “answering the telephone”:
 Ibid.
44  some patterns of behavior:
 White to
Marshall, NAACP, July 17, 1945.
44  “unbuttoned office manners”:
Sullivan, 
Lift Every Voice
, p. 298.
44  “You shouldn’t beat me”:
 Clark and


--- PAGE 1496 ---
Davis, Thurgood Marshall , p. 135.
44  “He could tell”:
 Interview, Mildred
Roxborough, 
Thurgood Marshall: Justice
for All
, A&E Biography, 2005.
45  “Nigger in a Pit”:
 Kluger, 
Simple
Justice
, p. 643.
45  Mr. Turgood:
 NAACP, May 1949.
46  “Mr. Marshall was”:
 Author
interview, Gloria Samuels, November 11,
2010.
46  “total lack of formality”:
 Motley,
Equal Justice Under Law
, p. 58.
46  “nobody was hiring”:
 Constance
Baker Motley, “My Personal Debt to
Thurgood Marshall,” 
Yale Law Journal
,
Vol. 101, 1991–1992.


--- PAGE 1497 ---
46   “His mother was a”:  National
Visionary Project, Oral Histories
Interviews, Constance Baker Motley,
http://www.visionaryproject.com/motleyconstancebaker/.
47  “first feminists”:
 Yanick Rice Lamb,
“Evelyn Cunningham, A Witness to
History,” 
Heart & Soul
,
http://www.heartandsoul.com/2010/04/evelyn-
cunningham-a-witness-to-history/.
47  “a piece of paper”:
 
Hearings Before
the Committee on the Judiciary, United
States Senate, One Hundred Third
Congress, First Session on the
Nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsberg, to
Be Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States
, July 20, 21,
22, and 23, 1993. Also, Rowan, 
Dream
Makers, Dream Breakers
, p. 21.


--- PAGE 1498 ---
47  “no sense in coming”:  Marshall to
Loren Miller, NAACP, undated.
47  “I do not want to burden you”:
 Ibid.
47  “It has been suggested”:
 Daniel
Byrd to Marshall, NAACP, April 23,
1948.
48
  
Otherwise they’d work:
 Author
interviews, Alexander Tureaud, Jr., 2009
and 2010.
48  “to the types of”:
 Marshall to staff,
NAACP, February 16, 1949.
48  limit[ing] ourselves:
 Ibid., Perry note
on memo.
48  “any experienced lawyer”:
 Marshall
to staff, NAACP, undated.
49  “harboring an escaped”:
 Greenberg,


--- PAGE 1499 ---
Crusaders in the Courts , p. 81.
49  “not to sign”:
 Ibid.
49  Her son had just:
 Ibid., p. 31.
49  “no blacks lived”:
 Ibid., p. 46.
49  “one of those enormous”:
 Ibid.,
p. 31.
49
“pursed lips and”:
 Ibid.
50  “panic-stricken Westchester”:
Daniel J. Sharfstein, “Saving the Race,”
Legal Affairs
, March/April 2005.
50  “the sex stopped”:
 Ibid.
50  “He was supposed to”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 120.
50  “thousands of Negro domestics”:
Chicago Defender
, December 12, 1940.
50  “to the limit of our”:
 Sharfstein,


--- PAGE 1500 ---
“Saving the Race.”
50  “I’m sure he raped”:
 Ibid.
51
  
“not only innocent”:
 Ibid.
51  “lust-mad Negro”:
 Ibid.
51  “shame and disgrace”:
 
Daily
Kennebec Journal
, February 1, 1941.
51  “resent bitterly this acquittal”:
Kingston Daily Freeman
, February 3,
1941.
51  “What a relief!”:
 Sharfstein, “Saving
the Race.”.
51  “the actual danger”:
 Cash, 
The Mind
of the South
, p. 115.
51  “had nothing immediately”:
 Ibid.,
p.117.
53
  
“There’s the bones”:
 
Oklahoma


--- PAGE 1501 ---
Black Dispatch , February 8, 1941.
53  “they beat me”:
 
Lyons v. Oklahoma
,
322 U. S. 596 (1944), Brief on Behalf of
Petitioner.
53  “extorted by violence”:
 
Chambers v.
Florida
, 309 U. S. 227 (1940),
Petitioner’s Brief.
53  “could never read aloud”:
 Black and
Black, 
Mr. Justice and Mrs. Black
, p. 73.
53  “Today, as in ages past”:
 
Chambers
v. Florida
, 309 U. S. 227 (1940).
54
  
“We are going to teach”:
 Tushnet,
Making Civil Rights Law
, p. 52.
54  “a Nigger lawyer from”:
 Marshall to
White, NAACP, February 2, 1941.
54  “I ain’t scared”:
 Rowan, 
Dream


--- PAGE 1502 ---
Makers, Dream Breakers , p. 107.
54  “I think I remembered”:
 COHP,
Marshall.
54  “scared to try the case”:
 Marshall to
White, NAACP, January 29, 1941.
54-55  “a certain Negro lawyer”:
Marshall to White, NAACP, January 28,
1941.
55  “a gala day”:
 Marshall to White,
NAACP, January 29, 1941.
55  “two nationalities”:
 Marshall to
White, NAACP, February 2, 1941.
55  “the building did not fall”:
 Ibid.
55  “about doubled”:
 Ibid.
55  “Oh, yes, you were there”:
Oklahoma Black Dispatch
, February 8,


--- PAGE 1503 ---
1941.
55  “Why,” he stammered:
 Ibid.
55  “six or seven hours”:
 Marshall to
White, NAACP, April 5, 1941.
56  “go up to my room”:
 
Lyons v.
Oklahoma
.
56  “six—either six or”:
 Ibid.
56  “shaking as though”:
 
Oklahoma
Black Dispatch
, February 8, 1941.
56  “Boy, did I like that”:
 Marshall to
White, NAACP, April 2, 1941.
56  “stopped us in the halls”:
 Ibid.
56  “90% of the white people”:
 Ibid.
56  “We are in a perfect”:
 Ibid.
57  “I think we should aim”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1504 ---
Chapter 5: Trouble Fixin’ to Start
58  The motor shut off:
 C. C. Twiss
affidavit, WDL, April 29, 1951. Clifton
Twiss was visited by Rowland Watts of
the Workers Defense League, as well as
another man, Seymour Miller, and Twiss
provided a signed statement as to what he
and his wife, Ethel, witnessed on the
morning of July 16, 1949. This account is
based on Twiss’s statement.
59  At about 6:45 a.m.:
 Statement of
Lawrence Burtoft, WDL, April 29, 1951.
Burtoft was visited by Rowland Watts and
provided a signed statement regarding his
meeting with Norma Padgett on the
morning of July 16, 1949. I used this
statement, as well as Burtoft’s statements
to reporter Norman Bunin, which appear


--- PAGE 1505 ---
in Bunin’s series in the St. Petersburg
Times
 (April 9, 1949). In this scene, I also
quote from Burtoft’s testimony in 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
.
61  Sheriff Willis McCall was on his:
MM 44-156, FBI. This scene is derived
from this FBI file documenting the civil
rights and domestic violence investigation
into the beatings of Shepherd and Irvin
(part of FBI file 44-4055). The FBI
interviewed McCall, Hatcher, Yates,
Shepherd, and Irvin, and their
recollections and quotes are taken from
the statements in this report.
61  “We’re probably too far away”:
Ibid.
61  “What’s the trouble?”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1506 ---
61  “Boy, I’ve never”:  Ibid.
61  “A white housewife”:
 Ibid.
61  “pretty high feeling”:
 Ibid.
62  “Call Yates and”:
 Ibid.
63  “armed to the gills”:
 
St. Petersburg
Times
, July 18, 1949.
63  “Willis, we want”:
 “Murmur in the
Streets,” 
Time
, August 1, 1949.
63  “husky, brash”:
 Ibid.
63  “I can’t let you people”:
 Flores,
Justice Gone Wrong
, p. 15. Also author
interview with Isaac M. Flores, February
9, 2011.
63  “I may be in sympathy”:
 Flores,
Justice Gone Wrong
, p. 15. Also Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 31.


--- PAGE 1507 ---
63  “Look, McCall”:  Flores, Justice
Gone Wrong
, p. 15.
63  “The prisoners you want”:
 Ibid.
63  From the back:
 “Murmur in the
Streets.”
64  He had just arrived in town:
 MM
44-156, FBI. Also Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 1. The descriptions
and quotes by Charles Greenlee are
largely derived from his interviews with
Franklin Williams in the presence of
stenographer Dorothy N. Marshall at
Raiford State Prison, which are included
in the FBI file MM 44-127 (part of FBI
file 44-4055). Greenlee was also
interviewed by agents Tobias E.
Matthews, Jr., and John L. Quigley on


--- PAGE 1508 ---
August 8, 1949, as part of FBI file MM
44-156.
64  In May, Charles’s:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, pp. 1–2. Also MM 44-
156, FBI.
65  “Is there anywhere”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
65  “Hold still a minute”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 3. Also MM 44-156,
FBI.
65  Charles said the gun:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
65  “What road camp”:
 MM 44-127,
FBI.
65  “work out something”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.


--- PAGE 1509 ---
66  “Stand up, nigger”:  Ibid.
66  “I wasn’t in any car”:
 Ibid.
66  “You’re lying”:
 Ibid.
66  “what they would do”:
 Ibid.
66  “He’s not one”:
 Ibid.
66  “The boys what took”:
 MM 44-127,
FBI.
66  “No, sir”:
 Ibid.
66  “Boy, if you don’t know it”:
 Ibid
.
66  “hurry up and take”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
67  “might cause some trouble”:
 Ibid.
67  “two colored boys who were”:
 Ibid.
67  “had a big hole”:
 MM 44-127, FBI.
67  “Go ahead and try”:
 Corsair, 
The


--- PAGE 1510 ---
Groveland Four , p. 2.
67  “That’s the boy”:
 Ibid., p. 32.
67  “stout white man”:
 MM 44-156, FBI.
68  “You’ve got families”:
 Flores,
Justice Gone Wrong
, p. 16.
68  “Lake County Bride”:
 
Orlando
Sunday Sentinel
, July 17, 1949.
68  “Sheriff Staves Off”:
 Flores, 
Justice
Gone Wrong
, p. 17.
68  “fast talking” sheriff:
 
New York
Times
, July 18, 1949.
68  The
 
Miami Herald
 praised:
 
Miami
Herald
, July 18, 1949.
69  “all hell broke loose”:
 Sullivan, 
Lift
Every Voice
, p. 372.
69  “dressed like a tweedy”:
 Greenberg,


--- PAGE 1511 ---
Crusaders in the Courts , p. 16.
69  “Has Science Conquered”:
 
Look
,
August, 1949.
69  “whomever he wished”:
 Janken,
Walter White
, p. 371.
69  “within the rail”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 21.
69  “Now look,” Marshall told him:
COHP, Marshall.
69  “See that fellow”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 21.
70  “So he won”:
 COHP, Marshall.
70  “a sentence that had”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 9.
70  “crowd out other”:
 Ibid., p. 102.
70  “people of the Negro”:
 
Shelley et ux.


--- PAGE 1512 ---
v. Kraemer et ux. , 334 U.S. 1, May 3,
1948.
70  “the Joe Louis of the courtroom”:
Williams, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 151.
70  “wanted to lynch Walter”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 18.
Chapter 6: A Little
 
Bolita
73  “four niggers”:
 FOHP, Williams.
73  “sullen, glint-eyed”:
 “Murmur in the
Streets,” 
Time
, August 1, 1949.
73  “15 loads of buckshot”:
 Ibid.
73  “Boy,” Leroy Campbell said:
 MM
44-127, FBI.
74  “Were you one”:
 MM 44-156, FBI.
Dialogue and details from Greenlee’s


--- PAGE 1513 ---
interrogation are mostly derived from the
interview he gave to Franklin Williams,
which appears in this report.
75  “directing the traffic”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 37.
75  “Did you rape”:
 MM 44-156, FBI.
75  “Better start saying”:
 Ibid.
75  “Shoot him in the stomach”:
 Ibid.
75  “in the privates”:
 Ibid.
76  “heart yellow pine house”:
 McCall,
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
,
p. 11.
76  “scratch hard childhood”:
 
Life
,
November 17, 1972.
76  plowing, and chopping:
 McCall,
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
,


--- PAGE 1514 ---
p. 12.
77  “This Is a Minute Maid Grove”:
New York Daily Compass
, March 1, 1952.
77  “tough reputation in the groves”:
Robinson, 
Law and Order, by Any Means
Necessary
, p. 16.
77  “No white people”:
 
Journal of
Forest History
, Vol. 25, 1981, p. 16.
(Forest History Society.)
78  “charm a snake”:
 
Life
, November
17, 1972.
78  “the People’s Candidate”:
 Ibid.
78  “People have confidence”:
 McCall,
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
,
p. 14.
78  “sell-out in politics”:
 
Leesberg


--- PAGE 1515 ---
Commercial , July 2, 1945.
78  “King of Slots”:
 Ibid.
78  “It looks very much”:
 Ibid.
78  “Just as long as you”:
 McCall, 
Willis
V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 14.
78  “cracker mob of Central Florida”:
Dickerson, 
Remembering Orlando
, p. 38.
79  “from the back door”:
 Robinson,
Law and Order, by Any Means
Necessary
, p. 21.
79  “use their good offices”:
 Kennedy,
Southern Exposure
, p. 58.
79  “work or fight” laws:
 “Unfit Draftees
May Be Uniformed Plant Workers,”
Daytona Beach Morning Journal
,
February 17, 1945.


--- PAGE 1516 ---
79  “prevent loitering”:  Gary M.
Mormino, “Midas Returns: Miami Goes to
War, 1941–1945,” 
Journal of the
Historical Association of Southern
Florida
, Vol. 1, No. 57, 1997.
79  “a ready pool of”:
 Nieman, “Black
Southerners and the Law,” p. 53.
79  “None of your damn jaw”:
 Jerrell H.
Shofner, “The Legacy of Racial Slavery:
Free Enterprise and Forced Laobr in
Florida in the 1940s,” 
Journal of
Southern History
, Vol. 47, No. 3, August
1981.
80  “Florida Bail Bond Racket”:
 Report
on Groveland, WDL.
80  “secured from the stockades”:
 Ibid.
80  “without the formality”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1517 ---
80  “appears to have been to dragoon”:
New Leader
, Augyst 13, 1949.
80  “a pattern of beating”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
81  “the return to eight”:
 McCall, 
Willis
V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 63.
81  “Look at his wrists!”:
 
St. Petersburg
Times
, November 28, 1999.
81  “communist infiltrated groups”:
McCall, 
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake
County
, p. 15.
81  “I’m Willis McCall”:
 Transcript of
interview with Mabel Norris Chesley,
Franklin Hall Williams Papers,
Schomburg Center for Research in Black
Culture (hereafter cited as FHW Papers,
Chesley).


--- PAGE 1518 ---
81  “this great big hulk”:  Ibid.
81  “political shenanigans”“:
 Ibid.
82  “Hitler’s gestapo technique”:
McCall, 
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake
County
, p. 63.
82  “Now let that be a lesson”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 80.
82  “big ‘red scare’ trying”:
 McCall,
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
,
p. 18.
82  “a giant milestone”:
 “Landmark:
Smith v. Allwright
,” NAACPLDF.org,
http://naacpldf.org/case/smith-v-allwright.
82  “the greatest one”:
 COHP,
Marshall.
82  “a guy had the right”:
 Williams,


--- PAGE 1519 ---
Thurgood Marshall , p. 112.
83  “told the other states”:
 COHP,
Marshall.
83  “warning blacks not to vote”:
Newton, 
The Ku Klux Klan
, p. 384.
83  “making no attempt”:
 Newton, 
The
Invisible Empire
, p. 117.
Chapter 7: Wipe This Place Clean
84  “Everything was silent”:
 FHW
Papers, Chesley.
85  “People would rush inside”:
 Ibid.
85  “Knots of men”:
 “Mobile Violence:
Motorized Mobs in a Florida County,”
New South
, Vol. 4, No. 6, August 1949.
86  “leaps and bounds”:
 “The Carter-
Klan Documentary Project: Thomas


--- PAGE 1520 ---
Hamilton,” 2006–2007, Center for the
Study of the American South at UNC-CH,
http://www.carter-
klan.org/Hamilton.html.
86  “a beachhead in Florida”:
 Newton,
The Invisible Empire
, p. 114.
86  “see blood flow”:
 
Time
, March 15,
1948.
86  “If you come in here”:
 
Powell v.
Alabama
, 287 U.S. 45 (1932).
87  With more than five hundred:
 
South
Lake Press
, June 5, 2009,
http://www.southlakepress.com/060509land.
87  “colored people their homes”:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
87  “protecting lives”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1521 ---
87  “situation was getting out of hand”:
Ibid.
87  “psychological effect”:
 Ibid.
88  “as if he was a trusty”:
 Ibid.
89  “Three Negroes Confess”:
 
Ocala
Star-Banner
, July 19, 1949.
89  “There’ll be no lynching”:
 Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 38.
89  “We’re not going to”:
 Ibid.
89  “I told her we”:
 Ibid.
89  “Ku Klux Klan was”:
 “Mobile
Violence: Motorized Mobs in a Florida
County,” 
New South
, Vol. 4, No. 6,
August 1949.
90  “That’s old Joe Maxwell’s house”:
Sally Watt, Free Speech Radio News,


--- PAGE 1522 ---
January 1, 2002,
http://www.archive.org/details/fsrn_20020101.
90  “heard a window break”:
 Ibid.
90  “You better not go down there”:
Flores, 
Justice Gone Wrong
, p. 20.
90
“Sons of bitches”:
 Ibid.
91  “You fellas don’t”:
 Ibid., p. 21.
91  “We wanna wipe this place clean”:
Ibid.
91  “Don’t go out there”:
 Ibid.
91  As McCall surveyed the crowd:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
91  Groveland’s Curtis Merritt:
 Ibid.
91  McCall also recognized:
 Ibid.
91  “was the chief of”:
 Harry T. Moore
Murder Investigation, Florida Attorney


--- PAGE 1523 ---
General’s Office of Civil Rights/Florida
Department of Law Enforcement (Moore
Report), Exhibit 53. (Hereafter cited as
Moore Report.)
91  “to tell where”:
 “Mobile Violence:
Motorized Mobs in a Florida County.”
91  “Why don’t you take that
peashooter”:
 Flores, 
Justice Gone
Wrong
, p. 22.
92  “I don’t know the names”:
 Ibid.,
p. 23.
92  “Where is that son of a bitch”:
McCall, 
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake
County
, p. 21.
92  “I’ll tell him”:
 Flores, 
Justice Gone
Wrong
, p. 23.
92  “down the road”:
 McCall, 
Willis V.


--- PAGE 1524 ---
McCall, Sheriff of Lake County , p. 21.
92  “Go and get more ammunition”:
New Leader
, telegram to Governor Fuller
Warren, NAACP, September 14, 1949.
92
  
“miles of clay roads”:
 
New Leader
,
August 13, 1949.
92  “Little” Mary Hunter Valree:
Miami Daily News
, July 19, 1949. Also
undated clipping, FHW Papers. (Franklin
Williams kept a Groveland scrapbook that
included many undated clippings from the
Mount Dora Topic
, as well as other
newspapers.)
93  “he knew all of the ringleaders”:
MM 44-156, FBI.
93  “terrorizing the negroes”:
 Ibid.
93  “The next time”:
 “Murmur in the


--- PAGE 1525 ---
Streets,” Time , August 1, 1949.
94  “had all of his life savings”:
 MM 44-
156, FBI.
95
  
“They tell me my chickens and
ducks”:
 MM 44-127, FBI.
95  “ravaged ghost”:
 
New York Post
,
September 2, 1949..
95  “Negro self-emancipation”:
 WDL,
Report on Groveland.
95  “the best preserve cellar”:
 
New
York Post
, September 2, 1949.
96  “No nigger has any right”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
96  “too damned independent”:
 
New
Leader
, August 13, 1949.
96  “uppity nigger”:
 Steven F. Lawson,


--- PAGE 1526 ---
David R. Colburn, and Darryl Paulson,
“Groveland: Florida’s Little Scottsboro,”
Florida Historical Quarterly
, Vol. 65,
No. 1, July 1986, p. 3.
96  “smart nigger”:
 FOHP, Williams.
96  “that somebody put”:
 “Groveland:
Florida’s Little Scottsboro,” p. 4.
96  “three twisted bed frames”:
 
New
Leader
, August 2, 1949.
96  “They should never let”:
 Ibid.
97  He arrived at his property:
 J. P.
Ellis to Franklin Williams, NAACP-LDF,
undated, August 1949.
97  “I keep getting orders”:
 MM 44-
127, FBI.
97  “My family is all scattered”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1527 ---
97  “They’ll get out”:  New Leader ,
August 13, 1949.
97  “We’ll wait and see”:
 
Orlando
Sentinel
, July 17, 1949.
98  “If smart lawyers”:
 
New Leader
,
August 13, 1949.
98  “offered up as a”:
 Ibid.
98  “Honor Will Be Avenged”:
 
Mount
Dora Topic
, July 2, 1949.
98  “any persons bearing arms”:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
99  “too busy trying”:
 Ibid.
99  “would result in”:
 Ibid.
99
  
“positive action”:
 Ibid.
99  “had agreed to stop”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1528 ---
Chapter 8: A Christmas Card
100  “You can either jump”:
 Hobbs,
“Hitler Is Here,” p. 150.
101  “Dear Fried”:
 Willie James
Howard to Cynthia Goff, NAACP,
January 1, 1943 [actually 1944].
102  “the penalty of his crime”:
 Hobbs,
“Hitler Is Here,” p. 150.
102  “Willie, I cannot do”:
 Ibid.
102  “terribly afraid of something”:
Lula Howard affadavit, NAACP, March
19, 1944.
103  “rather die”:
 Hobbs, “Hitler Is
Here,” p. 149.
103  “I am sure you realize”:
 Spessard
L. Holland to Marshall, NAACP,
February 14, 1944.


--- PAGE 1529 ---
103
  
“the type of material”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 49.
104  “a waste of time”:
 Ibid.
104  “We are forced to wonder”:
 Moore
to Marshall, NAACP, June 30, 1944.
104  “The life of a Negro”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 50.
104  It was a lesson:
 Ibid., p. 71.
104  “Thus a man gets off”:
 Ibid.
104  “Your letters on lynching”:
 Current
to Moore, NAACP, July 3, 1947.
105  “south of the South”:
 Raymond A.
Mohl, “ ‘South of the South?’ Jews,
Blacks, and the Civil Rights Movement in
Miami, 1945–1960, ” 
Journal of
American Ethnic History
, Vol. 18, No. 2,


--- PAGE 1530 ---
Winter 1999.
105  “troublemaker and Negro
organizer”:
 Green, 
Before His Time
,
p. 61.
105  Moore, however, was not:
 Author
interview with Evangeline Moore,
February 8, 2011.
105  Recruiting his teenage daughter:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 65.
106  “that rich Professor Moore”:
 Ibid.,
p. 246.
107  “boldy challenge the”:
 “A Century
of Racial Segregation, 1849–1950,”
Library of Congress exhibition, “With an
Even Hand:
 Brown v. Board at Fifty
,”
http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/brown/brown-
segregation.html.


--- PAGE 1531 ---
107  “the law functioned”:  Martin,
Brown v. Board of Education
, p. 14.
107  “He seems to be a fine sort”:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 41.
107  “Thurgood was the savior”:
 Ibid.,
p. 42.
108  “From 1882 to 1930”:
 Wilkerson,
The Warmth of Other Suns
, p. 320.
108  “a black man had more risk”:
Gainesville Sun
, September 3, 2005.
108  “prosecution of mob leaders”:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 87.
108  “[l]ynching of negroes”:
 Ibid.,
p. 69.
109  “hooded hoodlums”:
 Newton, 
The
Invisible Empire
, p. 117.


--- PAGE 1532 ---
109  “as a favor to a friend”:  Ibid.
109  “Since mob leaders are known”:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 87.
109  “Have written him enough”:
 Ibid.,
p. 90.
109  “sage and trial-trained Jesse
Hunter”:
 
Mount Dora Topic
, July 2,
1949.
110  “You don’t investigate”:
 Wexler,
Fire in a Canebrake
, p. 130.
111  “The FBI has established”:
Marshall to Clark, NAACP, December
27, 1946.
111  “I have found from”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 159.
111  “rushing pell-mell”:
 Fairclough:


--- PAGE 1533 ---
Race & Democracy , p. 116.
111  “clear-cut, uncontroverted
evidence”:
 Ibid., p. 117.
111  “I . . . have no faith”:
 Wexler, 
Fire
in a Canebrake
, p. 191.
112  In April 1947:
 
Crisis
, December
1955.
112  “with his charming”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 161.
112  “Give this matter”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
112  “Thurgood Marshall of the
NAACP”:
 Ibid.
112  “The Association and Hoover”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 105.


--- PAGE 1534 ---
Chapter 9: Don’t Shoot, White Man
114  “like you see in a western”:
McCall, 
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake
County
, p. 23.
114  “peddling
 
bolita
”:
 
New York Daily
Compass
, March 1, 1952.
114  “a bearded, fantastic Negro”:
Mount Dora Topic
, FHW Papers, undated
clipping.
115  “had recently bought”:
 Ibid.
115  “cozy arrangement”:
 
New York
Daily Compass
, March 1, 1952.
115  “well-entrenched”:
 Ibid.
115  “the law enforcement officers”:
Ibid.
115  “Things were coming to a head”:


--- PAGE 1535 ---
Ibid.
115  “Thomas was feeling his oats”:
Ibid.
115  “It was obvious”:
 McCall, 
Willis V.
McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 22.
115  “only time in the whole
investigation”:
 Ibid.
116  “with some kin folks”:
 Coroner’s
Inquest, MM 44-156, FBI.
116  “settled down for the night”:
McCall, 
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake
County
, p. 22.
116  “we had not cased”:
 Ibid.
116  “cotton patch and”:
 Coroner’s
Inquest, MM 44-156, FBI.
116  “cut his breechesb legs off”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1536 ---
117  “That is him”:  Ibid.
118  “so much excitement”:
 Ibid.
118  “Don’t shoot, white man”:
 Ibid.
118  “belligerent as the devil”:
 
Ocala
Star Banner
, July 27, 1949.
118  “I was across on”:
 Coroner’s
Inquest, MM 44-156, FBI.
118  “but it was a bunch”:
 
Ocala Star
Banner
, July 27, 1949.
118  “above the eyes”:
 Ibid.
118  “nearly 400 slugs”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 64.
118  “there were other holes”:
Coroner’s Inquest, MM 44-156, FBI.
118  “when this negro”:
 Ibid.
118  “Sheriff McCall of Lake County”:


--- PAGE 1537 ---
Ibid.
118  “glaring flaws”:
 C.M.T. to Rowland
Watts, WDL, May 8, 1951.
119  “being told just the things”:
 Ibid.
119  “have never been answered”:
 Ibid.
119  “desperate to seal”:
 Ibid.
119  “definite threat to”:
 Ibid.
119  “broadly hinted”:
 
New York Daily
Compass
, March 1, 1952.
119  “Thomas was an bright”:
 Ibid.
119  After the inquest:
 Flores, 
Justice
Gone Wrong
, p. 34.
120  “learning to try cases”:
 Motley,
Equal Justice Under Law
, p. 70.
121  “that terrible summer”:
 White, 
A
Man Called White
, p. 325.


--- PAGE 1538 ---
121  Truman “exploded”:  Michael R.
Gardner, “Harry Truman and Civil Rights:
Moral Courage and Political Risks,”
speech at University of Virginia,
September 26, 2003,
http://www.virginia.edu/uvanewsmakers/newsmakers/gardner.html.
122  “a good platform person”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
122  “antimob violence fund”:
 Sullivan,
Lift Every Voice
, p. 320.
122  he declared it “disgraceful”:
Kluger, 
Simple Justice
, p. 298.
122  “make your hair stand on end”:
FOHP, Williams.
Chapter 10: Quite a Hose Wielder
124  “Don’t worry, Mama”:
 Corsair,


--- PAGE 1539 ---
The Groveland Four , p. 16.
124  “You little son of a bitch”:
 MM 44-
156, FBI.
125  “Get out of the car”:
 MM 44-127,
FBI.
125  “Why did you rape”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
125  “Better talk”:
 Ibid.
125  “Nigger, you the one”:
 Ibid.
125  “the right ones”:
 Ibid.
126  “solve your problems”:
 Green, 
The
Negro Motorist Green Book
, p. 3.
126  “Now We Can Travel Without
Embarrassment”:
 Ibid., p. 81.
126  “This wanton killing”:
 Marshall to
Clark, NAACP, July 27, 1949.


--- PAGE 1540 ---
126  “There is serious doubt”:  Marshall
to Warren, NAACP, July 27, 1949.
127  “My aunt wanted to know”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 72.
127  “Their heads were a mess”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
127  “Where is the guy”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
128  “They must have beat us”:
 MM 44-
127, FBI.
128  “These are not your tracks”:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
128  “Nigger, you are”:
 Ibid.
128  “a lot of motors”:
 Ibid.
128  “They hit me”:
 Ibid.
129  “he would get a thrill”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1541 ---
129  “My mouth was bleeding”:  MM 44-
127, FBI.
129  recognized as Wesley Evans:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
129  “quite a hose wielder”:
 Ibid.
129  “They tried to make me say”:
 MM
44-127, FBI.
129  “saved all the beating”:
 MM 44-
156, FBI.
130  “right jaw appeared”:
 MM 44-127,
FBI.
130  “I was bleeding”:
 Ibid.
130  “a mob was on its way”:
 Ibid.
130  “Where are those”:
 Ibid.
130  “really kicking him then”:
 MM 44-
156, FBI.


--- PAGE 1542 ---
130  “red and bruised”:  MM 44-127,
FBI.
131  “All of this is true”:
 Ibid.
131  “was going to tell”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
132  “I have no shoes”:
 MM 44-127,
FBI.
132  “Jesus,” Greenlee had said:
 FOHP,
Williams.
132  “devoted to the Socialist”:
 
New
Leader
, January/April 2006.
132  “I been told by”:
 MM 44-127.
132  “Sammy is a good boy”:
 Ibid.
133  “If they had a picture”:
 Wormser,
The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow
, p. 166.
133  “arrogance”:
 FOHP, Williams.


--- PAGE 1543 ---
133  “Had been communicated”:  Ibid.
133  “uppity Nigger”:
 “Florida’s Little
Scottsoboro: Groveland,” 
Crisis
, October
1949.
133  “McCall knew exactly”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
134  “blood was still in their hair”:
 Ibid.
134  “it was seldom”:
 Lawson, 
To
Secure These Rights
, p. 26.
134  “The resources of the
association”:
 Corsair, 
The Groveland
Four
, p. 78.
134  “entirely innocent”:
 Press release,
NAACP, August 9, 1949.
134  advised Harry T. Moore:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 92.


--- PAGE 1544 ---
135  “to indict the guilty mobsters”:
Moore to Warren, Florida State Archives,
July 30, 1949.
135  “brutally beaten by local officers”:
Ocala Star Banner
, August 14, 1949.
135  “duty bound”:
 McCall, 
Willis V.
McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 20.
Also author interview with Isaac Flores,
February 9, 2011.
135  “It’s a damn lie”:
 
Ocala Star
Banner
, August 14, 1949.
136  “negroes in a yellow convertible”:
FOHP, Williams.
136  “very distinguished criminal
lawyer”:
 Ibid.
136  “You know, Franklin”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1545 ---
136  “he would not raise any issue”:
Ibid.
136  “I can’t do this”:
 Ibid.
137  “I was not completely at ease”:
Ibid
.
137  “would give me some”:
 Ibid.
137  “for failing to follow”:
 Tushnet,
Making Civil Rights Law
, p. 97.
138  “You were in rare form”:
 Horne to
Marshall, NAACP, August 9, 1949.
138  “it would appear undesirable”:
 MM
44-127, FBI.
138  “full and exhaustive investigation”:
Ibid.
138  “all of the persons interviewed”:
MM 44-156, FBI.


--- PAGE 1546 ---
139  “a pair of pants”:  Ibid.
139  “asked them why”:
 Ibid.
139  “population of thirty-six
thousand”:
 Census of Population and
Housing, U.S. Census Bureau, 1950
Census.
140  “leading citizens”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
140  “caused by the people”:
 Ibid.
140  “cleared the county”:
 
Orlando
Sentinel
, December 3, 1997.
140  “he wouldn’t have a building left”:
MM 44-156, FBI.
140  “watching the City Hall”:
 Ibid.
141  “one man police department”:
 Ibid.
141  “affirmative action”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1547 ---
141  “County Sheriffs openly joined”:
Moore Report, p. 7.
141  “I believe the only thing”:
 Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 35.
142  “Bay Lake region people”:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
142  “They might have got in a fight”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 88.
142  “physician who examined”:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
143  “Report of Accident”:
 Ibid.
143  “I knew that this would be”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 94.
144  Unable to fulfill:
 
Orlando Sentinel
,
July 5, 1992.
144  “one full day of work”:
 
Mount


--- PAGE 1548 ---
Dora Topic , September 1, 1949.
145  “The University of Scuffletown”:
Ibid.
145  “filled with odds and ends”:
 Ibid.
145  “a tin building”:
 
Mount Dora Topic
,
August 25, 1949.
145  “He was almost a caricature”:
FOHP, Williams.
145  “Where is the third defendant?”:
Ibid.
145  “The dirty bastard”:
 Williams to
Wilkins, NAACP-LDF, August 25, 1949.
146  “We are not the defendants”:
 Ibid.
146  “Well, come on in”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
146  “It was very clear”:
 Ibid
.


--- PAGE 1549 ---
146  “in shirt sleeves”:  Williams to
Wilkins, LDF, undated.
146  “lawless mobs were roaming”:
 
Fl.
v. Shepherd
, Affidavit, p. 78.
146  “Filed too late”:
 
Fl. v. Shepherd
,
Vol. 1, p. 78.
147  “by persons purporting”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Affidavit, p. 78.
147  “completely irrelevant”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 1, p. 320.
147  good faith reasons:
 
Fl. v. Shepherd
,
Affidavit, p. 44.
147  “extremely inconvenient”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 1, p. 4.
147  “Every time” the defendants:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 96.


--- PAGE 1550 ---
148  “disgusting an disheartening”:  Fl.
v. Shepherd
, Vol. 2, p. 191.
148  “What are those nigger lawyers”:
Fl. v. Shepherd
, Affidavit, p. 79.
148  “Nigger lawyers better”:
 Ibid.
148  Particularly hard hit:
 Barnes,
Florida’s Hurricane History
, p. 184.
149  So it wasn’t much of a surprise:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 99.
Chapter 11: Bad Egg
150  “If I were asked”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI. Dr. Binneveld’s examination of
Norma Padgett on the morning of July 16,
1949, was taken from a report made by
Agent John L. Quigley on September 2,
1949, from Agent Watson Roper’s


--- PAGE 1551 ---
investigation and interview with the
physician. In this report, Quigley noted
that when U.S. Attorney Herbert S.
Phillips in Tampa learned of the FBI’s
interview with Binneveld and the
examination of Norma Padgett’s medical
report, Phillips wired FBI offices with
instructions to “discontinue investigation
in this matter.”
151  “highly regarded”
 Dr. Geoffrey
Binneveld:
 Ibid.
153  “Dirty Commie”:
 Robeson, 
The
Undiscovered Paul Robeson
, p. 168.
153  “Go back to Russia!”:
 Ibid.
153  “We were having enough trouble”:
Rise, 
The Martinsville Seven
, p. 60.
153  “If you were a Negro”:
 COHP,


--- PAGE 1552 ---
Marshall.
153  “Franklin Williams had”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 101.
154  “was to go into”:
 Thurgood
Marshall, “Remarks at a Testimonial
Dinner Honoring Raymond Pace
Alexander, November 25, 1951,” Tushnet,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 140.
154  “giv[ing] foreign governments”:
Ibid., p. 140.
154  “high-powered petitions”:
 Ibid.
154  “only the movement”:
 Rise, 
The
Martinsville Seven
, p. 66.
155  “These cases, the Groveland
cases”:
 Marshall to Patterson, LDF, June
9, 1950.


--- PAGE 1553 ---
155  “Dear Steve”:  Marshall to
Spingarn, LDF, June 18, 1950.
155  “I never believed”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
155  “can come up with more ideas”:
Presidential Recordings Program, Lyndon
Johnson Tapes Transcripts, Monday,
January 3, 1966: Thurgood Marshall,
Lyndon Johnson, participants,
http://whitehousetapes.net/transcript/johnson/wh6606-
01-9403.
156  “every bit of energy”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
156  “to cause constitutional error”:
Ibid.
156  Jesse Hunter kept it simple:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 2.


--- PAGE 1554 ---
156  “Jesse Hunter won’t have to ask”:
Mount Dora Topic
, September 1, 1949.
156  “Honor Will Be Avenged”:
 
Mount
Dora Topic
, July 2, 1949.
156-57  “Special Rules of Court”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Affadavit, p. 40.
157  “agitators or agents”:
 Ibid.
157  “They had deputies”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
157  “worst crime in Lake county’s
history”:
 
Mount Dora Topic
, September
1, 1949.
157  “there is considerable”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 2, p. 78.
157  “Supreme Court is the aim”:
Mount Dora Topic
, September 1, 1949.


--- PAGE 1555 ---
157  “to the staunch believers”:  Ibid.
158  “when the true story”:
 Ibid.
158  “damned scared”:
 Hauke, 
Ted
Poston
, p. 77.
158  “in the mail car”:
 Ibid., p. 58.
158  “kick in the pants”:
 Ibid., p. 59.
158  When Scottsboro:
 Ibid.
159  “grown young lady”:
 Ibid., p. 13.
This scene is recounted in Hauke’s book:
Allison Williams, Poston’s lifelong
friend, recalls conversations she had with
Poston about his boyhood sexual
encounters with a white woman.
159  “Horror in the Sunny South”:
 
New
York Post
, September 9, 1949.
159  “seething jealousy”:
 
Chicago


--- PAGE 1556 ---
Defender , July 30. 1949.
160  “I will leave this place”:
 Ibid.
160  “The theory was”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
160  “generally read from”:
 Moore
Report, Exhibit 71.
160  “greater modicum of security”:
FOHP, Williams.
160  “just in case anything happens”:
State of Florida v. Walter L. Irvin,
Charles Greenlee, and Samuel Shepherd
,
Prosecution Report, April 2, 1950,
Exhibit 1, FBI 44-2722.
161  that Norma Padgett was a “bad
egg”:
 FBI 44-2722.
161  “had grown up”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1557 ---
161  “stirred up” the violence:  Ibid.
161  When pressed by Williams:
 Bertha
E. Davis to Goldberg, LDF, August 1,
1949; and July 21, 1949.
161  “Mrs. Padgett, her husband”:
 FBI
44-2722.
161  “any traces of”:
 Davis to Goldberg,
LDF, August 1. 1949; and July 21, 1949.
162  “grave doubts”:
 FBI 44-2722.
162  “considerably affected”:
 Ibid.
162  “the investigation will result”:
 Ibid.
162  “Richard Roe and John Doe”:
 Ibid.
162  “the confidential nature”:
 Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 121.
162  “those clay eating crackers”:
FOHP, Williams.


--- PAGE 1558 ---
162  “How would you feel”:  Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 3, pp. 398, 322.
163  “They are not on trial”:
 Ibid.,
p. 413.
163  Akerman’s other primary concern:
Fl. v. Shepherd
, Vol 2, p. 236.
163  “in favor of it”:
 
Fl. v. Shepherd
,
Vol 3, p. 338.
163  “gray haired old handyman”:
Carson et al., 
Reporting Civil Rights,
Part One
, p. 127.
163  “one of the best niggers”:
 Ibid.
163  “Women Beg for Reserved Seats
at Trial”:
 
Mount Dora Topic
, August 18,
1949.
163  “Through sentiment”:
 
Chicago


--- PAGE 1559 ---
Defender , September 10, 1949.
163  “Bay Lake Crackers”:
 Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 132.
164  “always intimidated me”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
164  “bare feet making”:
 
Mount Dora
Topic
, undated clipping, FHW Papers,
July 1949.
164  Oppressive heat:
 FOHP, Williams.
164  “of what he might do”:
 Ibid.
164  “dying declaration”:
 Williams to
Wilkins, undated letter, LDF, September
1949.
165  “promenading”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 127.
165  “Undiscovered American


--- PAGE 1560 ---
Beauties”:  International Center of
Photography Blog, 
Ladies Home Journal
Prospectus, September 21, 1948, John
Morris, Picture Editor,
http://icplibrary.wordpress.com/2010/12/14/ladies-
home-journal’s-undiscovered-american-
beauties-provide-potential-bounty-to-
photographers’/.
165  “rise and point out”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 4, p. 509.
166  “The nigger Shepherd”:
 FOHP,
Williams. This is Franklin Williams’s
recollection of the manner in which
Norma Padgett identified her alleged
attackers, according to the transcripts from
FOHP, Williams. According to the trial
transcripts, Norma Padgett, in her
testimony, repeatedly referred to the


--- PAGE 1561 ---
defendants (and the deceased Ernest
Thomas) as “this (or the) Thomas nigger,”
“that Shepherd nigger,” “the Greenlee
nigger,” and even “that Shepherd man” at
times. Walter Irvin was referred to only as
“Irvin” by Padgett.
166  “probably the most dramatic
moment”:
 FOHP, Williams.
166  “resentful-eyed”:
 
Mount Dora
Topic
, September 8, 1949. Also transcript
of interview with Mabel Norris Chesley,
Franklin Hall Williams Papers,
Schomburg Center for Research in Black
Culture (FOHP, Chesley).
166  “wasn’t wearing a watch”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 4, p. 521.
166  “plaster Paris casts”:
 Ibid., p. 541.


--- PAGE 1562 ---
166  “the sheriff has kept me”:  Ibid.,
p. 542.
167  “feed you and sleep you”:
 Ibid.,
p. 552.
167  “jostled by a couple of hoodlums”:
New York Post
, September 9, 1949.
167  “Objection is overruled”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 4, p. 600.
167  “I see no purpose”:
 Ibid., p. 601.
168  “Well, Mr Williams”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 149.
168  “It’s the worst framed-up case”:
Ibid.
168  “It was like a story”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
168  “Mr. Williams,” he said:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1563 ---
169  “Willis McCall,” Shepherd told
him:
 Ibid.
169  “murdered blacks”:
 Ibid.
169  “tall, gangly”:
 Ibid.
169  “if you just tell”:
 Ted Poston, “The
Story of Florida’s Legal Lynching,” 
The
Nation
, September 2, 1949.
170  “I said to myself”:
 
Fl. v. Shepherd
,
Vol. 4, p. 600.
170  “hurry up and take me away”:
Ibid., p. 640.
170  “So I was sitting”:
 Ibid., p. 641.
172  “Would you have been”:
 Ibid.,
p. 644.
171  “the white lady”:
 Irene Holmes to
Franklin Williams, LDF, December 12,


--- PAGE 1564 ---
1949.
171  “Charlie Greenlee’s such a good
actor”:
 Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 104.
171  “eyes filled with grief”:
 
Mount
Dora Topic
, September 8, 1949.
171  “When are you going to put him”:
FOHP, Williams.
171  “You know what your problem is”:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 104.
171  “At Long Last”:
 
Mount Dora
Topic
, September 8, 1949.
172  “Except for the”:
 
New York Post
,
September 9, 1949.
172  “Not necessary”:
 Ibid.
172  “Mr. Hunter didn’t want”:
 Ibid.
172  “possible stains”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1565 ---
172  “If that white lady”:  Ibid.
172  “bowing and cringing”:
 Ibid.
172  “I won’t take very long”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 4, p. 644.
172  “a lot can happen”:
 Green, 
Before
His Time
, p. 103.
172  “no human being”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 165.
173  “grim game of ‘Musical Chairs’ ”:
St. Petersburg Times
, April 9, 1950.
173  “a little out of line”:
 Ibid.
173  “Jesse,” Futch said:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 167.
173  “the one long distance phone
booth”:
 
New York Post
, September 9,
1949.


--- PAGE 1566 ---
173  “an expectant father”:  State of
Florida v. Walter L. Irvin, Charles
Greenlee, and Samuel Shepherd
,
Prosecution Report, April 2, 1950,
Exhibit 1, FBI 44-2722.
173  “Keep your shirt on”:
 
New York
Post
, September 9, 1949.
173  that Sheriff McCall “needed help”:
Moore Report, Exhibit 53.
173  “no demonstration:
 
Fl. v. Shepherd
,
Vol. 4, p. 654.
174  “We the jury find”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Affadavit, p. 22.
174  “Hope was gone from the eyes”:
Mount Dora Topic
, September 8, 1949.
174  “Then a smile”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1567 ---
174  “Alex, psst, Alex”:  FOHP,
Williams. This scene is mostly derived
from Franklin Williams’s recollections
(FOHP, Williams), and from Ted Poston’s
“Horror in the Sunny South” stories in the
New York Post
.
174  “go home quietly”:
 Ibid.
174  “I don’t doubt”:
 Ibid.
175  “Aren’t you going to escort us”:
Ibid.
175  “jammed that cigarette lighter”:
Ibid.
175  “hostile sea of white faces”:
 
New
York Post
, September 9, 1949.
175  “Hurry up and get in”:
 FOHP,
Williams.


--- PAGE 1568 ---
175  “Where’s Ramona?”:  New York
Post
, September 9, 1949.
176  “Jesus Christ,” Williams said:
FOHP, Williams.
176  “Oh, God. It’s my fault”:
 
New York
Post
, September 9, 1949.
177  “I have never been so happy”:
FOHP, Williams.
177  “I couldn’t see my own shame”:
New York Post
, September 9, 1949.
177  “Aw, you have got”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
Chapter 12: Atom Smasher
179  “if he didn’t say”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 188.
179  “He was going to handme over”:


--- PAGE 1569 ---
Ibid., p. 188.
179  “You lied on the witness stand?”:
Moore Report, p. 288. This scene is
derived from the transcript that Harry T.
Moore’s biographer, Ben Green, made
(July 15, 1992) from Willis McCall’s
interview of Charles Greenlee. The
transcript appears in the Moore Report.
180  “Scotland Yard”:
 
Mount Dora
Topic
, undated clipping, FHW Papers,
September 1949.
180  “An unlettered but articulate”:
New York Post
, September 6, 1949.
180  “ample opportunity”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 4, Affadavit, p. 142.
180  “vicious,” in Williams’s judgment:
FOHP, Williams.


--- PAGE 1570 ---
180   “the evidence was”:  Corsair, The
Groveland Four
, p. 188.
181  “My feeling is that”:
 Wilkins to
Spingarn, NAACP, September 6, 1949.
181  “that Tavares business”:
 
New York
Post
, September 6, 1949.
181  “thrown behind the defense”:
 Press
release, NAACP, August 1949.
181  “We’ll keep Frank’s promise”:
New York Post
, Septe,ber 6, 1949.
181  “bloodthirsty, motorized mob”:
New York Post
, September 9, 1949.
182  “all the characteristics”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
182  “He may have been”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 32.


--- PAGE 1571 ---
182  “I would  not  live in the South”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 154.
182  “deterred the assertion”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 98.
183  “So if God be with me”:
 Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 194.
183
  
“damn bunch of Communists”:
Ibid., p. 198.
184  The FBI chose:
 Moore Report,
Exhibit 76.
184  “intended to stop car”:
 Ibid.
184  by a federal grand jury:
 Marshall to
McGrath, 44-2772-43, FBI.
184  “there is substantial evidence”:
Campbell to Phillips, 144-18-117, FBI,


--- PAGE 1572 ---
September 13, 1949,
184  “as fair a trial”:
 Phillips to
Campbell, MM 44-156, FBI.
185  “Judge, I agree”:
 Kluger, 
Simple
Justice
, p. 277.
185-86  “all day and virtually every
night”:
 Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the
Courts
, p. 159.
186  “considerable talents”:
 Ibid.,
p. 160.
186  “great dark Munich beer”:
 Ibid.,
p. 159.
186  “If we can force the University of
Texas”:
 
The Survey
, Vol. 85, 1949,
p. 21. (Charity Organization Society of the
City of New York, Survey Associates.)


--- PAGE 1573 ---
186  “equal to the University of Texas
Law School”:
 Lavergne, 
Before Brown
,
p. 161.
187  “everyone knows what the score
is”:
 Unidentified news clipping, NAACP.
188  “opened [the judge’s] eyes”:
Williams, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 179.
188  “You keep talking”:
 Rowan, 
Dream
Makers, Dream Breakers
, p. 148.
188  “it was ‘nigger’ this”:
 Ibid.
188  “Thurgood was respectful”:
Address by John Paul Stevens, Associate
Justice, Supreme Court of the United
States, to the American Bar Association,
Thurgood Marshall Awards Dinner
Honoring Abner Mikva, Hyatt Regency
Hotel, Chicago, IL, August 6, 2005.


--- PAGE 1574 ---
188  “there would be intermarriage”:
Kluger, 
Simple Justice
, p. 265.
188  “We had eight people”:
 Ibid.
189  For one, McLaurin:
 Ibid.
189  “it offered the”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 71.
189  “clattering hot-lead Linotype
machines”:
 Ibid., p. 159.
189
  
“Thurgood focused on”:
 Ibid.,
p. 71.
189  “
Plessy
 must go”:
 Kluger, 
Simple
Justice
, p. 276.
190  “like a boxer”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 72.
190  “employed a rhetoric”:
 Ibid., p. 76.
190  “The rights of Sweatt”:
 Williams,


--- PAGE 1575 ---
Thurgood Marshall , p. 183.
190  “All we ask in the south”:
 Ibid.
191
  
“I was the first deputy”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
191  “Bill, take a few minutes”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 32. Also FOHP, Williams.
191  “Walter liked me”:
 Kluger, 
Simple
Justice
, p. 271.
191  “He had great success”:
 Ibid.
192  “cautious to a fault”:
 Ibid., p. 272.
192  “because they might”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 33.
192  “special counsel”:
 Ibid.
Chapter 13: In Any Fight Some Fall


--- PAGE 1576 ---
193  “Mrs. Padgett didn’t”:  Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Brief of Appellee, p. 44.
194  “in somebody’s back”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
194  “disturbed and disappointed”:
 MM
44-156, FBI.
195  didn’t “need any assistance”:
 FBI
44-2722-90, Phillips to McInerney, April
28, 1950.
195  “These education cases are”:
James, 
Root and Branch
, p. 199.
195  “didn’t know how to stop
working”:
 McNeil, 
Groundwork
, p. 209.
195
  
“to remember his father”:
 Ibid.
195  “Get down from there”:
 Ibid.,
p. 187.


--- PAGE 1577 ---
196  “open-air Scottsboro protest
meeting”:
 Ibid., p. 207.
196  Since Scottsboro:
 Ibid.
196  “Hi, Joe,” Houston said:
 Ibid.,
p. 211.
196  “Tell Bo I did not”:
 Ibid., p. 212.
197  “unremitting struggle”:
 
Crisis
, June
1950.
197  “Whatever credit”:
 Sullivan, 
Lift
Every Voice
, p. 382.
197
  
“guided us through”:
 
Crisis
, June
1950.
198  “We won the big one!”:
 Lavergne,
Before Brown
, p. 253.
198  left
 
Plessy
 in “tatters”:
 Tushnet,
Making Civil Rights Law
, p. 147.


--- PAGE 1578 ---
198  “Thurgood . . . a party man”:
Williams, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 185;
Motley, 
Equal Justice Under Law
, p. 106.
198  “lots of Scotch”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 78.
198  “the tools to destroy”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 185.
199  “she waited patiently”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, April 9, 1950.
200  “crying profusely”:
 Ibid.
200  As for her testimony:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, pp. 202–203.
200
  
“a dastardly lying libel”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, April 13, 1950.
201  “tried to keep him”:
 
Crisis
,
June/July 1982.


--- PAGE 1579 ---
201  To Morehouse College president:
Sullivan, 
Lift Every Voice
, p. 373.
201  “deplorable state of”:
 Current to
Black, NAACP, undated report.
202  “I plan to touch”:
 Green, 
Before
His Time
, p. 110.
202  “a lot of yelling”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 154.
202  “I won’t take it!”:
 COHP,
Marshall.
202  “Dutch uncle”:
 Presidential
Recordings Program, Lyndon Johnson
Tapes Transcripts, Monday, January 3,
1966: Thurgood Marshall, Lyndon
Johnson, participants,
http://whitehousetapes.net/transcript/johnson/wh6606-
01-9403. (Hereafter cited as LBJ tapes.)


--- PAGE 1580 ---
203  “less than bold”:  Kluger, Simple
Justice
, p. 248.
203  “made Marshall look”:
 Ibid.,
p. 304.
203  “not dragging his”:
 Ibid., p. 305.
203  “he didn’t have to worry”:
 COHP,
Marshall.
203  “You’re fired”:
 Ibid.
203
  
“Why, I didn’t mean that”:
 Ibid.
204  “he felt he was being exiled”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 33.
204  “although most of the whites”:
Reports of Ms. L. B. De Forest, ACLU,
Summer 1950.
204  “to avoid any possibility”:
 Watts to


--- PAGE 1581 ---
Marshall, August 2, 1950, ACLU.
204  “Keep away from Sheriff McCall”:
Reports of Ms. L. B. De Forest, ACLU,
Summer 1950.
205  “chose[n] jurymen”:
 
Cassell v.
Texas
, 339 U.S. 282 (1950).
205  “would not be likely”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 98.
205
  
“a number of old English cases”:
Ibid.
205  “The complete destruction”:
Lavergne, 
Before Brown
, p. 258.
206  “eradicate Communists”:
 
Crisis
,
November 1980.
206  “They’re in there”:
 COHP,
Marshall.


--- PAGE 1582 ---
206  “we socked them good”:  Ibid.
207  “The communists brought it on
themselves”:
 Williams, 
Thurgood
Marshall
, p. 169.
207  “staggering casualties”:
 
Crisis
,
May 1951.
208  “so-called trials”:
 COHP, Marshall.
208  “in a base hospital”:
 
Crisis
, May
1951.
208  “There was so much sniper fire”:
Life
, November 12, 1965.
208  “What happened over there”:
COHP, Marshall.
208  “not even in the band”:
 
Pittsburgh
Courier
, March 3, 1951.
208  “the United States Air Force took


--- PAGE 1583 ---
just one day”:  Crisis , May 1951.
209  “The Red Koreans”:
 Ibid.
209  “just a bad egg”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 80.
209  “My dad told me”:
 
New York
Times
, June 29, 1991.
Chapter 14: This Is a Rape Case
211  a “Communist agent”:
 
Ocala Star
Banner
, March 29, 1956.
211  “a stranger coming”:
 De Forest,
WDL. All observations and quotes are
from the journal entries of L. B. De
Forest, mailed to Rowland Watts during
the summer of 1950.
212  “If we were to tell the truth”:
 Ibid.
213  “heard the motor start up again”:


--- PAGE 1584 ---
Twiss affadavit, WDL, April 29, 1951.
213  “police alarm”:
 Thomas to Watts
,
WDL, undated.
214  “sitting in the grass”:
 
Fl. v.
Shepherd
, Vol. 4, p. 578.
214  “thought she might have gotten”:
MM 44-156, FBI.
214  “vagaries in both”:
 Thomas to
Watts, WDL, undated.
215  “seen the girl”:
 Ibid.
215–216  “I am sure you can
appreciate”:
 Williams to Marshall, LDF,
December 4, 1950.
216  “To pull you out”:
 Marshall to
Williams, LDF, December 12, 1950.
216
  
“Well,” Bowen had responded:


--- PAGE 1585 ---
Corsair, The Groveland Four , p. 213.
216  “irritated me a little”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
217  “to say anything more”:
 
Crisis
,
April 1951.
217  “Well,” Carter asked:
 FOHP,
Williams.
217  argued the case “superbly”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 98.
218  “the hardest thing”:
 
Crisis
, April
1951. The reporting and quotes from
Shepherd v. Florida
 are derived from this
issue of 
Crisis
.
Chapter 15: You Have Pissed in My Whiskey
219  “Won new trial for Walter Irvin”:


--- PAGE 1586 ---
Marshall to Dellia Irvin, LDF, April 10,
1951.
220  “do not meet any civilized
conception”:
 
Shepherd v. Irvin
, 341 U.S.
50 (1951).
220  “not surprised”:
 
New York Times
,
April 11, 1951.
220  “very disappointed”:
 Ibid.
220  “perfect this appeal”:
 
Orlando
Sentinel Star
, November 9, 1949.
220  Sidestepping questions:
 
Pittsburgh
Courier
, April 21, 1951.
221  In a public statement he ranted:
Ibid.
221  “to see that justice was done”:
McCall, 
Willis V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake


--- PAGE 1587 ---
County , p. 23.
221  “I have it directly”:
 Watts Report,
WDL.
221-22a  “God Damn Nigger Lover”:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 134.
222  “I don’t push easy”:
 McCall, 
Willis
V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 14.
222  “Our warm appreciation”:
 White to
Williams, NAACP, April 11, 1951.
222  “unable to give his whole support”:
St. Petersburg Times
, April 11, 1951.
222  “desegregated in about three
weeks”:
 COHP, Marshall.
222  “it wasn’t very smart”:
 Author
interview, Jack Greenberg, February 10,
2009.


--- PAGE 1588 ---
223  “ham or oranges”:  Corsair, The
Groveland Four
, p. 219.
223  “strange code of ethics”:
 Ibid.
223  “You all haven’t electrocuted”:
New York Post
, November 8, 1951.
223  “Wish you all would run”:
 Ibid
.
223  “causing trouble”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 223.
223  “plenty of Negroes”:
 Ibid.
224  “a big yellow streak”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 31.
224  “You can say all you want”:
Kluger, 
Simple Justice
, p. 750.
224
  
“I don’t sleep with”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 133.
224  “white travelers were not yet


--- PAGE 1589 ---
accustomed”:  Ibid.
224  “Norma Padgett and her husband”:
FOHP, Williams.
225  “regulation strap”:
 Moore Report,
Exhibit 74.
225  “put the finger on”:
 Ibid
.
225  “out of hearing distance”:
 FOHP,
Williams.
226  “feelings generated”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 134.
226
  
“unpainted, weather-beaten”:
Ibid., p. 135.
226  “an illegal search and seizure”:
Ibid.
226  “battlefield tension”:
 Ibid., p. 134.
226  “create an error”:
 FOHP,


--- PAGE 1590 ---
Williams.
226  “Anything can happen”:
 Ibid
.
227  “Prisons breed criminals”:
 De
Forest, WDL, Watts Report.
231  “I am ready now”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 253.
231  “Go on ahead”:
 “Testimony of
Walter Irvin,” State of Florida, County of
Lake, November 8, 1951, George State
University Special Collections
Department, Stetson Kennedy Papers.
231  “You sons of bitches,” McCall said:
FBI 44-267.
232  “Well,” he told Marshall:
 Thurgood
Marshall, “Remarks at a Testimonial
Dinner Honoring Raymond Pace
Alexander, November 25, 1951,” Mark V.


--- PAGE 1591 ---
Tushnet, Thurgood Marshall: His
Speeches, Writings, Arguments,
Opinions, and Reminiscences
, p. 140.
232  “Lake County Sheriff Shoots Two
Negores”:
 
Orlando Sentinel Star
,
November 7, 1951.
233  “wanted to furnish information”:
FBI 44-267.
233  “killing of Samuel Shepherd”:
Greenberg to Fuller Warren, NAACP,
November 7, 1951.
233  “the build of a blocking back”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 141.
234  “exactly what happened”:
 
New
York Post
, November 8, 1951.
234  “You might as well go away”:


--- PAGE 1592 ---
Orlando Morning Sentinel , November 8,
1951.
234  “I have orders not to let anyone”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 238.
234  “suffering shock”:
 
Orlando
Evening Star
, November 8, 1951.
234  “Yates kept us”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 141.
234  “when the law gives”:
 
Orlando
Evening Star
, November 8, 1951.
235  “appeared to be in pain”:
 FBI 44-
4055.
235  “entirely different story”:
 Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 239.
235  “half way down”:
 FBI 44-4055.
Willis McCall’s version of the shooting is


--- PAGE 1593 ---
derived from his statement to FBI agents
Swinney and Aderhold and transcribed in
this report.
235  “He said, ‘I will piss’ ”:
 Ibid.
236  “he knew nothing”:
 Ibid.
236  “Marie, it’s just”:
 
Orlando
Morning Sentinel
, November 8, 1951.
236  “saw one of them move”:
 Stetson
Kennedy Papers, Georgia State
University, Special Collections
Department.
237  “You have pissed in my whiskey”:
Author interview with Stetson Kennedy,
December 7, 2009.
237  “One of them has a pulse”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 138.


--- PAGE 1594 ---
237  “friends of Sheriff Willis V.
McCall”:
 
New York Post
, November 10,
1951.
237  “extreme shock”:
 Lake County
Medical Center, report of Dr. R. H.
Williams, FBI 44-267.
237  “a batch of the sheriff’s hair”:
 FBI
44-267.
238  “I’m just happy to be here”:
Orlando Morning Sentinel
, November 8,
1951.
238  “I expect I’ll get”:
 
Tampa Morning
Tribune
, November 9, 1951.
238  “Please give me a truthful
answer”:
 
New Leader
, November 19,
1951.
239  “Visibly shaken”:
 
Orlando


--- PAGE 1595 ---
Morning Sentinel , November 8, 1951.
239  “Guess what. McCall’s”:
 FHW
Papers, Chesley.
239  “Mabel,” he’d said:
 Green, 
Before
His Time
, p. 141.
Chapter 16: It’s a Funny Thing
240  “This is what human rights
means”:
 
New York Times
, November 9,
1951.
241  “the shooting of”:
 
St. Peterburg
Times
, November 8, 1951.
241  “primitive mobile crime lab”:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 141.
241  “check all angles”:
 
New York
Times
, November 8, 1951.
241  “Well, boys, I’m here”:
 
Tampa


--- PAGE 1596 ---
Tribune , November 9, 1951.
241  “court-appointed elisor”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, November 8, 1951.
241  and a “special nurse”:
 
Crisis
,
December 1951.
242  “This was the first time”:
 FHW
Papers, Chesley.
242  “No one’s going to hurt you”:
Miami Herald
, November 9, 1951. Also
Stetson Kennedy Papers, Georgia State
University, Special Collections
Department. Walter Irvin’s version of the
shooting is derived from his interview
with lawyers at Waterman Memorial
Hospital on November 8, 1951.
245  “We sincerely hope the good
people”:
 
St. Petersburg Times
,


--- PAGE 1597 ---
November 9, 1951.
245  “Colored men who are accused”:
Pittsburgh Courier
, November 17, 1951.
245  “It’s a funny thing”:
 
New York
Post
, November 9, 1951.
245  “was visibly shaken”:
 
Orlando
Morning Sentinel
, November 8, 1951.
245  “This is the worst thing”:
 Ibid.
245  “IRVIN agreeable”:
 MM 44-267,
FBI.
246  “and the laws of this country”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 283.
246  “We must leave”:
 Wilkins
statement, NAACP, November 8, 1951.
246  “to whitewash the whole affair”:
Marshall to McGrath, NAACP, November


--- PAGE 1598 ---
8, 1951.
246  The national office:
 Author
interview, Vernon Jordan, April 14, 2011.
247  “There isn’t a threat”:
 
Time
,
September 19, 1955.
247  “ducking, weaving and”:
 
New York
Post
, November 8, 1951.
247  “It’s a funny thing”:
 
New York
Post
, November 9, 1951.
248  It took Willis McCall:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 250.
248  “to kill Alex Akerman”:
 Ibid.,
p. 249.
248  “No, I’m in the clear”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 251.
248  “a big SOB in the NAACP”:


--- PAGE 1599 ---
Corsair, The Groveland Four , p. 250.
249  “hatchet job”:
 Byrd to Lucille
Black, NAACP, September 29, 1950.
249  “always delivered the votes”:
Author interview, Vernon Jordan, April
14, 2011.
249  “wondering if Moore”:
 MM 44-
270, FBI.
249  “neck ought to be broken”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 156.
249  “afraid to travel”:
 Ibid.
250  “grooves between the tread
design”:
 MM 44-267, FBI.
250  “I will ask you”:
 Ibid.
250  “The nail on the tire”:
 FHW,
Chesley.


--- PAGE 1600 ---
251  “Was this ground dug up”:  MM 44-
267, FBI.
252  “until I got permission”:
 Ibid.
253  “guest of honor”:
 
Federated Press
,
November 19, 1951.
253  “I believe that this”:
 MM 44-267,
FBI.
253  “justified by reason”:
 Ibid.
253  “At that time,” Futch wrote:
 Ibid.,
Statement of the Court, Fifth Judicial
Circuit, Lake County, Florida, November
12, 1951.
253–
54  “only as I have been directed”:
St. Petersburg Times
, November 13,
1951.
254  “directly beneath a blood spot”:


--- PAGE 1601 ---
FBI 44-4066-70.
254  “reached up and grabbed”:
 MM
44-267, FBI.
254  “for probable use”:
 FBI 44-4055-
15.
254  “no need for a grand jury”:
 MM
44-267, FBI.
255  he was “out of the city”:
 Kennedy
Papers.
255  “complete vindication”:
 
New York
Post
, November 10, 1951.
256  “fantastic savagery”:
 Ibid.
256  “Irvin’s story was so convincing”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 279.
256  “after this conference”:
 Marshall
to Warren, NAACP, November 11, 1951.


--- PAGE 1602 ---
256  “This is the worst case”:  Chicago
Defender
, November 17, 1951.
257  “are no good at all”:
 McCall, 
Willis
V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 14.
257  “sheer, filthy offensiveness”:
 
New
York Post
, November 11, 1951.
257  “I don’t think there is any
question”:
 McCall, 
Willis V. McCall,
Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 14.
Chapter 17: No Man Alive or to Be Born
259  “crap games, after-hour”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 149.
259  “play the ace up my sleeve”:
Stetson Kennedy, 
The Klan Unmasked
,
p. 245.
259  “has facilitated”:
 Ibid., p. xiii.


--- PAGE 1603 ---
259  “Well, well!” Elliott said:  Ibid.,
p. 245. Kennedy’s conversation with
Elliott, which also appeared in several
newspapers, is derived from his account
in 
The Klan Unmasked
.
260  Stetson Kennedy didn’t even stop:
Ibid., pp. 249–250.
260  “Red hot information”:
 
Chicago
Defender
, November 24, 1951.
260  “for further funds”:
 FBI 44-4055-
27. This report details the FBI’s
interactions with Stetson Kennedy and
also contains Hoover’s handwritten
notation.
261  “it looked like Kennedy had
swindled”:
 Ibid.
261  “could result in the nicest”:


--- PAGE 1604 ---
Chicago Defender , November 24, 1951.
262  “prejudiced in Civil Rights
investigations”:
.
 FBI 44-4055-27.
262  “entirely possible,” given:
 Ibid.
262  “Klan-ridden regime”:
 Newton, 
The
Invisible Empire
, p. 125.
262  “Sometime later,” however:
 Moore
Report, p. 134.
266  “the best person would”:
Groveland Case Minutes, LDF, November
13, 1951.
262  “In the name of human decency”:
Marshall to Warren, NAACP, December
5, 1951.
263  “doomed murderer”:
 FBI 44-4055-
65. Leiby’s statement and the FBI


--- PAGE 1605 ---
investigation at Raiford are derived from
this report.
264  “it is not the practice”:
 
Jet
, January
17, 1951.
264  “remove Sheriff Willis B. McCall”:
Resolutions: Florida State Conference of
NAACP Branches, November 23–35,
1951, Daytona Beach, NAACP.
264  “came in and took over”:
 Moore
Report, p. 98.
265  “he could not understand”:
 Ibid.,
p. 34.
265
  
“the easy part of the job”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 86.
265  “anti-Semitic and anti-Negro
slogans”:
 Raymond A. Mohl, “ ‘South of


--- PAGE 1606 ---
the South?’ Jews, Blacks, and the Civil
Rights Movement in Miami, 1945–1960, ”
Journal of American Ethnic History
,
Vol. 18, No. 2, Winter 1999.
265  “The Jew has already”:
 Ibid.
266  “Florida Terror”:
 
Gainesville Sun
,
November 5, 2000.
266  “the worst year of minority
outrages”:
 “The Truth About the Florida
Race Troubles,” 
Saturday Evening Post
,
June 1952.
266  “still echoing around the world”:
Moore to Warren, NAACP, December 2,
1951.
266
  
“Is it true that”:
 Ibid.
266  “I’ll take a few”:
 Green, 
Before His
Time
, p. 155.


--- PAGE 1607 ---
267  “We really ought to”:  Ibid.
267  “Some of the tactics”:
 Ibid.
267  “As matters now stand”:
Washington Afro-American
, December 4,
1951.
267  “vicious, slanderous and”:
 Corsair,
The Groveland Four
, p. 290.
267  “has nothing whatsover”:
Unidentified news clipping, NAACP.
268
  
“Did you interview him”:
 
Fl. v.
Samuel Shepherd and Walter Irvin
,
Florida State Archives, Application for
Removal of Cause, p. 139.
268  “That statement is entirely false”:
Ibid
.
268  “this whole thing has”:
 
St.


--- PAGE 1608 ---
Petersburg Times , December 7, 1951.
269  “took the first step”:
 
Daily
Worker
, December 7, 1951.
269  “stirred up trouble”:
 Columbia
University Oral History Project, Jack
Greenberg with Kitty Gelhorn, Columbia
Center for Oral History, Columbia
University, Butler Library, New York, NY
(hereafter cited as COHP, Greenberg).
269  “because they represent the
NAACP”:
 
St. Petersburg Times
,
December 7, 1951.
270  “believed that the threat”:
Pittsburgh Courier
, December 22, 1951.
270  “ordinary, conversational”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 76.


--- PAGE 1609 ---
270  “In a mass meeting”:  Ibid., p. 29.
271  “Why did McCall have to
remove”:
 
Pittsburgh Courier
, December
22, 1951.
271  “They can keep me”:
 Ibid.
271  “from some of these white
people”:
 Ibid.
271
  
“I was glad of the chance”:
 Doggett
to Marshall, LDF, December 15, 1951,
and January 1, 1952.
272  “This is not a single battle”:
Tushnet, 
The NAACP’s Legal Strategy
Against Segregated Education
,
1925
–
1950
, p. 95.
272  “going too far” in his work:
 Moore
Report, Exhibit 39.


--- PAGE 1610 ---
272  “I’m going to keep doing it”:
Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 162.
Chapter 18: All Over the Place, Like Rats
274  “Is that you, Harry?”:
 Moore
Report, p. 31. The accounts of the evening
of December 25, 1951, are derived from
various FBI reports, interviews, and
witness statements included in this report.
276  “We seek no special favors”:
Moore to Warren, NAACP, December 2,
1951.
277  “Trying to scare”:
 Moore Report,
p. 315.
277  “There isn’t much left”:
 
Orlando
Sentinel
, December 28, 1951.
277  “Bombing Kills Negro Leader”:


--- PAGE 1611 ---
New York Times , December 27, 1951.
278  “When state officers”:
 
Washington
Post
, December 29, 1951.
278  “That kind of violent incident”:
Crisis
, May/June, 1999.
278
  
“I can testify”:
 
Collier’s
, February
23, 1952.
278  “the possibility of violent death”:
Jet
, September 29, 1955.
278  “representatives of the finest
type”:
 Marshall to Warren, NAACP,
December 26, 1951.
279  “Terrorism in Florida”:
 
Crisis
,
February 1952.
279  “Notice Negro Blood on Your
Grapefruit?”:
 
Ebony
, April 1952.


--- PAGE 1612 ---
279  “It’s a pat on the back”:  Ebony ,
November 1975.
279  “Terrorists Kill by Night”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, December 30, 1951.
279  “arrest and conviction”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, December 28, 1951.
279  “acting as a human shield”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 183.
279  “I am the second best pistol shot”:
Baltimore Afro-American
, January 5,
1952.
279  “to see what can be done”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, December 28, 1951.
279  “in their moment of degradation”:
New York Times
, December 31, 1951.
280  “fast, resolute action”:
 
New York


--- PAGE 1613 ---
Times , January 3, 1952.
280  “Everything was being done”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, December 28, 1951.
280  “I’m sure as I can be”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 184.
280  “a relief to know”:
 
St. Petersburg
Times
, December 31, 1951.
280  Against Dr. Starke’s wishes:
 Ibid.,
p. 186.
281  “even if they had a pistol”:
 Green,
Before His Time
, p. 187.
282  “You can pick up a newspaper”:
Pittsburgh Courier
, February 2, 1952.
282  “Getting dynamite”:
 Moore Report,
p. 123.
282  “We’d go in and talk”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1614 ---
282  “We had informants”:  Ibid.
Chapter 19: Private Parts
284  was “booked solid”:
 Moore Report,
p. 316.
284  “I don’t care how booked you
are”:
 Ibid.
284  “to ensure that the FBI”:
 Ibid.
284  “Klan members and some law
enforcement officers”:
 Ibid.
285  “How you want your body shipped
back?”:
 
Chicago Defender
, February 23,
1952.
285  “American Confederate Army”:
Jet
, July 31, 1952.
285  1. denounce the NAACP:
 Ibid.
285  “Florida must have a few


--- PAGE 1615 ---
lynchings”:  Ibid.
285  “at least 25 cars”:
 
Pittsburgh
Courier
, February 23, 1952.
285  “with confederate flags flying”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 141.
285  “It was frightening, it was
exciting”:
 COHP, Greenberg.
286  “took the vain precaution”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 141.
286  “too busy with traffic accidents”:
Fort Pierce News Tribune
, February 12,
1952.
286  “misquoted” with regard:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, February 17, 1952.


--- PAGE 1616 ---
286  “libelous and defamatory”
postcards:
 
Lubbock Evening Journal
,
February 13, 1952.
286  “Your boys, the KKKs”:
 
Chicago
Defender
, February 23, 1952.
286  “beautiful shiny Cadillac”:
 Ibid.
286  “rip-roaring welcome parade”:
Pittsburgh Courier
, February 23, 1952.
286  “stirred up trouble in the
community”:
 
Atlanta Daily World
,
February 10, 1952.
286  “My shoulder worries me”:
 
New
York Daily Compass
, February 13, 1952.
287  “packed to the ceiling”:
 
Chicago
Defender
, February 23, 1952.
287  “our greatest civil liberties


--- PAGE 1617 ---
lawyer”:  Collier’s , February 23, 1952.
287  a Louisiana judge who was “no
friend”:
 COHP, Marshall.
288  “You don’t have to worry”:
 Ibid.
288  “not one of the 518 whites”:
 
New
York Daily Compass
, February 12, 1952.
288  “place the trial”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 143.
288  “chewed occasionally”:
 
New York
Daily Compass
, February 12, 1952.
288  “How much did they pay you?”:
 
Fl.
v. Irvin
, p. 24.
288  “Now, as a matter of fact”:
 Ibid.,
p. 29.
289  “one of the best friends”:
 Ibid.,
p. 93.


--- PAGE 1618 ---
289  “I would put this county”:  Ibid.,
p. 105.
290  “gentleman of the frock”:
 
Chicago
Defender
, February 23, 1952.
290  “The objection is sustained”:
 
Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 57.
290  “I’m here at the wish of the
government”:
 Juan Williams interview
with Thurgood Marshall,
http://www.thurgoodmarshall.com/interviews/early_naacp.htm.
This scene between Marshall and J. J.
Elliott is derived from Williams’s
interview with Marshall about his early
NAACP work.
291  “our greatest civil rights lawyer”:
Collier’s
, February 23, 1952.
291  “So go toward them”:
 Williams


--- PAGE 1619 ---
interview with Marshall.
291  “It shocked me”:
 FOHP, Williams.
292  “a heavy woman in a dark dress”:
New York Daily Compass
, February 12,
1952.
292  “Well, you got the case”:
 Williams
interview with Marshall.
292  “clearly implied that”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 144.
292  “Well,” he said:
 Williams interview
with Marshall.
293  “Won’t say it on myself”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 144.
293  “who wouldn’t confess”:
 Ibid.
293  “I’ll take a life sentence”:
 
New


--- PAGE 1620 ---
York Daily Compass , February 17, 1952.
294  shout “Nigger!” over and over:
Life
, September 20, 1948.
294  “see it when it was made up”:
Chicago Defender
, February 23, 1952.
294  “Well, this Deputy Sheriff”:
 
Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 144.
295  Marshall had also learned:
 Byrd to
Carter, LDF, Ocotber 21, 1951.
295  “best colored man on the panel”:
Chicago Defender
, February 23, 1952.
295  “If he says the boy is good”:
 Ibid.
295  “An ingenious man”:
 Ibid.
296  “remarkable,” according to one
reporter:
 
New York Daily Compass
,
February 13, 1952.


--- PAGE 1621 ---
296  “hit quite a few licks”:  Fl. v. Irvin ,
p. 295.
296  “Dressed for a party”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 145.
296  “coral-colored cardigan sweater”:
New York Daily Compass
, February 13,
1952.
297  “Why would a ‘rape victim’ strut”:
Crisis
, Vol. 56, October 1949.
297  “bone-poor”:
 
New York Daily
Compass
, February 13, 1952.
297  “has the bent carriage”:
 Ibid.
297  “which often could not be heard”:
Ibid.
297  “Grab the lady”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
,
p. 302.


--- PAGE 1622 ---
298  “That’s all, brother”:  New York
Daily Compass
, February 13, 1952.
298  “One of them said”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
,
p. 305.
299
  
“The nigger Shepherd . . .”
:
 FOHP,
Williams.
299  “Now, Norma, this is”:
 
FL. vs.
Irvin
, p. 310.
299  “You had a farmer jury”:
 FHW
Papers, Chesley.
300  “What did you tell him?”:
 
Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 321.
300  “You watch her on the witness
stand”:
 
New York Daily Compass
,
February 13, 1952.
300  “gum-chewing husky”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1623 ---
301  “protecting the integrity”:  Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 339.
301  “Now, Mr. Yates,” Hunter began:
Ibid., p. 341.
302  “emission of seed”:
 Ibid., p. 494.
302  “the old common Florida way”:
Ibid., p. 513.
302  “Now, Mr. Yates, is it true”:
 Ibid.,
p. 372.
Chapter 20: A Genius Here Before Us
303  “a spread collar”:
 
New York Daily
Compass
, February 14, 1952.
303  Howard would break his share of
vows:
 Author interview with Kim
Howard, April 12, 2011.
304  “Just tell what happened”:
 
Fl. v.


--- PAGE 1624 ---
Irvin , p. 374.
304  “Why did you rape”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
305  “Did you tell them”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
,
p. 376.
305  They had been classmates:
Leesburg High School Yearbook, 1947.
305  “Well, I asked her”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
,
p. 376.
305  “as smooth as Willie is bucolic”:
New York Daily Compass
, February 14,
1952.
306  The Groveland case was never
mentioned:
 Author interview with Kim
Howard, April 12, 1952.
306  “My mother was a saint”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1625 ---
306 – 7  “The absence of medical proof”:
New York Daily Compass
, February 17,
1952.
307  “We need you very much”:
 S.
Ralph Harlow to Lawrence Burtoft, LDF,
January 15, 1952.
307  “hit over the head”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
,
p. 388.
308  “at least one Ku Klux Klan
member”:
 
New York Daily Compass
,
February 17, 1952.
309  “genuine fear of reprisals”:
 Caxton
Doggett to Greenberg, LDF, January 31,
1952.
309  “wanted him to let his conscience”:
Ibid.
309  “Now, as a matter of fact”:
 
Fl. v.


--- PAGE 1626 ---
Irvin , p. 392.
310  “reported to a man”:
 MM 44-156,
FBI.
310  citing the “confidential nature”:
FBI 44-2722-24.
310  “To tell what I knew”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 318.
310  “The only chance these Negroes
had”:
 
Shepherd v. Florida
, 341 U.S. 50
(1951).
312  “Just a minute”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
, p. 418.
313  “cracking wise to his friends”:
 
New
York Daily Compass
, February 14, 1952.
313
–
14  “stop the prosecutor”:
 Ibid.
314  “After carefully studying”:
 
Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 437.


--- PAGE 1627 ---
314  “Then it is your contention”:  Ibid.,
p. 438.
314  “ridiculed the testimony”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 146.
314  “Then, as a matter of fact”:
 
Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 440.
315  “chew anything substantial”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 147.
315  “We do not insist on it”:
 
Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 446.
316  “pretty well acquainted”:
 Ibid.,
p. 452.
316  “Gentlemen,” he told the jury:
Ibid., p. 464.


--- PAGE 1628 ---
316  “crazy” Herman Bennett:  Ibid.,
p. 473.
316  “Now, gentlemen”:
 Ibid., p. 474.
316  “They’re probably wondering”:
New York Daily Compass
, February 17,
1952.
317  “in a difficult spot”:
 Ibid.
317  “as if they never knew”:
 
New York
Daily Compass
, February 15, 1952.
317  “Gentlemen of the jury, Marshall
began”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
, p. 477.
317  “drumming his fingers”:
 
New York
Daily Compass
, February 15, 1952.
317  “Now, in cases of this type”:
 
Fl. v.
Irvin
, p. 477.
319  “patiently, politely”:
 
New York


--- PAGE 1629 ---
Daily Compass , February 15, 1952.
319  “With Marshall, you really got the
impression”:
 E. Barrett Prettyman, Jr.,
interview, 
Thurgood Marshall: Justice
for All
, A&E Biography, 2005.
319  “best evidence we could find”:
 
Fl.
v. Irvin
, p. 485.
320  “Damn, that nigger was good”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 157.
Chapter 21: The Colored Way
321  “Boy, that’s a great man”:
 FHW
Papers, Chesley.
321  quite “buddy-buddy”:
 Ibid.
321  “a terrible racist”:
 Ibid.
322  “conned into believing”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1630 ---
322  “because of its possible good
effects”:
 “Musings,” 
Mount Dora Topic
,
undated clipping. FHW Papers.
322  “Stay away from that man”:
 FHW
Papers, Chesley.
323  “We don’t say that she was not
raped”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
, p. 490.
324  “Gentlemen, although”:
 Ibid., 505.
325  “whooped and hollered”:
 
New York
Daily Compass
, February 15, 1952.
325  “Now, gentlemen, she sat there”:
Fl. v. Irvin
, p. 485.
326
–
27  “open up until the case went to
the jury”:
 
New York Post
, February 19.
1952.
327  “I didn’t do it”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1631 ---
327  “Judge Futch, I’m quite serious”:
Williams interview with Marshall.
327  “rigidly scrutinized”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 338.
328  “How long’s the jury”:
 Williams
interview with Marshall.
329  “Now when the jury gives its
verdict”:
 Ibid.
329  “We the jury find”:
 
New York
Daily Compass
, February 15, 1952.
329  “Like a man stunned”:
 Ibid.
329  “Don’t you know that”:
 
Fl. v. Irvin
,
p. 516.
329  the word
 
criminal
, not
 
colored
:
New York Daily Compass
, February 15,
1952.


--- PAGE 1632 ---
329  “the reporter who was faithful”:
Ibid.
329  “Could this be another”:
 
New York
Daily Compass
, February 17, 1952.
330  “Say, is that Carter”:
 Ibid.
330  “She had the most impressive
face”:
 Williams interview with Marshall.
330  “Lawyer, don’t you let”:
 Tushnet,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 455. Also
Williams interview with Marshall.
330  “Don’t worry, honey”:
 
Chicago
Defender
, February 23, 1952.
330  “Get away,” Reese said:
 FHW
Papers, Chesley.
Chapter 22: A Place in the Sun
331  “I don’t see how”:
 
Baltimore Afro-


--- PAGE 1633 ---
American , February 23, 1952.
332  “All-White Jury”:
 
New York Times
,
February 15, 1952.
332  praised the “tranquillity”:
 
Ocala
Star Banner
, February 15, 1952.
332  “Brutal and cynical”:
 
Daily
Worker
, February 28, 1952.
332  “I’m not sorry,”:
 
New York Post
,
February 19, 1952.
334  “If you show your black”:
 Kluger,
Simple Justice
, p. 536.
334  “We could only move”:
 COHP,
Marshall.
334  Marshall’s “charisma”:
 Greenberg,
Crusaders in the Courts
, p. 153.
334  “fund-raising and organizing


--- PAGE 1634 ---
potential”:  Ibid., p. 180.
335  “black people of no great means”:
Ibid.
335  “He’s aged so”:
 
Collier’s
, February
23, 1952.
335  “beyond the limits of the human
anatomy”:
 Kluger, 
Simple Justice
,
p. 563.
335  Marshall flashed the secret:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 170.
336  “Why don’t we take”:
 Franklin,
Mirror to America
, p. 157.
337  “present a case so persuasive”:
Ibid., p. 158.
337  “I’m going to be a good butler”:


--- PAGE 1635 ---
COHP, Marshall.
337  “It deserves a place”:
 Kluger,
Simple Justice
, p. 648.
337  “I realized there wasn’t”:
 “Justice
Thurgood Marshall,” Ken Gormley, 
ABA
Journal
, June 1992.
339  “separate educational facilities”:
Brown v Board of Education
, 347 U.S.
483 (1954).
339  “Thurgood was very discreet”:
Williams, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 231.
340  “You know, he favors”:
 “Look At
Your Own Child,” 
Time
, December 13,
1954. Also FHW Papers, Chesley; Berry,
Almost White
, p. 179.
340  “Black Angus cattle”:
 
Daytona
Beach Morning Journal
, March 14, 1963.


--- PAGE 1636 ---
340  “The sheriff is the law here”:  St.
Petersburg Times
, October 16, 1955.
340  “If the children never”:
 Berry,
Almost White
, p. 179.
340  “people of mixed”:
 McCall, 
Willis
V. McCall, Sheriff of Lake County
, p. 70.
341  “right to an education”:
 Bill
Maxwell, “Jim Crow Conflict Clouded
the Point,” 
St. Petersburg Times
,
February 14, 2001.
341  “that if they weren’t out by that
night”:
 FHW Papers, Chesley.
341  “a man who knows how”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, November 7, 1954.
341  “I for one, am going to do all I
can”:
 Green, 
Before His Time
, p. 196.


--- PAGE 1637 ---
341  Johns responded by telling
reporters:
 
Ocala Star Banner
, October
13, 1954.
341  “hog and hominy” segregationist:
New York Times
, May 27, 1956.
342  “till the last tick”:
 
Palm Beach
Post
, November 4, 1954.
342  “How did you find me?”:
 Williams,
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 148.
343  “He had become cadaverous”:
Greenberg, 
Crusaders in the Courts
,
p. 202.
343  “morose and unhappy”:
 COHP,
Greenberg.
343  “three sturdy legs”:
 
Time
,
December 19, 1955.


--- PAGE 1638 ---
344  “ward-heeling, back scratching”:
St. Petersburg Times
, January 5, 1955.
344  “were never convinced”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, February 21, 1954.
344  “get rid of this case”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 348.
344  In November 1951, only:
 Byrd to
Marshall, LDF, November 29, 1951.
344  “caused him to plot this killing”:
Ibid.
344–
45  “trying to drag Hunter into this
killing”:
 Marshall to Byrd, LDF,
November 30, 1951.
345  “house might catch fire”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, October 19, 1955.
345  “out of control”:
 FHW Papers,


--- PAGE 1639 ---
Chesley.
345  “Much as I hate it”:
 
St. Petersburg
Times
, October 19, 1955.
345  “The Lord be praised”:
 Ibid.
345  “I have no comment”:
 Ibid.
345  “night-riding terrorists”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, November 13, 1955.
345  “didn’t want to go to school”:
Evening Independent
, December 14,
1962.
346  “I’ve got more justice”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, November 13, 1955.
346  The former prosecutor also:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, November 14, 1955.
346  “In my book, they’re”:
 Berry,
Almost White
, p. 182.


--- PAGE 1640 ---
346  “due chiefly to the influence”:
FHW Papers, Chesley.
346  countless “Florida selling” trips:
Time
, December 19, 1955.
346  “Is there Negro Blood”:
 
Ebony
,
November 1975.
347  There are enough staid people:
Gilbert Geis, “A Quarter of a Century for
‘Social Justice,’ ” 
Social Justice
, Vol. 26,
No. 2 (76), Summer, 1999.
347  “desperate situation”:
 Committee
of 100 reports, NAACP.
348  “could have nailed this case
down”:
 Florida State Archives, LeRoy
Collins Papers.
348  “in its best light”:
 Ibid.


--- PAGE 1641 ---
348  “substantial evidence”:  Campbell
to Phillips, September 13, 1949, 144-18-
117, FBI.
348  “Since I am your personal friend”:
Florida State Archives, Collins.
349  “In recognizing the humanity”:
Furman v. Georgia
, 408 U.S. 238 (1972).
349  “Florida’s gutter of shame”:
 
Ocala
Star Banner
, September 2, 1987.
349  “I realized we had to change”:
New York Times
, March 13, 1991.
349  “offer to the people of the world”:
LeRoy Collins, inaugural speech from his
den, Florida State Archives,
http://www.floridamemory.com/items/show/232461.
349  “Confess to the rape”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, December 16, 1955.


--- PAGE 1642 ---
350  “a demonstration of senility”:
Corsair, 
The Groveland Four
, p. 352.
351  It had come to Collins:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, February 6, 1956.
Epilogue
353  “The State,” Governor LeRoy
Collins said:
 
St. Petersburg Times
,
December 16, 1952.
354  “the victim of a gross
miscarriage”:
 Ibid.
354  “it took far more political
courage”:
 
Miami News
, February 25,
1956.
354  “I want you to know”:
 Corsair, 
The
Groveland Four
, p. 361.
354  “Communist pressure tactics”:
 
St.


--- PAGE 1643 ---
Petersburg Times , March 30, 1956.
354  “the innocent victim”:
 Ibid.
355  “smearing of the good people”:
Sarasota Herald Tribune
, May 5, 1956.
355  “obtaining and circulating a
petition”:
 
St. Petersburg Times
, May 5,
1956.
355  “when feelings ran high”:
 
St.
Petersburg Times
, September 24, 1955.
355  “You’re the one who”:
 
Miami
News
, February 23, 1956.
356  In March 1960 Deputy James
Yates:
 
Ocala Star-Banner
, December 21,
1962.
357  “I never hurt anyone”:
 Flores,
Justice Gone Wrong
, p. 187.


--- PAGE 1644 ---
357  The FBI ultimately laid
responsibility:
 Moore Report, p. 331.
357  “for the ‘Tranquility of the South’
”:
 Ibid., p. 123.
358  a “model life”:
 
Daytona Beach
Morning Journal
, November 18, 1957.
358  “I would put Frank there”:
Marshall to Johnson, LBJ tapes.
358  “This man is a”:
 FOHP, Williams.
359  Mabel Norris Chesley was
suspicious:
 FHW Papers, Chesley.
359  Ku Klux Klan leader:
 
Brandenburg
v. Ohio
, 395 U.S. 444 (1969).
360  “There is very little truth”:
Marshall’s speech, 1966 White House
conference on civil rights, 
Thurgood


--- PAGE 1645 ---
Marshall: Justice for All , A&E
Biography, 2005.
360  Governor LeRoy Collins had done:
Collins later became known as “Liberal
LeRoy” after he arrived in Selma,
Alabama (dispatched by President
Johnson), on March 9, 1965, and
successfully negotiated a compromise
with police so that Martin Luther King Jr.,
and the 2,500 marchers could cross the
Edmund Pettus Bridge without the police
brutality and bloodshed that had marred
the first attempt at a Selma-to-
Montgomery march two days earlier.
360  “did the most immediate good”:
Tushnet, 
Thurgood Marshall
, p. 455.
360  “the sonofabitch”:
 Williams


--- PAGE 1646 ---
interview with Marshall.
361  My dear Mr. Justice:
 Marshall
Papers, LOC.


--- PAGE 1647 ---


