=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Doug Linder~The Amistad Trial.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 305
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:14.025846
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Images: 
  
 (1) Tappan   
 
 
 
 
 (2) Cinque  
 
 
(3) Trial Scene
The 
Amistad 
Trials Site 
Trial 
Heroes 
Site


--- PAGE 2 ---
Stamped With Glory: Lewis Tappan and the Africans of the 
Amistad  
by Doug Linder (c) 2000  
[ Footnotes are now being added to this essay. ]  
1 
The officers and crew of the Tecora waited at sea for darkness to come to Cuba. Closer to 
shore, British cruisers patrolled the waters looking for slave ships.  The British had been 
trying for nineteen years, since 1820, to enforce the provisions of a treaty between 
England and Spain that prohibited the importation of slaves to Cuba and other Spanish 
dominions.  The captain of the Portuguese slave ship knew, however, that the odds were 
with him. Two thousand miles of Cuban coastline made capture at sea difficult, and once 
on land the slavers were outside British authority and under the protection of complicit 
Cuban officials.  
The weak glow of lights on shore guided the Tecora to a secluded inlet along the Cuban 
shoreline.  Quickly the crew loaded the ship’s cargo of over three hundred African men, 
women, and children—none over th e age of twenty-five—into small boats and carried 
them to land. After everyone was on the beach, the crew hustled the Africans on a three-
mile trek through the jungle.  Arriving at their destination, the crew locked the Africans 
in crude human warehouses.  
About ten days after their arrival in Cuba, the captives marched again, this time to a 
barracoon, or slave stockade, within sight of the city of Havana. The Misericordia 
barracoon stood just off a busy road that connected the city and the white palace of the 
Governor General. The surrounding structures of the barracoon formed a large courtyard, 
where the Africans exercised and where they could be observed by Cuban spectators.  
Thin or depressed blacks did not command high prices, so slave importers treated their 
human merchandise relatively well.  Employees of the Martinez Company fed and 
clothed the Africans, gave them tobacco, and rubbed their skin with palm oil to make it 
shine.  
Two Spanish dons came to the barracoon in late June to select new slaves for their 
plantations in Puerto Principe, on the northwest coast of the island.  Jose Ruiz, twenty-
four, made his selections carefully.  He ordered blacks to stand in a row, then inspected 
their bodies and teeth one-by-one.  Ruiz  bought the forty-nine adult males that passed his 
inspection for $450 each.  Fifty-eight-year-old Pedro Montes, meanwhile, selected four 
children, three of them girls.  
The two Cuban plantation owners obtained fraudulent passports for their human property 
from the captain general--passports  that would allow them to transport their “black


--- PAGE 3 ---
Ladinos” to Puerto Principe by sea.  The passports contained descriptions of each black 
along with the false Spanish names that they had been given by their purchasers.  
On June 28, 1839, the Spanish dons loaded the Africans on a chartered two-masted black  
schooner called the Amistad.  Although they had papers, Montes and Ruiz knew their 
vessel was subject to search by British slave patrol boats.  The papers showing the 
captives to be ladinos, or legal slaves born in Spanish territory, would not fool a 
conscientious enforcer of the anti-importation treaty. None of the slaves spoke Spanish 
and the children were far too young to have been born in Cuba before 1820.  At midnight, 
the Amistad, captained by Ramon Ferrer, sailed out of Havana harbor with its cargo of 
fifty-three slaves and about $40,000 in provisions.  
For the Africans, the voyage was to be endured, not enjoyed.  Crew members placed iron 
collars around the neck of each slave.  They connected each collar by a chain to another 
slave, and whole string of collars they chained to the wall.  The Africans were kept in the 
suffocating heat of the hold most of the voyage. Time on deck was limited to meals and 
to brief relief breaks, taken a few at a time.  Discipline was strict.  Ruiz ordered crew 
members to flog a captive who took more than his alloted share of water.  
A sadistic joke turned the Africans to thoughts of mutiny.  One of the captives, a 
physically impressive twenty-five-year-old named Cinque, used sign language to ask the 
ship’s cook, Celestino, what would happen to them when they reached their destination. 
Celestino smiled and pointed to a nearby pile of beef.  Indicating with his hands, 
Celestino told Cinque that the slaves would have their throats slit, be chopped to pieces, 
salted, and eaten as dried meat.  Cinque, who had seen the barbarism of the Middle 
Passage, believed him.  
The startling news led Cinque to call a conference among the slaves on their third day at 
sea.  One of the slaves, a boy named Kinna, later recounted what happened:  
We feel bad, and we ask Cinque what to do.  Cinque say, “Me think and 
by and by I tell you.”  Cinque then said, “If we do nothing, we be killed.  
We may as well die in trying to be free as to be killed and eaten.” 
A nail hidden by Cinque under his arm became the captives’ means to freedom.  Using 
the nail, Cinque freed himself and the others from their iron chains.  He and another 
captive, Grabeau, located a box of sugar cane knives with two-foot-long blades.  About 
4:00 A.M. on a stormy July 2, most of the adult Africans climbed up the hatchway.  
Cinque found the cook and killed him with a single blow.  A crew member who 
witnessed the attack screamed “Murder!” awakening Ruiz and Montes.  Cinque and other 
slaves began closing in on Captain Ferrer and his cabin boy, Antonio.  Waving his dagger 
to fend off an attack, the captain yelled to Antonio, “Throw some bread at them.”  The 
captain fought ferociously, killing one African and wounding two others, but in the end 
he was struck by Cinque, then strangled by other captives.  Attention turned to Montes, 
who flailed away with a knife in one hand and a pump handle in the other. Struck by oars 
and cane knifes, the seriously injured Montes managed to stagger down to the hold and


--- PAGE 4 ---
hide behind a food barrel. Two sailors jumped over board.  Antonio was tied to an 
anchor.  Ruiz surrendered.  Cinque discovered Montes the next morning.  He stood over 
him, ready to inflict a fatal blow, when another African, Burnah, grabbed him and 
persuaded him to spare the slave owner’s life.  
The mutiny had succeeded.  The Africans controlled the Amistad.  They ordered Montes 
to head east across the Atlantic--to Africa.  
2 
Lewis Tappan, as an abolitionist and a devout Christian, found the spectacle of 
Emancipation Day disheartening and scandalous. Celebrated on the Fourth of July, the 
holiday commemorated the freeing of New York’s last slaves on that date in 1827.  Most 
of New York City’s 14,000 Negroes saw Emancipation Day as an occasion for raucous 
celebration.  Dressed in “outrageous costumes,” they paraded through the streets blowing 
trumpets, banging drums, and drinking cider and rum.  
Tappan decided to offer an alternative to the carousing he found so distasteful.  On 
Emancipation Day in 1834, he opened the doors of his Chatham Street Chapel for a 
special service.  Along with the blacks he hoped would come, came some that he hoped 
would not: a mob of mostly lower-income, pro-slavery whites filled the upper galleries. 
As Tappan finished a “forcible and impressive” reading of the Declaration of Sentiments-
-the statement of principles adopted by abolitionists at their first national convention in 
Philadelphia seven months earlier--the unruly crowd began to hoot and stamp.  Minutes 
later, as choirs of Negro and whites attempted to sing a new hymn by John Greenleaf 
Whittier, prayer books and insults began flying from the balconies.  It took a squad of 
watchmen dispatched by the mayor  to head off more serious violence--at least for the 
day.  
Three days after the Emancipation Day disturbance at Chatham Street Chapel, things 
went from bad to worse. A group of Negro parishioners gathered in the Chapel refused 
the demand of members of a white group, the Sacred Music Society, that they leave the 
premises.  Word of the Negroes’ stand spread. Soon rioters were beating blacks and 
tossing benches—not just books--from balconies .  The church caretaker ran to Lewis 
Tappan’s home at 40 Rose Street, where he interrupted the Monthly Concert for the 
Enslaved.  Tappan rushed to the Chapel, only to discover that police had already 
dispersed the mob.  
At the Tappan home, Susan Tappan listened worriedly as a mob yelled for her husband to 
come out.  Returning home, Tappan pushed his way to his front door “amidst a 
tremendous noise, mingled groans, hisses, and execrations.”  Hired guards finally 
persuaded the mob to leave.  
The next afternoon, Tappan, with threats against him swirling all around New York, 
moved his family to Harlem Village.  As darkness fell that hot, muggy night, a man on a 
white horse led a mob back to Rose Street.  Rowdies broke open the door of Tappan’s


--- PAGE 5 ---
home, smashed windows and hurled the family’s furniture out into the street of the 
usually quiet neighborhood.  Blue-collar whites inflicted most of the damage, but 
merchants and even a church deacon looked on in approval.  In the center of Rose Street, 
men set afire a large pile of bedding, pictures, furniture, and window frames, and other 
Tappan family belongings.  
The Tappans returned the next day to inspect the damage.  They faced their travails 
bravely.  Lewis Tappan later commented, “When my wife saw the large chimney glass--
which we purchased eighteen years ago and which I often said looked too extravagant-- 
was demolished, she laughed and said, ‘you got rid of that piece of furniture that troubled 
you so much.’”  Characteristically, Tappan saw his personal misfortune as an 
opportunity.  He chose not to repair his home that summer.  Let it stand as it is, he said, to 
serve as a “silent Anti-Slavery preacher to the crowds who will flock to see it.”  
New York City boiled with trouble in the summer of 1834. Newspapers ran virulent 
attacks on abolitionist leaders. Rumors circulated that pro-slavery merchants had ordered 
their employees to ambush Tappan “expressly to tar and feather” him. With one of eight 
people unemployed, whites feared that black competition in the labor market would make 
things worse. Then there was the issue of interracial marriage: opponents of abolition 
used the bugaboo to raise levels of hostility to anti-slavery movement leaders to a fever 
pitch.  
Undaunted by violence, insults, and threats, Lewis Tappan outlined to fellow abolitionists 
a bold propaganda effort to win the hearts and minds of Americans.  Apathy, he believed, 
was the only great enemy of abolition. Tappan proposed a massive mailing of anti-
slavery publications to clergy, educators, and local officials on both sides of the Mason-
Dixon Line. Tappan doubted that abolition could come through timid, halfway measures: 
“If you wish to draw off the people from a bad or wicked custom, you must beat up for a 
march; you must make an excitement, do something that everybody will notice.”  
In July 1835, Tappan unleashed a flood of anti-slavery writings: the lively journal, 
Human Rights, the newsy Emancipator, the Anti-Slavery Record embellished with 
woodcuts, and a children’s magazine, Slave’s Friend.  “Moral suasion,” Tappan 
optimistically believed, would separate slaveholders from Christian fellowship, convince 
legislators to gradually tighten state and federal controls on slavery, and cause slave 
states to give up the immoral institution of slavery—all without much bloodshed. In a 
ten-month period, the Society mailed over one million anti-slavery pieces.  
Tappan’s propaganda effort outraged pro-slavery southerners.  On July 29, 1835, angry 
citizens of Charleston broke into the U. S. Post Office and hauled off mailbags that had 
recently arrived from New York City.  The next evening, 3,000 Charlestonians assembled 
on the parade grounds to watch slavery supporters burn a pile of abolitionist mailings 
under the hanging effigies of despised abolitionists. One rabid southerner offered a 
$50,000 reward was offered for Tappan’s head, delivered to New Orleans. Calls for the 
extradition of abolitionist leaders came from southern newspaper editors, governors, and


--- PAGE 6 ---
attorney generals.  A grand jury in Virginia indicted Lewis Tappan and other members of 
the American Anti-slavery Society’s Executive Committee.  
The South’s reaction to Tappans’ mail campaign caused many northern editorialists--not 
previously sympathetic to the abolitionist cause--to rally to their defense.  Editors 
denounced threats of violence and defended the right to free speech.  Public opinion, 
especially among northern churchgoers, began to turn against slavery.  
But growing abolitionist sentiments only fueled southern anger. In 1836, Lewis Tappan 
opened a package and discovered in a box a slave’s ear and an accompanying note 
recommending the body part for his “collection of natural curiosities.” In another 
package, he found a piece of rope suggesting a gallows.  
Tappan responded to these attempts at intimidation by placing in his breast pocket his 
only weapon, a copy of the New Testament.  He seemed invigorated by danger.  In a 
response to a threatening letter from a member of a South Carolina vigilance committee, 
Tappan wrote: “We will persevere, come life or death.  If any fall by the hand of 
violence, others will continue the blessed work.”  
Persevere Tappan did.  But the optimism of the mid-1830s gave way to doubts.  An 
economic depression and internal fighting among factions of abolitionists slowed anti-
slavery momentum.  Tappan began devoting more and more of his attention to trying to 
heal fundamental schisms within the abolitionist movement.  He served as a bridge 
between the evangelical, “respectable” New York faction and the more pacifist and 
utopian faction based in Boston and led by William Lloyd Garrison. By 1839, keeping 
the warring groups together was proving increasingly difficult.  The movement needed a 
cause that abolitionists of all stripes could rally around—it n eeded intervention, divine or 
otherwise.  
Then the Amistad turned up.  
3 
“They made fools of us,” said Cinque, “and did not go to Sierra Leone.” The leader of the 
Africans of the Amistad related the story of his six weeks at sea from his jail cell. In the 
daytime, he explained through an interpreter, he could tell by the sun that the Spaniards 
were heading east, toward Africa. But at night the Spaniards deceived them, and turned 
the vessel the other way. We got here, Cinque said, and we did not know where we were.  
Captain Henry Green, a sea captain, and several companions were shooting birds among 
the dunes at the eastern tip of Long Island on the morning of August 26, 1839, when they 
encountered several black men wearing only blankets. One of the blacks--who spoke a 
little broken English--asked, “What country is this?” Green replied, “This is America.” 
“Is it a slave country?” the African inquired. No, Green answered, “it is free here, and 
safe, and there are no Spanish laws here.” Cinque whistled.  The other Africans gathered 
on the beach sprang to their feet and shouted. Fearing attack, Captain Green and his


--- PAGE 7 ---
associates dashed toward their wagon for their guns. Cinque, however, demonstrated the 
Africans’peaceable intentions by handing his cutlass and gun to the Americans. The rest 
of the blacks did the same.  
The Africans led Green and the others to a point in the dunes where they could see a 
black schooner, flagless with its sails in tatters, sitting at anchor a mile or so from the 
beach. Another smaller boat rested on the beach, guarded by more blacks.  
The Africans made Green an offer.  The ship and all of its cargo, they proposed, in return 
for provisions and help in sailing back to their African homeland. Green expressed 
interest—especially in the gold doubloons that the Africans said were in the Amistad’s 
trunks.  
A brig of the U. S. Coast Guard, the Washington interrupted Captain Green’s dreams of 
riches. The Washington came alongside the Amistad. The commander of the brig, 
Lieutenant Thomas Gedney, sent a contingent of seven armed men led by Lieutenant 
Richard Meade to investigate the schooner. The men boarded the schooner and ordered, 
at gunpoint, all hands below the deck. Two Spaniards emerged from below exclaiming, 
“Bless our Holy Virgin; you are our preservers.” Jose Ruiz, the younger of the two men, 
spoke English.  Eagerly, he began to tell the tale of mutiny, blood, deceit, and desperation 
aboard the Amistad.  
After listening to the Spaniard’s story, Meade dispatched four of his men to round up the 
Africans on shore. It took a warning shot and drawn cutlasses, but soon the sailors were 
heading back to the Amistad with their black captives, including Cinque.  Cinque was 
back on board the schooner for only a moment when he suddenly jumped overboard.  A 
detachment of sailors chased after him in a boat, but each time they approached, he dove 
under the water only to resurface some distance away. The sailors finally pulled the 
exhausted African from the sea twenty minutes later with a boat hook.  
Gedney ordered the Amistad towed to New London, Connecticut, where the arrival of the 
mysterious schooner dominated the local news.  On August 26, a sensational story ran in 
the New London Gazette:  
[Pedro Montes] is the most striking instance of complacency and 
unalloyed delight we have ever witnessed, and it is not strange since only 
yesterday his sentence was pronounced by the chief of the bucanniers, and 
his death song chanted by the grim crew, who gathered with uplifted 
sabres around his devoted head, which, as well as his arms, bear the scars 
of several wounds inflicted at the time of the murder of the ill-fated 
captain and crew. He sat smoking his Havana on the deck, and to judge 
from the martyr-like serenity of his countenance, his emotions are such as 
rarely stir the heart of man….  
On board the brig we also saw Cinques, the master spirit and hero of this 
bloody tragedy, in irons.  He is about five feet eight inches in height, 25 or


--- PAGE 8 ---
26 years of age, of erect figure, well built, and very active.  He is said to 
be a match for any two men aboard the schooner.  His countenance, for a 
native African, is unusually intelligent, evincing uncommon decision and 
coolness, with a composure characteristic of true courage, and nothing to 
mark him a malicious man.  He is a negro, who could command in New 
Orleans, under the hammer, at least $1500….  
[W]e visited the schooner, which is anchored within musket shot of the 
Washington and there we saw a sight as we never saw before and never 
wish to see again. The bottom and sides of this vessel are covered with 
barnacles and sea-grass, while her rigging and sails presented an 
appearance worthy of the Flying Dutchman, after her fabled cruise….On 
her deck were grouped amid various goods and arms, the remnant of her 
Ethiop crew, some decked in the most fantastic manner, in silks and 
finery, pilfered from the cargo, white others, in a state of nudity, 
emaciated to mere skeletons, lay coiled upon the decks…. Around the 
windlass were gathered the three little girls, from eight to thirteen years of 
age, the very images of health and gladness.  
Over the deck were scattered in the most wanton and disorderly profusion, 
raisins, vermicelli, bread, rice, silk, and cotton goods. In the cabin and 
hold were the marks of the same wasteful destruction. Her cargo appears 
to consist of silks, crepes, calicoes, cotton, and fancy goods of various 
descriptions, glass and hard ware, bridles, saddles, holsters, pictures 
looking-glasses, books, fruit, olives and olive oil, and other things too 
numerous to mention--which are now all mixed up in a strange and 
fantastic medley. On the forward hatch we unconsciously rested our hand 
on a cold object, which we soon discovered to be a naked corpse, 
enveloped in a pall of black bombazine. On removing its folds, we beheld 
the rigid countenance and glazed eye of a poor negro who died last night. 
His mouth was unclosed and still wore the ghastly expression of his last 
struggle. Near him like some watching fiend sat the most horrible creature 
we ever saw in human shape, an object of terror to the very blacks, who 
said that he was a cannibal. His teeth projected at almost right angles from 
his mouth, while his eyes had a most range and demoniac expression. We 
were glad to leave this vessel, as the exhalations from her hold and deck, 
were like any thing but ‘gales washed over the gardens of Gul.’ 
 
4 
Abolitionism came relatively late to Lewis Tappan. “Devotional,” “benevolent” and  
“hardworking” are all words that describe Tappan in his twenties and thirties.  Social 
reformer he was not.


--- PAGE 9 ---
In 1818, Tappan abandoned the Calvinism of his mother for Unitarianism, then a 
fashionable creed for a socially ambitious merchant.  For the next eight years, Tappan 
enjoyed the typical life of an upper-middle-class New England merchant: he attended 
theater, danced, drank wine moderately, and read novels.  He took his new faith 
seriously, however, editing the Christian Register, a Unitarian journal, and becoming the 
first treasurer of the American Unitarian Association.  
In the mid-1820’s, America experienced “The Great Second Awakening,” a widespread 
revival of religion and religious debate.  The new Calvanist critique of “infidelism” 
proclaimed that religion was about things to do, not just things to think about.  Tappan 
took a great interest in the debate.  He saw in the Unitarians’ lack of interest in foreign 
missions and revivals confirmation of the criticism that they lacked the spirit and energy 
that should reside in true Christians.  Tappan made the decision to recommit himself to 
the Calvanist orthodoxy of his mother.  So firm did his conversion to Trinitarianism 
become that he wrote a tract describing reasons for his switch that sold over 3,000 
copies.  Growing in Tappan’s bosom was a dynamic, optimistic faith, one that looked 
forward to the happiness of mankind, the spread of the Christian message from sea to sea, 
the extinction of heresy, and the birth of a new moral order that reflected the strict ethics 
of Calvanism.  
Tappan became a zealous Christian. He was no theologian; he was a believer.  “There is 
too much theology in the Church now, and too little of the Gospel,” Tappan wrote.  He 
walked the sidewalks and wharves, handing out Bibles and religious tracts.  He 
campaigned for legislation consistent with Calvanist teachings, such as Sunday closing 
laws. Soon the aggressive campaigns of Tappan and like-minded men and women 
inspired opposition.  But the opposition only seemed to strengthened Tappan’s resolve:  
“their enmity and clamor are evidence of the righteousness of the cause.”  Tappan left the 
mainstream.  He opened up to ideas that most people dismissed as fanatical.  
Around 1830, at the age of forty-one, Tappan began to take an interest in the slavery 
question.  A book describing the dramatic efforts of William Wilberforce in England to 
end the slave trade made a deep impression on him.  The fervent abolitionism of men he 
admired—men like his older brot her, Arthur, and the “monitor general” of his sons at 
Oneida Academy, Theodore Weld—completed his conversion.  In the summer of 1833, 
Tappan resolved to do whatever he could for the abolitionist cause.  It turned out to be a 
lot.  
5 
The United States Attorney for Connecticut, William S. Holabird, ordered a judicial 
hearing on the Washington. It was unclear to Holabird whether a crime had been 
committed, who had committed it, or whether U. S. courts even had jurisdiction.  There 
was also the matter of salvage rights, which were claimed by Captain Green as well as by 
Gedney and the crew of the Washington. Some estimates placed the value of the 
Amistad's cargo of wine, saddles, gold, and silk at $40,000 in 1839 dollars, and the slaves 
had a market value of at least half that much.


--- PAGE 10 ---
On August 29, 1839, three days after the schooner's discovery, District Judge Andrew T. 
Judson opened a hearing on complaints of murder and piracy filed by Montes and Ruiz.  
Thirty-nine Africans (of the forty-three who had survived the weeks at sea) attended, 
including Cinque, who appeared wearing a red flannel shirt, white duck pants, and 
manacles.  He appeared calm and mute, occasionally making a motion with his hand to 
his throat to suggest a hanging. The three principal witnesses at the hearing--the first 
mate of the Washington, Montes, and Ruiz--each presented his account of events.  
After listening to the testimony, Judge Judson issued his order:  
To the Marshal of the District of Connecticut--greeting.  
Whereas upon the complaint and information of the United States by 
William S. Holabird, District Attorney of the United States for said 
District, against [the Amistads] for the murder of Ramon Ferrer, on the 
20th day of June 1839, on the high seas, within the admiralty and maritime 
jurisdiction of the United States, it was ordered and adjudged by the 
undersigned that they against whom said information and complaint was 
made, stand committed to appear before the Circuit Court of the United 
States for the District of Connecticut, to be holden at Hartford, in said 
District on the 17th day of September, 1839, to answer to the said crime of 
murder, as set forth in said information and complaint.  
You are therefore commanded to take the said persons, named as above, 
and charged with said crime, and them safely keep in the jail in New 
Haven in said District, and then have before the Circuit Court of the 
United States to be holden at Hartford, in said District, on the 17th day of 
September A. D. 1839. Hereof fail not, &c. Dated at New  
London. August 29, 1839.  
ANDREW T. JUDSON,  
Judge of the United States for the District of Connecticut. 
 
The grateful Spaniards published a letter expressing gratitude to the American people for 
their rescue:  
NEW LONDON, AUGUST 29, 1839.  
The subscribers, Don Jose Ruiz, and Don Pedro Montez, in gratitude for 
their most unhoped for and providential rescue from the bands of a 
ruthless gang of African bucaneers and an awful death, would take the 
means of expressing, in some slight decree, their thankfulness and 
obligation to Lieut. Com T. R. Gedney, and the officers and crew of the U. 
S surveying brig Washington, for their decision in seizing the Amistad, 
and their unremitting kindness and hospitality in providing for their


--- PAGE 11 ---
comfort on board their vessel, as well as the means they have taken for the 
protection of their property.  
We also must express our indebtedness to that nation whose flag they so 
worthily bear, with an assurance that the act will be duly appreciated by 
our most gracious sovereign, her Majesty the Queen of Spain.  
DON JOSE RUIZ,  
DON PEDRO MONTEZ. 
 
As the Spaniards thanked America, newspaper editors throughout the East puzzled over 
the legal questions presented by the slaves’ mutiny and their capture.  Even editors 
unsympathetic to the abolitionist cause, hesitated over pronouncing the Africans guilty.  
On September 2, 1837, the strongly anti-abolitionist New York Morning Herald told its 
readers:  
We despise the humbug doctrines of the abolitionists and the miserable 
fanatics who propagate them; but if men will traffic in human flesh, steal 
men from their homes on the coast of Africa, and sell them like cattle at 
Cuba, they must not murmur if some of the men stealers get murdered by 
the unfortunate wretches whom they have wronged and stole. It is certain 
that the Spanish Government, at Havana, recognizing the right to steal, 
buy and sell blacks, will, instantly demand the slaves of this government; 
it is also possible that this government will give up the men, and sell the 
vessel and cargo for salvage; in that case it is also certain that every one of 
the male blacks,who rose on the captain will be executed.  
The various questions that will arise will be most curious; and the great 
difficulty will be that the vessel they seized was not a slaver; that they had 
been sold as merchandize in Cuba, and seized a merchant vessel, and 
killed a merchant Captain. This alone will constitute them pirates in the 
fullest sense of the word. Had they merely seized the vessel, without 
murdering any one, and tried to take her to Africa, our government would 
have been justified in sending them back to their native homes. Or had 
they rose on the Captain of the slaver that brought them from Africa, and 
murdered the Captain and all the crew, by the laws of God and man, the 
laws of nature and of nations they would have been perfectly justified. But 
their having been landed at Havana from a slave ship, sold there, and 
reshipped…will totally alter the aspect of their position and be the main 
ground of all the arguments for delivering them up and treating them as 
pirates. It is a hard case, for had they rose on their Captain and his crew 
two weeks before or been driven into Halifax or Bermuda, they would 
now have been free was the winds of Heaven. As it is, they will probably 
be hung.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Let the case be decided as it may, they in all probability, will have to 
suffer. It is a lamentable state of things. 
 
6 
When word of the arrest of the Amistad Africans reached Lewis Tappan in New York, he 
immediately called a meeting of the city’s leading abolitionists.  Tappan recognized that 
the Amistad story had drama and romance.  If developed properly, it could be used to 
bring to the attention of the public the plight of the hundreds of thousands American 
slaves.  At Tappan’s urging, the group formed a committee of three persons—Tappan, 
Joshua Levitt and Simon Jocelyn—to aid in the defense of the Africans. The Amistad 
Committee’s wasted no time in publishing an “Appeal to the Friends of Liberty”:  
Thirty-eight fellow men from Africa, after having been piratically 
kidnapped from their native land, transported across the seas, and 
subjected to atrocious cruelties, have been thrown upon our shores, and 
are now incarcerated in jail to await their trial for crimes alleged by their 
oppressors to have been committed by them.  They are ignorant of our 
language, of the usages of civilized society, and the obligations of 
Christianity.  Under these circumstances, several friends of human rights 
have met to consult upon the case of these unfortunate men, and have 
appointed the undersigned a committee to employ interpreters, able 
counsel, and take all necessary means to secure the rights of the accused.  
It is intended to employ three legal gentlemen of distinguished abilities, 
and to incur other needful expenses.  The poor prisoners being destitute of 
clothing, and several having scarcely rags to cover them, immediate steps 
will be taken to provide what may be necessary.  The undersigned, 
therefore, makes this appeal to the friends of humanity to contribute for 
the above objects.  Donations may be sent to either of the Committee, who 
will acknowledge the same, and make a public report of their 
disbursements.  
SIMEON JOCELYN. 34 Wall St.  
JOSHUA LEAVITT,  143 Nassau St.  
LEWIS TAPPAN, 122 Pearl St.  
New York, September 4, 1839 
Not content to merely collect donations, Tappan set off for New Haven.  He met the 
Africans for the first time on September 6 at the city jail. Tappan described his visit in a 
letter published in the New York Journal of Commerce:  
I arrived here last Friday evening, with three men who are natives of 
Africa…to act as interpreters in conversing with Joseph Cinquez and his 
comrades. On going to the jail, the next morning, we found to our great 
disappointment, that only one of the men, [John Ferry], was able to


--- PAGE 13 ---
converse with the prisoners.  Most of the prisoners can understand him, 
although none of them can speak his Geshee dialect. You may imagine the 
joy manifested by these poor Africans, when they heard one of their own 
color address them in a friendly manner, and in a language they could 
comprehend!  
The prisoners are in comfortable rooms. They are well clothed in dark-
striped cotton trousers…and in striped cotton shirts. The girls are in calico 
frocks, and have made the little shawls that were given them into turbans. 
The prisoners eyed the clothes some time, and laughed a good deal among 
themselves before they put them on.  
The four children are apparently from 10 to 12 years of age….They are 
robust [and] full of hilarity….The sheriff of the county took them to ride 
in a wagon on Friday. At first their eyes were filled with tears, and they 
seemed to be afraid, but soon they enjoyed themselves very well, and 
appeared to be greatly delighted.  
Most of the prisoners told the interpreter that they are from Mandingo. 
The district of Mandingo, in the Senegambia country, is bounded by the 
Atlantic Ocean, and is directly north of Liberia. Two or three of the men, 
besides one of the little girls, are natives of Congo, which is on the coast 
just south of the equator.  
Cinquez is about 5 feet 8 inches high, of fine proportions, with a noble air. 
Indeed, the whole company, although thin in flesh, and generally of slight 
forms, and limbs, especially, are as good looking and intelligent a body of 
men as we usually meet with. All are young, and several are quite 
striplings. The Mandingos are described in books as being a very gentle 
race, cheerful in their dispositions, inquisitive, credulous, simple hearted, 
and much given to trading propensities.  
After conversing awhile through the interpreter with the men, who are in 
three different rooms, and with the four children, who are in a room by 
themselves, we went to the door of the room where Joseph Cinquez is 
confined. He is with several savage-looking fellows, black and white, who 
are in jail on various charges…We found Cinquez stretched upon his 
bedding on the floor, wholly unclothed, with a single blanket partly 
wrapped around him. He arose at the call of the jailer, rather reluctantly, 
and came towards us with a good degree of gracefulness and native 
dignity…[He] conversed very freely, a nd with much energy of expression 
and action….  
The African prisoners are orderly and peaceable among themselves. Some 
of them sing well, and appear to be in good spirits and grateful for the 
kindness shown them. Col. Stanton Pendleton, at whose house I stop, is


--- PAGE 14 ---
the jailer, and is kind and attentive to the prisoners. He provides them 
wholesome food in sufficient quantities, and gives every reasonable 
indulgence to the numerous visitors, from the neighboring towns and 
elsewhere, who throng the prison continually to see these interesting 
strangers from a distant land. Col.[Pendleton] has allowed me to take 
copies of the warrants of commitment….Shinquau and his comrades are 
bound over “for murder on the high seas.”  
I have read an ingenious and well written article in the Evening Post 
signed Veto, in which the learned writer presents a pretty full examination 
of the case of the schooner Amistad… [W]here there exists no treaty 
stipulation, as there does not at present between the United States and 
Spain,…this country ought not to surre nder persons situated as are Joseph 
Shinquau and his unfortunate countrymen, who are, by the act of God, 
thrown upon these shores to find, I trust, that protection and relief of 
which they had been, probably, forever deprived had it not been for this 
remarkable and providential interposition.  
I remain, very truly, yours,  
LEWIS TAPPAN.  
P. S. Sabbath evening. The Rev. H. G. Ludlow prayed for the poor 
Africans this forenoon, very feelingly, at the service in his church…I 
distributed some religious tracts, in the morning, to the convicts, and 
attempted to instruct the African prisoners, especially the children. They 
pronounce words in English very distinctly, and have already nearly the 
numerals. In showing them some books containing pictures of tropical 
animals, birds, &c., they seemed much pleased to recognize those with 
whose appearance they were acquainted, endeavoring to imitate their 
voices and actions. With suitable instruction these intelligent and docile 
Africans would soon learn to read and speak our language, and I cannot 
but hope that some of the benevolent inhabitants of this city will diligently 
continue to improve the opportunity to impart instruction to these pagans, 
brought by the providence of God to their very doors.  
Towards evening we made a visit to Shinquau, and conversed with him a 
considerable time. He drew his hand across his throat, as his roommates 
said he had done frequently before, and asked whether the people here 
intended to kill him. He was assured that probably no harm would happen 
to him--that we were his friends--and that he would be sent across the 
ocean towards the rising sun, home to his friends. His countenance 
immediately lost the anxious and distressed expression it had before, and 
beamed with joy….He says he left in  Africa both his parents, a wife and 
three children. Two of the children, he remarked, are a little larger than the 
African girls who are prisoners, and the other about as large. We


--- PAGE 15 ---
endeavored to ascertain what his ideas were about a Supreme Being, if he 
had any. He said, “God is good.”  L. T. 
7 
The pro-slavery New York Morning Herald answered Tappan’s account with scathing 
and often viciously racist “letters from Bennett.’ On September 9, the Herald ran the 
following letter:  
The abolitionists are making immense exertions to get the negroes set free; 
they are raising subscriptions, collecting money, clothing and feeding 
them; employing the most able counsel, riding over the country, by night 
and day, to get interpreters who can converse alike in their language and in 
English; rummaging over musty records, old statutes, treaties and laws, in 
order to “get a peg to hang a doubt upon” in relation to delivering them 
up….The canting semi-abolition papers , like the “Journal of Commerce” 
and the “American” and “Post” are all endeavoring to mis-state, 
misrepresent, and throw difficulties upon the matter in order to get the 
black murderers set free. The Southern papers have articles proving the 
propriety of the surrender.--Meanwhile, the negroes are getting fat and 
lazy; perfectly indifferent to the disposal to be made of them. They only 
do two things on the coast of Africa; that is, eat and steal…. Senor Ruiz 
says that they are all great cowards, and had the captain killed one on the 
night of the mutiny they would have been subdued instantly, and all have 
run below. His impression is that they will be sent out to Havana, the 
ringleaders executed, and the rest given up to him. We shall see. It is a 
most singular case; we shall follow it up closely; and, unlike the “Journal 
of Commerce,” we shall do so accurately. 
Four days later, "Bennett" predicted that the Amistad affair might figure mightily in the 
upcoming presidential election:  
The "Journal of Commerce" and several other abolition papers, are very 
busy trying to create excitement out of the Amistad case and captured 
Africans. The Rev. David Hale, with a hypocritical cast of the eye--not an 
honest, downright squint like mine--is publishing the correspondence of 
Lewis Tappan & Co., who intend, out of this case, to revive the dying 
embers of abolition in the north….. Th is day we renew the publication of 
our correspondence from New Haven, and at the holding of the U. S. 
Court, beginning on the 17th instant, we shall also have our reporters in 
constant attendance. Already this strange affair bids fair to excite a 
stronger feeling throughout the Union, than any event that has happened in 
a long time. Whatever disposition be made of these Africans, the laws and 
treaties between nations ought to govern its course, in exclusion of those 
mischievous appeals to the passions of the mob of pious or profane 
loafers. We should not be surprised even, if the Amistad case entered


--- PAGE 16 ---
deeply into the next election. Every thing about it looks black enough for a 
squall. Get out your great coats and umbrellas--we know not the moment 
the clouds will pour down, or the wind may blow. 
On October 4, "Bennett" published a revealing--if highly slanted--account of New 
England's fascination with the Amistad Africans:  
A change has passed over the entire spirit of the existence of the negroes 
since their confinement at Hartford. Their animal spirits are greater than 
ever; they eat more, drink more, chatter more, gambol more, and turn 
more somersets than ever. In short, they are as merry as crickets, and as 
satisfied as pigs in clover. The excitement that is manifested by almost 
every one in relation to their disposition and their present condition, 
communicates itself to them. They are tickled half to death at the idea of 
having so much to eat without any labor to obtain it; so many persons to 
visit them; so many presents made to them; so much time to sun 
themselves; to roll, and tumble, and turn somersets.  
Accompanying this letter, you will receive a drawing made by a 
distinguished artist from New York, called Peter Quaint, which is a 
faithful representation of the scenes generally taking place here. On the 
left hand is Lewis Tappan, with his white hat, attended by another 
abolitionist, looking at Cinguez kissing a pretty young girl, who was 
handed up to him by her sympathetic mother. Near the mother is the 
celebrated phrenologist, Mr. Pierce, who has been forming a vocabulary of 
their language, hereunto annexed. In the center of the prison group is 
Garrah, turning a somerset before the Africans and white company --- and 
below, in the foreground, are two negroes scratching themselves, for it is 
well known that many of them have the itch. Away to the right is the 
fashionable, pious, learned, and gay people of Connecticut, precisely as 
they appeared during these amusing scenes in Hartford prison, receiving 
lectures and instructions in African philosophy and civilization.  
These blacks have created a greater excitement in Connecticut than any 
event that has occurred there since the close of the last century. Every kind 
of engine is set in motion to create a feeling of sympathy and an 
excitement in their favor; the parsons preach about them, the men talk 
about them, the ladies give tea parties and discuss their chivalry, heroism, 
sufferings; thews and sinews, over their souchong; pious young women 
get up in prayer meetings and pray for them; scouts are sent round the 
country to hunt up all the negroes that can speak any kind of African 
dialect; interpreters by dozens arrive daily at Hartford; grammars and 
spelling books and primers without number, in all sorts of unknown 
tongues, are sought for and secured. [It has been a] few weeks since Lewis 
Tappan arrived in Hartford, accompanied by his black tail; consisting of a 
great number of negroes of all ages and sizes, and colors, and speaking all


--- PAGE 17 ---
languages from the Monshee down to the Mandingo. The appearance of 
this patron of pious negroes was exceedingly singular, as he paraded the 
streets of Hartford with a dozen negroes forming a black tail; first came a 
dark Congo negro, then one from further north not quite as black; then a 
very dark mulatto nearly black, then a very brown fellow, then a copper 
colored negro, then one a brownish yellow, then a dark yellow, then a light 
yellow, then a mustee, and then one almost as white as himself and much 
better looking.  
The black fellows in confinement are astonished at all these singular 
movements, and begin to think, from the number of negroes brought to 
talk and jabber with them, that the blacks are the principle men in this 
country. They laugh heartily at all the movements of the whites, and 
consider them poor loafers, with ungraceful movements, and very much to 
be pitied because they are totally unable to turn a somerset. This is the ne 
plus ultra of accomplishments and refinements with them. If a man cannot 
turn a somerset they think very little of him in the way of civilization. 
They listen to what Lewis Tappan and the others have to say; and although 
Cinguez understands scarce a word that is said, and is conversed with 
often by signs; he replies merely by taking Lewis Tappan and his friends 
into the middle of the floor, and by signs asking them to turn a somerset. 
When he finds they are unable to oblige him in this particular, he throws a 
somerset himself by way of a lesson to them, laughs heartily, tries to turn 
up his flat nose, and walks off to his comrades, evincing the greatest 
contempt for the white chiefs who can't throw a somerset. In short, to such 
an extent do they carry this tumbling propensity, that it forms part of their 
religion….  
At new Haven ladies were not allowed to visit the negroes generally;but at 
Hartford all who wish to enter are admitted. Before they left New Haven a 
very beautiful single white lady called on Captain Pendleton, the keeper of 
the prison there, and expressed a desire to see Cinguez, the chief and hero 
of this affair, as she termed him, as she wished to have a private interview 
with him, and converse with him alone. The keeper very politely told her 
that she could not be admitted to see him alone in his cell, but that he had 
a private room in his own house, where she could interview with him 
alone, as long as she liked. This she declined; but this is a faint specimen 
of the enthusiasm that exists among the young people of Connecticut in 
relation to them, particularly the women. It is a species of hallucination. 
They have invested in this affair, with all the romance of an eastern fairy 
tale, and they consider the black fellows as worthy of as much honor as 
the colored Moorish Knights of old; and if they get clear, it is probable 
some Yankees will pick them up in detail, and take them around the 
country to show them by way of a speculation. The poor blacks 
themselves are utterly astonished at the prodigious sensation they have 
created; it is the only topic touched upon in conversation, in the streets, the


--- PAGE 18 ---
bar room, the ball room, the boudoir, the bed room, the kitchen, the parlor 
and the pulpit. And the negroes show their astonishment by eating an 
additional quantity of rice and throwing a few extra somersets to assist 
digestion.  
The scenes that daily take place here in the prison here in consequence of 
this excited feeling, are ludicrous in the extreme. Parsons go to preach to 
them, philosophers to experiment on them, professors to pick up a 
knowledge of their language, phrenologists to feel their heads, and young 
ladies to look and laugh at them. 
 
8 
Lewis Tappan's reports, read by a very different audience, brought even more attention to 
Cinque.  The leader of the Amistad mutiny was fast becoming a romantic figure.  Tappan 
described an “examination” Cinque and another African named Bowle.  Present with 
Tappan for the interview were Roger S. Baldwin (a well-respected lawyer retained by the 
Committee to represent the Africans), Josiah Gibbs (a Yale professor of linquistics), and 
an African interpreter:  
We endeavored to impress upon their minds, in the first place, that we 
were their friends, and that they must speak the truth. Both of them 
appeared to have some idea of a good Spirit, and also of an evil Spirit. 
They said "God is good," and if they told lies, the evil Spirit would take 
them somewhere, they did not know where. Jingua had been asked if he 
did not know that God would punish him if he did not speak the truth, and 
he replied "yes," and added in his own language--"me tell no lie; me tell 
the truth." Jingua said he knew that if they do good they will go to God, 
and if they do bad the evil one will get them. On being asked where God 
was, he pointed upward.  
Jingua repeated that he left his father, mother, wife and three children in 
Africa, and Bowle said he left his mother, three brothers and two sisters 
and his native place, Badebou….They stated that they had been in battles, 
in  their own country, using muskets, but had never been kidnappers. I 
would never take any advantage of any one, said Jingua, but would always 
defend myself. Bowle said his oldest brother was in debt, and they sold 
him, to pay it. They have no money there, said he, and trade away to the 
Spaniards, for powder and guns. Bowle said there was great slavery in 
Gallinas. (This is the place where Don Blanco, the great slave trader, 
pursues his hellish business.) They stated that they were brought down the 
country to the seacoast, and were chained when put on board the slaver, 
which was a brig. It was crowded with slaves, there being 200 men, 300 
women, and "plenty of children." Jingua here got down on the floor, to 
show us how they were stowed on board, then moved about on his knees,


--- PAGE 19 ---
and as he rose put his hand of the top of his head, to indicate how low the 
deck was. They said their sufferings were great on the passage, and several 
of their number had died.  
They stated that they were nearly two months going to Havana….  
Jingua appeared to be highly gratified to be taken from his cell, and to 
have the opportunity to look at the public buildings and the beautiful park, 
for the first time, from the windows of the chamber. When he entered the 
room his bearing was like another Othello. He seemed, at first, under some 
apprehension, but, after a while, appeared to be well aware that he was 
interrogated by persons friendly to him. He told his story in an animated 
manner…Occasionally he would shake hands with the interpreter, and 
laugh very heartily. When removed from the chamber, he was allowed to 
visit his countrymen. They shouted for joy, on seeing him, called him 
'massa,' and every one of them immediately, of their own accord, gave into 
his hands all the money, &c. they had received from the visitors. He took 
it, but before he reached his cell, he suddenly handed the money to his 
brother, who is one of the prisoners, thinking probably, and justly enough, 
too, that it would not be very safe when he should return to the convicts 
with whom he is incarcerated.  
One of the men attached to the prison was the occasion of great 
amusement on the part of the prisoners, as well as the spectators, by taking 
a large lump of ice to show these strangers from the tropics. They all 
handled it in turn, but each one, after holding it a moment, screamed out as 
if their hands had been burned, and entreated the man to take it out of their 
hands. They would then look at their hands to see of the skin was off, 
examine very closely the novelty, then taste of the water on their hands, 
then touch the ice with their tongues, or take a small piece into their 
mouths. As the ice was passed around, they laughed immoderately at the 
momentary agony of their comrades.  
One of the physicians of the city, who happened to be at the prison, and 
who expressed his surprise to find that the prisoners, as a body, were all 
well formed, and appeared quite as intelligent as an equal number of of 
colored persons in New Haven, or any other part of the country, took hold 
of the head of one of them, to examine it phrenologically, when the young 
man burst into a rough laugh saying, "it is a very poor head." Some of 
them are not only cheerful, but merry, and show much agility, wit and 
shrewdness. Jingua is generally grave and thoughtful, but his countenance 
is occasionally light up, when the expression is very prepossessing, 
indicating much natural benevolence of heart.  
The curiosity to see the prisoners appears to be unabated. Most of the 
visitors express much sympathy with these much abused strangers, and


--- PAGE 20 ---
utter sentiments of strong indignation against those who have torn them 
from their native land, or meditated their enslavement. But there are a few 
persons, even in Connecticut, who unblushingly aver that these Africans 
are not men; that it is right to enslave them, and that they will undoubtedly 
be given up by our government. It remains to be seen whether a grand jury 
can be found in the land of Roger Sherman to find a bill of indictment 
against these victims of cupidity, or a petty jury to find them guilty of 
crime, or whether the judge will pronounce that they have violated 
American Law, or the Executive attempt to surrender them to a foreign 
owner. The wise and good throughout Christendom will watch our 
proceedings; and the result, be it what it may, will materially affect the 
character of this nation, both with contemporaries and posterity….  
Very truly yours,  
LEWIS TAPPAN. 
9 
The usually quiet town of Hartford took on a carnival atmosphere as the time of trial 
approached.  Lawyers, reporters, and interested visitors from Boston to New York filled 
hotel rooms, roamed the public streets, and picnicked on the lawn in front of the two-
story brick courthouse.  Vendors hawked engravings of Cinque or the schooner Amistad. 
People gathered excitedly along the banks of the Connecticut River to welcome the 
arrival of boats bearing principal players in the courtroom drama: a paddle steamboat 
carrying Senors Ruiz and Montes and Lieutenant Gedney, a canal boat carrying the 
Africans, shivering in the cool September air.  
In a courtroom “filled to suffocation” Lewis Tappan sat on a bench next to the little girls 
Montez claimed as his slaves.  The girls sobbed loudly as they sat wrapped in white 
blankets. Tappan took the hand of the girl next to him. Colonel Pendleton, their New 
Haven jailer, gave them apples in an effort to cheer them up.  
The great excitement surrounding the case pleased Tappan and his fellow abolitionists. In 
the weeks preceding the trial, 4,000 persons a day had paid twelve cents each to catch a 
glimpse of the Africans.  All the leading New York papers were giving the trial extensive 
coverage. No paper attached more significance to the case than the abolitionist weekly, 
the Emancipator. An editorial in the Emancipator’s trial day edition proclaimed that 
“God has ordered [the African to our shores] to hasten the overthrow of slavery.”  
The young African girls sitting next to Tappan might have understood that the courtroom 
activity was about them, but they could hardly understand why.  The abolitionists and 
their lawyers had asked the Circuit Court of Connecticut for a writ of habeas corpus that 
would order the release of the three girls from custody.  They had chosen to limit their 
initial effort to the girls for two reasons.  First, they wanted to keep the focus on the girls, 
who played no role in the mutiny and who could be expected to generate public sympathy 
for the abolitionist cause.  If the writ were to be granted for them, it would be strong


--- PAGE 21 ---
precedent for other Africans.  Second, they recognized that it was almost beyond 
argument that the girls--given their tender age and the fact that none spoke a word of 
Spanish--were Africans, and therefore a judge would have a difficult time concluding that 
they legally had been sold as slaves.  
Two federal judges and a grand jury assembled in Hartford to try to untangle what had 
become a legal knot of unprecedented dimensions.  In addition to the habeas corpus 
petition of the abolitionists, the case presented issues of criminal law, property law, 
admiralty law, and jurisdiction.  As lawyers laid out their arguments in the courtroom, a 
grand jury meeting in another room in the courthouse debated the testimony of Ruiz, 
Montes, and the cabin boy Antonio relating to the mutiny and killing of the Amistad’s 
captain and cook.  Every so often the grand jury would shuffle into the courtroom to ask 
Circuit Judge Smith Thompson for guidance on their deliberations. Attorneys for the 
Spaniards pressed their demand that the Africans, as slaves lawfully purchased in a nation 
where slaveholding is legal, be returned to them as their property.  The lawyer of Captain 
Henry Green, who first met the Africans on a Long Island beach, argued that Green was 
entitled to salvage—a percen tage of the value of the Amistad and its cargo, including the 
slaves.  Another attorney argued a similar claim for Lieutenant Gedney.  Finally, U. S. 
District Attorney William Holabird, citing a 1795 Treaty, contended that the Africans 
should be placed under the control of President Van Buren.  
Lewis Tappan published his account of the complicated legal maneuverings in the New 
York Commercial Advertiser.  Not surprisingly, Tappan’s characterizations of the 
arguments reflected his abolitionist bias.  He described the arguments of abolitionist 
attorneys Roger Baldwin and Seth Staples as “powerful,” the argument of District 
Attorney Holabird as “lame.” The Spaniard’s argument, however, he credited as being 
“ingenious.” Tappan wrote that Staple’s argument for release of the girls demonstrated 
the “noble and eloquent character of the writ.”  Baldwin’s argument received his 
commendation for “bestowing a very severe castigation on the Spaniards.”  
The trial story read very differently in the pro-slavery New York Herald.  The Herald saw 
the trial as involving “principles of the greatest magnitude to the country.”  It digested the 
case for its readers as primarily “a struggle between the government and the Abolitionists 
for possession of the Africans: The U. S. government wants to get them to deliver to the 
Spanish authorities—and Lewis Tappan and Co. want to get them, to make saints of 
them.”  Despite its slant on the proceedings, the Herald conceded that the abolitionists 
had made a strong case.  Roger Baldwin, the paper said, had put the African’s case in the 
“strongest possible light” and had “closed with an effective appeal to the sympathies of 
the court.”  
After all the grand jurors, attorneys, deponents, and judges in Hartford had done their 
work, what came out was half victory, half defeat for the Africans and their abolitionist 
defenders.  Judge Smith Thompson, accepting the grand jury’s facts concerning the 
mutiny, announced that the court was without jurisdiction to hear any criminal charges 
against the mutineers of the Amistad.  The crime, if there was one, was committed 
against Spanish citizens on a Spanish boat in Spanish waters.  Jurisdiction to hear a


--- PAGE 22 ---
criminal case could only rest in Spain or her possessions.  There would be no criminal 
prosecution in his courtroom.  Smith, however, refused to issue a writ ordering the 
Africans’ immediate release, despite having great sympathy for the request.  Smith, one 
of only two justices on the United States Supreme Court known to oppose slavery, 
explained his decision: “However abhorrent it may be to our feelings, however desirable 
that every human being should be set at liberty, we cannot be governed by our feelings, 
but only by the law.”  The law, Smith announced, convinced him that the district court 
had the right to keep the Africans in its custody until it decided whether any of the 
several claimants held a property right in them as slaves.  The district court would meet 
in November to resolve the matter of property.  
The New York Herald gleefully reported that abolitionists were “half frantic” at 
Thompson’s refusal to release the Africans: “It would do your heart good to see the 
abolitionists since the decision of Judge Thompson.  Poor devils!  They are chagrined 
beyond measure.  Their faces have increased so much in longitude that every barber in 
the place charges double price for shaving them.”  With cruel sarcasm, the Herald 
described the abolitionists’ disappointment in being denied their hoped-for division of the 
Africans: William Lloyd Garrison would not get the cannibal he hoped to lease to the 
Zoological Institute to pay down the debts of his abolitionist paper, The Liberator.  
Reverend Henry Ludlow would not be able “to fit for holy orders” the murderer of 
Captain Ferrar. Lewis Tappan would not be allotted Kenyee, the African girl best 
“calculated to aid in the mixture of milk and molasses” (a reference to Tappan’s much-
ridiculed hope that inter-marriage might someday turn all Americans “copper-colored.”)  
10 
Yesterday we had Ruiz and Montez, the two Spaniards of the Amistad 
arrested, and not choosing to give bail they are now in prison.  They are 
arrested at the suits of some of the captured Africans for assault & battery, 
and false imprisonment.  The pro-slavery press, and the Southern 
slaveholders now here, are greatly exasperated & I doubt not it will 
exasperate the tyrants & their abettors throughout the country.  But we 
shall try the question in our courts, & see if a man, although he is black, 
cannot have justice done him here.  
--Lewis Tappan (letter to Joseph Sturge, October 19, 1839) 
 
Lewis Tappan believed that the only enemy of abolition was apathy.  Whatever got 
people thinking and talking about slavery advanced the noble cause.  With the start of the 
civil trial in Hartford a month away, Tappan considered strategies for keeping the 
Amistad controversy in the public spotlight.  What action would be more certain to create 
a furor than initiating a suit against the Spanish slaveowners for assault and false 
imprisonment?  The pro-slavery press would be practically apoplectic.  He saw other 
benefits from a civil suit as well.  The suit could be filed in New York (a free state) rather 
than in Connecticut (where slavery was still legal).  The suit would force the court to


--- PAGE 23 ---
choose between finding the Africans slaves without recourse against their masters or free 
persons with legal rights.  Finally, it would provide an opportunity to refute the narrative 
of Ruiz and Montes—“a lame account” in Tappan’s estimation. Tappan knew the 
chances for success on the merits of the suit small, but the other advantages justified the 
action. He filed suit.  
On the morning of October 17, Lewis Tappan carried to the office of the sheriff in New 
York City two writs, one for each of the Spaniards, calling on them to answer charges of 
assault and false imprisonment brought by Cinque and Fulah, “Africans of the Mendi 
tribe.”  The writs demanded that Montes and Ruiz each pay $2000 for their mistreatment 
of the plaintiffs.  Deputy Sheriff Josiah Kreene accepted the writs and set out with 
Tappan to make the requested arrests.  
The two men found the Spaniards in their hotel.  The New York Herald of October 18 
offered an account of the arrests that nearly screamed with outrage:  
Lewis Tappan, like his prototype, who first kissed his master and then sold 
him for thirty pieces of silver, went up to Mr. Ruiz and said to him, with a 
half-benevolent, half-malignant smile—“How do you do, Mr. Ruiz?”  
Then turning to the officer, he said, “This is your man—take him”….“I 
have no bail—I cannot get bail at pr esent,” said Mr. Ruiz.  “Then you’ll 
have to go to prison,” said Lewis, with a chuckle.  The same process took 
place with Senor Montez, who is almost too sick and weak to get out of 
bed…If ever deeper and intense mali gnity could be shown to the world 
than Lewis Tappan has now exemplified we should like to hear of it.  For 
the sake of human nature, it is to be hoped that his conscience will not 
make him hang himself on the next tree; because it he waits till he gets a 
little leaner, there will be less danger of his breaking the rope. 
Pro-slavery editorialists fumed at what they variously called a “ruse” or “subornation of 
perjury.”   The Charleston Courier scoffed at the notion that two Africans would choose 
to pursue a legal action:  “The Savages, in whose names these suits are instituted, are of 
course ignorant of the whole matter.  A lifetime would not suffice to make them 
comprehend it.”  The New York Herald saw the suit as “a ruse to prevent [Ruiz and 
Montes] from proceeding to Havana to procure evidence of their right to the negroes.”  
The Richmond Enquirer proposed placing Tappan in a “lunatic asylum” and asked 
whether he planned to “make the blacks our masters.”  
The new Spanish minister to the United States, Pedro Argaiz, angrily protested the arrest 
of the two Spanish citizens in a letter to pro-slavery Secretary of State John Forsyth.  He 
blasted the abolitionists who shamelessly supported “notorious murderers” and 
“savages.”  “When, in what country, at what period of history,” Argaiz asked, “has a 
slave been considered as enjoying civil rights?”  Argaiz requested that the Van Buren 
Administration use “the law of habeas corpus” to “liberate” Montes and Ruiz.  Such a 
response, Argaiz suggested, would calm “the disquiet which this news may occasion in 
the mind of her Majesty,” young Queen Isabella.


--- PAGE 24 ---
In an atmosphere of great excitement, Judge Inglis of the New York Court of Common 
Pleas opened preliminary hearings in the cases of Fulah vs. Ruiz and Cinque vs Montes.  
John Purroy, the young, hot-tempered attorney for the defendants read affidavits of Ruiz 
and Montes in which they claimed not to know that their slaves—purchased lawfully, 
they insisted--were Africans.  The Spaniards in their affidavits asserted that they fed the 
slaves of the Amistad well and never whipped or manacled them.  Purroy glared at 
Tappan, who was present at the hearing, and accused him of instituting the suits.  He 
called him “Judas” and an “archfiend.” The plaintiffs he called “pirates” and 
“murderers.”  Theodore Sedgewick, hired by Tappan to represent the Africans, responded 
with affidavits of his own, including one from Lewis Tappan describing his visit to the 
plaintiffs’ jail cells in New Haven and the grounds for his belief that they were Africans.  
Sedgewick asserted that Ruiz and Montes must have known their non-Spanish speaking 
slaves to be Africans. He read from the 1817 Treaty between England and Spain which, 
he contended, showed the Africans to be free persons, not the lawful property of the two 
Spaniards. A jury, Sedgewick, contended must finally decide the issue of his clients’ 
status as either slaves or free persons entitled to redress for their injuries. Sedgewick’s 
co-counsel, Seth Staples, lamented the “spirit of slavery” whose “direful influence” had 
“debauched” the court.  Judge Inglis announced that he would take the papers prepared 
by the lawyers, research the law, and give a decision in a day or two.  
On October 31, Judge Inglis delivered his decision.  The trial could go on, he said.  In the 
matter of the application of Ruiz and Montes to be freed without bail, Inglis announced a 
split decision.  He granted the application of Montes who, he said, was not implicated in 
any assault. On the other hand, Ruiz, who was alleged to be present when the cook of the 
Amistad struck Cinque, would be retained on bail of $250. Spanish minister Argaiz 
observed the court proceedings with growing incredulity.  Was there no federal power, he 
wondered, to “interpose its authority to put down the irregularity of these proceedings?”  
The Emanicipator celebrated its achievement of a “great point”: the right of blacks to 
bring civil suits.  Southern editorialists fretted that the decision might encourage fugitive 
slaves to haul their former owners into northern courts where they might be forced to pay 
damages by a “prejudiced and fanatical jury.”  
Montes, not unexpectedly, left the country for Cuba.  Ruiz, however, refused for four 
months to post bail and remained in the New York City jail in relaxed confinement.  
Tappan called Ruiz’s decision to forego bail a “ruse to excite sympathy, and prejudice the 
community against the Africans and their defenders.”  If that was indeed the goal of Ruiz, 
his efforts were successful.  The Ruiz-Montes controversy caused sympathy for the 
captive Africans to evaporate.  “TAPPANISM,” as it was called by the New Orleans 
Picayune, again came under heavy attack.  At another level, Tappan’s risky strategy may 
have paid off.  The civil suit focused such attention on the judicial process that it made 
executive intervention in the Amistad case by the Van Buren Administration politically 
risky.  If there was one thing President Martin Van Buren cared about, it was getting re-
elected.  
11


--- PAGE 25 ---
Mr. Leavitt went to Hartford to attend the trial of the Africans for the 
Amistad, & a large number of persons attended the court.  As Dr. Madden 
attended as a witness he will be able to give you all the particulars.  He 
sailed hence for England a few weeks ago.  The trial was postponed to 7th 
Jan owing to the illness of James Covey the African lad, who speaks the 
English language and whom Capt Fitzgerald of H. B. M. Brig Buzzard 
kindly consented to send to New Haven as interpreter.  The Spaniards did 
not even appear as counsel.  Montez had previously departed for Cuba and 
Ruiz remained in prison.  Some one asked him why he lay in jail—he 
replied—“it is a national matter.”  He  expects to excite sympathy & to 
embroil this Government with Spain in consequence of one of the liege 
subjects of Her Catholic Majesty being in prison merely for stealing half a 
hundred men and women!  I blush to tell you that the U. S. District 
Attorney appeared as counsel for the Spanish minister by order of this 
government!!  
--Lewis Tappan  (letter to John Scoble, December 10, 1839) 
 
The schooner Texas arrived in New York harbor from Havana on November 5, bearing a 
cargo of molasses and one passenger, Dr. Richard Robert Madden.  Madden carried with 
him a letter bearing the address of Lewis Tappan’s office.  After asking directions, he 
headed toward the Tappan warehouse in Hanover Square.  
As the British superintendent of liberated Africans in Cuba, Madden sought to protect 
freed Africans from becoming slaves in all but name. It was not an easy job.  Under the 
England-Spain Treaty, emancipated slaves were to be turned over by the British to Cuban 
officials, who could put them to work as free laborers for seven years before the Africans 
gained full freedom.  Cuban officials sold the emancipated blacks to planters who worked 
them harder than they did their regular slaves, knowing that at the end of the seven years 
they would be of no further use to them. Many Africans did not last the seven years. 
Madden’s work made him intimately acquainted with all aspects of the Cuban slave 
trade, from the importation business of the notorious Martinez and Company to the 
issuance by Cuban officials of passports fraudulently labeling Africans as “Ladinos.”  
Madden, a fervent abolitionist, had decided to volunteer his testimony in support of the 
Amistads.  No evidence in the trial would be more critical.  
Tappan shared with his British guest his concerns about the upcoming proceedings that 
would determine the fate of the Africans.  His biggest worry was Andrew T. Judson, the 
District Judge for Connecticut. Tappan and his brother Arthur knew Judson well.  A few 
years earlier the Tappans and Judson had been on opposite sides of a controversy 
involving a young white woman named Prudence Crandall.  Crandall had opened an all-
black girls academy in rural Connecticut near the home of Judson, then a town 
selectmen.  Judson led the drive to rid his state of Crandall and her school.  Judson rallied 
townspeople to his cause claiming that the school would become “an auxiliary in the 
work of immediate abolition” and soon New England would become “the Liberia of


--- PAGE 26 ---
North America.”  Townspeople passed a resolution condemning Crandall for 
promulgating the “disgusting doctrines of amalgamation.”  Ultimately Judson and his 
followers succeeded in pressuring the state assembly to enact the “Connecticut Black 
Law,” which provided for the expulsion from private schools of non-resident blacks.  
Judson prosecuted Crandall, the first defendant under the new law. The Tappans financed 
her defense. Judson told the jury, that Crandall’s “professed object is to educate the 
blacks” but that her real goal was to place the African race “on the footing of perfect 
equality with Americans.” The lawyers hired by the Tappans made an eloquent 
argument—years ahead of its time--that the la w violated the constitutional rights of 
blacks.  Judson got his conviction.  When Connecticut’s supreme court overturned 
Crandall’s conviction on a technicality, a mob set fire to her house.  Crandall gave up her 
school.  
Before they would face Judge Judson, Tappan thought it important that Madden meet the 
Africans on whose behalf he would testify.  The two men set out for the jail in New 
Haven, where Tappan introduced the Africans to Madden.  
From New Haven, Madden left by coach for Hartford, arriving the day before the trial 
began in Judge Judson’s courtroom.  Madden sat on the sidelines during the opening day 
as attorneys skirmished over whether the admiralty claims belonged in Judson’s court or 
a court in New York, the state where the Africans first landed--and where the 
abolitionists would now like to be. After several hours of testimony concerning the exact 
location of the Amistad at the point of capture—was it in New York waters or on the 
“high seas”?—Judson ruled that th e case belonged in his court.  Realizing that they were 
stuck with Judge Judson, the abolitionists argued their main point: that the blacks were 
kidnapped Africans, not slaves who could be claimed as property or salvage.  On this 
issue the abolitionists intended to rely heavily on the testimony of Madden, but counted 
also on James Covey, their African-born interpreter.  Unfortunately, Covey was seriously 
ill and did not make it to Hartford.  
Could the trial be postponed without sacrificing Madden’s crucial testimony?  Judson 
consented to allow a deposition of Madden that could be used when the trial reconvened 
in January.  On the afternoon of November 20 in the chambers of Judge Judson, before a 
group of interested attorneys and spectators, Madden described the system of fraud, 
corruption, and cruelty that accompanied the buying and selling of human beings in 
Cuba. Madden recounted a visit to the barracoon where the Amistad Africans had been 
bought.  When the “major domo” of the barracoon said of the Africans’upcoming trial in 
the United States, “Que lastima!” (“What a pity!”), Madden expressed surprise at the 
Cuban’s sympathy for their plight.  The major domo explained that the Africans surely 
would be executed and it was a shame for Ruiz and Montes to lose “so many valuable 
[slaves].” Madden’s convincing and impressive performance confirmed everything the 
abolitionists had said about slave trafficking in Cuba.  
Judson announced that the trial would reconvene in New Haven in January.  
12


--- PAGE 27 ---
The Marshal of the United States for the district of Connecticut, will 
deliver over to Lieut. John S. Paine, of the U. S. Navy, and aid in 
conveying on board the schooner Grampus, under his command all the 
negroes, late of the Spanish schooner Amistad, in his custody, under 
process now pending before the Circuit Court of the United States for the 
District of Connecticut.  For so doing, this order will be his warrant.  
Given under my hand, at the city of Washington, this 7th day of January, 
A. D. 1840.”  
--President Martin Van Buren 
The vessel destined to convey the negroes of the Amistad to Cuba, to be 
ordered to anchor off the port of New Haven, Connecticut, as early as the 
10th of January next, and be in readiness to receive said negroes from the 
Marshal of the United States, and proceed with them to Havana, under 
instructions hereafter transmitted.  
Lieutenants Gedney and Meade to be ordered to hold themselves in 
readiness to proceed in the same vessel, for the purpose of affording their 
testimony in any proceedings that may be ordered by the authorities of 
Cuba in this matter.  
These orders should be given with special instructions that they are not to 
be communicated to anyone.  
--Memorandum from the Department of State to the Secretary of the Navy 
On the night of January 9, 1840, the naval schooner USS Grampus slipped into New 
Haven harbor.  The Van Buren Administration had diverted the Grampus from its anti-
slavery patrol on the African coast to Connecticut for an important mission.  Lieutenant 
John S. Paine, the ship’s commander, and Norris Willcox, the U.S. Marshall at the trial 
then in progress before Judge Andrew Judson, had top secret orders.  President Van 
Buren’s order called upon Willcox to take possession of the Amistad Africans should--as 
expected--Judson authorize their transport to Cuba to stand trial for piracy and murder.  
The orders called for Willcox to hustle the blacks onto the Grampus for immediate 
departure for Cuba “unless an appeal shall actually have been imposed.”  Van Buren was 
anxious to placate Spain which, its minister said, “did not demand delivery of slaves but 
of assassins.”  
Van Buren’s order was an attempted subversion of the judicial process—nothing short of 
a blatant interference with the guarantee of due process set forth in the Constitution. Most 
abolitionists, noting the presence of the schooner in the harbor, did not imagine its 
nefarious purpose.  Lewis Tappan did.  He never underestimated the deviousness of 
slavery’s defenders and protectors.  Tappan, according to some historians, developed a 
secret plan of his own.  Rumors circulated that he and other  abolitionists procured a


--- PAGE 28 ---
schooner which they hoped to use to whisk the Africans to Canada, should things turn out 
poorly in the New Haven courtroom.  
Spectators, lawyers, and parties squeezed into every available seat in Judge Judson’s 
courtroom.   Yale Law School and Yale Divinity students lucky enough to have gotten 
seats refused to leave the courtroom, even during long recesses, for fear of losing their 
places.  Nearly a dozen lawyers representing the Africans, the Spaniards, the salvage 
claimants, and the U. S. government, huddled at their desks.  Judson, serious and austere, 
presided from the bench.  Lewis Tappan, sitting near the Africans, gazed at the 
remarkable scene that he--more than anyone--had produced.  
Roger Baldwin won loud cheers from a mostly pro-African crowd for an eloquent 
defense of liberty.  Irritated, Judge Judson rapped for order.  A parade of abolitionist 
witnesses offered evidence of the Negroes’ African origins.  Then the moment that the 
crowd eagerly anticipated arrived.  Cinque, wrapped in a blanket, rose from his chair and 
walked to the witness stand accompanied by James Covey, the Mende interpreter.  With 
“breathless attention,” courtroom spectators listened as Cinque told the story of an 
eventful five months beginning with his being kidnapped by four Africans while working 
on a road near the home of his wife and three children and ending with his arrival and 
capture on Long Island.  Cinque sat on the courtroom floor to show how he was 
manacled, hands and feet together, on the Middle Passage voyage of the Tecora.  
No trial is non-stop entertainment.  Mixed with the dramatic testimony of Africans and 
Antonio, the Cuban cabin boy, were arguments and testimony that only an admiralty 
lawyer could enjoy.  The trial would decide not only the fate of the Africans, but of the 
Amistad and its cargo as well.  On Saturday, January 11, the court adjourned.  Judson 
announced that he hoped to have his decision ready by Monday.  
On a cold Monday morning, with his face gaunt and tense, Judge Judson announced his 
several-part decision to a filled courtroom.  He began with his resolution of the salvage 
claims. He accepted Gedney’s claim: the Lieutenant rendered a valuable service in 
seizing the Amistad and preventing the likely loss of its remaining cargo.  Judson 
awarded one-third of the value of the ship and its non-human cargo to Gedney.  The ship 
and its cargo—subject to Gedney’s salvage lien—should be restored to the Spanish 
government.  But, ruled Judson, there could be no salvage right in the Africans. Neither 
were they the property of Ruiz and Montes. The blacks “were born free and ever since 
have been and still of right are free and not slaves.”  They would not be returned to Cuba 
to stand trial as accused murderers and pirates.  They revolted, Judson concluded, out of a 
natural “desire of winning their liberty and returning to their families.”  Judson 
continued, “Cinque and Grabeau [another African who testified] shall not sigh for Africa 
in vain.  Bloody as may be their hands, they shall yet embrace their kindred.”  Judson 
ordered that the Africans be placed under the control of the Executive and returned to 
Africa.  
Tappan saw Judson’s decision as an attempt to “steer between” slavery and unequivocal 
freedom.  It was a compromise, but one that he and the abolitionists could live with.  As


--- PAGE 29 ---
much as he might have wished it would be so, Tappan could not have expected any 
federal district judge—least of all Andrew  T. Judson—to issue a decision repudiating the 
institution of slavery.  All in all, it was a very good decision. Tappan hurried to the New 
Haven jail to tell the Africans the news.  Upon hearing Tappan’s words, the young 
Negroes fell on their knees before him, then leaped and shouted in joy.  When the tumult 
subsided, the Rev. Henry Ludlow led a prayer of thanksgiving.  Tappan observed that the 
Africans “followed him audibly, and with apparent devoutness.”  
Meanwhile, the USS Grampus sailed out of the harbor and headed south.  
13 
You will see in our Emancipator of April 30th & May 7th a report of the 
proceedings in the Circuit Court at New Haven, in the case of the Africans 
of the Amistad.  The cause goes up to the Supreme Court of the United 
States which will sit at Washington January 1841.  As Judge Thompson 
learned that the case would go up, whichever side he decided, he advised 
the counsel not to argue the matter at length, but to let it go to the highest 
judicial tribunal in the country with as little delay as possible.  The action 
of this government is decidedly against these Africans and they will send 
them to Cuba if they dare.  
--Lewis Tappan (letter to John Scoble in London, May 5, 1840) 
 
Circuit Judge Thompson affirmed Judge Judson’s decision.  The Administration again 
appealed, this time to the United States Supreme Court, where five of the nine justices 
were southerners who either owned or had owned slaves.  
In October 1840, Lewis Tappan visited John Quincy Adams, seventy-four-years-old and 
three decades removed from his last argument in court, at his home in Massachusetts.  
Tappan asked "Old Man Eloquent" to join Roger Baldwin in arguing the Africans’ case 
in Washington. The former President at first resisted, pleading age, infirmity and duties in 
Congress. But Adams believed firmly in the rightness of the cause.  He finally agreed to 
join Baldwin in arguments before the Court. "By the blessing of God, I will argue the 
case before the Supreme Court," Adams told Tappan.  Adams’ diary entry for the day 
read: "I implore the mercy of God to control my temper, to enlighten my soul, and to give 
me utterance, that I may prove myself in every respect equal to the task."  
Tappan believed it to be important that the Africans have the option “to remain here or go 
where they choose.”  He told Adams, “They are entitled to their freedom here.”  But 
Tappan was hardly optimistic: he wrote that he viewed the Africans upcoming date in the 
Supreme Court with “strong apprehensions.”  
On Monday, February 22, 1841, arguments began in the Supreme Court's crowded 
chamber in the U.S. Capitol. Attorney General Henry Gilpin, arguing for the government,


--- PAGE 30 ---
told the Court that it should not "go behind" the Amistad's papers and make inquiry as to 
their accuracy, but should accept them on their face in order to show proper respect for 
another sovereign nation. Accepting the fraudulent papers would have meant, of course, 
that the Africans were slaves to be returned to Cuba.  Roger Baldwin followed Gilpin, 
making many of the same arguments that been persuasive in the district and circuit 
courts.  
John Quincy Adams began his eagerly anticipated argument on February 24th.  Justice 
Story would later call Adams’ argument “extraordinary for its power, for its bitter 
sarcasm, and for its dealing with topics far beyond the record and points of discussion.” It 
was at times eloquent, at times a harangue, and at times a political declamation.  Adams 
argued that if the President had the power to send the Africans to Cuba, he would equally 
as well have the power to seize forty Americans and send them overseas for trial. Spain, 
he told the Court, asked the President to "first turn man-robber...next turn jailer... and 
lastly turn catchpole and convey them to Havana, to appease the vengeance of the 
African slave-traders of the barracoons." He attacked the President for his ordering a 
naval vessel to stand ready in New Haven harbor. He quoted the Declaration of 
Independence: "The moment you come to the Declaration of Independence, that every 
man has a right to life and liberty, an inalienable right, this case is decided. I ask nothing 
more in behalf of these unfortunate men than this Declaration."  
Adams ended his Supreme Court argument on a personal, reflective note:  
I appear again to plead the cause of justice and now of liberty and life, in 
behalf of many of my fellow men, before the same Court, which in a 
former age, I had addressed in support of rights of property….In taking, 
then, my final leave of this Bar, and of this Honorable Court, I can only 
ejaculate a fervent petition to Heaven, that every member of it may go to 
his final account with as little of earthly frailty to answer for as those 
illustrious dead, and that you may, every one, after the close of a long and 
virtuous career in this world, be received at the portals of the next with the 
approving sentence, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant; enter thou into 
the joy of they Lord.’ 
On March 9, 1841, the Supreme Court announced its decision.  The Court’s decision 
rested principally on the arguments of Roger Baldwin, not the “interesting remarks” of  
Adams.  Justice Story, speaking for the Court, said that the Negroes were "kidnapped 
Africans, who by the laws of Spain itself were entitled to their freedom." They were not 
criminals: the “ultimate right of human beings in extreme cases is…to apply force against 
ruinous injustice.” The Africans could stay or they could return to Africa.  
On the day of the Court’s decision, John Quincy Adams penned a letter to Lewis 
Tappan.  “The captives are free!” Adams wrote.  “Thanks! in the name of humanity and 
justice, to you.”  
14


--- PAGE 31 ---
To Friends of the African Captives: The Committee have the high 
satisfaction of announcing that the Supreme Court of the United States 
have definitely decided that our long-imprisoned brethren who were taken 
in the schooner Amistad, ARE FREE on this soil, without condition or 
restraint.  The opinion of the court was pronounced on Tuesday, March 9, 
by Judge Story.  
In view of this great deliverance, in which the lives and liberties of thirty-
six fellow-men are secured, as well as many fundamental principles of 
law, justice, and human rights established; the Committee respectfully 
recommend that public thanks be given on the occasion, to Almighty God, 
in all the churches throughout the land.  
S. S. JOCELYN  
JOSHUA LEAVITT  
LEWIS TAPPAN  
[Newpaper announcement of the Amistad Committee, March 11, 1841] 
 
For Lewis Tappan—the man most responsible for the freeing of the Amistad Africans—
the undiluted joy that ought to have been his at the news of the Supreme Court victory 
mixed with the sadness of personal tragedy.   As the Supreme Court decided the 
Africans’ fate, Tappan’s eighteen-year-old daughter, Eliza, lay stricken with 
tuberculosis.  The five to six weeks that doctors had given her to live in January were up, 
but she bravely clung to life.  He did not hide from his gentle, intelligent daughter the 
truth about her illness.  In his diary he recorded that Eliza cried when he told her that her 
case was “critical and her lungs affected.”  “Eliza, is this unexpected to you—does it 
distress you?” asked Tappan.  The truth is always preferable to false hope, he explained.  
Then father and daughter prayed.  Tappan’s diary, written in the formal style popular in 
the 1800’s, only hints at the heartache this good—but often absent—fat her felt during this 
time of grief and helplessness. But it is clear that Eliza’s calm acceptance of her illness, 
religious faith, and thoughtfulness deeply moved Tappan.  
Eliza understood her principled father and loved him dearly.  The burdens of his 
abolitionist work, piled on top of his full-time job as a bookkeeper at his brother’s 
warehouse, left few opportunities for spontaneous family activities in the Tappan 
household.  Even on holidays, Tappan often excused himself to attend to anti-slavery 
business.  But in the spring of 1841, Tappan made time to be with his dying daughter.  
On May 6, 1841, Eliza asked her father to stay by her bedside: “I want to talk with you 
before my voice fails me.”  She died the next day.  
Lewis Tappan spent the next two days mourning, comforting, greeting, cleaning, 
arranging—performing all the chor es associated with a death in the family. On the third 
day, Eliza’s body began its journey to Brookline, Massachusetts for burial, but Lewis did 
not accompany it.  In his diary Tappan explains: “the Amistad Africans were to be on 
exhibition of Wednesday afternoon and the duty of superintending it devolved to me.”


--- PAGE 32 ---
He hired a man to go with  Eliza’s coffin.  After all, he reminded himself, his daughter’s 
greatest “desire” in life was “to be useful.”  Surely Eliza would not want her death to 
hinder the great cause.  
Exactly one week after tuberculosis took his beloved daughter, Tappan led sixteen 
Amistad Africans into the Broadway Tabernacle.   Cinque trailed Tappan in the 
procession, followed by the three girls, then twelve males.  About 2,500 people, having 
paid fifty cents a head, buzzed as Cinque, Kinna (“the most intelligent of the blacks”), 
Kale (“who has been in correspondence with John Quincy Adams”), and the three girls 
took seats at a desk at the front of the Tabernacle and the other Africans took seats in 
elevated choir pews.  Many in the racially mixed audience rose and rushed toward the 
desk to get better looks.  This brought on a general cry from those who had remained 
seated:  “Sit down, sit down,” “down there in front,” “we can’t see through you.”   
Tappan, amidst thunderous applause, addressed the crowd: “If the congregation will keep 
perfectly still, and refrain from all manifestations of approbation, the exercises will be 
easily heard all over the house.”  
Tappan, serving as master of ceremonies, hurried through the program’s preliminaries.  
He displayed to the audience the elegant Bible that the Africans planned to present to 
President Adams.  He read a letter from Montreal describing the abolitionists’ success in 
secreting Antonio, the slave of Captain Ferrar of the Amistad, to Canada and out of the 
reach of American slave laws.  Then Tappan turned the program over to the evening’s 
main attraction, the Africans.  
To demonstrate the Africans’ progress, Tappan ran them through a series of exercises.  
They read Bible verses--“badly,” according to the pro-slavery Herald’s account (though 
it noted that their efforts were cheered “with great earnestness and perseverance.”)  The 
Colored American took a somewhat more positive view of the readings: “While some 
[did] better than others, they all succeeded beyond all human expectation.” They spelled 
better than they read—words such as let, truth, abide, commandments and immediately.  
“The spelling lesson gave great satisfaction to the audience,” reported the Herald.  They 
sang, to the tune of Auld Lang Syne: “When I can read my title clear/ To mansions in the 
skies./ I’ll bid farewell to every fear,/ And wipe my weeping eyes.”  Speeches by several 
of the Africans relating their stories—in ha lting English—followed.  Kinna perhaps best 
summed up the Africans’ impressions of their strange new land:  “Some good people 
here—some bad.”   The exercises concluded with a singing “in fine style” of the hymn, 
“From Greenland’s Icy Mountains.”  
Tappan had purposes in exhibiting the Africans beyond merely satisfying the curiosity of 
the masses.  First among them was raising money. The Amistad Committee needed funds 
for support of the Africans: for their food, housing, instruction, and eventual transport 
back to their homeland.  In addition, Tappan hoped that the exhibitions would build 
public support for his grand plan to establish a Christian mission in Africa.  Tappan 
dreamed that the light of God carried by Africans of the Amistad would someday 
illuminate a whole continent.  Tappan asked the audience at the Tabernacle to help “send


--- PAGE 33 ---
them back—not slaves but missionaries.” He later wrote of the Tabenacle meeting and 
others like it:  
These meetings all have excited great attention, and have been of an 
exceedingly interesting character.  The one at the Tabernacle on 
Wednesday, we regarded as a consuming fire to prejudice.  We do not 
believe that any went away with the same views, and the same feelings in 
relation to any one in whose veins courses African blood.  The event of 
the landing of these brethren upon our shores is to be, not without its 
beneficial effect, as well to the colored population of this country, as it 
promises to be to ill-fated Africa. 
15 
With Tappan making most of the arrangements, the Africans moved to Farmington, 
Connecticut.  The men found quarters in a made over barn.  Tappan placed the three girls 
in private homes.  For the next eight months, the blacks received about six hours per day 
of instruction, tended a garden of corn, potatoes, beets and onions, and traveled as a sort 
of vaudeville team to places such as Boston, Lowell, Springfield, and Hartford.  
Many noted a change taking place. In a letter to Lewis Tappan, one of their instructors, S. 
M. Booth, wrote of the Africans, “They begin to feel their liberty.”  Some seemed 
haughty and proud.  Others, to the dismay of their spiritual advisers, sang songs or turned 
somersaults for shillings.  Encounters with local residents were mostly positive, but now 
and then there were insults and even fights.  Homesickness was a growing problem.  In 
the summer of 1841 an African named Fonne, a strong swimmer, drowned in a 
Farmington pond.  Many people suspected suicide.  Fonne had been visibly depressed in 
the weeks before his drowning, often thinking and talking about his mother.  A. F. 
Williams wrote, “They entertain the belief that they will all die in America; they believe 
that when they die they will go immediately to Mendi and some of them think the sooner 
the better.”  
By September, Tappan knew it was time to send the Africans home.  
    16 
Lewis Tappan appealed urgently for clergymen willing to accompany the Africans to 
their homeland and start a Christian mission on the Dark Continent.  Few answered the 
call.  A young man named William Raymond was the exception.  In a letter to Tappan, 
Raymond described the moment he realized Africa was his destiny:  “I cried out, ‘Lord, 
what wilt thou have me do, where wilt thou have me go?’  No sooner had the words 
escaped my lips than Western Africa laid plain before me as though it had not been more 
than half a mile distant, attended with these words: ‘There is your field,’ coming with so 
much force to my mind as though they had been spoken with a human voice.”  By 
November, two more missionaries had volunteered and the money necessary to charter 
and provision a ship had been raised.


--- PAGE 34 ---
At the break of day on a late November morning, the Africans left Farmington in a packet 
boat for New York.  Over one hundred local citizens rose before five o'clock to see them 
off.  Witnesses reported tearful farewells:  “The Mendians seized hold of their friends, as 
almost unwilling to leave them, and in return their friends held them fast by the hand; 
some of the men sobbed aloud.”  More goodbyes followed at the Broadway Tabernacle in 
New York City. The crowd at the Tabernacle listened to a reading of a letter recently 
received by Lewis Tappan:  
Lewis Tappan, Esq. New York  
Dear Sir,--I received and accept with thanks the elegant Bible, presented 
me by Cinque, Kinna, Kale and the thirty-two other Mendians, who are 
indebted to you, and your benevolent associates, probably for their lives, 
certainly for their deliverance from unjust prosecution, and long protracted 
imprisonment and finally for the means of returning to their own 
country….[I] hope for the consummation of your kindness to them in the 
accomplishment of their restoration in freedom and safety to their native 
land.  
I am, with great respect, dear sir, faithfully yours,  
JOHN QUINCY ADAMS 
17 
Last Saturday all the Mendean Africans (35 in number) sailed from this 
Port for Sierra Leone, on board the baroque ‘Gentleman,’ together with 
five Missionaries and Teachers….They have a fine breeze and are now we 
hope, well on their way.  The Anti-Slavery public have generously 
responded to our appeal, and sent the means to enable us to fit them out 
well, to pay their passages, supply them with many useful articles and give 
the Missionaries money to sustain themselves for a while.  
--Lewis Tappan (letter to John Scoble) 
 
On December 4, 1841, Lewis Tappan, a handful of other abolitionists, and the Africans 
traveled by steamboat to the Gentleman, waiting in quarantine near Staten Island. Tappan 
gathered the voyagers in the captain’s cabin.  He said goodbye and presented each 
African with a momento of his two-year-stay in the United States.  Then Tappan read a 
poem to Cinque that he had composed for the occasion:  “One prayer I breathe, ere yet 
you leave our land,/  God bless thee, and thy native land.”  The farewell ceremony closed 
with the group bowing their heads as Tappan led a recital of the Lord’s Prayer.  When the 
steamboat reached the larger ship that would carry the Africans back across the Atlantic, 
the blacks and the three young missionaries picked up their modest belongings and 
walked up the gangway of the Gentleman.  Tappan watched in the brisk morning air as 
the ship sailed toward the eastern horizon.


--- PAGE 35 ---
The hopes of abolitionists had never been higher.  “The spirit of liberty,” Tappan wrote to 
a friend, “I am happy to say is rising.”  A few months later, he received from the Africans 
his first communications, composed at sea near Sierra Leone:  
Mr. Tappan—Dear Sir: Captain good—no touch Mendi people.  All 
Mendi people love Mr. Tappan.  Mr. Tappan, pray for Cinque and all 
Mendi people all time, and Cinque and Mendi people pray for Mr. Tappan 
all time….Cinque love Mr. Tappan very  much, and all Mendi people love 
Mr. Tappan very much.  I no forget Mr. Tappan forever and ever; and I no 
forget God, because God help Mr. Tappan and Mendi people….I thank all 
‘merica people for they send Mendi people home.  I shall never forget 
‘merica people.  
Your friend, CINQUE  
Mr. Lewis Tappan—Dear Sir: We have  reached Sierra Leone, and one 
little while after we go Mendi, and we get land very safely.  Oh dear 
friend, pray to God—God will hear your  prayer.  We will pray for you; 
and God is very great, very good, and kind.  We have been on great 
water—no danger fell upon us—oh no.  We never forget glorious God for 
these great blessings.  How joyful we shall be! I never forget you.  May 
God be blessed!  Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ has done wondrous 
works.  Oh, dear Mr. Tappan, how I feel for this wondrous work.  Oh, dear 
Mr. Tappan, how I feel for these wondrous things.  I cannot write so plain 
because the ship rolls, and pray—Jesus  will hear you; and if never see you 
in this world, we will meet in Heaven.  
Your true friend, KINNA 
 
18 
After fifty days at sea, the Gentleman put down anchor in Freetown harbor. It didn't take 
long for the missionaries to realize they had their work cut out for them. After 
disembarking, some of the Africans stripped and engaged in "heathenish dancing." 
British missionaries in Freetown told the Americans that their plan to establish a mission 
in Mendeland was folly.  Soon the missionaries wrote letters complaining of their 
Amistad students: some fell back to their "licentious habits," some disappeared, some 
were just trouble. Others, such as Kinna, clearly felt the pull of two different worlds.  
Kinna became an ordained minister but practiced polygamy. The missionaries could also 
report success stories such as Margru [Sarah], a “very devoted Christian” who would 
return to the United States to study at Oberlin College and then spend the rest of her life 
working at the African mission.  
The missionaries faced a tide of difficulties.  They contended with rats (William 
Raymond killed 164 in a single day), 175 inches of annual rainfall, and diseases such as 
malaria and yellow fever.  One by one, the missionaries died and were replaced by others. 
The mission, however, lived on.


--- PAGE 36 ---
The last of the Amistad Africans to have contact with the Christian outpost was Cinque. 
In 1879, old and emaciated, he came to die.  Missionaries buried him among the graves 
of the mission called Mo Tappan.  
19 
Lewis Tappan, the seventy-five-year-old patriarch of New York’s abolitionist movement, 
sat in the audience at Cooper Hall in January 1863 as Negro minister Henry Garnat 
opened the “Emancipation Jubilee” with a reading of Lincoln’s Proclamation freeing the 
slaves.  When the reading finished, Tappan joined the crowd in giving three cheers for 
the President. The abolitionist movement had come along way since the Amistad turned 
up along Long Island’s coast and Tappan as much as anyone was responsible for its 
progress. Tappan could look back at a remarkable career.  
What made Tappan’s success as a dedicated social reformer all the more impressive was 
that he managed at the same time to achieve great success also as a creative 
businessman.  While assuming leadership of the traditional, evangelical wing of the 
abolitionist movement in the 1840’s, Tappan in his day job established the nation’s first 
credit rating agency, the Wall Street and Merchant Exchange.  A clerk in Tappan’s firm 
half-complained, “He has wonderful endurance himself and drives others as if made of 
the same stuff.”  Today the firm Tappan built is known as Dun and Bradstreet.  
The 1840’s also saw Tappan create the American Missionary Association, formed in 
1842 through a merger of the Amistad Committee and the Union Missionary Society.  
“Its simple object,” Tappan said, “is to send out the pure gospel, free from every 
compromise.”  His work on behalf of the Association had been tireless.  He raised 
money, wrote letters, organized conventions and paid bills.  At the time of the 
Emancipation Proclamation, A. M. A. missionaries stretched around the globe, from 
Sierra Leone to Turkey to the Sandwich Islands to the American frontier.  
Tappan also had been a determined foe of the infamous Fugitive Slave Act.  He traveled 
to England to extract a promise from the government than it would not extradite fugitive 
slaves that managed to make their way to Canada.  He called upon his fellow Yankees to 
open their doors to the “panting fugitive,” suggesting that to not disobey such an immoral 
act would be to dishonor Revolutionary forebears.  At times, Tappan took a very personal 
role in securing freedom for runaway slaves. In 1855 he took a young girl, dressed as a 
boy, into his Brooklyn house and then sent her on her way to a minister in Canada.  
Beginning in 1857, Tappan suffered from rheumatism.  By the time the first shots of the 
Civil War were fired, his active career as an abolitionist was all but over.  Except for 
attendance at annual meetings of the American Missionary Association, Tappan would 
make his last public appearance at the Emancipation Jubilee.  
Lewis Tappan stood to address the crowd at Cooper Hall.  He told the crowd, to cheers 
and laughter, that he thought “a white man was as good as a black man, if he behaved 
himself.”  Tappan held in his hand one document.  He read it to the crowd.  It was the


--- PAGE 37 ---
letter of March 9, 1841 from John Quincy Adams informing Tappan of the Amistad 
Africans’ victory, achieved that day, in the Supreme Court.  Tappan concluded his 
remarks with a poem: “Judge not of virtue by the name/ or think to read it on the skin;/  
Honor is white and black the same--/ the stamp of glory is within.”  
On June 21, 1873, at the age of eighty-five, Lewis Tappan suffered a fatal heart attack at 
his home in Brooklyn Heights.  
Famous Trials Page 
Tappan Essay Footnotes (work in progress)  
Abbreviations  
MOA         Howard Jones.  Mutiny on the Amistad.  Oxford Press, 1987.  
LTEW        Bertram Wyatt-Brown.  Lewis Tappan and the Evangelical War 
Against Slavery  
Section 1  
"We feel bad and we ask Cinque...":  
"Throw some bread at them":  
Section 2  
"outrageous costumes":  
"forcible and impressive":  
"amidst a tremendous noise...":  
"When my wife saw the large...":  
"silent Anti-Slavery preacher...":  
"expressly to tar and feather":  
"If you wish to draw off the people...":  LTEW, p144.  
"Moral suasion": LTEW, p144.  
"collection of natural curiosities": Emancipator (12/8/1836).  
"We will persevere, come life or death....":  LT letter to S. C. vigilance committee, quoted 
in LTEW, p154.  
"respectable" New York faction:  
Section 3  
"They made fools of us...":  
"What country is this?....":  
"Bless our Holy Virgin...":  
"[Pedro Montes] is the most striking...":  
Section 4  
"There is too much theology in the Church...":  LT letter to Theodore Weld (10/25/1831), 
quoted in LTEW, p65.  
"their enmity and clamor are evidence...": New York Evangelist (10/81831).  
"monitor general": LTEW, p102.  
Section 5  
"To the Marshal of the District...":  
"The subscribers, Don Jose Ruiz, and...":


--- PAGE 38 ---
"We despise the jumbug doctrines...":  
Section 6  
"Thirty-eight fellow men from Africa...":  
"I arrived here last Friday evening...":  
Section 7  
"The abolitionisists are making immense...":  
"The Journal of Commerce and several...":  
"A change has passed over the entire...":  
Section 8  
Section 9  
Section 10  
Section 11  
Section 12  
Section 13  
Section 14  
Section 15  
Section 16  
Section 17  
Section 18  
Section 19  
   
   
   
   
Map of 
Voyages Famous American Trials   
   
Amistad Trials  
   
1839 - 1840 
Newspaper 
Accounts 
Chronology 
Biographies 
of Trial 
Participants 
Sketches of 
the Amistads 
The Trial 
Record 
Supreme 
Court 
Arguments 
& Decision


--- PAGE 39 ---
Letters & 
Diary 
Entries 
Slaver Montes points at Cinque in a portion of a mural by Hale Woodruff 
Images 
A Trial Account  
  by Douglas Linder (c) 1998  
The improbable voyage of the schooner Amistad, and the 
court proceedings and diplomatic maneuverings that 
resulted from that voyage, form one of the most significant 
stories of the nineteenth century. When Steven Spielberg 
chose the Amistad case as the subject of his 1997 feature 
film, he finally brought it the attention the case had long 
deserved, but never received. The Amistad case energized 
the fledgling abolitionist movement and  (cont.) 
Famous Trials Homepage 
Essay:   
Salvaging 
Amistad 
Stage & 
Screen 
Productions 
  
Bibliography 
& Links 
 
  
The Amistad Case  
by Douglas O. Linder (2000) 
 
     The improbable voyage of the schooner Amistad and the court 
proceedings and diplomatic maneuverings that resulted from that 
voyage form one of the most significant stories of the nineteenth 
century. When Steven Spielberg chose the Amistad case as the subject 
of his 1997 feature film (LINK TO REVIEWS), he finally brought it the 
attention the case had long deserved, but never received. The Amistad 
case energized the fledgling abolitionist movement and intensified 
conflict over slavery, prompted a former President to go before the 
Supreme Court and condemn the policies of a present Administration, 
soured diplomatic relations between the United States and Spain for a 
generation, and created a wave of interest in sending Christian


--- PAGE 40 ---
missionaries to Africa. 
Mutiny and Zig-Zagging to American Justice 
     Two sea captains, Peletiah Fordham and Henry Green, were shooting 
birds among the dunes at the eastern tip of Long Island on the morning 
of August 26, 1839, when they were startled to encounter four black 
men wearing only blankets. Once the blacks were assured through sign 
language that they were not in slaveholding country, they led Fordham 
and Green to a point in the dunes where they could see a black 
schooner, flagless with its sails in tatters, sitting at anchor a mile or so 
from the beach. Another smaller boat was on the beach, guarded by 
more black men, many of whom were wearing necklaces and bracelets 
of gold doubloons. One of the black men, who appeared to be the leader 
of the group, told Fordham and Green that there were two trunks full of 
gold aboard the schooner, and that they would be given to whoever 
outfitted them with provisions and helped them sail back to their 
African homeland. Green suggested that if they got the trunks he would 
help them return to Africa.  
     Green's and Fordham's dreams of riches were interrupted by a brig of 
the U. S. Coast Guard, the Washington, which intercepted the rowboat 
as it made its way back to the schooner. The commander of the brig, 
Lieutenant Thomas Gedney, boarded the schooner and ordered, at 
gunpoint, all hands below the deck. Two Spaniards emerged from 
below.  One was old, bearded, and sobbing.  The other was a man in his 
mid-twenties. Jose Ruiz, the younger man, spoke English and eagerly 
began to tell the tale of mutiny, blood, deceit, and desperation aboard 
the Amistad.  
     The schooner had left Havana on June 28, bound for Puerto Principe, 
a Cuban coastal town. Aboard the Amistad were five whites, a mulatto 
cook, a black cabin boy, and fifty-three slaves. Ruiz had bought forty-
nine adult male slaves at the Havana market. The older, bearded white, 
Pedro Montes, had bought four child slaves, including three girls. On 
the fourth night at sea, the slaves managed to free themselves from their 
irons. In the ensuing struggle, the Africans killed the captain, Ramon 
Ferrer, and a mulatto cook. (According to the story later told by the 
Africans, the mulatto cook had told the slaves that they would be 
chopped to pieces and salted as meat for the Spaniards when the ship 
arrived at its destination.) Two crewman abandoned ship in the stern 
boat. Montes and Ruiz were spared, apparently because their help was 
thought necessary in steering the ship to Africa. Montes sailed toward 
Africa, but slowly and only during the day. At night, he reversed course 
and headed due west, hoping to landfall in the southern United States.


--- PAGE 41 ---
After six weeks of zig-zagging at sea, the Amistad arrived in New York. 
     (What Ruiz did not say was that the slaves were were recently 
brought from Africa and brought to Cuba in direct contravention of an 
1817 treaty between Spain and Britain prohibiting the importation of 
slaves to Spanish colonies. Using falsified passports, corrupt officials, 
and nighttime landings, slave traders often were successful in eluding 
the British ships that patrolled waters in an effort to enforce the 
importation ban.)  
     As Ruiz told his story, an athletic-looking black man, naked except 
for a gold necklace, suddenly appeared from below and leaped off the 
boat. The Washington gave chase, but the man was a strong swimmer, 
constantly diving as the ship neared. Tiring, the man took off his 
necklace, letting it--to the dismay of Gedney--fall to the bottom of the 
sea. Finally, crew members recaptured the black man, later known as 
Cinque, and put him into chains. The Amistad was towed to New 
London, Connecticut, where its arrival would dominate the news for 
weeks to come.  
     The United States Attorney for Connecticut, William S. Holabird, 
ordered a judicial hearing on the Washington. It was unclear to 
Holabird, as it was to many, whether a crime had been committed, who 
had committed it, or whether U. S. courts even had jurisdiction.  There 
was also the matter of salvage rights, which were claimed by Gedney 
and the Washington crew.  The Amistad's cargo of wine, saddles, gold, 
and silk was worth an estimated $40,000 in 1839 dollars, and the slaves 
had a market value of at least half that much.  
     The district judge for Connecticut was Andrew T. Judson, an 
appointee of then President Martin Van Buren. Judson was not likely to 
sympathize with the Africans, having six years earlier prosecuted a 
Connecticut schoolmistress for establishing a school for Negroes that 
Judson claimed violated a state law against encouraging black 
migration. (When the jury was unable to reach a verdict in the case, a 
mob set fire to the schoolmistress's house.) 
The Criminal Trial 
     On August 29, 1839, three days after the schooner's discovery, Judge 
Judson opened a hearing on complaints of murder and piracy filed by 
Montes and Ruiz.  Thirty-nine Africans (of the forty-three who had 
survived the weeks at sea) were present, including Cinque, who 
appeared wearing a red flannel shirt, white duck pants, and manacles.  
He appeared calm and mute, occasionally making a motion with his


--- PAGE 42 ---
hand to his throat to suggest a hanging.  
     The three principal witnesses at the hearing were the first mate of the 
Washington and Montes and Ruiz. The first mate described what 
happened when the Amistad was first boarded.  Montes and Ruiz 
described the mutiny and subsequent weeks at sea. Ruiz testified:  
"I took an oar and tried to quell the mutiny. I cried 'No! No!.' I then heard one of the 
crew cry murder. I then heard the captain order the cabin boy to go below and get 
some bread to throw among the negroes, hoping to pacify them. I did not see the 
captain killed."
  
Montes added his description of events on the fourth night at sea:  
"Between three and four was awakened by a noise which was caused by blows to the 
mulatto cook. I went on deck and they attacked me. I seized a stick and a knife with a 
view to defend myself....At this time [Cinque] wounded me on the head severely with 
one of the sugar knives, also on the arm. I then ran below and stowed myself between 
two barrels, wrapped up in a sail. [Cinque] rushed after me and attempted to kill me, 
but was prevented by the interference of another man....I was then taken on deck and 
tied to the hand of Ruiz."
  
     After listening to the testimony, Judge Judson referred the case for 
trial in Circuit Court, where in 1839 all federal criminal trials were held, 
and ordered the Africans put into custody at the county jail in New 
Haven. The Amistads became a huge attraction. As many as 5,000 
people a day visited the jail.  The jailer charged "one New York 
shilling" (about twelve cents) for close looks at the captives. The 
Africans also attracted scientific interest. A phrenologist examined the 
captives and took "life masks" which were later put on public display. 
The New Haven jail was relatively loose. Jailers took the children, 
"robust" and "full of hilarity," on wagon rides. The adults were allowed 
daily exercise on New Haven's green, where their cavorting, 
somersaults, and acrobatic leaps surprised residents unaccustomed to 
such public displays of exuberance.  
     For most New Englanders the Amistads were a curiosity. For a small, 
but growing, group of abolitionists, however, they were a cause and an 
opportunity. Abolitionist leader Lewis Tappan described the capture of 
the Africans as a "providential occurrence" that might allow "the heart 
of the nation" to be touched "through the power of sympathy." The 
"Amistad Committee" was quickly formed and soon the group had 
enlisted legal help, including that of Roger Baldwin, who would later 
become the governor of Connecticut.  
     Spain, meanwhile, pressed the United States to return the schooner to 
its Cuban owners, concede that the U. S. courts had no jurisdiction over 
Spanish subjects, and return the Amistads to Havana. The Van Buren


--- PAGE 43 ---
Administration was anxious to comply with the Spanish demands, but 
there was this matter of due process of law. The Administration, through 
District Attorney Holabird, crafted legal arguments that it hoped would 
produce the results sought by Spain.  
     On September 14, 1839, the Amistads were sent by canal boat and 
stage to Hartford for their trial in the Circuit courtroom of Judge Smith 
Thompson, who also served (as was then the custom for Circuit Court 
judges) as a justice on the United States Supreme Court. Holabird asked 
the court to turn all the prisoners over to the President and to let him 
decide this matter that bore heavily on the relations between great 
powers. Baldwin, for the defense, argued that "no power on earth has 
the right to reduce [the Africans] to slavery" and the United States 
should never stoop so low as to become a "slave-catcher for foreign 
slave-holders." Judge Thompson preferred to evade the larger debate 
over abolition and rested his decision on jurisdictional grounds. He 
decided after three days of argument that because the alleged mutiny 
and murders occurred in international waters and did not involve U.. S. 
citizens, the court had no jurisdiction to consider the criminal charges.  
     Were the slaves "property"? That was a matter, Judge Thompson 
ruled, that had to be decided first in the district court. Thompson ruled 
that the Africans, although no longer considered prisoners, should be 
detained until the district court could decide whether they were property 
and--if they were property--who owned them. 
The Civil Trial: Were the Amistads Property? 
     The defense devoted considerable time to the task of trying to locate 
someone familiar with the language spoken by the Africans. Dr. Josiah 
Gibbs, a Yale philologist, and a clergymen who trained the deaf and 
dumb examined the Africans. They concluded that the Amistads were 
Mende, from a region south of Freetown in what is now Sierra Leone. 
Gibbs learned to count in Mende, then wandered up and down the 
waterfronts of New York counting in Mende, looking for signs of 
recognition among the Africans he encountered. Finally his efforts were 
successful, and a Mende speaker, James Covey, was brought to New 
Haven.  
     The full story of the Africans' adventures began to come out. The 
Amistad captives had first met at a slave factory in Lomboko after 
having been kidnapped by African slavers. They along with about 600 
other Africans were loaded aboard the Portugeese ship Tecora and taken 
via the infamous "Middle Passage" across the Atlantic. The slaves were 
kept naked, flogged for not eating, and chained in a half-lying position. 
Many died and sea and were tossed overboard. Landing at night in


--- PAGE 44 ---
Havana, they were taken to the "barracoon," or slave market where ten 
days later they were bought by Ruiz and Montes. On the fourth night of 
the Amistad's voyage, Cinque used a nail to break the chain that 
fastened all the slaves to the wall, and the mutiny began.  
     Life in Connecticut for the Amistads began to take on a semblance of 
normalcy. For two to five hours a day they were instructed in English 
and theology by students of the Yale Divinity school. Bonds between 
some of the Africans and their teachers began to develop. Still, it was a 
trying time for many of the Amistads, experiencing their first harsh 
weather, exposed to new diseases, and the length of their separation 
from their homeland growing with no end in sight. Tu-a became the first 
African to die in New Haven, occasioning a raucous funeral that raised 
many New Englanders' eyebrows.  
    The Amistad civil trial began on November 19, 1839 in Hartford. 
After two days of testimony, the trial was adjourned until January 7, 
1840. In the New Haven harbor was the naval schooner Grampus, sent 
there by President Van Buren to sail the Amistads back to Cuba should 
the court rule, as expected, in the government's favor. Van Buren's 
secret orders provided that the Africans were to be rushed immediately 
to the ship and placed in irons before an appeal could be filed, and that 
the Grampus should sail for Havana unless an "appeal shall actually 
have been interposed."  
     Baldwin and the Amistads' lawyers produced several witnesses to 
support their claim that the Africans were illegally imported from Africa 
and were therefore the property of no one. Dr. Gibbs, as a linguistics 
expert, testified that the Amistads spoke Mende, not Spanish. Cinque 
and Grabeau, another of the Africans, recounted (through James Covey, 
their interpreter) the story of their capture, voyage across the Atlantic, 
sale in Havana, mutiny, and eventual arrival in Long Island. Spectators 
reportedly listened to Cinque "with breathless attention." The New 
Haven Herald reported that he "manifested a high degree of sagacity, of 
keenness, and decision." Sullivan Haley testified that Ruiz, now back in 
Cuba, had admitted that the captives were not legal slaves. Francis 
Bacon, a local resident who had visited the west African coast in the 
summer of 1839 described how Lomboko was frequented by Cuban 
traders and how the slave trade was "the universal business of the 
country." (The slave factory at Lomboko, incidentally, had been raided 
by the British one month before the trial, and all slaves held there had 
been liberated.) Baldwin also introduced the deposition of Dr. Richard 
Madden, an abolitionist and the British anti-slavery commissioner in 
Cuba. He described how Cuban authorities "winked at the slave trade in 
return for $10 to $15 a slave," used fraudulent documents to deceive 
inspectors, and would without hesitation kill the Amistad blacks should


--- PAGE 45 ---
they be returned to Cuba. (LINK TO MADDEN DEPOSITION)(After 
giving his deposition, Madden returned to London where, in an audience 
with Queen Victoria, he explained the facts surrounding the Amistad 
Affair.)  
     District Attorney Holabird introduced statements from the Spanish 
consul urging that the Amistads be returned to Spain and presented 
testimony and depositions of crew members of the Washington 
describing their discovery and capture of the Amistad , while Gedney's 
counsel tried to establish that Cinque was himself a slave trader.  
      Judge Judson announced his decision on January 13, 1840, after a 
weekend of deliberation. He ruled that the Amistad captives were "born 
free" and kidnapped in violation of international law. They had 
mutinied, he said, out of a "desire of winning their liberty and of 
returning to their families and kindred." He ordered that the Amistads be 
"delivered to President Van Buren for transport back to Africa." He 
ended his opinion with the observation, "Cinque and Grabeau shall not 
sigh for Africa in vain. Bloody as may be their hands, they shall yet 
embrace their kindred." The Grampus sailed out of New Haven harbor 
without its black passengers. Van Buren was described as "greatly 
dissatisfied." 
The Adminstration's Appeal to the Supreme Court 
     The Administration appealed Judson's decision, but it was affirmed 
by Circuit Judge Thompson.  The Administration again appealed, this 
time to the United States Supreme Court, where five of the nine justices 
were southerners who either owned or had owned slaves.  
     After an appeal was made to the Supreme Court, Lewis Tappan 
visited John Quincy Adams at his home in Massachusetts in an effort to 
persuade "Old Man Eloquent" to argue the Africans case in Washington. 
Former President Adams, then 74 and a member of Congress, at first 
resisted, pleading age and infirmity. But Adams believed firmly in the 
rightness of the cause, and eventually agreed to join Baldwin in 
arguments before the Court. "By the blessing of God, I will argue the 
case before the Supreme Court," Adams was quoted as saying. That 
October, 1840 date he wrote in his diary: "I implore the mercy of God to 
control my temper, to enlighten my soul, and to give me utterance, that I 
may prove myself in every respect equal to the task."  
     The next month Adams stopped by Westville, near New Haven, to 
visit his clients. He found them all in a thirty-foot-by- twenty-foot room, 
taken up almost entirely by thirty-six cots. Adams shook hands with 
Cinque and Grabeau, telling them "God willing, we will make you


--- PAGE 46 ---
free."  Later, Adams would receive touching letters from two of the 
younger Africans, Ka-le and Kin-na.  
     On Monday, February 22, 1841, arguments began in the Supreme 
Court's crowded chamber in the U.S. Capitol. (Among those in 
attendance was Francis Scott Key, author of the Star Spangled Banner 
and now an attorney, who approached Adams and offered his advice on 
the case.) Attorney General Henry Gilpin, arguing for the government, 
told the Court that it should not "go behind" the Amistad's papers and 
make inquiry as to their accuracy, but should accept them on their face 
in order to show proper respect for another sovereign nation. Roger 
Baldwin followed Gipin, making many of the same arguments that been 
persuasive in the district and circuit courts. (LINK TO BALDWIN 
ARGUMENT). John Quincy Adams began his argument on February 
24th.  He did not disappoint. He argued that if the President had the 
power to send the Africans to Cuba, he would equally as well have the 
power to seize forty Americans and send them overseas for trial. He 
argued that Spain was asking the President to "first turn man-
robber,...next turn jailer,... and lastly turn catchpole and convey them to 
Havana, to appease the vengeance of the African slave-traders of the 
barracoons." He attacked the President for his ordering a naval vessel to 
stand ready in New Haven harbor, he attacked a southern intellectual's 
defense of slavery, and he quoted the Declaration of Independence: 
"The moment you come to the Declaration of Independence, that every 
man has a right to life and liberty, an inalienable right, this case is 
decided. I ask nothing more in behalf of these unfortunate men than this 
Declaration."  
    
  Adams ended his Supreme Court argument on a personal, reflective 
note:  
"May it please your Honors: On the 7th of February, 1804, now more than thirty-seven 
years past, my name was entered, and yet stands recorded, on both the rolls, as one of 
the Attorneys and Counselors of this Court. Five years later, in February and March, 
1809, I appeared for the last time before this Court, in defense of the cause of justice, 
and of important rights, in which many of my fellow-citizens had property to a large 
amount at stake. Very shortly afterwards, I was called to the discharge of other duties--
first in distant lands, and in later years, within our own country, but in different 
departments of her Government. Little did I imagine that I should ever again be 
required to claim the right of appearing in the capacity of an office of this Court; yet 
such has been the dictate of my destiny--and I appear again to plead the cause of 
justice and now of liberty and life, in behalf of many of my fellow men, before the 
same Court, which in a former age, I had addressed in support of rights of property. I 
stand again, I trust for the last time, before the same Court--hic caestus, artemque 
repono. I stand before the same Court, but not before the same judges--nor aided by 
the same associates--nor resisted by the same opponents. As I cast my eyes along those 
seats of honor and of public trust, now occupied you, they seek in vain for one of those 
honored and honorable persons whose indulgence listened then to my voice. Marshall-
-Cushing--Chase--Washington--Johnson--Livingston--Todd-- Where are they? . . .


--- PAGE 47 ---
Where is the marshal--where are the criers of the Court? Alas! where is one of the very 
judges of the Court, arbiters of life and death, before whom I commenced this anxious 
argument, even now prematurely closed? Where are they all? Gone! Gone! All gone!-- 
Gone from the services which, in their day and generation, they faithfully rendered to 
their country. . . . In taking, then, my final leave of this Bar, and of this Honorable 
Court, I can only ejaculate a fervent petition to Heaven, that every member of it may 
go to his final account with as little of earthly frailty to answer for as those illustrious 
dead, and that you may, every one, after the close of a long and virtuous career in this 
world, be received at the portals of the next with the approving sentence, ‘Well done, 
good and faithful servant; enter thou into the joy of they Lord.'"
  
     On March 9, 1841, the Supreme Court announced its decision.  
Justice Story, speaking for the Court, said that the Amistads were 
"kidnapped Africans, who by the laws of Spain itself were entitled to 
their freedom." As justification for the Court's decision, Justice Story 
relied largely on the narrower arguments of Roger Baldwin, rather than 
the "interesting remarks" of John Quincy Adams. (LINK TO SCT 
DECISION) The Africans were free: they could stay or they could 
return to Africa. (The decision was, of course, by no means a  
repudiation of slavery, and clearly implied that if the Amistads had been 
brought from Africa prior to the 1820 treaty banning importation of 
slaves, they would have been considered property of Ruiz and Montes 
and been returned to Cuba.)  
     Reactions to the decision varied. Adams wrote that he was filled with 
"great joy." The Amistads were described as "ecstatic." Lewis Tappan 
and other evangelical abolitionists saw an opportunity for the Amistads 
to become the key to an effort to bring Christianity to black Africa. The 
Spanish government angered and somewhat mystified by the Court's 
action, began a long series of unsuccessful diplomatic efforts to obtain 
indemnification for loss of the Amistad and the her cargo. 
Epilogue 
     Efforts began to raise the money necessary to transport the Amistads 
back to their Mende homeland.  Some local residents complained when 
the need for money caused some of the Africans to begin to charge for 
jumping, talking, and singing. Cinque asked $3 for a song. The Amistad 
Committee put together a sort of traveling show, holding church 
"meetings" in which the Africans would describe their homes and their 
kidnapping, sing native songs, and read from the Bible. Cinque quickly 
developed a reputation as a powerful orator.  
     The Amistads, strangers in a strange land, were not without their 
problems. One of the Amistads, Fon-ne, drowned in a pond, an apparent 
suicide. Grabeau was the victim of an assault. Others were the victims 
of racial taunts. Cinque was involved in a brawl with some local 
rowdies. It was, everyone recognized, time to go. Tappan redoubled


--- PAGE 48 ---
efforts to recruit missionaries to accompany the Africans back to Sierra 
Leone.  
     In November, 1841, the ship Gentleman was chartered for $1840 to 
carry the Africans back to Freetown, where the Governor of Sierra 
Leone said the group would be met and guided on a four day journey to 
Mendeland. After a moving and tearful round of goodbyes, the thirty-
five surviving Africans of the Amistad and four American missionaries 
boarded the Gentleman, bound for West Africa. (Only one African, 
Sarah, would ever return to America. She attended Oberlin College.)  
     After fifty days at sea, the Gentleman put down anchor in Freetown 
harbor. It didn't take long for the missionaries to realize they had their 
work cut out for them. After disembarking, some of the Africans began 
to strip and engage in "heathenish dancing." British missionaries in 
Freetown told the Americans that their plan to establish a mission in 
Mendeland was folly.  Soon the missionaries wrote letters complaining 
of their Amistad students: some fell back to their "licentious habits," 
some disappeared, some were just trouble. Others, such as Kin-na, were 
clearly torn by the pull of two different worlds, becoming an ordained 
minister but practicing polygamy.  The missionaries also contended with 
rats (Brother Raymond killed 164 in a single day), the 175 annual inches 
of rain, malaria and yellow fever ("black vomit.") One by one, the 
missionaries died and were replaced by others. With the new arrivals, 
the character of the mission might also change. Tolerance might turn to 
hell-fire and ex-communication.  
    The last of the Amistad Africans to have contact with the mission was 
Cinque. In 1879, old and emaciated, he stumbled into the mission to die 
and was buried among the graves of the American missionaries.  
     Although every American President from the time of the Amistad 
decision of the Supreme Court until 1860 urged that Spain be 
compensated, efforts to appropriate funds for such a purpose were 
consistently stymied in the House. John Quincy Adams led the 
opposition to compensation efforts until his death in 1847, calling the 
proposal "a robbery of the people of the United States." With the 
election of Abraham Lincoln in 1860, Spain's efforts came to an end. 
For a more detailed essay on the Amistad case, see:  
Stamped With Glory: Lewis Tappan and the Amistad Trials  
LINK TO MAIN AMISTAD PAGE


--- PAGE 49 ---
Newspaper Accounts 
The following account appeared in the New London Gazette of August 
26,1839:  
While this vessel was sounding this day between Gardner’s and Montauk 
Points, a schooner was seen lying in shore off Culloden Point, under 
circumstances so suspicious as to authorize Lt. Com. Gedney to stand in 
to see what was her character--seeing a number of people on the beach 
with carts and horses, and a boat passing to and fro a boat was armed 
and dispached with an officer to board her.
  
On coming along side a number of negroes were discovered on her deck, 
and twenty or thirty more were on the beach--two white men came forward 
and claimed the protection of the officer. The schooner proved to be 
the “Amistad,” Capt. Ramonflues, from the Havana bound to Guanaja, Port 
Principe, with 54 blacks and two passengers on board ; the former, four 
nights after they were out, rose and murdered the captain and three of 
the crew ; they then took possession of the vessel with the intention 
of returning to the coast of Africa. Pedro Montes, passenger, and Jose 
Rues owner of the slaves and part of the cargo, were only saved to 
navigate the vessel.
  
After boxing about for four days in the Bahama Channel the vessel was


--- PAGE 50 ---
steered for the Island of St. Andrews, near New Providence ; from 
thence she went to Green Key, where the blacks laid in a supply of 
water. After leaving this place the vessel was steered by Pedro Montes 
for New Providence, the negroes being under the impression that she was 
steering for the coast of Africa--they would not, however, permit her 
to enter the port but anchored every night off the coast.
  
The situation of the two whites was all this time truly deplorable, 
being treated with the greatest severity, and Pedro Montes, who had 
charge of the navigation, was suffering from two severe wounds, one in 
the head and one in the arm, their lives threatened every instant. He 
was ordered to change the course again for the coast of Africa, the 
negroes themselves steering by the sun in the day time, while at night 
he would alter their course so as to bring them back to their original 
place of destination.--They remained three days off Long Island, to the 
Eastward of Providence, after which time they were two months on the 
ocean, sometimes steering to the Eastward, and whenever an occasson 
[sic] would permit the whites would alter the course to the Northward 
and Westward, always in hopes of falling in with some vessel of war, or 
being enabled to run into some port, when they would be relieved from 
their horrid situation.
  
Several times they were boarded by vessels ; once by an American 
schooner from Kingston. On these occasions the whites were ordered 
below, while the negroes communicated and traded with the vessel ; the 
schooner from Kingston supplied them with a demijohn of water, for the 
moderate sum of one doubloon--this schooner, whose name was not 
ascertained, finding that the negroes had plenty of money, remained 
lashed alongside the “Amistad” for twenty-four hours, though they must 
have been aware that all was not right on board, and probably suspected 
the character of the vessel--that was on the 18th of the present month 
; the vessel was steered to the northward and westward, and on the 20th 
instant, distant from N.Y. 25 miles, the pilot boat No. 3 came 
alongside and gave the negroes some apples. She was also hailed by No. 
4 ; when the latter boat came near, the negroes armed themselves and 
would not permit her to board them ; they were so exasperated with the 
two whites for bringing them so much out of their way that they 
expected every moment to be murdered.
  
On the 24th they made Montauk Light and steered for it in the hope of 
running the vessel ashore, but the tide drifted them up the bay and 
they anchored where they were found by the brig Washington, off 
Culloden point. The negroes were found in communication with shore, 
where they laid in a fresh supply of water, and were on the point of 
sailing again for the coast of Africa. They had a god supply of money 
with them, some of which it is likely was taken by the people on the 
beach.--After they were disarmed, and sent on board from the beach, the 
ringleader jumped overboard with three hundred doubloons about him, the 
property of the captain, all of which he succeeded in loosing from his 
person and then permitted himself to be captured. The schooner was 
taken in tow by the brig and carried into New London.
  
TUESDAY, 12 o’clock, M. 
We have just returned from a visit to the Washington and her prize, 
which are riding at anchor in the bay, near the fort. On board the 
former we saw and conversed with the two Spanish gentlemen who were 
passengers on board the schooner, as well as owners of the negroes and 
most of the cargo.


--- PAGE 51 ---
One of them, Jose Rues, is very gentlemanly and intelligent young man, 
and speaks English fluently. He was the owner of most of the slaves and 
cargo, which he was conveying to his estate on the Island of Cuba.  
he other, Pedro Montes, is about fifty years of age, and is the owner 
of three slaves. He was formerly a ship-master, and has navigated the 
vessel since her seizure by the blacks. Both of them, as may be 
naturally supposed are most unfeignedly thankful for their deliverance. 
Signor Pedro is the most striking instance of complacency and unalloyed 
delight we ever have seen, and it is not strange, since only yesterday 
his sentence was pronounced by the chief of the buccaniers, and his 
death song chanted by the grim crew, who gathered with uplifted sabres 
around his devoted head, which, as well as his arms, bear the scars of 
several wounds inflicted at the time of the murder of the ill-fated 
captain and crew.
  
He sat smoking his Havana on the deck, and, to junge [sic] from the 
martyr-like serenity of his countenance, his emotions are such as 
rarely stir the heart of man. When Mr. Porter, the prize-master, 
assured him of his safety, he threw his arms around his neck, while 
gushing tears coursing down his furrowed cheek, bespoke the overflowing 
transport of his soul Every now and then he clasps his hands, and with 
uplifted eyes gives thanks to “the Holy Virgin” who had led him out of 
all his troubles.
  
Senor Rues has given us two letters for his agents. Messrs, Shelton, 
Brothers & Co., of Boston, and Peter A. Harmony & Co., of New York. It 
appears that the slaves, the greater portion of whom were his, were 
very much attached to him, and had determined, after reaching the coast 
of Africa, to allow him to seek his home what way he could, while his 
poor companion was to be sacrificed.
  
On board the brig we also saw Cingues, the master-spirit and hero of 
this bloody tragedy, in irons. He is about five feet eight inches in 
height, 25 or 26 years of age, of erect figure, well built, and very 
active. He is said to be a match for any two men on board the schooner. 
His countenance, for a native African, is unusually intelligent, 
evincing uncommon decision and coolness, with a composure 
characteristic of true courage and nothing to mark him as a malicious 
man. He is a negro who would command, in New Orleans, under the hammer, 
at least $1,500.
  
He is said to have killed the captain and crew with his own hand, by 
cutting their throats. He also has several times attempted to take the 
life of Senor Montes, and the backs of several poor negroes are scored 
with the scars of blows inflicted by his lash to keep them in 
submission. He expects to be executed, but nevertheless manifests a 
sang froid worthy of a Sto[ne] under similar circumstances.
  
With Capt. Gedney, the surgeon of the port, and others, we visited the 
schooner, which is anchored within musket shot of the Washington, and 
there we saw such a sight as we never saw before, and never wish to see 
again. The bottom and sides of this vessel are covered with barnacles 
and sea-grass, while her rigging and sales [sic] present a scene worthy 
of the Flying Dutchman, after her fabled cruise. She is a Baltimore 
built vessel of matchless model for speed, about 120 tons burthen and 
about six years old.
  
On her deck were grouped, amid various goods and arms, the remnant of 
her Ethiop crew, some decked in the most fantastic manner in the silks 
and finery pilfered from the cargo while others, in a state of nudity, 
emaciated to mere skeletons, lay coiled upon the decks. Here could be


--- PAGE 52 ---
seen a negro with white pantaloons and the sable shirt which nature 
gave him, and a planter’s broad-brimmed hat upon his head, with a 
string of gewgaws around his neck ; and another with a linen cambric 
shirt, whose bosom was worked by the hand of some dark-eyed daughter of 
Spain, while his nether proportions were enveloped in a shawl of gauze 
and Canton crape. Around the windlass were gathered the three little 
girls, from eight to thirteen years of age, the very images of health 
and gladness.
  
Over the deck were scattered, in the most wanton and disorderly 
profusion, raisins, vermicelli, bread, rice, silk, and cotton goods. In 
the cabin and hold were the marks of the same wasteful destruction --
Her cargo appears to consist of silks, crapes, calicoes, cotton and 
fancy goods of various descriptions, glass and hardware, bridles, 
saddles, holsters, pictures, looking-glasses, books, fruits, olives, 
and olive oil, and “other things too numerous to mention,” which are 
now all mixed up in a strange and fantastic medldy [sic].
  
On the forward hatch we unconsciously rested our hand on a cold object, 
which we soon discovered to be a naked corpse enveloped in a pall of 
black bombazine. On removing its folds we beheld the rigid countenance 
and glazed eye of a poor negro who died last night. His mouth was 
unclosed, and still wore the ghastly expression of his last struggle. 
Near by him, like some watching fiend, sat the most horrible creature 
we ever saw in human shape, an object of terror to the very blacks, who 
said that he was a cannibal. His teeth projected at almost right angles 
from his mouth, while his eyes had a most savage and demoniac 
expression.
  
We were glad to leave this vessel, as the exhalations from her hold and 
deck were like anything but “gales wafted over the gardens of Gul.” 
Capt. Gedney has dispatched an express to the U. S. marshal, at New 
Haven, while he has made the most humane arrangements for the health 
and comfort of the prisoners, and the purification of the prize. There 
are now alive 44 negroes, three of whom are girls ; about 10 have died. 
They have been at sea 63 days.
  
The vessel and cargo were worth $40,000 when they let Havana, exclusive 
of the negroes, which cost from 20 to $30,000. Vessel and cargo were 
insured in Havana.
  
Capt. Gedney, when he first espied the Amistad, was running a line of 
sounding toward Montauk Point. He had heard nothing of this vessel 
being on the coast till after his arrival in this port.
  
   
As the Amistad sailed along the eastern coast of the United States 
several pilot boats began running across it. The Columbian Centinel 
reported this description of the encounter between the Amistad and the 
pilot boat, Gratitude, as reported by Captain Seaman of the Gratitude:  
She spoke the long, low, black schooner twenty-five miles East of Fire 
Island and about eighteen miles from the land, standing E.N.E. The 
Gratitude ran within a few yards of her with the intention of putting a 
pilot aboard. Two or three of the blacks, who appeared to be the 
ringleaders and kept the others in awe, made signs to the pilot not to 
come. One had a pistol in one hand and a cutlass in the other, which he 
flourished over his head to keep the others down. These appeared to be 
very anxious to receive a pilot and when the eye of the fellow who had 
the pistol was aft of them, they would beckon the pilot to come aboard. 
The schooner held a name on her stern which they took to be Almeda. She


--- PAGE 53 ---
had a small gilt eaglehead. The latest news from the suspicious vessel 
is that on Saturday at sunset she was off the end of Long Island, 
Montauk Point, North by East, twenty miles distant. She was standing 
east with sail she was able to make.
  
After the capture of the Amistad by the crew of the Washington, Jose 
Ruiz and Pedro Montes wrote a letter addressed to the newspaper 
subscribers of the New London, Connecticut which was published in local 
newspapers:  
The subscribers, Don Jose Ruiz and Don Pedro Montes, in gratitude for 
their most unhoped for and most providential rescue from the hands of a 
ruthless gang of African buccaneers, and an awful death, would take 
this means of expressing, in some slight degree, their thankfulness and 
obligations to Lieutenant Commander T.R. Gedney, and the officers and 
crew of the U.S. surveying brig Washington, for their decision in 
seizing the Amistad, and their unremitting kindness and hospitality in 
providing for their comfort on board their vessel, as well as the means 
they have taken for the protection of their property.
  
We also must express our indebtedness to that nation whose flag they so 
worthily bear, with an assurance that this act will be duly appreciated 
by our most gracious sovereign, Her Majesty the Queen of Spain.  
The Hartford Courant published an article expressing the opinion that 
no legal grounds for action against the Amistad Africans existed:
  
By the laws of the United States, the African slave trade is declared 
to be piracy and the persons engaged in it are liable to be punished as 
pirates. It would be very extraordinary then if these men, who had been 
stolen from their own country, and brought away for the purpose of 
being reduced to slavery, should be punished in the United States for 
using such means as they possessed to extricate themselves from the 
power and custody of men who gained that custody by the perpetration of 
a crime which by our laws would cost them their lives. It would be a 
singular case if both parties in the same transaction should be held 
guilty of a capital offense and suffer the same penalty of the law for 
their crimes.
  
The description of conditions on the slave ship during the journey from 
Africa given by Gilabaru, as translated by James Covey, to reporters 
and published in the New York Journal of Commerce:
  
On board the vessel there was a large number of men, but the women and 
children were by far the most numerous. They were fastened together by 
couples by the wrists and legs and kept in that situation day and 
night. By day it was no better. The space between the decks was so 
small - according to their account not exceeding four feet - that they 
were obliged, if they attempted to stand, to keep a crouching posture. 
The decks, fore and aft, were crowded to overflowing. They suffered 
terribly. They had rice enough to eat but they had very little to 
drink. If they left any of the rice that was given to them uneaten, 
either from sickness or any other cause, they were whipped. It was a 
common thing for them to be forced to eat so much as to vomit. Many of 
the men, women and children died on the passage.


--- PAGE 54 ---
John Quincy Adams expressed the following in a letter dated November 
19, 1839 written to and published in the New York Journal of Commerce:  
The Africans of the Amistad were cast upon our coast in a condition 
perhaps as calamitous as could befall human beings, not by their own 
will - not with any intention hostile or predatory on their part, not 
even by the act of God as in the case of shipwreck, but by their own 
ignorance of navigation and the deception of one of their oppressors 
whom they had overpowered, and whose life they had spared to enable 
them by his knowledge of navigation to reach their native land.
  
They were victims of the African slave trade, recently imported into 
the island of Cuba, in gross violation of the laws of the Island and of 
Spain; and by acts which our own laws have made piracy - punishable 
with death. They had indicated their natural right to liberty, by 
conspiracy, insurrection, homicide and capture and they were accused by 
the two Cuban Spaniards embarked with them in the ship, of murder and 
piracy - and they were claimed by the same two Cuban Spaniards, 
accessories after the fact to the slave-trade piracy, by which they had 
been brought from Africa to Cuba, as their property, because they had 
bought them from slave-trade pirates.
  
They knew nothing of the Constitution, laws or language of the country 
upon which they were thus thrown, and accused as pirates and murderers, 
claimed as slaves of the very men who were their captives, they were 
deprived even of the faculty of speech in their own defense. This 
condition was sorely calamitous; it claimed from the humanity of a 
civilized nation compassion; - it claimed from brotherly love of a 
Christian land sympathy; - it claimed from a Republic professing 
reverence for the rights of man justice - and what have we done?
  
A naval officer of the United States seizes them, their ship and cargo, 
with themselves; tramples on the territorial jurisdiction of the state 
of New York, by seizing, disarming and sending on board their ship, 
without warrant of arrest, several of them whom he found on shore; 
releases their captives; admits the claim of the two captives to fifty 
masters as their slaves; and claims salvage for restoring them to 
servitude. They are then brought before a court of the United States, 
at once upon the charge of piracy and murder, upon a claim to them as 
slaves, and upon a claim against their pretended masters for salvage, 
by kidnapping them again into slavery. The Circuit Judge decides that 
the United States do not exercise the right of all other civilized 
nations to try piracies committed in foreign vessels; that he thereupon 
cannot try them for piracy or murder, but that the District Court may 
try whether they are slaves or not; as it is doubtful whether this 
trial will be held in Connecticut or New York, and it must take time to 
ascertain in which, they shall in the mean time be held as slaves to 
abide the issue.
  
Is this compassion? Is it sympathy? Is it justice? But here the case 
now stands.
  
On February 10, 1840 the Hartford Courant published an article 
attacking President Martin Van Buren for his stand on the Amistad case.


--- PAGE 55 ---
We are informed by a gentleman from New Haven that a short time 
previous to the trial of the Africans of the Amistad, before the U.S. 
District Court at New Haven, Judge Judson presiding, Martin Van Buren 
addressed a letter to the Judge recommending and urging him to order 
the Africans to be taken back to Havana in a government vessel, to be 
sold there as slaves - and that about the same time the U.S. schooner 
Grampus was ordered to New Haven for the purpose of receiving them. The 
schooner, we learned from several sources, arrived at New Haven about 
the time of the trial under "sealed orders" and, after learning the 
decision of the court again, "made off." The letter of the President, 
recommending that these poor unfortunate Africans be sent into 
perpetual bondage, is said to contain statements disgraceful to the 
high station of its author, and which, were they published, would 
excite the indignation of every Republican freeman in the land. What 
will the friends of liberty say to this? Surely Martin Van Buren is 
playing the part of a tyrant with a high hand - else why this tampering 
with our courts of justice, this Executive usurpation, and this 
heartless violation of the inalienable rights of man? Of the truth of 
the above there is no doubt, and we leave the unprincipled author of 
such a proceeding in the hands of a just and high-minded People.
  
A letter to the New London Gazette from an unidentified writer provided 
additional information regarding the arrival of the Grampus in New 
Haven at the time of the trial.  
Now, sir it appears to me to be of little consequence to know whether 
instructions came from Washington or whether the case was decided 
before trial and its decision transmitted thither - if either 
supposition be true (and the facts have a strong squinting that way) 
the people should know it. The stride which the President has made 
towards universal power in other branches of the government render it 
by no means improbable that he has at length assumed the duties of the 
Judiciary, and that the case was decided at Washington long before the 
trial, and the Grampus held in readiness to remove the Negroes the 
moment the court completes the forms of the trial.
  
I cannot hope, sir, that this view of the subject is a mistaken one; 
for if it be true, our Federal Courts have become the mere instruments 
of the President, and if this case was prejudged without hearing either 
of the testimony or argument, what security is left us for our property 
or liberties?
  
Until the movements of the Grampus are explained there will remain in 
the minds of many, even of those who are friends of the Administration, 
a painful suspicion of foul play.
  
A reporter for the Boston Recorder described the Amistad Africans after 
visiting them in Westville as follows:
  
With one or two exceptions, they all have active minds and are quick, 
shrewd and intelligent. They possess deep and warm affections. Their 
love of Africa and home is very strong; in reply to a question put to 
two of the most intelligent of their number, the instant and deep-
feeling answer was, "Tell the American people that we very, very much 
want to go home." Poor fellows! Who can doubt it?


--- PAGE 56 ---
LINK TO MAIN AMISTAD PAGE 
 
The Amistad Case: A Chronology 
1837 - 1839: 25,000 Africans brought to Cuba as slaves.  
April 1839: Cinque captured by other Africans, taken to the slave factory in 
Lomboko and sold to a Portuguese slave trader.  
April - June 1839: Cinque and others resold to another slave trader and put 
aboard the Tecora which sailed to Cuba.  
June 1839: Cinque and others sold to Ruiz and Montes in Havana, Cuba. 
Amistad leaves Havana for Guanaja with slaves and owners.  
July 1839: Mutiny led by Cinque; Amistad's captain and cook killed while two 
crewmen escape; Africans control Amistad.  
July - August 1839: Amistad steered by Montes east by day and northwest by 
night, toward United States.  
August 1839: Amistad captured by crew of U.S.S. Washington off of Long 
Island, New York; Africans held and taken with Amistad to New London, 
Connecticut; Judicial hearing, presided over by Judge Judson, on the U.S. S. 
Washington; Africans await trial in a New Haven, Connecticut jail.  
September 1839: Lewis Tappan forms Friend of Amistad Africans Committee; 
Judge Thompson presides in Circuit Court hearing on Amistad criminal case; 
case dismissed by Judge Thompson for jurisdictional reasons; civil case left for 
District Court resolution.  
October 1839: Professor Josiah Gibbs locates interperter, James Covey, and the 
Africans are able to tell their story; teaching Africans the English language and 
Christianity began; Cinque and others file charges of assualt and false 
imprisonment against Ruiz and Montes.  
November 1839: District Court meets and postpones case.


--- PAGE 57 ---
December 1839: Slave factory at Lomboko, Sierra Leone raided by British and 
all slaves there liberated.  
January 8, 1840: The Amistad civil trial begins in New Haven.  
January 15, 1840: Judge Hudson presiding in District Court rules the Africans 
are to be turned over to the President for return to Africa.  
August 1840: Africans taken to Westville.  
September 1840: Judge Thompson of the Circuit Court upholds District Court 
decision; government appeals to U.S. Supreme Court.  
October 1840: John Quincy Adams convinces to join Roger Baldwin in 
arguing the case for the Africans before the Supreme Court.  
Feb. - March 1841: Baldwin and Adams argue case before Supreme Court; 
Court orders Africans to be freed immediately.  
Mar. - Nov. 1841: Freed Africans go to Farmington for further English and 
religious education; local committee plans mission establishment in Africa.  
November 1841: African survivors leave with missionaries for Africa aboard 
Gentleman.  
January 1842: Arrive in Sierra Leone; mission experiences problems; many of 
the Africans abandon missionaries.  
1846: Brother Raymond, founder of the mission in Sierra Leone dies of yellow 
fever and is replaced by George Thomas; 68 students attend the mission; efforts 
to compensate Spain for the Amistad are opposed in the House by John Quincy 
Adams.  
1860: With the election of Abraham Lincoln as President, efforts to compensate 
Spain for the Amistad incident come to an end.  
1879: Cinque, old and emaciated, comes to the mission to die and is buried 
among the graves of American missionaries.  
LINK TO MAIN AMISTAD PAGE 
 
Biographies of Players in the Amistad Affair


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Amistad Captives  
Cinque  
Others  
 
Cuban Slaveholders  
Pedro Montes  
Jose Ruiz  
 
Attorneys for the Amistads  
Roger Baldwin  
John Quincy Adams  
 
U. S. District Attorney  
William Holabird  
 
Government Leaders  
President Martin Van Buren  
Secretary of State John Forsyth  
 
Other Key Players  
Richard Madden, Anti-Slavery Comm'n.  
Josiah Gibbs, Linquitics Prof.  
James Covey, Interpreter  
 
The Judges  
Andrew Judson  
Smith Thompson  
Justice Joseph Story  
 
The Missionaries  
Lewis Tappan  
William Raymond  
 
 
CINQUE


--- PAGE 59 ---
Cinque was born the son of a Mendi village leader in the village of Mani in West 
Africa. He was trained to assume his father's leadership role from childhood, 
learning the Mendi way of life and laws of the Mendi people. But Cinque was never 
to lead his people. 
Cinque's fate took a different path when he was taken captive by African tribesmen 
of the Ley people, due to impatience of a creditor for payment of a debt owed by 
Cinque. Cinque was taken to a "slave factory" in Gallinas where he was sold to a 
Spanish slave trader. He was subsequently resold and placed on the Tecora, a slave 
trade ship.  
The Tecora sailed to Havana, Cuba, where Cinque was briefly held. He was 
subsequently sold to Pedro Ruiz, along with 49 other men and four children. The 53 
Africans were placed aboard the Spanish coasting vessel La Amistad (The 
Friendship) to be taken to Porta Prince. 
The Amistad sailed on June 27, 1839 with a crew consisting of the Captain, two 
Spanish crewmen, a Creole slave, and a mulatto slave (cook). The two new 
"owners" of the slaves, Montes and Ruiz, were also aboard. The journey was 
expected to take two and one half to three days, however, storms slowed the 
progress of the Amistad and, recognizing the journey would be longer than 
anticipated, the Captain had provision rationing begin on the third day. The 
crewmen also became abusive to slaves who asked for more food and began flogging 
several of them. On the fourth day the cook told the some of the Africans that they 
would be killed and eaten on arrival at Porta Prince. Cinque and the others already 
feared such an act and, on receiving this information, Cinque resolved to take the 
ship, if an opportunity arose. 
Cinque spoke with several of his comrades and, although all were not of the same 
tribal heritage and could not completely understand one another, the entire group 
of men agreed the ship must be taken. Cinque located a loose nail in the decking of 
the Amistad when he was taken on deck to eat. He concealed this nail and later used


--- PAGE 60 ---
it to unlocked the shackles which bound him below deck. He freed the others from 
their chains and they proceeded to the cargo hold where they found sugarcane 
knives in crates. The Africans armed themselves and under Cinque's leadership 
moved against the Captain and cook, who slept on deck. The Captain awoke and 
briefly fought the Africans before being killed by Cinque. The cook was also killed. 
The two Spanish crewmen fled the ship aboard a skiff. 
Cinque took command and managed to convey to Montes that he wished the ship 
steered east to Africa. Montes steered east during the day and northwest, toward the 
United States, at night. Cinque maintained command of the vessel, sometimes 
through use of force, until it and all survivors were taken captive by the crew of the 
U.S. Washington on August 26, 1839. Cinque had been ashore foraging with others 
when the Washington approached and was taken captive as he returned to the 
Amistad. 
Cinque was identified as the leader by Ruiz and Montes. He was subsequently taken 
aboard the Washington, as he attempted to arouse the Africans to rebel against 
these new captors while on board the Amistad. An arraignment was held before 
then Circuit Judge Judson and the Africans were ordered held for trial without 
bond based on the testimony of Ruiz that they were slaves who, during mutiny, had 
murdered the captain and cook. 
The Africans were taken to New Haven where they were held in jail with Cinque 
being separated from them to prevent him from stirring them to rebel. Cinque 
continued to be recognized as the group's leader throughout the court proceedings 
associated with the Amistad Africans. He learned a great deal of English while in 
the U.S. as well as learning about Christianity. 
Cinque returned to Africa with missionaries and the remaining Amistad survivors. 
After his return he discovered that his family could not be found and his entire 
village had been destroyed. It is suspected that his family was taken and sold into 
slavery. He became frustrated with the missionaries and eventually left the mission. 
He later returned, shortly before his death in 1879, instructing the missionaries to 
provide him with a Christian burial.  
Documentation of Personal Encounters with Cinque 
A phrenologist was brought to the jail where the Africans were held in New Haven, 
shortly after their imprisonment, to examine their skulls and characteristics. One 
reported the following relating to Cinque: 
Cingque [sic] appears to be about 26 years of age, powerful frame, bilious and 
sanguine temperament, bilious predominating. His head by measurement id 22 3/8 
inches in circumference, 15 inches from the root f the nose to the occipital 
protuberance over the top of the head, 15 inches from the Meatus Auditorius to do, 
over the head, and 5 3/4 inches through the head at destructiveness.


--- PAGE 61 ---
The development of the faculties is as follows: 
Firmness; self-esteem; hope - very large. 
Benevolence; veneration; conscientiousness; approbativeness; wonder; 
concentrativeness; inhabitiveness; comparison; form - large. Amativeness; 
philoprogenitiveness; adhesiveness; combativeness; destructiveness; secretiveness; 
constructiveness; caution; language; individuality; eventuality; causality; order - 
average. Alimentiveness; acquisitiveness; ideality; mirthfulness; imitation; size; 
weight; color; locality; number; time; tune - moderate and small. The head is well-
formed and such as a phrenologist admires. The coronal region being the largest, 
the frontal and occipital nearly balanced, and the basilar moderate. In fact, such an 
African head is seldom to be seen, and doubtless in other circumstances would have 
been an honor to his race. 
Lewis Tappan described Cinque after their initial meeting as follows: 
He is with several savage-looking fellows, black and white, who are in jail on various 
charges. Visitors are not allowed to enter this stronghold of the jail, and the inmates 
can only be seen and conversed with through the aperture of the door. 
Towards evening, we made a visit to Shidquau [sic] and conversed with him a 
considerable time. He drew his hand across his throat, as his room mates said he 
had done frequently before, and asked whether the people here intended to kill him. 
He was assured that probably no harm would happen to him - that we were his 
friends - and that he would be sent across the ocean towards the rising sun, home to 
his friends. 
His countenance immediately lost the anxious and distressed expression it had 
before, and beamed with joy. He says he was born about two days traveling from 
the ocean; that he purchased some goods, and being able to pay for only two-thirds 
of the amount, he was seized by the traders, his own countrymen, and sold to King 
Sharka for the remaining third.  
For biographical information about any of the captives, from A History of the 
Amistad Captives by John W. Barber (1840), click on a name. 
 
Cin-gue                 Grab-eau       Kimbo           Kon-no-ma          Bur-na


--- PAGE 62 ---
Bar-tu                 Gna-kwoi                Kwong         Fu-li-wa             P-ie                 
Pung-wu-ni 
 
Ses-si                     Mo-ru              Ndam-ma          Fu-li-wu-lu             Ba-u 
 
Ba                 Shu-le                Ka-le               Ba-gua               Sa 
 
  Kin-na          Nga-ho-ni                    Fa-kin-na            Fa-gin-na          Ya-boi


--- PAGE 63 ---
Fa-ban-na       Tsu-ka-ma         Ber-ri                 Fo-ni                  Bur-na           
Shuma 
 
Ka-li                 Te-me              Ka-gne            Mar-gru          James Covey 
The descriptions that follow are from A History of the Amistad Captives by John W. Barber (1840).
(1.) Sing-gbe, [Cin-gue,] (generally spelt Cinque~) was born in Ma-ni, in Dzho-poa, 
i.e. in the open land, in the Mendi-country. The distance from Mani to Lomboko, he 
says, is ten suns, or days. His mother is dead, and he lived with his father. He has a 
wife and three children, one son and two daughters. His son's name is Ge-waw, 
(God.) His king, Ka-lum-bo, lived at Kaw-men-di, a large town in the Mendi 
country. He is a planter of rice, and never owned or sold slaves. He was seized by 
four men, when traveling in the road, and his right hand tied to his neck. Ma-ya-gi-
la-lo sold him to Ba-ma-dzha, son of Shaka, king of Gen-du-ma, in the Vai country. 
Bamadzha carried him to Lomboko and sold him to a Spaniard. He was with 
Mayagilalo three nights; with Bamadzha one month, and at Lomboko two months. 
He had heard of Pedro Blanco, who lived at Te-i-lu, near Lomboko. BACK  
(2.) Gi-la-ba-ru, [Grab-eau,] (have mercy on me)was born at Fu-lu, in the Mendi 
country, two moons' journey into the interior. His name in the public prints is 
generally spelt Grabeau. He was the next after Cingue in command of the Amistad. 
His parens are dead, one brother and one sister living. He is married, but no 
children; he is a planter of rice. His king Baw-baw, lived in Fu-lu. He saw Cingue at 
Fulu and Fadzhinna, in Bombali. He was caught on the road when going to 
Taurang, in the Bandi country. to buy clothes. His uncle had bought two slaves in 
Bandi, and gave them in payment for a debt; one of them ran away and he 
(Grabeau) was taken for him. He was sold to a Vai-man, who sold him to Laigo, a 
Spaniard, at Lomboko. Slaves in this place are put into a prison, two are chained 
together by the legs, and the Spaniards give them rice and fish to eat. In his country 
has seen people write--they wrote from right to left. They have cows, sheep, and 
goats, and wear cotton cloth. Smoking tobacco is a common practice. None but the 
rich eat salt, it costs so much. Has seen leopards and elephants, the latter of which, 
are hunted for ivory. Grabeau is four feet eleven inches in height; very active,


--- PAGE 64 ---
especially in turning somersets. Besides Mendi, he speaks Vai, Kon-no and Gissi. He 
aided John Ferry by his knowledge of Gissi, in the examination at Hartford. BACK 
(3.)Kimbo (cricket) is 5 ft. 6 in. in height, with mustaches and long beard; in middle 
life, and is intelligent. He was born at Maw-ko-ba, a town in the Mendi country; his 
father was a gentleman, and after his death, his king took him for his slave, and 
gave him to his son Ban-ga, residing in the Bullom country. He was sold to a Bullom 
man, who sold him to a Spaniard at Lomboko. He counts thus: 1, eta; 2 fili; 3, kiau-
wa; 4, naeni; 5, loelu; 6, weta; 7, wafura; 8, wayapa; 9, ta-u; 10, pu.--Never saw any 
books in his country. When people die in his country, they suppose the spirit lives 
but where, they cannot tell. BACK  
(4.)Nazha-u-lu (a water stick,) also called from his country, Kon-no-ma, is 5 ft. 4 in. 
in height, has large lips, and projecting mouth, his incisor teeth pressed outward 
and filed, giving him rather a savage appearance; he is the one who was supposed to 
be a cannibal, tattooed in the forehead with a diamond shaped figure. He was born 
in the Konno country: his language is not readily understood by Covey, the 
interpreter. Kon-no-ma recognizes many words in Mungo Park's Mandingo 
vocabulary. BACK  
(5.)Bur-na, the younger, height 5 ft. 2 in. lived in a small town in the Mendi country. 
He counts in Tim-ma-ni and Bullom. He was a blacksmith in his native village, and 
made hoes, axes, and knives; he also planted rice. He was sold for crim. con. to a 
Spaniard at Lomboko. He was taken in the road, and was four days in traveling to 
Lomboko. Has a wife and one child, a father, three sisters and brother living. 
BACK  
(6.) Gba-tu, (Bar-tu,) (a club or sword,) height 5 ft. 6 in. with a tattooed breast was 
born in the country of Tu-ma, near a large body of fresh water, called Ma-wu-a. His 
father is a gentleman and does no work. His king, named Da-be, resided in the town 
of Tu-ma. He was sent by his father to a village to buy clothes; on his return, he was 
seized by six men, and his hands tied behind; was ten days in going to Lomboko. 
There are high mountains in his country, rice is cultivated, people have guns; has 
seen elephants. Remark.--There is a village called Tu-ma, in the Timmani country, 
60 miles from Sierra Leone, visited by Major Laing. BACK  
(7.)Gna-kwoi (in Ba-lu dialect, second born) was born at Kong-go-la-hung, the 
largest town in the Balu country. This town is situated on a large river called in 
Balu, Za-li-bu; and in Mendi, Kal-wa-ra: fish are caught in this river as large a 
man's body--they are caught in nets and sometimes shot with guns. When going to 
the gold country to buy clothes, he was taken and sold to a Vai-man, who sold him 
to a Spaniard named Peli. Gna-kwoi has a wife and one child; he calls himself a 
Balu-man; has learned the Mendi language since he was a slave; 5 ft. 6 in. in height. 
BACK  
(8.)Kwong was born at Man-bui, a town in the Mendi country. When a boy he was


--- PAGE 65 ---
called Ka-gnwa-ni. Kwong is a Bullom name. He was sold by a Tim-nani gentleman 
in the Du-bu country, for crim. con. with his wife, to Luisi, a Spaniard, at Lomboko. 
He is in middle life, 5 ft. 6 in. high. BACK  
(9.) Fu-li-wa, Fu-li, (sun,) called by his fellow prisoners Fuliwa, (great Fuli,) to 
distinguish him from Fu-li-wu-lu, (little Fuli,) was born at Ma-no, a town in the 
Mendi country, where his king, Ti-kba, resided. He lived with his parents, and has 
five brothers. His town was surrounded by soldiers, some were killed, and he with 
the rest were taken prisoners. He passed through the Vai country, when taken to 
Lomboko, and was one month on the journey. He is in middle life, 5 ft. 3 in. high, 
face broad in the middle, with a slight beard. It was this Fuli who instituted the suit 
against Ruiz and Montez. BACK  
(10.) P-ie, Pi-e, or Bi-a, (5 ft. 4 1-2 in. high,) calls himself a Timmani, and the father 
of Fu-li-wu-lu. He appears to have been distinguished for hunting in his country: 
says he has killed 5 leopards, 3 on the land, and 2 in the water; has killed three 
elephants. He has a very pleasant countenance; his hands are whitened by wounds 
received from the bursting of a gun barrel, which he had overloaded when showing 
his dexterity. He had a leopard's skin hung up on his hut, to show that he was a 
hunter. He has a wife and four children. He recognizes with great readiness the 
Timmani words and phrases contained in Winterbottom's account of Sierra Leone. 
He and his son seemed overjoyed to find an American who could articulate the 
sound of their native tongue. BACK  
(11.) Pu-gnwaw-ni, [Pung-wu-ni,] (a duck,) 5 ft. 1 in. high, body tattooed, teeth filed, 
was born at Fe-baw, in Sando, between Mendi and Konno. His mother's brother 
sold him for a coat. He was taken in the night, and was taken a six days' journey 
and sold to Garloba, who had four wives. He stayed with this man two years, and 
was employed in cultivating rice. His master's wives and children were employed in 
the same manner, and no distinction made in regard to labor. BACK  
(12.) Ses-si, 5 ft. 7 1-2 in. with a sly and mirthful countenance, was born in Mas-sa-
kum, in the Bandi country, where his king, Pa-ma-sa, resided. He has three 
brothers, two sisters, a wife, and three children. He is a blacksmith, having learnt 
that trade of his brother; he made axes, hoes, and knives from iron obtained in the 
Mendi country. He was taken captive by soldiers and wounded in the leg. He was 
sold twice before he arrived at Lomboko, where he was kept about a month. 
Although a Bandi, he appears to have been able to talk in Mendi. BACK  
(13.)Mo-ru, middle age, 5 ft. 8 1-2 in. with full negro features, was born at Sanka, in 
the Bandi country. His parents died when he was a child. His master, Margona, who 
sold him, had ten wives and many houses; he was twenty days on his journey to 
Lomboko. He was sold to Be-le-wa, (great whiskers,) i.e. to a Spaniard. BACK  
(14.) Ndam-ma, (put on or up,) 5 ft. 3 in. a stout built youth, born in the Mendi 
country, on the river Ma-le. His father is dead, and he lived with his mother; has a


--- PAGE 66 ---
brother and sister. He was taken in the road by twenty men, and was many days in 
traveling to Lomboko. BACK  
(15.) Fu-li-wu-lu, (Fuli,) or, as the name has been written, Furie, (sun,), called 
Fuliwulu, to distinguish him from Fuliwa, (great Fuli,) lived with his parents in the 
Timmani, near the Mendi country. He is the son of Pie, (No. 10.) He was taken with 
his father, by an African, who sold him to a Bullom man, who sold him to Luis, a 
Spaniard at Lomboko. He has a depression in the skull from a wound in the 
forehead. 5 ft. 2 1-2 in. in height. BACK  
(16.) Ba-u, (broke,) 5 ft. 5 in. high, sober, intelligent looking and rather slightly 
built. Has a wife and three children. He was caught in the bush by 4 men as he was 
going to plant rice; his left hand was tied to his neck; was ten days in going to 
Lomboko. He lived near a large river named Wo-wa. In his country all have to pay 
for their wives; for his, he had to pay 10 clothes, 1 goat, 1 gun, and plenty of mats; 
his mother made the cloth for him. BACK  
(17.) Ba, (have none,) 5 ft. 4 1-2 in. with a narrow and high head; in middle life. 
Parents living, 4 brothers and 4 sisters; has got a wife and child. He is a planter of 
rice. He was seized by two men in the road and was sold to a Gallina Vai-man, who 
sold him to a Spaniard. High mountains in his country, but small streams; cotton 
cloth is manufactured, and hens, sheep, goats, cows, and wild hogs, are common. 
BACK  
(18.) Shu-le, (water fall,) 5 ft. 4 in. the oldest of the Amistad captives, and the fourth 
in command, when on board the schooner. He was born at Konau, in the open land, 
in the Mendi country. He was taken for a slave by Ma-ya, for crim. con. with his 
wife. Momawru caught both him and his master Ma-ya, and made them slaves, and 
sold them to a man who sold him to the Spaniards at Lomboko. There is a large 
river in his country named Wu-wa, which runs from Gissi, passes through Mendi, 
and runs south into the Konno country. BACK  
(19.) Ka-le, (bone,) 5 ft. 4 in. small head and large under lip, young and pleasant. 
His parents living; has two sisters. He was taken while going to a town to buy rice. 
He was two months in traveling to Lomboko. BACK  
(20.) Ba-gna, (sand or gravel,) 5 ft. 3 in. was born at Du-gau-na, in the Konno 
country, where his king, Da-ga, lived. His parents are dead, and he lived with his 
brother, a planter of rice. BACK  
(21.) Sa, 5 ft. 2 in. a youth with a long narrow head. He was the only child of his 
parents, and was stolen when walking in the road, by two men. He was two months 
in traveling to Lomboko. BACK  
(22.) Kin-na, (man or big man,) 5 ft. 5 1-2 in. has a bright countenance, is young, 
and, since he has been in New Haven, has been a good scholar. His parents and


--- PAGE 67 ---
grandparents were living; has four brothers and one sister. He as born at Si-ma-b u, 
in the Mendi country; his king, Sa-mang, resided at the same place. He was seized 
when going to Kon-gol-li, by a Bullom man, who sold him to Luiz, at Lombuko. 
BACK  
(23.) Ndzha-gnwaw-ni, [Nga-ho-ni,] (water bird,) 5 ft. 9 in. with a large head, high 
cheek bones, in middle life. He has a wife and one child; he gave twenty clothes and 
one shawl for his wife. He lived in a mountainous country; his town was formerly 
fenced around, but now broken down. He was seized by four men when in a rice 
field, and was two weeks in traveling to Lomboko. BACK  
(24.) Fang, [Fa-kin-na,] 5 ft. 4 in. head elevated in the middle, stout built, and 
middle aged. He was born at Dzho-po-a-hu, in the Mendi country, at which place 
his father, Baw-nge, is chief or king. He has a wife and two children; was caught in 
the bushes by a Mendi man, belonging to a party with guns, and says he was ten 
days in traveling to Lomboko after being a slave to the man that took him, less than 
a month. BACK  
(25.) Fahi-dzhin-na, [Fa-gin-na,] (twin,) 5 ft. 4 in. marked on the face with the small 
pox; was born at Tom-bo-lu, a town of Bombali, in the Mendi country. He was 
made a slave by Tamu for crim. con. with his wife. Tamu sold him to a Mendi man, 
who sold him to Laigo, a Spaniard, the same who purchased Grabeau. He says 
many people in his country have the samll pox, to cure which, they oil their bodies. 
BACK  
(26.)Ya-boi, 5 ft. 7 in large head, stout built, and in middle life; was born at Kon-do-
wa-lu, where his king, Ka-kbe-ni (lazy,) resided. His village was surrounded by 
soldiers and he was taken by Gillewa, a Mendo man, to whom he was a slave ten 
years. Had a wife and one child. Gillewa sold him to Luiz, the Spaniard. BACK  
(27.)Fa-ban-na, (remember,) 5 ft. 5 in. large round head, tattooed on the breast; in 
middle life; he and Grabeau were from the same country, both having the same 
king. He has two wives and one child; all lived in one house. His village was 
surrounded by soldiers: he was taken prisoner, sold twice, the last time to a 
Spaniard at Lomboko. BACK  
(28.) Tsu-ka-ma, (a learner,) 5 ft. 5 1-2 in. young, with a pleasant countenance; was 
born at Sun-ga-ru, in the Mendi country, where his king, Gnam-be, resided: has 
parents living, 3 sisters, and 4 brothers. He was taken and sold into the Bullom 
country, where he lived for a time with his master, who sold him to Luiz, at 
Lomboko. BACK  
(29.) Be-ri [Ber-ri,] (stick,) 5 ft. 3 in. with mustaches and beard, broad nose; in 
middle life. He was born at Fang-te, in Gula, a large fenced town, where his king, 
Ge-le-wa, resided. He was taken by soldiers, and was sold to Shaka, king of 
Genduma, in the Vai or Gallina country, who sold him to a Spaniard. Genduma is


--- PAGE 68 ---
on a fresh water river, called Boba. It is three or four miles from the river, and nine 
from the sea. BACK  
(30.) Faw-ni, [Fo-ni,] 5 ft. 2 in. stout built; in middle life. He was born at Bum-be, a 
large town in the Mendi country: the name of his king was Ka-ban-du. He is 
married, and has parents, brothers, and sisters living. He was seized by two men as 
he was going to plant rice. He was carried to Bem-be-law, in the Vai country, and 
sold to Luiz, who kept him there two months, before he took him to Lomboko. 
From Bem-be-law to Lomboko is one day's walk. BACK  
(31.) Bur-na, (twin,) the elder, has a cast in the eye; was taken when going to the 
next town, by three men. His father is dead, and he lived with his mother; has four 
sisters and two brothes. When his father died his brother married; all lived in the 
same house. In his country are high mountains, but no rivers; has seen elephants 
and leopards. He was six weeks in travleing to Lomboko, where he was kept three 
and a half moons. BACK  
(32.) Shuma, (falling water,) 5 ft. 6 in. with mustaches and beard; in middle life. He 
can count in the Mendi, Timmani, and Bullom. His parents have been dead a long 
time; has a wife and one child, was taken prisoner in war, and it was four moons 
after he was taken, before he arrived at Lomboko. Shuma spoke over the corpse of 
Tua, after the Rev. Mr. Bacon's pra
yer. The substance of what he said, as translated 
by Covey, was "Now Tua dead, God takes Tua,--we are left beyhind--No one can die 
but once," etc. BACK  
(33.) Ka-li, (bone,) 4 ft. 3 in. a small boy, with a large head, flat and borad nose, 
stout built. He says his parents ae living; has a sister and brother; was stolen when 
in the street, and was about a month in traveling to Lomboko. BACK  
(34.) Te-me, (frog,) 4 ft. 3 in. a young girl, says she lived with her mother, with an 
elder brother, and sister; her father was dead. A party of men in the night broke 
into her mother's house, and made them prisoners; she never saw her mother or 
brother afterwards, and was a long time in traveling to Lomboko. BACK  
(35.) Ka-gne, (country,) 4 ft. 3 in. a young girl. She counts in Mendi like Kwong, she 
also counts in Fai or Gallina, imperfectly. She says her parents are living, and has 
four brothers and four sisters; she was put in pawn for a debt by her father which 
not being paid, she was sold into slavery, and was many days in going to Lomboko. 
BACK  
(36.) Mar-gru, (black snake,) 4 ft. 3 in. a young girl, with a large, high forehead; her 
parents were living; she had four sisters and two brothers; she was panwed by her 
father for a debt, which being unapid, she was sold intoslavery. BACK  
The foregoing list comprises all the Africans captured with the Amistad, now [May, 
1840] living. Six have died while they have been in New Haven; viz 1, Fa Sept. 3d,


--- PAGE 69 ---
1839; 2, Tua (a Bullom name) died Sept. 11th; 3, We-lu-wa (a Bandi name) died 
Sept. 14th; 4, Ka-ba, a Mendi man, died Dec. 321st; 5, Ka-pe-li, a Mendi youth, died 
Oct. 30; 6 Yam-mo-ni, in middle life, died Nov. 4th.  
James Covey, the interpreter for the Africans, is apparently about 20 years of age; 
was born at Benderi, in the Mendi country. His father was of Kon-no descent, and 
his mother Gissi. Covey was taken by three men, in the evening, from his parents' 
house, at Go-la-hung, whither they had removed when he was quite young. He was 
carried to the Bullom country, and sold as a slave to Ba-yi-mi, the king of the Bul-
loms, who resided at Mani. He lived there for three 
yeas, and was employed to plant 
rice for the wife of Ba-yi-mi, the king of the Bul-loms, who resided at Mani. He was 
sold to a Portuguese, living near Mani, who carried him, with 200 or 300 others to 
Lomboko, for the purpose of being transported to America. After staying in this 
place about one month, Covey was put on board a Portuguese slave-ship, which, 
after being out about four days from Lomboko, was captured by a British armed 
vessel, and carried into Sierra Leone. Covey thus obtained his freedom, and 
remained in this place five or six years, and was taught to read and write the 
English language, in the schools of the Church Missionary Society. Covey's original 
name was Kaw-we-li, which signifies, in Mendi, war road, i.e., a road dangerous to 
pass, for fear of being taken captive. His Christian name, James, was given hm by 
Rev. J. W. Weeks, a Church Missionary, at Sierra Leone. In Nov., 1838, he enlisted 
as a sailor on board the British brig of war Buzzard, commanded by Captain 
Fitzgerald. It was on board this vessel, when at New York, in Oct. 1839, that James 
was found, amid some twenty native Africans, and by the kindness of captain 
Fitzgerald, his services as an interpreter were procured. BACK
 
 
PEDRO MONTES 
Pedro Montes was a wealthy 58-year-old Cuban businessman who bought four 
children, including three girls, who would become Amistad captives. On June 22, 
1839 he obtained fraudulent passports authorizing the transport of his new slaves to 
his plantation at Puerto Principe on the nortwest coast of Cuba. On June 28, at 
night in order to avoid British inspection, Montes departed Havana along with his 
slaves aboard the Amistad. 
When the mutiny began aboard the Amistad, Montes attacked Cinque with a knife 
and stick. His attack was thwarted by Fanquanah, who slashed him with a sugar 
cane knife. Montes ran below deck and hid himself between two barrels, wrapped 
up in a sail. He was discovered by Fuleh, who intended to kill him until he was 
convinced by Kimbo that he might be useful in piloting the Amistad to Sierra Leone. 
Montes was taken on deck and tied to Ruiz. After Cinque held a knife to his throat, 
Montes agreed to sail east, but then tricked his captors by charting a westerly 
course at night.


--- PAGE 70 ---
After the Amistad's interception off Long Island, Montes began efforts to have the 
Africans, and the vessel and its cargo returned to him. As a practical matter, his 
legal interests were represented by U. S. Attorney Holabird. 
JOSE RUIZ  
 
Jose Ruiz, also known as Pepe, was a twenty-four-year-old Cuban who purchased, 
for $450 a piece,  forty-nine adult male Africans at a baracoon in Havana in June, 
1839.  On June 26, Ruiz obtained fraudulent passports for the would-be slaves, 
authorizing their transport to his plantation near Puerto Principe, Cuba, and listing 
the Africans as "black Ladinos".  While enroute to Puerto Principe aboard the 
schooner Amistad, the Africans revolted.  Ruiz sustained several minor wounds in 
the mutiny, but was spared death after the Africans were convinced that he and 
fellow  Cuban slaveowner Montes could be helpful in steering the schooner back to 
their native Africa. The Africans would later accuse Ruiz of cruelty, alleging that he 
had whipped four of their number for such infractions as stealing water.  
After the Amistad was boarded by crewmembers of the U. S. S. Washington, Ruiz, 
who spoke English, told the story of the mutiny and improbable voyage to Long 
Island.  He repeated his story at a hastily called judicial hearing aboard the brig, 
and asked for the return of his slaves and cargo.  At the hearing, Ruiz admitted 
privately to an abolitionist named Dwight Janes that the Amistad captives were "just 
from Africa," and therefore not legally slaves.  Ruiz did not testify in subsequent 
criminal or civil trials, most likely because he feared a possible perjury prosecution 
if he were to state under oath that he did not know the blacks had recently arrived 
in Cuba from Africa.  
In October, 1839, Ruiz was staying in a rented hotel room in New York City when 
he was served in a civil suit charging him with assault, battery, and false 
imprisonment.  Ruiz would spend the next month before trial in a New York jail, 
while Montes was on his way back to Cuba.  
Judge Judson found that Ruiz was without legal title to his would-be slaves, and that 
his only remedy was to find the owner of the Cuban baracoon who illegally took 
$20,000 for the blacks.  
ROGER S. BALDWIN


--- PAGE 71 ---
Roger Baldwin was a Yale-educated forty-six-year old 
New Haven lawyer with a reputation for defending the unfortunate when he was 
asked to represent the Africans of the Amistad. He first became associated with 
abolitionist causes in 1831 when he confronted a mob seeking to block construction 
of a training school for negroes in New Haven.  
Baldwin was joined on the Amistad defense team by Theodore Sedgwick and Seth 
Staples, who would later found the Yale Law School.  Baldwin's principal legal goal 
was to win the freedom of the Africans, and the arguments he stressed were those he 
thought most likely to produce success.  Often these were narrow, property-law 
based arguments rather than moralistic, broad-based attacks on slavery itself.  
Baldwin, however, did argue that Ruiz and Montes were the criminals, not the 
Africans who fought for their freedom, and that the two Cubans "deserve the 
penalty of death for piracy."  
Baldwin and John Quincy Adams both argued the Africans' cause before the U. S.  
Supreme Court, but it was Baldwin's arguments that the Court found convincing.  
Upon learning of the Court's 7 to 1 vote to recognize the status of the Africans as 
free persons, Baldwin expressed pleasure at "the glorious result of our cause."  
Baldwin, whose mother was the daughter of Roger Sherman, a signer of the 
Declaration of Independence and a key player in the Constitutional Convention of 
1787, went on to an illustrious political career of his own.  Baldwin was elected 
Governor of Connecticut, and later represented his state in the United States Senate.  
JOHN QUINCY ADAMS (1767 - 1848)


--- PAGE 72 ---
John Quincy Adams was born the son of John, who later became the second 
President of the United States, and Abigail Adams on July 11, 1767 in Braintree, 
Massachusetts. He was educated principally by his parents during his adolescence 
and later at private schools in Paris while accompanying his father on diplomatic 
missions in Europe. He also attended the University of Lieden while in Europe. He 
furthered his formal education at Harvard University on his return to the United 
States in 1785 graduating in 1787, then studied law under Theophilus Parsons in 
Newbury, Massachusetts. On completing his studies with Mr. Parsons he began to 
practice law in Boston in 1790.  
Adams had several articles published in the Boston newspapers defending President 
George Washington's policies. President Washington recognized the value of Adams 
as an ally and appointed him minister to the Netherlands from 1794 to 1797. In 1797 
Adams was appointed as minister to Berlin where he remained until 1801. While on 
a mission to England Adams married Louisa Catherine Johnson, the daughter of 
the U.S. consul at London.  
After the election of Thomas Jefferson to the Presidency in 1801, President John 
Adams relieved his son from the Berlin ministerial position. John Quincy Adams 
returned to Boston and resumed his law practice. He sought a more active political 
role in U.S. affairs and was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1803. He also served as a 
professor at Harvard University from 1806 - 1809. On the election of President 
Madison, Adams was appointed minister to Russia where he remained from 1809 - 
1814. Adams was called to peace negotiations during the war of 1812 and was 
subsequently assigned to serve as U.S. minister to England. He was recalled to the 
U.S. by President James Madison to become Secretary of State.  
Adams went on to run for the Presidency in 1824 and won the election as a result of 
the last minute support of an opposing candidate, Henry Clay. He was a minority 
party president with little political backing and had a rather uneventful presidency. 
He was soundly defeated in the election campaign of 1828.


--- PAGE 73 ---
In 1830, Adams was elected to Congress as the representative of the 12th District in 
Massachusetts. He was outspoken about nationalism and abolition of slavery. He 
attempted to introduce amendments to the Constitution in 1839 which would 
prevent any person born in the U.S. from being born a slave. He additionally 
became involved as a proponent for the Amistad Africans in writings of late 1839 
forward. He eventually joined the team defending the Africans and helped win their 
freedom in arguments before the U.S. Supreme Court.  
He remained in Congress until 1848, when he was stricken on the floor of the House 
of Representatives and died.  
WILLIAM HOLABIRD 
William Holabird was appointed by Presdent Van Buren to the position of United 
States Attorney for the district of Connecticut. In this position, it fell to Holabird to 
make the fateful decision what to do initially with the Amistad, its passengers, and 
its cargo. His cautious decision to write the Secretary of State for instructions and 
hold a judicial hearing on board the Washington made possible the remarkable 
story that would span three decades. 
Holabird's personal sympathies clearly lay with Montes and Ruiz. Holabird had no 
use for the abolitionist movement. He at first viewed the case as a open and shut 
matter of mutiny and murder. He hoped, however, that the matter could be handled 
through diplomatic channels rather than it become his duty to try the Amistads. 
Holabird essentially served the interests of President Van Buren and Spain. In so 
doing, he took the position that the courts should put the matter in the hands of the 
Executive, who in turn should deliver the captives to Spain. In a letter to Secretary 
of state Forsyth as the trial began in Hartford, Holabird expressed concern over the 
outcome: "I should regret extremely if the rascally blacks should fall into the hands 
of the abolitionists, with whom Hartford is filled." 
PRESIDENT MARTIN VAN BUREN


--- PAGE 74 ---
Martin Van Buren was born on December 5, 1782 in 
Kinderhook, N.Y. in, fittingly,  a place people came to cast their ballots and gather 
to talk politics -- Abraham Van Buren's tavern. After his graduation from 
Kinderhook Academy, Van Buren began working for a local law office. Soon he 
began a successful career of managing political campaigns. In 1808 he helped Daniel 
Tompkins become governor of New York.  Four years later, Van Buren won a seat 
in  the New York State Senate.  Van Buren soon became a key figure in the upstate 
New York political organization known as the "Albany Regency.   He earned the 
nickname  "The Little Magician because of  his stature of only five feet six and his 
political craftiness. Van Buren's success in upstate led to success in Washington. In 
1821 Van Buren won a seat in the U.S. Senate.  Seven years later President Andrew 
Jackson appointed him Secretary of State. Van Buren  became the vice-president in 
1832 and the eighth U.S. President in 1836.  He was the first President born in the 
United States.  
   
    The good luck which led to Van Buren's ascent to the presidency turned sour 
during his one term as president.  In 1836, Jackson withdrew federal deposits from 
the Bank of America in Philadelphia and allotted it to banks around the country 
and removed restrictions on inflationary practices of some state banks.  This created 
a boom in investments initially, but it led to a bust when consumer confidence in 
banks dwindled.  During Van Buren's presidency hundreds of banks and other 
businesses failed in what was at the time the worst depression the U.S. history.  Also 
during Van Buren's term a boundary dispute with Canada erupted,  relations 
between the U.S. and Mexico grew tense due to a dispute over what later became 
Texas, and "the Trail of Tears" led to the death or forced removal of thousands of 
Native Americans from their homes.  
   
    In 1840 Van Buren was soundly defeated by a campaign by William Henry 
Harrison and John Tyler ("Tippecanoe and Tyler too").  In 1848, Van Buren made 
an unsuccessful bid for the presidency as candidate for the the Free-Soil Party, a 
party of Northerners opposed to the expansion of slavery into the western 
territories.  
   
   Following his political career, Van Buren spent two years traveling through 
Europe.  He then retired to a mansion in Kinderhook, N.Y.  Martin Van Buren died 
on July 24, 1862.


--- PAGE 75 ---
JOHN FORSYTH  
John Forsyth was a slaveholder from Georgia who 
served as Secretary of State in the Van Buren Administration at the time of the 
Amistad Affair.  Forsyth's primary goal seems to have been to minimize the negative 
political fallout, especially in the South, of the Amistad controversy. His strong pro-
slavery views and his prior experience as minister to Spain from 1819-1823 
undoubtedly affected his decision to support Spain's demands for return of the 
Amistad captives to Cuba based on Pinckney's Treaty of 1795.  His position 
remained unchanged despite his private acknowledgment that the captives were not 
legal slaves, but rather Africans.  
Forsyth's handling of the Amistad Affair was severely criticized by John Quincy 
Adams in his arguments before the Supreme Court.  Adams attacked Forsyth's 
"extreme zeal" in complying with Spanish wishes, even when he knew that doing so 
would have almost certainly resulted in the executions in Cuba of the Africans.  
Adams argued that Forsyth was guilty of misstatements and deception in his 
interpretation of the Spanish claims as a treaty obligation to return slaves, rather 
than as a demand that the captives be returned for trials and executions in Cuba.  
Forsyth assumed his cabinet position in the Van Buren Administation after service 
as a Georgia congressman and governor.  A person of fairly modest means, 
Forsyth's slave holdings were limited to three household servants.  
RICHARD MADDEN 
One of the most heroic figures in the Amistad affair was neither African nor 
American, but an Irish Catholic named Richard Madden. Madden was a man of 
culture, fluent in several languages, an author and poet, former judge, and one of 
the period's most zealous opponents of slavery. Madden's crusade to end slavery 
had taken him from the ports of West Africa to the infamous barracoons (slave 
markets) of Havana to the offices of world leaders. His efforts to persuade leaders to


--- PAGE 76 ---
more actively work to eliminate slavery usually were met with distain, indifference, 
and even (as from President Andrew Jackson) laughter. 
Madden was the head of the British Anti-Slavery (or Mixed) Commission in 
Havana, a body charged with enforcing the provisions of the 1820 British-Spanish 
treaty banning the importation and trade of slaves. In this post, Madden came to 
understand the slave trade in Cuba, from the nighttime landings of Portugeese slave 
ships in Havana Harbor to the use of fraudulent documents and passports to hide 
the slaves' origins.  Cuban officials resented Madden's efforts to stem the illegal 
trade in slaves and American officials on the island were equally unhelpful. Except 
in rare cases where British vessels were able to intercept slave traders on the high 
seas, the trade of slaves in Cuba continued unabated to the time of the Amistad 
incident. 
Madden read a newspaper account of the Amistad's landing in the United States and 
knew well the likely fate of the Africans should they be returned to Cuba for trial. 
Madden hopped a molasses-carrying cargo ship and sailed to New York to see what 
he could do to help. Upon arrival, Madden sought out Lewis Tappan who asked 
Madden if he would testify at the upcoming district court trial in Connecticut. He 
said that of course he would be willing. In November of 1840 Madden, together with 
Baldwin and Tappan, boarded a carriage in New Haven for a journey to the 
courthouse in Hartford. One can only imagine how the provincial minds of Tappan 
and Baldwin must have been stimulated by the vastly more worldy Madden. 
After the first few witnesses were called in Hartford, the trial was postponed until 
January because of the illness of the attorney for Meade and Gedney. Madden was, 
however, nonetheless allowed to offer a deposition which was introduced as evidence 
in the January trial. In his deposition, Madden described the nature of the slave 
trade in Cuba and confirmed the recent arrival from Africa of the captives. He 
described a September visit to the barracoon where the Amistads were sold, and 
how the operator of the barracoon regretted the loss of so many fine slaves, who he 
assumed would surely be executed in the United States. 
After giving his deposition in Hartford, Madden returned to England where he 
briefed Queen Victoria on the Amistad incident. 
JOSIAH W. GIBBS


--- PAGE 77 ---
Josiah W. Gibbs, a professor of linguistics at Yale, was the man most responsible for 
bringing the African's own story of the Amistad incident to the American people. It 
was through the determined efforts of Gibbs that a Mendi translator was located.  
Josiah Gibbs began his work by visiting the Africans in their New Haven cell. He 
held up a finger and said "one." He held up a single coin and said "one." Finally, 
Grabeau sensed what Gibbs was trying to do and shouted "eta," the Mendi word 
for one. Eventually, Gibbs began to build up a limited Mendi vocabulary, including 
words for the numbers one through ten. In the course of these efforts, Gibbs was 
also able to determine that at least three different African languages were 
represented in the group, although most were Mendi speakers.  
Gibbs began a search for an English-speaking Mendi on the waterfronts of New 
Haven and New York. He would go up to blacks and begin counting from one to ten 
in Mendi, looking for signs of recognition. In New Haven, he found a sailor named 
John Ferry who knew some Mendi, but his vocabulary proved too limited to be of 
much use and Gibbs continued his search along the New York waterfront. James 
Covey, rescued from a slave boat by the British and trained by British missionaries 
in Sierra Leone, turned out to be the key to unlocking the Amistad Africans' story. 
Gibbs received permission from the captain of the H.M..S. Buzzard, the British 
warship which employed Covey, to take him to meet the Africans. Soon the captives 
began to spill out heir stories of their lives in Sierra Leone, their capture, their 
voyages, and their mutiny. Gibbs untook an extensive interrogation of Cinque, who 
then asked Gibbs if he could arrange for them instruction in the English language. 
Gibbs replied that he would gladly do so.  
In January of 1840, Gibbs testified at the district court trial in Hartford. He began 
with a detailed explanation of the importance of language to a determination of 
whether the Amistads were recently arrived from Africa, or had resided for years in 
Cuba, as their documents indicated. He pointed out how the name of each 
corresponded to a place, object, or thing in Mendi, and how if they had been in 
Cuba for years their names would have been "corrupted in form and sound." Gibbs 
testimony was finally cut off by Judge Judson who announced that he was "fully 
convinced that the men were from Africa, and it is idle to deny it."


--- PAGE 78 ---
JAMES COVEY  
James Covey was "stolen by a black man" from his Sierra Leone 
village at age twelve and taken to the notorious slave factory of Lomboko, where he 
was placed on a slave ship bound for Cuba.  The slave ship was intercepted by a 
British cruiser, and Covey and the other Africans were freed.  Covey later decided 
to enlist as a sailor on a British man-of-war, the Buzzard.  
In June of 1839, the Buzzard was in port at New York habor when Yale professor 
Josiah Gibbs was walking the waterfront looking for Mende speakers. Gibbs found 
twenty-year-old James Covey. Covey was taken to New Haven where he met with 
the African captives of the Amistad.  Great excitement and confusion erupted when 
the captives realized that a fellow Mende, who could also speak English, had arrived 
at their jail.  
Covey soon discovered that all bu two or three of the captives spoke Mende, that 
they were familiar with the rivers of his homeland, and that all agreed where and 
when they commenced their trip across the Atlantic.  After his jailhouse interviews 
with the captives, Covey was taken to the home of a New Haven resident 
sympathetic to the abolitionist cause.  Covey stayed in New Haven for four months 
until he provided critical testimony at the January, 1840 civil trial in Hartford.  
Covey testified as to his interviews in the New Haven jail, then interpreted for 
Cinque and others as they told their own stories of kidnap, terror, and mutiny.  
Covey was aboard the Gentleman as it sailed in November, 1841 for Africa with the 
surviving Africans of the Amistad.  
JUDGE ANDREW T. JUDSON  
Andrew Judson seems to have been very much a self made man.  He was born in 
Ashford, Connecticut to a poor clergyman, and had very little formal education.  
Since he was unable to afford college, he studied law at an attorney's office, and was 
admitted to the bar in 1806. After practicing law for a few years in Vermont and 
then Connecticut,  Judson began what would be a fairly long political career when 
he was elected to the General Assembly.   In 1816 he switched his political allegiance 
to the Democratic Party.  
From 1819 to 1834, Judson was active in state politics, holding the post of State 
Attorney for Windham County, and serving in both the state House of


--- PAGE 79 ---
Representatives and Senate.  In 1835 Judson was elected to the U.S. House of 
Representatives.  Also in that year he undertook a controversial prosecution of  
Prudence Crandall for operating a  school for black and white girls.  Although the 
case ended in a mistrial, the school was burned by a mob and never reopened.  In  
1836, Judson resigned his seat in the house to fill a vacant judgeship in the Sixth 
District of Connecticut.  Judson continued to serve as a judge until his death in 
1853.  
In 1840 Judson ruled in the Amistad case that the blacks of the Amistad were not 
slaves, but rather free Africans, and that the President should arrange for their 
transport back to Africa.  
JUDGE SMITH THOMPSON  
 
Smith Thompson was born in 1768 to a wealthy speculator and state politician.  
Upon graduation from Princeton in 1788, Thompson taught school for several 
months.  At the New York convention in 1788, although strongly outspoken in 
opposition of the new federal constitution, Thompson eventually voted for 
ratification.  He then began his legal education as a clerk in the firm of Gilbert 
Livingston and James Kent.  In a letter Kent described Thompson as “a plain, 
modest, humble, ignorant young man with narrow views and anti-federal politics.  
His mind did not expand and his principles became liberal very slowly.”  Kent’s 
opinion was likely biased by the fact that in 1793 Thompson succeeded him as 
Livingston’s partner, and the following year married his daughter, Sarah 
Livingston.  Livingston was friends with powerful Jeffersonian politicians in New 
York, which likely contributed to Thompson’s quick political success.  
While serving a term in the state legislator in 1802, Thompson was offered and 
accepted a seat on the New York Supreme Court.  In 1807, Thompson declined an


--- PAGE 80 ---
appointment as Mayor of New York, likely because he felt more secure in his life 
time tenure position on the court.  He remained politically ambitious though out his 
career.  He also remained close with Martin Van Buren, as evidenced by their heavy 
correspondence and the name of Van Buren’s fourth son, Smith Thompson Van 
Buren.  
Thompson kept his seat on the New York Supreme Court until President James 
Monroe named him Secretary of the Navy in 1818.  He held the post until 1823,  
when he was appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court.   While on the Supreme Court, 
Thompson remained active in politics.  In 1828, he unsuccessfully ran for Governor 
of New York.  Although a member of the Marshall Court, Thompson’s anti-
federalist views often made him a dissenter.  Thompson remained on the  Supreme 
Court until his death in 1843.  
It was in 1839 that Thompson presided over the Circuit Court trial in the Amistad 
case.  He made two primary rulings in the case.  He first decided that no American 
court had jurisdiction over the criminal charges of murder and mutiny because such 
acts had been committed on a Spanish ship in Spanish waters.  The then ruled that 
the District court of Connecticut would have to decide all of the competing claims, 
including whether the Amistad captives were property.  Had Thompson granted 
District Attorney Holabird’s request that the captives be turned over to President 
Van Buren, the case likely would have ended immediately as the President was 
prepared to turn the captives over to Spain or return them to Africa.  When the case 
finally reached the Supreme Court in 1841, Thompson joined Story's majority 
opinion.  
JUSTICE JOSEPH STORY  
 
Joseph Story was born in Marblehead, Massachusetts in 1779.   He graduated from 
Harvard in 1798, second in his class.  He was admitted to the bar in 1801. From


--- PAGE 81 ---
1805 to 1811, Story served in the state legislature, Congress, and as Speaker of the 
Massachusetts House of Representative.  His decision to get out of politics rested 
largely on his personal belief that allegiance to a particular party required too much 
sacrifice of opinions and feelings.  At age 32 Story was appointed to the Supreme 
Court by James Madison.  
Despite Story’s personal feelings on slavery (“unnecessary, unjust, and inhuman 
[and] repugnant to the general principles of justice and humanity”;  “repugnant 
to...the dictates on natural religion, the obligations of good faith and morality and 
the eternal maxims of social justice.”),  he often felt compelled to uphold slavery in 
his rulings.  When possible, however,  he would find ways to narrow its application. 
Such a possibility existed in  the case in United States v. Amistad, and  Story  
narrowly interpreted the Treaty of  1795 so as not to apply to the Amistad case, and 
thus justify an order releasing the Africans.  
Story’s impact on the evolution of law in America reaches far beyond his  Supreme 
Court decisions.  He wrote eleven volumes on commentary on various branches of 
American law.  His frequent critic, Olliver Wendell Holmes, conceded that Story 
had “done more than any other English-speaking man in this century to make the 
law luminous and easy to understand.”  From 1829 to 1845, Story served as Dane 
Professor of Law at Harvard University.  He almost singlehandedly founded the law 
school (which had only one student the year before his arrival), and under his 
guidance the law school at Harvard became the model for national, university-based 
legal education in the United States.  
While serving on the Supreme Court, Story would continue to ride the New England 
circuit twice a year, holding court in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Hamphire 
and Maine.  In order to do this, and maintain his teaching duties at Harvard and 
serve on the Supreme Court, he traveled more than 2000 miles a year over 
sometimes dangerous roads.  Despite Story’s vast and varied duties, he seems to 
have liked best to teach at Harvard.  He endearingly refered to his students there as 
his “foster children,” and one such student commented that “he never seemed to 
have been happier” than when he was at the law school.  Historians have noted that 
“nowhere was his buoyant personality, his kindness, his gift for gab, his idealism 
more apparant than in the old Lecture Room of Dane Hall.”  
At the time of his death Story was regarded as America’s greatest jurist.    His body 
was burried in Mt. Auburn cemetary in Cambridge, Mass.  
LEWIS TAPPAN


--- PAGE 82 ---
Lewis Tappan was the New York abolitionist 
who, in the opinion of John Quincy Adams, was most responsible for securing the 
freedom of the Africans of the Amistad.  Contacted by Connecticut abolitionists 
soon after the Amistad was towed into port, Tappan dedicated himself to securing 
high quality legal representation for the captives, raising money for their defense 
and provision, increasing public support for their cause, recruiting teachers to 
provide them instruction, and finally arranging for their return to their African 
homeland.  
Lewis Tappan and his brother Arthur were successful merchants who helped found 
the American Antislavery Society.  The Tappan brothers outspoken championing of 
"universal liberty" made them the targets of pro-slavery mobs and terrorists.  In 
1834, a mob broke into Tappan's home where an Antislavery Society meeting was 
being held.  They threw his furniture out into the street, then burned it.  The next 
year an unnamed person advertised a $100,000 reward to the person who would 
deliver the dead bodies of the Tappans to any slave state.  Tappan was burned in 
effigy, attacked in the press, unable to purchase insurance for either himself or his 
possessions, and sent crude  warnings in the mail ranging from pieces of rope to a 
slave's ear.  For protection, Tappan carried only a copy of the New Testament in his 
breast pocket.  
Tappan was a uncompromising moralist with views that many even in the 
abolitionist movement found rather extreme.  For example, Tappan favored 
intermarriage as the long range solution to racial issues.  He envisioned a "copper-
colored" America where race would cease to be a defining characteristic. Tappan 
described slavery as "the worm at the root of the tree of Liberty."  The Amistad's 
arrival on American shores was, he thought, a "providential occurrence" that might 
allow "the heart of the nation" to be "touched by the power of sympathy".


--- PAGE 83 ---
Tappan joined with Simeon Jocelyn and Joshua Leavitt to form the "Amistad 
Committee" that hired legal counsel, made key litigation decisions, and provided 
support of all kinds for the Africans.  It was the decision of Tappan and the 
Committee to file civil suits in New York against Montes and Ruiz for assault, 
battery, and false imprisonment.  The civil suits, though generating considerable 
anger and adverse publicity, succeeded in drawing public attention to the broader 
moral issues raised by the Amistad Affair.  
Tappan attended each day of the Amistad trials and wrote daily accounts of the 
proceedings for the Emancipator.  
After achieving legal victory in the Supreme Court, Tappan began plans to use the 
Amistad Africans as the nucleus for his dream to Christianize Africa.  
WILLIAM RAYMOND 
William Raymond was a man filled with a burning desire to bring the light of 
Christianity to sub-Saharan Africa. When Lewis Tappan issued a call for clergy to 
accompany the Amistad Africans on their voyage back to Sierra Leone, Raymond 
did not let even a pregnant wife prevent him from jumping at the chance. 
Raymond was hired to teach the Africans while Tappan and other Amistad 
Committee members planned for the trip and the new African mission. Raymond 
was not the Committee's first choice to head the mission. Some members thought 
him distinctly lacking in leadership qualitities. However, when the Committee's first 
choice to head the mission had the temerity to ask for an increade in his $20 per 
month salary, Raymond moved to the top of the list. 
When Raymond and two other missionaries arrived with the Amistad Africans in 
Freetown in January, 1842, it quickly became apparent that they had their work cut 
out for them. Defections began almost immediately, tribal warfare was raging in the 
region identified as the site for the mission, and British missionaries were decidedly 
pessimistic about prospects. 
Raymond and the remaining Africans stayed several weeks in Freetown before 
selecting a new site for the mission about 100 miles to the south. Life in a temporary 
mission along the Boom River was not easy. Mangrove swamps made travel 
difficult, malaria was prevalent, and there was rarely enough money to cover 
operating expenses. By April, most of the Amistad Africans had scattered across the 
country. In a letter to Lewis Tappan, Raymond truthfully reported the 
disillusioning news. 
In 1843, William Raymond and his wife (their infant child had died soon after 
arrival in Africa) returned to the United States to regain their health and go on a 
fund-raising lecture tour. Raymond put a positive spin on the defection of so many 
Amistad Africans: "They have gone through the country as so many living


--- PAGE 84 ---
recommendations to me--by their means I am known all along the coast and as far 
into the interior as Cinque has travelled...." The tour was a modest success, bringing 
in donations ranging from umbrellas to fishing lines, plus a new female missionary 
recruit. 
A measure of optimism returned to Raymond once back in Sierra Leone. He wrote 
to Tappan of his hopes: "Of those that are now with with me I have more hope of 
making something than ever I have had since we first landed in Sierra Leone. If I 
can only induce themto marry and settle down by the side of me I think they will 
likely to makesomething. As long as they remain without wives they are too 
licentious." 
Soon, however, problems mounted. Raymond's new missionary recruit died of 
malaria, a constant battle with rats (Raymond killed 164 in a single day) took its 
emotional toll, and his wife became delusional and had to be sent back to the United 
States. 
Over his four-year tenure as head of the Sierra Leone mission, Raymond grew more 
tolerant of the African tendency toward "licentiosness" that had distressed him so 
much early on. Efforts to spread the Gospel, however, were often thwarted by tribal 
chiefs concerned that the Christian message of love and forgiveness would have an 
adverse effect on the willingness of tribal members to wage war. 
Raymond died in 1846 in Freetown of "black vomit" (yellow fever). His replacement 
to head the mission was a stern, fire-and-brimstone missionary named George 
Thompson. 
 
TRIAL HISTORY of the Amistad 
Case 
NOTE 
There were two Amistad trials, one criminal and one civil. 
In 1839, federal criminal trials were heard by the Circuit 
Court, presided over by a justice of the U. S. Supreme 
Court. Civil trials, with rare exceptions, were heard by 
the District Court.  
The first Amistad trial concerned the criminal charges of 
murder, mutiny, and piracy against the Africans of the 
Amistad. Judge Smith Thompson presided as the criminal 
trial began on September 19, 1839. After three days of 
arguments, Judge Thompson ruled that the court had no


--- PAGE 85 ---
jurisdiction over the charges, because the alleged crimes 
had been committed on a Spanish ship in Spanish waters and 
were therefore not crimes punishable under U. S. law.  
The Amistad civil case was tried before District Judge 
Andrew Judson. The trial began on November 19, 1839 in 
Hartford.  After testimony was taken on November 20, the 
trial adjourned until January 7, 1840.  On January 13, 
1840, Judge Judson announced his decision.  
NEWSPAPER REPORT OF SEPTEMBER 1839 CRIMINAL TRIAL  
 
"The Amistad Circuit Court Trial," New York Commercial Advertiser, 23 
Sept. 1839 
 
Hartford, Thursday Evening, Sept. 20  
At the opening of the Court this morning Mr. Sedgwick read the answer of the three girls, 
by their next friend, to the return of the marshal to the habeas corpus. It set forth the 
circumstances of their kidnapping in Africa, their conveyance to Havana, &c.; and denied 
that they were slaves or the property of Senor Montez, or of any other persons. It recited 
also a royal decree of Spain prohibiting the traffic in slaves, and declaring free all negroes 
imported into any Spanish port. Wheaton, Vol. 10, p.32, Appendix. December, 1817.  
Also another decree of the Queen Regent of Spain, reiterating the former, and urging the 
Governor of Cuba to enforce it. 2nd November, 1838. From documents laid before 
Parliament by Lord Palmerston.  
Mr. Sedgwick also read affidavits to prove that the girls are native Africans. Augustus W. 
Hanson, and John Ferry, native Africans, were the deponents.  
Mr. Ingersoll suggested to the Court whether it would go into the facts called in question 
by the answer to the return -- inasmuch as these facts were in litigation in the District 
Court.  
Mr. Baldwin replied, contending that the question was properly brought before the 
Circuit Court; it was to decide whether these persons were or were not illegally held in 
custody. He averred that the District Court had no right to issue a warrant for the arrest of 
these girls, as property, not the marshal to hold them as property.  
Judge Thompson suggested that the girls were held as witnesses in a criminal case -- a 
fact which seemed to obviate the difficulty.


--- PAGE 86 ---
[Here the proceedings were interrupted by the entrance of the grand jury. The foreman 
stated that the grand jurors had before them bills of indictment for murder and privacy 
against the Africans, and wished for advice from the Court respecting the law.  
Judge Thompson said the Court could not give advice unless advised of the facts brought 
to the knowledge of the jurors, and that advice, when given, could relate only to the 
jurisdiction of the Court.  
There upon the grand jury retired.  
Mr. Baldwin resumed. When the habeas corpus was sued out, the only process under 
which the marshal held these girls was the monition on the libel of Lieut. Gedney, which 
directed him to take possession of the vessel and of the property on board. He contended 
that the girls were free; and deemed the authority of any Court to make them slaves, or to 
deal with them as slaves. As witnesses they might indeed be bound over for their 
appearance to testify; and in that light security for their appearance would not be wanting. 
But no otherwise than as witnesses could they be held; and no Court in Connecticut could 
assume jurisdiction over them for any other purpose.  
Mr. Baldwin adverted to the fact that some of the Africans were arrested on shore, within 
the state of New York; and averred that if that were so, no Admiralty Court could have 
jurisdiction over them.-- Kent's Com. 1.366. The libel did not allege that these girls were 
on board the Amistad; therefore it was defective to give jurisdiction to the District Court.  
He alleged also that if there was jurisdiction in any Admiralty Court, it must be in the 
District Court of New York. The Amistad was taken within that district. Lieut. Gedney 
had no authority to transport the captives into any district other than the one in which 
they were found.  
Again -- the monition directs the marshal to take into his custody the schooner and the 
"articles of personal property" on board. Here was no warrant for the arrest of these 
individuals. The marshal had no right to assume that they were included under the term 
"property." He was bound to regard them and treat them as human beings, not as 
property. There was no process against them -- no authority for him to take them into 
custody.  
On these and other grounds Mr. Baldwin contended that it was within the power and the 
duty of the Circuit Court to inquire into the jurisdiction of the District Court over these 
Africans as property; into the authority of the marshal to arrest them; and into the right or 
authority by which they are held in custody. And the writ of the habeas corpus was the 
proper process to bring the subject before the Circuit Court for its adjudication.  
Mr. Baldwin was very severe upon Lieut. Gedney -- not for taking the vessel, but for 
setting up a claim for salvage, which, he said, should be scouted from the tribunals of a 
free country.


--- PAGE 87 ---
Judge Thompson, referring to the dictum of Judge Judson yesterday, that there was no 
power in the District Court to sell the negroes, said that the question of property was 
already settled; and that the negroes were not held under any process from that Court. Of 
course therefore they are entitled to be discharged.  
Judge Judson said he had so decided, and meant to be understood. He had intended to 
rule that the negroes were only held under the application of the district attorney, on 
behalf of the the government of the United States, consequent upon the demand of the 
Spanish minister.  
Thus it appeared that the negroes were only in custody under the process of the Circuit 
Court, on the criminal charge. And Mr. Baldwin, under this state of facts, made a 
powerful argument against the claims of Senors Ruiz and Montez to take out any process 
from the District Court, for the arrest and detention of the negroes, as slaves; and against 
the power of the District Court to issue any such process. The negroes were in the state of 
Connecticut, and entitled to their freedom. The District Court had no power over them -- 
much less any power to hold them as slaves He read the 8th and 9th articles of the treaty 
with Spain, which was relied on by the Spanish claimants -- providing for the restitution 
of vessels and effects that should be rescued from pirates or robbers on the high seas but 
contended that the question of property still came up. The treaty did not make negroes 
property.  
Mr. Baldwin then took up the libel filed by the district attorney, on behalf of the United 
States.  
[The grand jury came in again, and the foreman read a short statement of facts, on which 
they wished instruction from the Court. Judge Thompson told them that in the afternoon 
he would be prepared to advise them as they requested.]  
Mr. Baldwin resumed the reading of the district attorney's application. He denied the 
right of the district attorney to make any such application to the District Court. The 
Executive of the United States had no right to call upon the Court for the arrest and 
detention of the slaves, at the instance of the Spanish minister. The Spanish minister had 
nothing to do with the matter. He denied that the Executive of the United States was 
under any obligation to pursue and arrest fugitives from bondage. Mr. Baldwin argued 
these points at great length and very elaborately.  
Then as to the alternative application of the district attorney, that the negroes may be held 
subject to the disposal of the President, under the act of 1819, providing for their 
restoration to Africa, he contended that the act applied only to the cases of negroes found 
on board American slave ships, which had been captured by American vessels of war, 
and brought into a port of the United Stated, with the intent to hold them there in slavery. 
Therefore he alleged that there was no cause for the interference of the district attorney, 
and no law authorizing him to call upon the Court for its assistance.


--- PAGE 88 ---
Mr. Ingersoll replied. He contended that even if the opinion of Judge Judson, touching 
the inability of the Court to order a sale of negroes, had been judicially pronounced, still 
the attachment subsisted, to authorize their detention by the marshal, and to lay a 
foundation for subsequent proceedings. The negroes were lawfully in the custody of the 
District Court, and the other claims and libels were properly filed, and remained in force.  
He denied that the negroes were not to be treated as property. This Court was instituted 
under a confederacy of states, in some of which negroes are held and recognized as slaves 
-- as property. The government itself recognized negroes as property, by demanding 
compensation from Great Britain, for negroes owned in the United States which had been 
set at liberty under British jurisdiction.  
He read the 6th article of the treaty with Spain -- binding each party to defend and protect 
the vessels and effects of subjects or citizens belonging to the other; and contended that 
under the 9th article it was the duty of the district attorney to demand the interference and 
assistance of the judicial tribunals, for the preservation and restoration of the property.  
He cited various decisions of the Supreme Court of the U.S. -- particularly the case of the 
Antelope -- to the effect that slaves taken on board a foreign vessel, and brought into the 
United States, must be restored.  
He contended that the question of property ought not to be considered in this Court, under 
the writ of habeas corpus. The only question here was whether the process by which the 
girls were held was valid. If that process was defective he admitted that they were entitled 
to be released; but the question of property -- that grave question involving rights of the 
highest interest and importance, ought not to be discussed in this summary manner. It 
belonged to the District Court -- it would be examined there with full time for 
preparation, for obtaining evidence, and for the most careful and deliberate consideration 
-- and there he hoped it would be left for decision.  
Mr. Staples has just risen to reply. But the dinner hour having arrived, the Court adjourns 
until 2 o'clock, and I send off this dispatch. The proceedings are of high interest, and are 
observed with close attention by a very numerous audience.  
-------  
Soon after two o'clock the Court again assembled, and Judge Thompson instructed the 
grand jury that, upon the statement of facts submitted to him, the Court was entirely 
without jurisdiction for the trial of the prisoners on the criminal charge. In the first place 
it appeared that the Amistad was taken possession of within the Southern district of New 
York, and not within the district of Connecticut -- therefore the prisoners, if subject to 
trial at all, must be tried in the Southern district of New York.  
But he was clearly and decidedly of opinion that no Court in the United States had 
jurisdiction for their trial. The offense with which they were charged was committed on 
board a Spanish vessel, sailing under a Spanish flag, with Spanish papers, owned by 
Spaniards, and making a voyage from one port to another of a Spanish island; it was


--- PAGE 89 ---
therefore an offense, not against the law of nations or of the United States, but against the 
law of Spain; and under Spanish law only could it be tried.  
Under this view of the case the judge decided that the grand jury had nothing to do in the 
matter, and there being no other business before them, the grand jurors were discharged.  
Mr. Staples then commenced his argument for the prisoners. He began with a noble and 
eloquent character of the writ of habeas corpus, which he described as dealing with 
objects infinitely higher in importance than bales and boxes; it disregarded mere 
questions of property, and took cognizance of more essential interests -- of life and 
liberty. [This opening was applicable to the earnest appeal of Mr. Ingersoll, who had 
strongly contended that the Court should not, upon the habeas corpus, enter into any 
consideration but the regularity of the process issued out of the District Court; leaving all 
the great questions to be discussed and decided in that Court, at the proper time and in the 
proper manner.]  
Mr. Staples insisted that it was the right and the duty of the Circuit Court to decide those 
questions now. The claims of the Spaniards and of all other parties to the vessel and 
cargo might be left for decision in the District Court; but here was a question of liberty -- 
of personal rights -- and it was not to be tolerated that these unfortunate Africans should 
be immured in a prison while third parties were disputing about them as property; as if 
they were bales of merchandize, or brutes devoid of reason.  
Mr. Staples then went on to argue the general questions at great length, and with 
exceeding force contending that the Africans, even by the law of Spain, were free, the 
moment they arrived at Havana -- in proof of which he read a decree issued by the King 
of Spain in 1817, prohibiting the importation of slaves, and another decree, confirming it, 
issued by the Queen Regent in 1838; the first of which was given at length in a volume of 
Wheaton's Reports, and the second was among the documents communicated to the 
British Parliament by Lord Palmerston. As Mr. Baldwin had done before him, Mr. 
Staples took up all the numerous and complicated questions presented by the facts, and 
examined them with very great ability -- making a powerful argument in support of the 
position that the Africans could not be held in durance under the process issued against 
them. He was prepared also to show that the Circuit Court had not criminal jurisdiction in 
the matter, but on this point he had been anticipated by the decision of Judge Thompson.  
Mr. Holabird, the district attorney, followed, with a very lame attempt to sustain the libel 
he had filed on behalf of the United States government; which he sought to uphold by the 
act of Congress passed on the 3rd of March, 1819, providing for the disposal of negroes 
taken on board American slavers, and brought into the United States by American men of 
war.  
Mr. Hungerford, of counsel for the Spaniards, followed with a long and highly ingenious 
speech, in which he contended that the Africans were the property of Senors Montez and 
Ruiz; that property in slaves was recognized by the laws of Spain and of the United 
States; that there was no proof that these negroes had been imported into Cuba from


--- PAGE 90 ---
Africa, and had not been born slaves in the island; and finally that the Courts and the 
government of the United States were bound by the treaty with Spain, which provides for 
the mutual delivery of vessels and property, coming into the ports of either nation by 
stress of weather or other necessity.  
In the course of the afternoon an affidavit was read, which had been made by John Ferry, 
a native of Gallina, who had been brought from Africa to the West Indes when about 
eleven or twelve years old, and still retained a knowledge of his mother tongue. He 
deposed that he had seen and conversed with the three girls, and found that they spoke 
the Gallina language and no other; and from their speech and appearance, he was 
satisfied that they were native Africans, and very recently from that country.  
Another affidavit to the same effect was read, made by a man named Hanson. And also 
the following affidavit of Bahoo, one of the captives, taken through the interpretation of 
Ferry.  
I, Bahoo, of Bandaboo, in Africa, being duly cautioned, depose and say, that I knew 
Marngroo and Kenyee, two little girls now in prison at Hartford; that they were born in 
Bandaboo in Mandingo, and came over in the same vessel that I did to Havana, as did 
Penna and the little boy Carle; that they were about two moons in coming from Africa to 
Havana, where they stayed less than one moon. Good many in vessel, and many died -- 
were tight together, two and two chained together by hands and feet, night and day, until 
near Havana, when the chains were taken off -- were landed on the coast at a little place, 
near sun set -- staid until night and walked into the city, put them into an old building and 
fastened them in -- after some time the people now in jail were put on board the same 
vessel they came here in, in the night, and sailed away, about the time the gun fired. I 
know that these children are the same that came over from Africa, and that Marngroo and 
Kenyee were born in the same place I was, which was Bandaboo, and farther sail not.  
Bahoo, his X mark.  
State of Connecticut,  
Hartford, Sept. the 20th, 1839  
Antonio, the boy, was introduced, and being examined through the interpretation of 
Lieut. Meade, deposed that he was the slave of Captain Ferrez; that the Amistad sailed 
from Havana openly, in daylight, without any attempt to evade the observation of the 
British and Yankee men of war then lying in that port; that the slaves were not chained 
together &c. &c. His testimony had no very important bearing on the case.  
Mr. Staples then concluded the argument, bestowing a severe castigation on the 
Spaniards and the district attorney, and reiterating with great clearness and power the 
arguments, already presented by himself and Mr. Baldwin.  
Judge Thompson gave notice that he would pronounce his decision on Saturday morning.  
Hartford, Saturday night, Sept. 21.  
Gentlemen-- Judge Thompson occupied half an hour this morning in giving the views of


--- PAGE 91 ---
the Court on the points submitted yesterday by the counsel. -- The question is, are these 
people rightfully detained in the District Court? If they are, the Circuit Court has no right, 
by summary process, to take them out of the possession of the District Court. He said that 
the Court was of the opinion that the prisoners cannot be taken out of the jurisdiction of 
the District Court, on the writ of the habeas corpus. The Court therefore requested the 
counsel to furnish them with an argument on the main question, whether the District 
Court had any jurisdiction in the case? The Court then took a recess till 2 o'clock to 
allow the counsel to prepare. This afternoon the question was elaborately discussed. The 
Court adjourned till Monday morning, when the opinion of the Court will be given. 
Respectfully, L. Tappan.  
EVIDENCE IN THE AMISTAD CIVIL TRIAL 
DEPOSITION OF RICHARD MADDEN, BRITISH SUPERINTENDENT OF 
LIBERATED AFRICANS  
THE DEPOSITION OF RICHARD MADDEN, 
BRITISH SUPERITENDENT OF LIBERATED 
AFRICANS 
"I, Richard Robert Madden, a British subject, having 
resided for the last three years and upwards, at Havana, 
where I have held official situations under the British 
government, depose and say, that I have held the office of 
superintendent of liberated Africans during that term, and 
still hold it; and have held for the term of one year, the 
office there, of British commissioners, in the Mixed Court 
of Justice. The duties of my office and of my avocation, 
have led me to become well acquainted with Africans 
recently imported from Africa. I have seen and had in my 
charge many hundreds of them. I have seen and had Africans 
in the custody of the marshal of the district of 
Connecticut, except the small children. I have examined 
them and observed their language, appearance, and manners; 
and I have no doubt of their having been, very recently, 
brought from Africa. To one of them, I spoke, and repeated 
a Mohammedan form of prayer in the Arabic language; the man 
immediately recognised the language, and repeated a few 
words of it after me, and appeared to understand it, 
particularly the words 'Allah akbar,' or God is great. The 
man who was beside this negro, I also addressed in Arabic, 
saying -- 'salaam ailkoem,' or peace be to you; he 
immediately, in the customary oriental salutations, replied 
-- 'aleckoum salaam,' or peace be on you. From my knowledge 
of oriental habits, and of the appearance of the newly


--- PAGE 92 ---
imported slaves in Cuba, I have no doubt of those negroes 
of the Amistad being bona fide Bozal negroes, quite newly 
imported from Africa.I have a full knowledge of the subject 
of slavery -- slave trade in Cuba; and I know that no law 
exists, or has existed since the year 1820, that sanctions 
the introduction of negroes into the island of Cuba, from 
Africa for the purpose of making slaves, or being held in 
slavery; and, that all such Bozal negroes, as those 
recently imported are called, are legally free; and no law, 
common or statute, exists there, by which they can be held 
in slavery. Such Africans, long settled in Cuba, and 
acclimated, are called ladinos, and must have been 
introduced before 1820, and are so called in 
contradistinction to the term creole, which is applied to 
the negroes born in the island. I have seen, and now have 
before me, a document, dated 26th June, 1839, purporting to 
be signed by Ezpeleta, who is captain general of the 
island, to identify which, I have put my name to the 
lefthand corner of the document, in presence of the counsel 
of the Africans; this document, or "trasspasso," purporting 
to be a permit granted to Don I. Ruiz, to export from 
Havana to Porto Principe, forty-nine negroes, designated by 
Spanish names, and called therein ladinos, a term totally 
inapplicable to newly imported Africans. I have seen, and 
now have before me, another document, dated 22d June, 1839, 
and signed in the same manner, granted to Don Pedro Montez, 
for the removal of three negro children from Havana to 
Porto Principe, also disignated by Spanish names, and 
likewise called 'ladinos,' and wholly inapplicable to young 
African children, who could not have been acclimated, and 
long settled in the island; which document, I have 
identified in the same manner as the former. To have 
obtained these documents from the governor, for bona fide 
Bozal negroes, and have described them in the application 
for it, as ladinos, was evidently a fraud, but nothing more 
than such an application and the payment of the necessary 
fees would be required to procure it, as there is never any 
inquiry or inspection of the negroes on the part of the 
governor or his officers, nor is there any oath required 
from the applicant. I further state, that the above 
documents are manifestly inapplicable to the Africans of 
the Amisted, I have been here and in New Haven; but such 
documents are commonly obtained by similar applications at 
Havana, and by these means, the negroes recently and 
illegally introduced, are thus removed to the different 
ports of the island, and the danger obviated of their 
falling in with English cruisers, and then they are


--- PAGE 93 ---
illegally carried into slavery. One of the largest dealers 
and importers of the island of Cuba, in African slaves, is 
the notorious house of Martiner & Co., of Havana; and for 
years past, as at present, they have been deeply engaged in 
this traffic; and the Bozal Africans, imported by these and 
all other slave traders, when brought to the Havana, are 
immediately taken to the barracoons, or slave marts; five 
of which are situated in the immediate vicinity of the 
governor's county house, about one mile and a half from the 
walls of Havana; and from these barracoons, they are taken 
and removed to the different parts of the island when sold; 
and having examined the endorsements on the back of the 
transspasso, or permits for the removal of the said negroes 
of the Amistad, the signature to that endorsement appears 
to be that of Martiner & Co.; and the document purports to 
be a permit of pass for the removal of the said negroes. 
The handwriting of Martiner & Co., I am not acquainted 
with. These barracoons, outside the city walls, are fitted 
up exclusively for the reception and sale of Bozal negroes; 
one of these barracoons or slave marts, called la 
miserecordia, or 'mercy,' kept by a man, named 'Riera,' I 
visited the 24th September last, in company with a person 
well acquainted with this establishment; and the factor or 
major domo of the master, in the absence of the latter, 
said to me, that the negroes of the Amistad had been 
purchased there; that he knew them well; that they had been 
bought by a man from Porto Principe, and had been embarked 
for that place; and speaking of the said negroes, he said, 
'che, castima,' or what pity it is, which rather surprised 
me; the man further explained himself, and said, his regret 
was for the loss of so many valuable Bozals, in the event 
of their being executed in the United States.  
"One of the houses most openly engaged, and notoriously 
implicated in the slave trade transactions, it that of 
Martiner & Co.; and their practice is to remove their newly 
arrived negroes from the slave ships to these barracoons, 
where they commonly remain two or three weeks before sold, 
as these negroes of the Amistad, illegally introduced by 
Martiner & Co., were in the present instance, as is 
generally reported and believed in the Havana. Of the 
Africans which I have seen and examined, from the necessity 
which my office imposes on me at the Havana of assisting at 
the registry of the newly imported Bozals, emancipated by 
the Mixed Court, I can speak with tolerable certainty of 
the ages of these people, with the excertion of the 
children, whom I have not seen. Sa, about 17; Ba, 21;


--- PAGE 94 ---
Luckawa, 19; Tussi, 30; Beli, 18; Shuma, 26; Nama, 20; 
Tenquis, 21; the others, I had not time to take a note of 
their ages.  
"With respect to the Mixed Commission, its jurisdiction 
extends only to cases of captured negroes brought in by 
British or Spanish cruisers; and notwithstanding the 
illegalities of the traffic in slaves, from twenty to 
twenty-five thousand slaves have been introduced into the 
island during the last three years; and such is the state 
of society, and of the administration of the laws there, 
that hopeless slavery is the inevitable result of their 
removal into the interior."  
On his cross-examination the witness stated, that he was 
not acquainted with the dialects of the African tribes, but 
was slightly acquainted with the Arabic language. Lawful 
slaves of the island are not offered for sale generally, or 
often placed in the barracoons, or man marts. The practice 
in Havana is to use the barracoons "for Bozal negroes 
only." Barracoons are used for negroes recently imported, 
and for their reception and sale. The native language of 
the Africans is not often continued for a long time on 
certain plantations. "It has been to me a matter of 
astonishment at the shortness of time in which the language 
of the negroes is disused, and the Spanish language adopted 
and acquired. I speak this, from a very intimate knowledge 
of the condition of the negroes in Cuba, from frequent 
visits to plantations, and journeys in the interior; and, 
on this subject, I think I can say my knowledge is as full 
as any person's can be.  
"There are five or six barracoons within pistol shot of the 
country residence of the Captain General of Cuba. On every 
other part of the coast where the slave trade is carried 
on, a barracoon or barracoons must likewise exist. They are 
a part of the things necessary to the slave trade, and are 
for its use only; for instance, near Matanzas there is a 
building or shed of this kind and used for this purpose.  
"Any negroes landed in the island since 1820, and carried 
into slavery, have been illegally introduced; and the 
transfer of them under false names, such as calling Bozal, 
Ladinos, is, necessarily, a fraud. Unfortunately, there is 
no interference on the part of the local authorities; they 
connive at it, and collude with the slave traders; the 
governor, alone, at the Havana, receiving a bounty or


--- PAGE 95 ---
impost on each negro thus illegally introduced, of ten 
dollars a head. As to the Mixed Commission, once the 
negroes clandestinely introduced are landed they no longer 
have cognisance of the violation of the treaty; the 
governor has cognisance of this and every other bearing of 
the Spanish law on Spanish soil. This head-money has not 
the sanction of any Spanish law for its imposition; and the 
proof of this is, it is called a voluntary contribution."  
STATEMENT OF A. G. VEGA, SPANISH CONSUL  
STATEMENT OF A.G. VEGA, SPANISH CONSUL 
"That he is a Spanish subject; that he resided in the 
island of Cuba several years; that he knows the laws of 
that island on the subject of slavery; that there was no 
law that was considered in force in the island of Cuba, 
that prohibited the bringing in African slaves; that the 
Court of Mixed Commissioners had no jurisdiction except in 
cases of capture on the sea; that newly imported African 
negroes were constantly brought to the island, and, after 
landing, were bona fide transferred from one owner to 
another, without any interference by the local authorities 
or the Mixed Commission, and were held by the owners, and 
recognised as lawful property; that slavery was recognised 
in Cuba by all the laws that were considered in force 
there; that the native language of the slaves was kept up 
on some plantations for years. That the barracoons are 
public markets, where all descriptions of slaves and sold 
and bought; that the papers of the Amistad are genuine, and 
are in the usual form; that it was not necessary to 
practise any fraud to obtain such papers from the proper 
officers of the government; that none of the papers of the 
Amistad are signed by Martiner, spoken of by R. R. Madden 
in his deposition; that he (Martiner) did not hold the 
office from whence that paper issued."  
--A. G. Vega, Esq., Spanish Consul, January 10th, 1840  
DEPOSITION OF JAMES COVEY, A FREE AFRICAN 
 
DEPOSITION OF JAMES COVEY 
"[I] was born at Berong-Mendi country; left there seven and 
a half years ago; was a slave, and carried to Lumboko. All 
these Africans were from Africa. Never saw them until now.


--- PAGE 96 ---
I could talk with them. They appeared glad because they 
could speak the same language. I could understand all but 
two or three. They say they from Lumboke; three moons. They 
all have Mendi names, and their names all mean something; 
Carle, means bone; Kimbo, means cricket. They speak of 
rivers which I know; said they sailed from Lumboko; two or 
three speak different language from the others; the Timone 
language. Say-ang-wa rivers spoken of; these run through 
the Vi country. I learned to speak English at Sierre Leone. 
Was put on board a man-of-war one year and a half. They all 
agree as to where they sailed from. I have no doubt they 
are Africans. I have been in this country six months; came 
in a British man-of-war; have been in this town (New Haven) 
four months with Mr. Bishop; he calls on me for no money, 
and do not know who pays my board. I was stolen by a black 
man who stole ten of us. One man carried us two months' 
walk. Have conversed with Sinqua; Barton has been in my 
town, Gorang. I was sailing for Havana when the British 
man-of-war captured us."  
TESTIMONY OF PELETIAH FORDHAM CONCERNING HIS DISCOVERY AND 
DETAINMENT OF THE AFRICANS  
TESTIMONY OF THOMAS GEDNEY AND RICHARD MEADE CONCERNING 
THEIR SEIZURE OF THE AMISTAD  
TESTIMONY OF SULLIVAN HALEY AND DWIGHT JANES CONCERNING 
REMARKS OF RUIZ  
DEPOSITION OF JAMES RAY, CREW MEMBER OF THE U.S.S. 
WASHINGTON  
TESTIMONY OF JAMES COVEY AND CHARLES PRATT, TRANSLATORS  
TESTIMONY OF DR. JOSIAH GIBBS, LINQUIST, CONCERNING THE 
ORIGIN OF THE NEGROES  
TESTIMONY OF CINQUE, FULIWA AND GRABEAUCONCERNING THEIR 
KIDNAPPING, PASSAGE TO CUBA, SALE, AND MUTINY  
TESTIMONY OF ANTONIO, THE CUBAN (CREOLE) CABIN BOY 
CONCERNING THE MUTINY  
TESTIMONY OF FRANCIS BACON, A RECENT VISITOR TO SIERRA 
LEONE, CONCERNING THE SLAVE FACTORY AT LOMBOKO


--- PAGE 97 ---
CLAIM OF GEDNEY AND MEADE AND CREW OF  
THE WASHINGTON FOR SALVAGE 
On the 23d day of January, 1840, Thomas R. Gedney, and 
Richard W. Meade, officers of the United States surveying 
brig Washington, on behalf of themselves and the officers 
and crew of the brig Washington, and of others interested 
and entitled, filed a libel in the District Court of the 
United States, for the District of Connecticut, stating 
that off Culloden Point, near Montauck Point, they took 
possession of a vessel which proved to be a Spanish 
schooner called the Amistad, of Havana, in the island of 
Cuba, of about 120 tons burden; and the said libellants 
found said schooner was manned by forty-five negroes, some 
of whom had landed near the said point for water; and there 
were also on board, two Spanish gentlemen, who represented 
themselves to be, and, as the libellants verily believe 
were part owners of the cargo, and of the negroes on board, 
who were slaves, belonging to said Spanish gentlemen; that 
the schooner Amistad sailed on the 28th day of June, A.D. 
1839 from the port of Havana, bound to a port in the 
province of Principe, both in the island of Cuba, under the 
command of Raymon Ferrer as master thereof: that the 
schooner had on board and was laden with a large and 
valuable cargo, and provisions, to the amount, in all, of 
foty thousand dollars, and also money to the sum and amount 
of about two hundred and fifty dollars; and also fifty-four 
slaves, to wit, fifty-one male slaves, and three young 
female slaves, who were worth twenty-five thousand dolalrs; 
and while on the voyage from Havana to Principe, the slaves 
rose upon the captain and crew of the schooner, and killed 
and murdered the captain and one of the crew, and two more 
of the crew escaped and got away from the schooner; that 
the two Spaniards on board, to wit, Pedro Montez, and Jose 
Ruiz, remained alive on board the schooner after the murder 
of the captain, and after the negroes had taken possession 
of the vessel and cargo; that their lives were spared to 
assist in the sailing of the vessel; and it was directed by 
the negroes, that the schooner should be navigated for the 
coast of Africa; and Pedro Montez, and Jose Ruiz did, 
accordingly, steer as thus directed and compelled by the 
negroes, at the peril of their lives, in the daytime, and 
in the night altered their course and steered for the 
American shore; but after two months on the ocean, they 
succeeded in coming round Montauck Point, then they were 
discovered in coming by the libellants, and the two Spanish


--- PAGE 98 ---
gentlemen begged for and claimed the aid and protection of 
the libellants. That the schooner was accordingly taken 
possession of, and recaptured from the hands and possession 
of the negroes who had taken the same; that the schooner 
was brought into the port of New London, where she now is; 
and the schooner would with great difficulty, exposure, and 
danger have been taken by the libellants, but for the 
surprise upon the blacks who had possession thereof, a part 
of whom were on shore; and but for the aid and assistance 
and services of the libellants, the vessel and cargo would 
have been wholly lost to the respective owners thereof. 
That the cargo belongs to divers Spanish merchants and 
others, resident in the island of Cuba, and to Pedro Montez 
and Jose Ruiz, the latter owning most of the slaves.  
The libellants stated, that having saved the schooner 
Amistad and cargo, and the slaves, with considerable 
danger, they prayed that process should be issued against 
the same, and that the usual proceedings might be had by 
the Court, by which a reasonable salvage should be decreed 
out of the property so saved.  
Afterwards, Henry Green and Pelatiah Fordham, and others, 
filed a petition and answer to the libel, claiming salvage 
out of the property proceeded against by Thomas R. Gedney 
and others, and stating that before the Amistad was seen or 
boarded by the officers and crew of the Washington, they 
had secured a portion of the negroes who had come on shore, 
and had thus aided on saving the vessel and cargo.  
CLAIM OF RUIZ AND MONTEZ UNDER A TREATY 
WITH SPAIN 
On the 29th of August, 1839, Jose Ruiz and Pedro Montez, of 
Cuba, filed claims to all the negroes on board of the 
Amistad, except Antonio, as their slaves. A part of the 
merchandise on board the vessel was also claimed by them. 
They alleged that the negroes had risen on the captain of 
the schooner, and had murdered him; and that afterwards 
they, Ruiz and Montez, had brought her into the United 
States. They claimed that the negroes and merchandise ought 
to be restored to them, under the treaty with Spain; and 
denied salvage to Lieutenant Gedney, and to all other 
persons claiming salvage.


--- PAGE 99 ---
Afterwards, Ruiz and Montez each filed in the District 
Court, a separate libel, stating more at large the 
circumstances of the voyage of the Amistad, the murder of 
the captain by the negroes, and that the negroes afterwards 
compelled them to steer the vessel towards Africa, but that 
they contrived to bring her to the coast of the United 
States, where she was captured by the United States brig 
Washington. Ruiz, in his libel, stated the negroes 
belonging to him to have been forty-nine in number, "named 
and known at Havana, as follows: Antonio, Simon, Jose 
Pedro, Martin, Manuel, Andreo, Edwards, Celedonia, 
Burtolono, Ramia, Augustin, Evaristo, Casamero, Merchoi, 
Gabriel, Santorion, Escolastico, Rascual, Estanislao, 
Desidero, Nicholas, Estevan, Tomas, Cosme, Luis, Bartolo, 
Julian, Federico, Salustiano, Ladislao, Celestino, 
Epifanio, Eduardo, Benancico, Felepe, Francisco, Hipoleto, 
Berreto, Isidoro, Vecente, Deconisco, Apolonio, Esequies, 
Leon, Julio, Hipoleto, and Zenon; of whom several have 
died." Their present names, Ruiz stated, he had been 
informed, were, "Cinque, Burnah 1st, Carpree, Dammah, 
Fourrie 1st, Shumah, Conomah, Choolay, Burnah 2d, Baah, 
Cabbah, Poomah, Kimbo, Peea, Bang-ye-ah, Saah, Carlee, 
Parale, Morrah, Yahome, Narquor, Quarto, Sesse, Con. 
Fourrie 2d, Kennah, Lammane, Fajanah, Faah, Yahboy, 
Faquannah, Berrie, Fawnu, Chockammaw, and Gabbow."  
The libel of Pedro Montez stated that the names of three 
negroes on board the Amistad, belonging to him, were 
Francisco, Juan, and Josepha; the Spanish name of the 
fourth was not mentioned; and the four were not called 
Teme, Mahgra, Kene, and Carria.  
All these were stated to be slaves, and the property of the 
claimants, purchased by them at Havana; where slavery is 
tolerated and allowed by law; and they and the merchandise 
on board the vessel, the claimants alleged, by the laws and 
usages of nations, and of the United States of America, and 
according to the treaties between Spain and the United 
States, ought to be restored to the claimants without 
diminution, and entire.  
The vessel, negroes, and merchandise were taken into his 
possession, by the Marshal of the district of Connecticut, 
under process issued by order of the Court.


--- PAGE 100 ---
POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES ATTORNEY 
HOLABIRD 
On the 19th of September, 1837, William S. Holabird, Esq., 
attorney of the United States, for the district, filed a 
suggestion in the District Court, stating that, since the 
libel aforesaid, of Thomas R. Gedney, Esq., was filed in 
this Court, viz. within the present month of September, in 
the year of our Lord 1839, the duly accredited minister to 
the United States, of her Catholic Majesty, the Queen of 
Spain, had officially presented to the proper department of 
the United States government, a claim, which is now 
pending, upon the United States, setting forth that "the 
vessel aforesaid, called the Amistad, and her cargo 
aforesaid, together with certain slaves on board the said 
vessel, all being the same as described in the libel 
aforesaid, are the property of Spanish subjects, and that 
the said vessel, cargo, and slaves, while so being the 
property of the said Spanish subjects, arrived within the 
jurisdictional limits of the United States, and were taken 
possession of by the said public armed brig of the United 
States, under such circumstances as make it the duty of the 
United States to cause the same vessel, cargo, and slaves, 
being the property of said Spanish subjects, to be restored 
to the true proprietors and owners of the same without 
further hindrance or detention, as required by the treaty 
now subsisting between the United States and Spain." The 
attorney of the United States, in behalf of the United 
States, prayed the Court, on its being made legally to 
appear that the claim of the Spanish minister is well 
founded, and is conformable to the treaty, that the Court 
make such order for the disposal of the said vessel, cargo, 
and slaves as may best enable the United States in all 
respects to comply with their treaty stipulations, and 
preserve the public faith inviolate. But if it should be 
made to appear that the persons described as slaves, are 
negroes and persons of colour, who have been transported 
from Africa, in violation of the laws of the United States, 
and brought within the United States, contrary to the same 
laws, the attorney, in behalf of the United States, claimed 
that, in such case, the Court will make such further order 
in the premises as may enable the United States, if deemed 
expedient, to remove such persons to the coast of Africa to 
be delivered there to such agent or agents as may be 
authorized to receive and provide for them, pursuant to the 
laws of the United States, in such case provided, or to


--- PAGE 101 ---
make such other order as to the Court may seem fit, right, 
and proper in the premises."  
CLAIM OF THE AMISTADS TO THEIR FREEDOM 
On the same day, September 19, 1839, the negroes, by their 
counsel, filed an answer to the libel of Lieutenant Gedney 
and others, claiming salvage, and to the claim of Ruiz and 
Montez, claiming them as slaves, as also to the 
intervention of the United States, on the application of 
the minister of Spain; in which they say, that they are 
natives of Africa, and were born free, and ever since have 
been and still of right are and ought to be free and not 
slaves; that they were never domiciled in the island of 
Cuba, or in the dominions of the Queen of Spain, or subject 
to the laws thereof. That on or about the 15th day of 
April, 1839, they were, in the land of their nativity, 
unlawfully kidnapped, and forcibly, and wrongfully, by 
certain persons to them unknown, who were there unlawfully 
and piratically engaged in the slave trade between the 
coast of Africa and the island of Cuba, contrary to the 
will of these respondents, unlawfully, and under 
circumstances of great cruelty, transported to the island 
of Cuba for the unlawful purpose of being sold as slaves, 
and were there illegally landed for that purpose. That Jose 
Ruiz, one of the libellants, well knowing all the premises, 
and confederating with the persons by whom the respondents 
were unlawfully taken and holden as slaves, and intending 
to deprive the respondents severally of their liberty, made 
a pretended purchase of the respondents, except the said 
Carria, Teme, Kene, and Mahgra; and that Pedro Montez, also 
well knowing all the premises, and confederating with the 
said persons for the purpose aforesaid, made a pretended 
purchase of the said Carria, Teme, Kene, and Mahgra; that 
the pretended purchases were made from persons who had no 
right whatever to the respondents or any of them, and that 
the same were null and void, and conferred no right or 
title on Ruiz or Montez, or right of control over the 
respondents or either of them. That on or about the 28th 
day of June, 1839, Ruiz and Montez, confederating with each 
other, and with one Ramon Ferrer, now deceased, captain of 
the schooner Amistad, and others of the crew thereof, 
caused respondents severally, without law or right, under 
color of certain false and fraudulent papers by them 
procured and fraudulently used for that purpose, to be 
placed by force on board the schooner to be transported 
with said Ruiz and Montez to some place unknown to the


--- PAGE 102 ---
respondents, and there enslaved for life. That the 
respondents, being treated on board said vessel by said 
Ruiz and Montez and their confederates with great cruelty 
and oppression, and being of right free as aforesaid, were 
incited by the love of liberty natural to all men, and by 
the desire of returning to their families and kindred, to 
take possession of said vessel while navigating the high 
seas, as they had a right to do, with the intent to return 
therein to their native country, or to seek an asylum in 
some free state, where slavery did not exist, in order that 
they might enjoy their liberty under the protection of its 
government; that the schooner, about the 26th of August, 
1839, arrived in the possession of the respondents, at 
Culloden Point near Montauk, and was there anchored near 
the shore of Long Island, within hailing distance thereof, 
and within the waters and territory of the state of New 
York; that the respondents, Cinque, Carlee, Dammah, Baah, 
Monat, Nahguis, Quato, Con, Fajanah, Berrie, Gabbo, 
Fouleaa, Kimbo, Faquannah, Cononia, otherwise called 
Ndzarbla, Yaboi, Burnah 1st, Shuma, Fawne, Peale, Ba, and 
Sheele, while said schooner lay at anchor as aforesaid, 
went on shore within the state of New York to procure 
provisions and other necessaries, and while there, in a 
state where slavery is unlawful and does not exist, under 
the protection of the government and laws of said state by 
which they were all free, whether on board of said 
schooner, or on shore, the respondents were severally 
seized, and well those who were on shore as aforesaid, as 
those who were on board of and in possession of said 
schooner, by Lieutenant Gedney, his officers, and crew of 
the United States brig Washington, without any lawful 
warrant or authority whatever, at the instance of Ruiz and 
Montez, with the intent to keep and secure them as slaves 
to Ruiz and Montez, respectively, and to obtain an award of 
salvage therefor, from this honourable Court, as for a 
meritorious act. That for that purpose, the respondents 
were, by Lieutenant Gedney, his officers and crew, brought 
to the port of New London; and while there, and afterwards, 
under the subsequent proceedings in this honourable Court 
taken into the custody of the marshal of said district of 
Connecticut, and confined and held in the jails in the 
cities of New Haven and Hartford, respectively, as 
aforesaid. Wherefore, the respondents pray that they may be 
set free, as they of right are and ought to be, and that 
they be released from the custody of the marshal, under the 
process of this honourable Court, under which, or under 
colour of which they are holden as aforesaid.


--- PAGE 103 ---
CLAIM OF CUBAN MERCHANTS THAT THEIR  
PROPERTY SHOULD BE RETURNED 
Jose Antonio Tellincas, and Aspe and Laca, subjects of 
Spain, and merchants of Cuba, presented claims for certain 
merchandise which was on board the Amistad when taken 
possession of by Lieutenant Gedney; denying all claims to 
salvage, and asking that the property should be restored to 
them.  
DECISION OF DISTRICT JUDGE ANDREW 
JUDSON 
On the 23d day of January the District Judge made a decree, 
having taken into his consideration all the libels, claims, 
and the suggestion of the District Attorney of the United 
States, and the claim preferred by him that the negroes 
should be delivered to the Spanish authorities, the negroes 
to be sent by them to Cuba, or that the negroes should be 
placed under the authority of the President of the United 
States, to be transported to Africa.  
The decree rejected the claim of Green and others to 
salvage with costs. The claim of Lieutenant Gedney and 
others to salvage on the alleged slaves was dismissed. The 
libels and claims of Ruiz and Montez being included under 
the claim of the minister of Spain, were ordered to be 
dismissed, with costs taxed against Ruiz and Montez 
respectively.  
"That that part of the claim of the minister of Spain which 
demands the surrender of Cinques and others, who are 
specifically named in the answer filed as aforesaid, be 
dismissed, without cost."  
That the claim of the vice counsul of Spain, demanding the 
surrender to the Spanish government of Antonio, a slave 
owned by the heirs of Captain Ferrer, should be sustained; 
and ordered that Antonio should be delivered to the 
government of Spain, or its agent, without costs.  
The claims of Tellincas and Aspe and Laca, for the 
restoration of the goods specified by them, being part of 
the cargo of the Amistad, was sustained, and that the same 
goods be restored to them, deducting one-third of the gross


--- PAGE 104 ---
appraised value of them, which was allowed as salvage to 
the officers and crew of the Washington. A like salvage of 
one-third of the gross value of the Amistad, and the other 
merchandise on board of her, was also adjudged to the 
salvors. The costs were to be deducted from the other two-
thirds.  
"And, whereas the duly accredited minister of Spain, 
resident in the United States, hath, in behalf of the 
government of Spain, for the owners of said schooner, and 
the residue of said goods, claimed that the same be 
restored to that government for the said owners, they being 
Spanish subjects, under the provisions of the treaty 
subsisting between the United States and Spain: And, 
whereas it hath been made to appear to this Court, that the 
said schooner is lawfully owned by the subjects of Spain, 
as also the residue of said goods not specifically claimed: 
And, whereas the aforesaid Don Pedro Montez, and Jose Ruiz, 
have in person ceased to prosecute their claim as specified 
in their respective libels, and their said claims fall 
within the demand and claim of the Spanish minister, made 
as aforesaid: And, whereas the seizure of the said schooner 
and goods by the said Thomas R. Gedney and others, was made 
on the high seas, in a perilous condition, and they were 
first brought into the port of New London, within the 
District of Connecticut, and libelled for salvage,"  
[The decree then proceeds to adjudge to Lieutenant Gedney 
and others, as salvage, one-third of the gross proceeds of 
the vessel and cargo, according to an appraisement which 
had been made thereof; and, if not paid, directed the 
property to be sold, and that proportion of the gross 
proceeds of the sale to be paid over to the captors, the 
residue, after payment of all costs, to be paid to the 
respective owners of the same.]  
Upon the answers of the negroes, and the representations of 
the District Attorney of the United States, and of Montez 
and Ruiz, the decree proceeds:  
"This Court having fully heard the parties appearing with 
their proofs, do find that the respondents, severally 
answering as aforesaid, are each of them natives of Africa, 
and were born free, and ever since have been, and still of 
right are free, and not slaves, as is in said several 
libels claims or representations alleged or surmised; that 
they were never domiciled in the Island of Cuba, or the


--- PAGE 105 ---
dominions of the Queen of Spain, or subject to the laws 
thereof; that they were severally kidnapped in their native 
country, and were, in violation of their own rights, and of 
the laws of Spain, prohibiting the African slave trade, 
imported into the island of Cuba, about the 12th June, 
1839, and were there unlawfully held and transferred to the 
said Ruiz and Montez, respectively; that said respondents 
were within fifteen days after their arrival at Havana, 
aforesaid, by said Ruiz and Montez, put on board said 
schooner Amistad to be transported to some port in said 
island of Cuba, and there unlawfully held as slaves; that 
the respondents or some of them, influenced by the desire 
of recovering their liberty, and of returning to their 
families and kindred in their native country, took 
possession of said schooner Amistad, killed the captain and 
cook, and severely wounded said Montez, while on her voyage 
from Havana, as aforesaid, and that the respondents arrived 
in possession of said schooner at Culloden Point near 
Montauck, and there anchored said schooner on the high 
seas, at the distance of half a mile from the shore of Long 
Island, and were there, while a part of the respondents 
were, as is alleged in their said answer, on shore in quest 
of water and other necessaries, and about to sail in said 
schooner for the coast of Africa, seized by said Lieutenant 
Gedney, and his officers and crew, and brought into the 
port of New London, in this district. And this Court doth 
further find, that it hath ever been the intention of the 
said Montez and Ruiz, since the said Africans were put on 
board the said schooner, to hold the said Africans as 
slaves; that at the time when the said Cinque and others, 
here making answer, were imported from Africa into the 
dominions of Spain, there was a law of Spain prohibiting 
such importations, declaring the persons so imported to be 
free; that said law was in force when the claimants took 
the possession of the said Africans and put them on board 
said schooner, and the same has ever sicne been in force."  
The decree of the District Court recites the decree of the 
government of Spain of December, 1817, prohibiting the 
slave trade, and declaring all negroes brought into the 
dominions of Spain by slave traders to be free; and 
enjoining the execution of the decree on all the officers 
of Spain in the dominions of Spain.  
The decree of the District Court proceeds:


--- PAGE 106 ---
And this Court doth further find, that when the said 
Africans were shipped on board the said schooner, by the 
said Montez and Ruiz, the same were shipped under the 
passports signed by the Governor General of the Island of 
Cuba, in the following words, viz.:  
Description.  
Size.  
Age.  
Colour.  
Hair.  
Forehead.  
Eyebrows.  
Eyes.  
Nose.  
Mouth.  
Beard.  
Peculiar signs.  
Havana, June 22d, 1839.  
I grant permission to carry three black ladinoes, named Juana, 
Francisca, and Josefa, property of Dr. Pedro Montez, to Puerto 
Principe, by sea. They must present themselves to the respective 
territorial judge with this permit.
  
Duty, 2 reasls. ESPLETA.  
(Endorsed) Commander of Matria.  
Let pass in the schooner Amistad, to Guana ja, Ferrer, master. Havana, 
June 27th, 1839
  
MART & Co.  
Description.  
Size.  
Age.  
Colour.  
Hair.  
Forehead.  
Eyebrows.  
Eyes.  
Nose.  
Mouth.


--- PAGE 107 ---
Beard.  
Peculiar signs.  
Havana, June 26th, 1839.  
I grant permission to carry forty-nine black ladinos, named Antonio, 
Simon, Lucas, Jose, Pedro, Martin, Manuel, Andrios, Edwardo, 
Celedernnio, Bartolo, Raman, Augustin, Evaristo, Casimero, Meratio, 
Gabriel, Santome, Ecclesiastico, pasenal, Stanislao, Desiderio, 
Nicolas, Estevan, Tomas, Cosme, Luis, Bartolo, Julian, Federico, 
Saturdino, Ladislas, Celestino, Epifano, Fronerie, Venaniro, Feligre, 
Francisco, Hypolito, Benito, Isdoro, Vicente, Dioniceo, Apolino, 
Esequiel, Leon, Julio, Hipolito, y Raman, property of Dr. Jose Ruiz, to 
Puerto Principe, by sea. They must present themselves with this permit 
to the respective territorial judge.
  
ESPLETA.  
Duty, 2 reals.  
(Endorsed) Commander of Matria.  
Let pass in the schooner Amistad, to Guanaja, Ferrer, master.  
Havana, June 27th, 1839.  
MART & Co."  
"Which said passorts do not truly describe the said persons 
shipped under the same.Whereupon, the said claim of the 
minister of Spain, as set forth in the two libels filed in 
the name of the United States by the said District 
Attorney, for and in behalf of the government of Spain and 
her subjects, so far as the same relate to the said Africas 
named in said claim, be dismissed."  
"And upon the libel filed by said District Attorney in 
behalf of the United States, claiming the said Africans 
libelled as aforesaid, and now in the custody of the 
Marshal of the district of Connecticut, under and by virtue 
of process issued from this Court, that they may be 
delivered to the President of the United States to be 
transported to Africa. It is decreed that the said Africans 
now in the custody of said Marshal, and libelled and 
claimed as aforesaid, (excepting Antonio Ferrer, be 
delivered to the President of the United States by the 
Marshal of the district of Connecticut, to be by him 
transported to Africa, in pursuance of the law of Congress,


--- PAGE 108 ---
passed March 3d, 1819, entitled "An act in addition to the 
acts prohibiting the slave trade.'"  
 
THE UNITED STATES, APPELLANTS, v. THE LIBELLANTS AND  
CLAIMANTS OF THE SCHOONER AMISTAD, HER TACKLE, APPAREL, AND  
FURNITURE, TOGETHER WITH HER CARGO, AND THE AFRICANS  
MENTIONED AND DESCRIBED IN THE SEVERAL LIBELS AND CLAIMS,  
APPELLEES.  
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES  
40 U.S. 518 
JANUARY, 1841 Term 
PRIOR HISTORY OF AMISTAD CASE  
 
PRIOR HISTORY of the Amistad Case 
ON appeal from the Circuit Court of the United States for 
the District of Connecticut.  
On the 23d day of January, 1840, Thomas R. Gedney, and 
Richard W. Meade, officers of the United States surveying 
brig Washington, on behalf of themselves and the officers 
and crew of the brig Washington, and of others interested 
and entitled, filed a libel in the District Court of the 
United States, for the District of Connecticut, stating 
that off Culloden Point, near Montauck Point, they took 
possession of a vessel which proved to be a Spanish 
schooner called the Amistad, of Havana, in the island of 
Cuba, of about 120 tons burden; and the said libellants 
found said schooner was manned by forty-five negroes, some 
of whom had landed near the said point for water; and there 
were also on board, two Spanish gentlemen, who represented 
themselves to be, and, as the libellants verily believe 
were part owners of the cargo, and of the negroes on board, 
who were slaves, belonging to said Spanish gentlemen; that 
the schooner Amistad sailed on the 28th day of June, A.D. 
1839 from the port of Havana, bound to a port in the 
province of Principe, both in the island of Cuba, under the 
command of Raymon Ferrer as master thereof: that the 
schooner had on board and was laden with a large and 
valuable cargo, and provisions, to the amount, in all, of


--- PAGE 109 ---
foty thousand dollars, and also money to the sum and amount 
of about two hundred and fifty dollars; and also fifty-four 
slaves, to wit, fifty-one male slaves, and three young 
female slaves, who were worth twenty-five thousand dolalrs; 
and while on the voyage from Havana to Principe, the slaves 
rose upon the captain and crew of the schooner, and killed 
and murdered the captain and one of the crew, and two more 
of the crew escaped and got away from the schooner; that 
the two Spaniards on board, to wit, Pedro Montez, and Jose 
Ruiz, remained alive on board the schooner after the murder 
of the captain, and after the negroes had taken possession 
of the vessel and cargo; that their lives were spared to 
assist in the sailing of the vessel; and it was directed by 
the negroes, that the schooner should be navigated for the 
coast of Africa; and Pedro Montez, and Jose Ruiz did, 
accordingly, steer as thus directed and compelled by the 
negroes, at the peril of their lives, in the daytime, and 
in the night altered their course and steered for the 
American shore; but after two months on the ocean, they 
succeeded in coming round Montauck Point, then they were 
discovered in coming by the libellants, and the two Spanish 
gentlemen begged for and claimed the aid and protection of 
the libellants. That the schooner was accordingly taken 
possession of, and recaptured from the hands and possession 
of the negroes who had taken the same; that the schooner 
was brought into the port of New London, where she now is; 
and the schooner would with great difficulty, exposure, and 
danger have been taken by the libellants, but for the 
surprise upon the blacks who had possession thereof, a part 
of whom were on shore; and but for the aid and assistance 
and services of the libellants, the vessel and cargo would 
have been wholly lost to the respective owners thereof. 
That the cargo belongs to divers Spanish merchants and 
others, resident in the island of Cuba, and to Pedro Montez 
and Jose Ruiz, the latter owning most of the slaves.  
The libellants stated, that having saved the schooner 
Amistad and cargo, and the slaves, with considerable 
danger, they prayed that process should be issued against 
the same, and that the usual proceedings might be had by 
the Court, by which a reasonable salvage should be decreed 
out of the property so saved.  
Afterwards, Henry Green and Pelatiah Fordham, and others, 
filed a petition and answer to the libel, claiming salvage 
out of the property proceeded against by Thomas R. Gedney 
and others, and stating that before the Amistad was seen or


--- PAGE 110 ---
boarded by the officers and crew of the Washington, they 
had secured a portion of the negroes who had come on shore, 
and had thus aided on saving the vessel and cargo.  
On the 29th of August, 1839, Jose Ruiz and Pedro Montez, of 
Cuba, filed claims to all the negroes on board of the 
Amistad, except Antonio, as their slaves. A part of the 
merchandise on board the vessel was also claimed by them. 
They alleged that the negroes had risen on the captain of 
the schooner, and had murdered him; and that afterwards 
they, Ruiz and Montez, had brought her into the United 
States. They claimed that the negroes and merchandise ought 
to be restored to them, under the treaty with Spain; and 
denied salvage to Lieutenant Gedney, and to all other 
persons claiming salvage.  
Afterwards, Ruiz and Montez each filed in the District 
Court, a separate libel, stating more at large the 
circumstances of the voyage of the Amistad, the murder of 
the captain by the negroes, and that the negroes afterwards 
compelled them to steer the vessel towards Africa, but that 
they contrived to bring her to the coast of the United 
States, where she was captured by the United States brig 
Washington. Ruiz, in his libel, stated the negroes 
belonging to him to have been forty-nine in number, "named 
and known at Havana, as follows: Antonio, Simon, Jose 
Pedro, Martin, Manuel, Andreo, Edwards, Celedonia, 
Burtolono, Ramia, Augustin, Evaristo, Casamero, Merchoi, 
Gabriel, Santorion, Escolastico, Rascual, Estanislao, 
Desidero, Nicholas, Estevan, Tomas, Cosme, Luis, Bartolo, 
Julian, Federico, Salustiano, Ladislao, Celestino, 
Epifanio, Eduardo, Benancico, Felepe, Francisco, Hipoleto, 
Berreto, Isidoro, Vecente, Deconisco, Apolonio, Esequies, 
Leon, Julio, Hipoleto, and Zenon; of whom several have 
died." Their present names, Ruiz stated, he had been 
informed, were, "Cinque, Burnah 1st, Carpree, Dammah, 
Fourrie 1st, Shumah, Conomah, Choolay, Burnah 2d, Baah, 
Cabbah, Poomah, Kimbo, Peea, Bang-ye-ah, Saah, Carlee, 
Parale, Morrah, Yahome, Narquor, Quarto, Sesse, Con. 
Fourrie 2d, Kennah, Lammane, Fajanah, Faah, Yahboy, 
Faquannah, Berrie, Fawnu, Chockammaw, and Gabbow."  
The libel of Pedro Montez stated that the names of three 
negroes on board the Amistad, belonging to him, were 
Francisco, Juan, and Josepha; the Spanish name of the 
fourth was not mentioned; and the four were not called 
Teme, Mahgra, Kene, and Carria.


--- PAGE 111 ---
All these were stated to be slaves, and the property of the 
claimants, purchased by them at Havana; where slavery is 
tolerated and allowed by law; and they and the merchandise 
on board the vessel, the claimants alleged, by the laws and 
usages of nations, and of the United States of America, and 
according to the treaties between Spain and the United 
States, ought to be restored to the claimants without 
diminution, and entire.  
The vessel, negroes, and merchandise were taken into his 
possession, by the Marshal of the district of Connecticut, 
under process issued by order of the Court.  
On the 19th of September, 1837, William S. Holabird, Esq., 
attorney of the United States, for the district, filed a 
suggestion in the District Court, stating that, since the 
libel aforesaid, of Thomas R. Gedney, Esq., was filed in 
this Court, viz. within the present month of September, in 
the year of our Lord 1839, the duly accredited minister to 
the United States, of her Catholic Majesty, the Queen of 
Spain, had officially presented to the proper department of 
the United States government, a claim, which is now 
pending, upon the United States, setting forth that "the 
vessel aforesaid, called the Amistad, and her cargo 
aforesaid, together with certain slaves on board the said 
vessel, all being the same as described in the libel 
aforesaid, are the property of Spanish subjects, and that 
the said vessel, cargo, and slaves, while so being the 
property of the said Spanish subjects, arrived within the 
jurisdictional limits of the United States, and were taken 
possession of by the said public armed brig of the United 
States, under such circumstances as make it the duty of the 
United States to cause the same vessel, cargo, and slaves, 
being the property of said Spanish subjects, to be restored 
to the true proprietors and owners of the same without 
further hindrance or detention, as required by the treaty 
now subsisting between the United States and Spain." The 
attorney of the United States, in behalf of the United 
States, prayed the Court, on its being made legally to 
appear that the claim of the Spanish minister is well 
founded, and is conformable to the treaty, that the Court 
make such order for the disposal of the said vessel, cargo, 
and slaves as may best enable the United States in all 
respects to comply with their treaty stipulations, and 
preserve the public faith inviolate. But if it should be 
made to appear that the persons described as slaves, are 
negroes and persons of colour, who have been transported


--- PAGE 112 ---
from Africa, in violation of the laws of the United States, 
and brought within the United States, contrary to the same 
laws, the attorney, in behalf of the United States, claimed 
that, in such case, the Court will make such further order 
in the premises as may enable the United States, if deemed 
expedient, to remove such persons to the coast of Africa to 
be delivered there to such agent or agents as may be 
authorized to receive and provide for them, pursuant to the 
laws of the United States, in such case provided, or to 
make such other order as to the Court may seem fit, right, 
and proper in the premises."  
On the same day, September 19, 1839, the negroes, by their 
counsel, filed an answer to the libel of Lieutenant Gedney 
and others, claiming salvage, and to the claim of Ruiz and 
Montez, claiming them as slaves, as also to the 
intervention of the United States, on the application of 
the minister of Spain; in which they say, that they are 
natives of Africa, and were born free, and ever since have 
been and still of right are and ought to be free and not 
slaves; that they were never domiciled in the island of 
Cuba, or in the dominions of the Queen of Spain, or subject 
to the laws thereof. That on or about the 15th day of 
April, 1839, they were, in the land of their nativity, 
unlawfully kidnapped, and forcibly, and wrongfully, by 
certain persons to them unknown, who were there unlawfully 
and piratically engaged in the slave trade between the 
coast of Africa and the island of Cuba, contrary to the 
will of these respondents, unlawfully, and under 
circumstances of great cruelty, transported to the island 
of Cuba for the unlawful purpose of being sold as slaves, 
and were there illegally landed for that purpose. That Jose 
Ruiz, one of the libellants, well knowing all the premises, 
and confederating with the persons by whom the respondents 
were unlawfully taken and holden as slaves, and intending 
to deprive the respondents severally of their liberty, made 
a pretended purchase of the respondents, except the said 
Carria, Teme, Kene, and Mahgra; and that Pedro Montez, also 
well knowing all the premises, and confederating with the 
said persons for the purpose aforesaid, made a pretended 
purchase of the said Carria, Teme, Kene, and Mahgra; that 
the pretended purchases were made from persons who had no 
right whatever to the respondents or any of them, and that 
the same were null and void, and conferred no right or 
title on Ruiz or Montez, or right of control over the 
respondents or either of them. That on or about the 28th 
day of June, 1839, Ruiz and Montez, confederating with each


--- PAGE 113 ---
other, and with one Ramon Ferrer, now deceased, captain of 
the schooner Amistad, and others of the crew thereof, 
caused respondents severally, without law or right, under 
color of certain false and fraudulent papers by them 
procured and fraudulently used for that purpose, to be 
placed by force on board the schooner to be transported 
with said Ruiz and Montez to some place unknown to the 
respondents, and there enslaved for life. That the 
respondents, being treated on board said vessel by said 
Ruiz and Montez and their confederates with great cruelty 
and oppression, and being of right free as aforesaid, were 
incited by the love of liberty natural to all men, and by 
the desire of returning to their families and kindred, to 
take possession of said vessel while navigating the high 
seas, as they had a right to do, with the intent to return 
therein to their native country, or to seek an asylum in 
some free state, where slavery did not exist, in order that 
they might enjoy their liberty under the protection of its 
government; that the schooner, about the 26th of August, 
1839, arrived in the possession of the respondents, at 
Culloden Point near Montauk, and was there anchored near 
the shore of Long Island, within hailing distance thereof, 
and within the waters and territory of the state of New 
York; that the respondents, Cinque, Carlee, Dammah, Baah, 
Monat, Nahguis, Quato, Con, Fajanah, Berrie, Gabbo, 
Fouleaa, Kimbo, Faquannah, Cononia, otherwise called 
Ndzarbla, Yaboi, Burnah 1st, Shuma, Fawne, Peale, Ba, and 
Sheele, while said schooner lay at anchor as aforesaid, 
went on shore within the state of New York to procure 
provisions and other necessaries, and while there, in a 
state where slavery is unlawful and does not exist, under 
the protection of the government and laws of said state by 
which they were all free, whether on board of said 
schooner, or on shore, the respondents were severally 
seized, and well those who were on shore as aforesaid, as 
those who were on board of and in possession of said 
schooner, by Lieutenant Gedney, his officers, and crew of 
the United States brig Washington, without any lawful 
warrant or authority whatever, at the instance of Ruiz and 
Montez, with the intent to keep and secure them as slaves 
to Ruiz and Montez, respectively, and to obtain an award of 
salvage therefor, from this honourable Court, as for a 
meritorious act. That for that purpose, the respondents 
were, by Lieutenant Gedney, his officers and crew, brought 
to the port of New London; and while there, and afterwards, 
under the subsequent proceedings in this honourable Court 
taken into the custody of the marshal of said district of


--- PAGE 114 ---
Connecticut, and confined and held in the jails in the 
cities of New Haven and Hartford, respectively, as 
aforesaid. Wherefore, the respondents pray that they may be 
set free, as they of right are and ought to be, and that 
they be released from the custody of the marshal, under the 
process of this honourable Court, under which, or under 
colour of which they are holden as aforesaid.  
Jose Antonio Tellincas, and Aspe and Laca, subjects of 
Spain, and merchants of Cuba, presented claims for certain 
merchandise which was on board the Amistad when taken 
possession of by Lieutenant Gedney; denying all claims to 
salvage, and asking that the property should be restored to 
them.  
On the 23d day of January the District Judge made a decree, 
having taken into his consideration all the libels, claims, 
and the suggestion of the District Attorney of the United 
States, and the claim preferred by him that the negroes 
should be delivered to the Spanish authorities, the negroes 
to be sent by them to Cuba, or that the negroes should be 
placed under the authority of the President of the United 
States, to be transported to Africa.  
The decree rejected the claim of Green and others to 
salvage with costs. The claim of Lieutenant Gedney and 
others to salvage on the alleged slaves was dismissed. The 
libels and claims of Ruiz and Montez being included under 
the claim of the minister of Spain, were ordered to be 
dismissed, with costs taxed against Ruiz and Montez 
respectively.  
"That that part of the claim of the minister of Spain which 
demands the surrender of Cinques and others, who are 
specifically named in the answer filed as aforesaid, be 
dismissed, without cost."  
That the claim of the vice counsul of Spain, demanding the 
surrender to the Spanish government of Antonio, a slave 
owned by the heirs of Captain Ferrer, should be sustained; 
and ordered that Antonio should be delivered to the 
government of Spain, or its agent, without costs.  
The claims of Tellincas and Aspe and Laca, for the 
restoration of the goods specified by them, being part of 
the cargo of the Amistad, was sustained, and that the same 
goods be restored to them, deducting one-third of the gross


--- PAGE 115 ---
appraised value of them, which was allowed as salvage to 
the officers and crew of the Washington. A like salvage of 
one-third of the gross value of the Amistad, and the other 
merchandise on board of her, was also adjudged to the 
salvors. The costs were to be deducted from the other two-
thirds.  
"And, whereas the duly accredited minister of Spain, 
resident in the United States, hath, in behalf of the 
government of Spain, for the owners of said schooner, and 
the residue of said goods, claimed that the same be 
restored to that government for the said owners, they being 
Spanish subjects, under the provisions of the treaty 
subsisting between the United States and Spain: And, 
whereas it hath been made to appear to this Court, that the 
said schooner is lawfully owned by the subjects of Spain, 
as also the residue of said goods not specifically claimed: 
And, whereas the aforesaid Don Pedro Montez, and Jose Ruiz, 
have in person ceased to prosecute their claim as specified 
in their respective libels, and their said claims fall 
within the demand and claim of the Spanish minister, made 
as aforesaid: And, whereas the seizure of the said schooner 
and goods by the said Thomas R. Gedney and others, was made 
on the high seas, in a perilous condition, and they were 
first brought into the port of New London, within the 
District of Connecticut, and libelled for salvage,"  
[The decree then proceeds to adjudge to Lieutenant Gedney 
and others, as salvage, one-third of the gross proceeds of 
the vessel and cargo, according to an appraisement which 
had been made thereof; and, if not paid, directed the 
property to be sold, and that proportion of the gross 
proceeds of the sale to be paid over to the captors, the 
residue, after payment of all costs, to be paid to the 
respective owners of the same.]  
Upon the answers of the negroes, and the representations of 
the District Attorney of the United States, and of Montez 
and Ruiz, the decree proceeds:  
"This Court having fully heard the parties appearing with 
their proofs, do find that the respondents, severally 
answering as aforesaid, are each of them natives of Africa, 
and were born free, and ever since have been, and still of 
right are free, and not slaves, as is in said several 
libels claims or representations alleged or surmised; that 
they were never domiciled in the Island of Cuba, or the


--- PAGE 116 ---
dominions of the Queen of Spain, or subject to the laws 
thereof; that they were severally kidnapped in their native 
country, and were, in violation of their own rights, and of 
the laws of Spain, prohibiting the African slave trade, 
imported into the island of Cuba, about the 12th June, 
1839, and were there unlawfully held and transferred to the 
said Ruiz and Montez, respectively; that said respondents 
were within fifteen days after their arrival at Havana, 
aforesaid, by said Ruiz and Montez, put on board said 
schooner Amistad to be transported to some port in said 
island of Cuba, and there unlawfully held as slaves; that 
the respondents or some of them, influenced by the desire 
of recovering their liberty, and of returning to their 
families and kindred in their native country, took 
possession of said schooner Amistad, killed the captain and 
cook, and severely wounded said Montez, while on her voyage 
from Havana, as aforesaid, and that the respondents arrived 
in possession of said schooner at Culloden Point near 
Montauck, and there anchored said schooner on the high 
seas, at the distance of half a mile from the shore of Long 
Island, and were there, while a part of the respondents 
were, as is alleged in their said answer, on shore in quest 
of water and other necessaries, and about to sail in said 
schooner for the coast of Africa, seized by said Lieutenant 
Gedney, and his officers and crew, and brought into the 
port of New London, in this district. And this Court doth 
further find, that it hath ever been the intention of the 
said Montez and Ruiz, since the said Africans were put on 
board the said schooner, to hold the said Africans as 
slaves; that at the time when the said Cinque and others, 
here making answer, were imported from Africa into the 
dominions of Spain, there was a law of Spain prohibiting 
such importations, declaring the persons so imported to be 
free; that said law was in force when the claimants took 
the possession of the said Africans and put them on board 
said schooner, and the same has ever sicne been in force."  
The decree of the District Court recites the decree of the 
government of Spain of December, 1817, prohibiting the 
slave trade, and declaring all negroes brought into the 
dominions of Spain by slave traders to be free; and 
enjoining the execution of the decree on all the officers 
of Spain in the dominions of Spain.  
The decree of the District Court proceeds:


--- PAGE 117 ---
And this Court doth further find, that when the said 
Africans were shipped on board the said schooner, by the 
said Montez and Ruiz, the same were shipped under the 
passports signed by the Governor General of the Island of 
Cuba, in the following words, viz.:  
Description.  
Size.  
Age.  
Colour.  
Hair.  
Forehead.  
Eyebrows.  
Eyes.  
Nose.  
Mouth.  
Beard.  
Peculiar signs.  
Havana, June 22d, 1839.  
I grant permission to carry three black ladinoes, named 
Juana, Francisca, and Josefa, property of Dr. Pedro Montez, 
to Puerto Principe, by sea. They must present themselves to 
the respective territorial judge with this permit.  
Duty, 2 reasls. ESPLETA.  
(Endorsed) Commander of Matria.  
Let pass in the schooner Amistad, to Guana ja, Ferrer, 
master. Havana, June 27th, 1839  
MART & Co.  
Description.


--- PAGE 118 ---
Size.  
Age.  
Colour.  
Hair.  
Forehead.  
Eyebrows.  
Eyes.  
Nose.  
Mouth.  
Beard.  
Peculiar signs.  
Havana, June 26th, 1839.  
I grant permission to carry forty-nine black ladinos, named 
Antonio, Simon, Lucas, Jose, Pedro, Martin, Manuel, 
Andrios, Edwardo, Celedernnio, Bartolo, Raman, Augustin, 
Evaristo, Casimero, Meratio, Gabriel, Santome, 
Ecclesiastico, pasenal, Stanislao, Desiderio, Nicolas, 
Estevan, Tomas, Cosme, Luis, Bartolo, Julian, Federico, 
Saturdino, Ladislas, Celestino, Epifano, Fronerie, 
Venaniro, Feligre, Francisco, Hypolito, Benito, Isdoro, 
Vicente, Dioniceo, Apolino, Esequiel, Leon, Julio, 
Hipolito, y Raman, property of Dr. Jose Ruiz, to Puerto 
Principe, by sea. They must present themselves with this 
permit to the respective territorial judge.  
ESPLETA.  
Duty, 2 reals.  
(Endorsed) Commander of Matria.  
Let pass in the schooner Amistad, to Guanaja, Ferrer, 
master.  
Havana, June 27th, 1839.


--- PAGE 119 ---
MART & Co."  
"Which said passorts do not truly describe the said persons 
shipped under the same.Whereupon, the said claim of the 
minister of Spain, as set forth in the two libels filed in 
the name of the United States by the said District 
Attorney, for and in behalf of the government of Spain and 
her subjects, so far as the same relate to the said Africas 
named in said claim, be dismissed."  
"And upon the libel filed by said District Attorney in 
behalf of the United States, claiming the said Africans 
libelled as aforesaid, and now in the custody of the 
Marshal of the district of Connecticut, under and by virtue 
of process issued from this Court, that they may be 
delivered to the President of the United States to be 
transported to Africa. It is decreed that the said Africans 
now in the custody of said Marshal, and libelled and 
claimed as aforesaid, (excepting Antonio Ferrer, be 
delivered to the President of the United States by the 
Marshal of the district of Connecticut, to be by him 
transported to Africa, in pursuance of the law of Congress, 
passed March 3d, 1819, entitled "An act in addition to the 
acts prohibiting the slave trade.'"  
After the decree was pronounced, the United States, 
"claiming in pursuance of a demand made upon them by the 
duly accredited minister of her Catholic Majesty, the Queen 
of Spain, to the United States, moved an appeal from the 
whole and every part of the said decree, except part of the 
same in relation to the slave Antonio, to the Circuit 
Court" of Connecticut.  
Antonio Tellincas, and Aspe and Laca, claimants, &c., also 
appealed from the decree to the Circuit Court, except for 
so much of the decree as sustains their claims to the 
goods, &c.  
The Africans, by their African names, moved in the Circuit 
Court, in April, 1840, that so much of the appeal of the 
District Attorney of the United States, from so much of the 
decree of the District Court as related to them severally, 
may be dismissed; "becuase, they say that the United States 
do not claim, nor have they ever claimed any interest in 
the appellees, respectively, or either of them, and have no 
right, either by the law of nations, or by the Constitution 
or laws of the United States to appear in the Courts of the


--- PAGE 120 ---
United States, to institute or prosecute claims to 
property, in behalf of the subjects of the Queen of Spain, 
under the circumstances appearing on the record in this 
case; much less to enforce the claims of the subject of a 
foreign government, to the persons of the said appellees, 
respectively, as the slaves of the said foreign subjects, 
under the circumstances aforesaid."  
The Circuit Court refused the motion.  
The Circuit Court affirmed the decree of the District 
Court, pro forma, except so far as respects the claims of 
Tellincas, and Aspe and Laca.  
After this decree of the Circuit Court, the United States, 
claiming in pursuance of a demand made upon them by the 
duly accredited minister of her Catholic Majesty, the Queen 
of Spain to the United states, moved an appeal from the 
whole and every part of the decree of the Court, affirming 
the decree of the District Court to the Supreme Court of 
the United States, to be holden at the city of Washington, 
on the second Monday of January, A.D. eighteen hundred and 
forty-one; and it was allowed.  
The Court as far as respects the decree of the District 
Court allowing salvage on the goods on board the Amistad, 
continued the case to await the decision of the Supreme 
Court, on that part of the decree appealed from.  
The Circuit Court in the decree, proceed to say, that "they 
had inspected certain depositions and papers remaining as 
of record in said Circuit Court, and to be used as 
evidence, before the Supreme Court of the United States, on 
the trial of said appeal.  
Among the depositions, were the following.  
"I, Richard Robert Madden, a British subject, having 
resided for the last three years and upwards, at Havana, 
where I have held official situations under the British 
government, depose and say, that I have held the office of 
superintendent of liberated Africans during that term, and 
still hold it; and have held for the term of one year, the 
office there, of British commissioners, in the Mixed Court 
of Justice. The duties of my office and of my avocation, 
have led me to become well acquainted with Africans 
recently imported from Africa. I have seen and had in my


--- PAGE 121 ---
charge many hundreds of them. I have seen and had Africans 
in the custody of the marshal of the district of 
Connecticut, except the small children. I have examined 
them and observed their language, appearance, and manners; 
and I have no doubt of their having been, very recently, 
brought from Africa. To one of them, I spoke, and repeated 
a Mohammedan form of prayer in the Arabic language; the man 
immediately recognised the language, and repeated a few 
words of it after me, and appeared to understand it, 
particularly the words 'Allah akbar,' or God is great. The 
man who was beside this negro, I also addressed in Arabic, 
saying -- 'salaam ailkoem,' or peace be to you; he 
immediately, in the customary oriental salutations, replied 
-- 'aleckoum salaam,' or peace be on you. From my knowledge 
of oriental habits, and of the appearance of the newly 
imported slaves in Cuba, I have no dobut of those negroes 
of the Amistad being bona fide Bozal negroes, quite newly 
imported from Africa.I have a full knowledge of the subject 
of slavery -- slave trade in Cuba; and I know that no law 
exists, or has existed since the year 1820, that sanctions 
the introduction of negroes into the island of Cuba, from 
Africa for the purpose of making slaves, or being held in 
slavery; and, that all such Bozal negroes, as those 
recently imported are called, are legally free; and no law, 
common or statute, exists there, by which they can be held 
in slavery. Such Africans, long settled in Cuba, and 
acclimated, are called ladinos, and must have been 
introduced before 1820, and are so called in 
contradistinction to the term creole, which is applied to 
the negroes born in the island. I have seen, and now have 
before me, a document, dated 26th June, 1839, purporting to 
be signed by Ezpeleta, who is captain general of the 
island, to identify which, I have put my name to the 
lefthand corner of the document, in presence of the counsel 
of the Africans; this document, or "trasspasso," purporting 
to be a permit granted to Don I. Ruiz, to export from 
Havana to Porto Principe, forty-nine negroes, designated by 
Spanish names, and called therein ladinos, a term totally 
inapplicable to newly imported Africans. I have seen, and 
now have before me, another document, dated 22d June, 1839, 
and signed in the same manner, granted to Don Pedro Montez, 
for the removal of three negro children from Havana to 
Porto Principe, also disignated by Spanish names, and 
likewise called 'ladions,' and wholly inapplicable to young 
African children, who could not have been acclimated, and 
long settled in the island; which document, I have 
identified in the same manner as the former. To have


--- PAGE 122 ---
obtained these documents from the governor, for bona fide 
Bozal negroes, and have described them in the application 
for it, as ladinos, was evidently a fraud, but nothing more 
than such an application and the payment of the necessary 
fees would be required to procure it, as there is never any 
inquiry or inspection of the negroes on the part of the 
governor or his officers, nor is there any oath required 
from the applicant. I further state, that the above 
documents are manifestly inapplicable to the Africans of 
the Amisted, I have been here and in New Haven; but such 
documents are commonly obtained by similar applications at 
the Havana, and by these means, the negroes recently and 
illegally introduced, are thus removed to the different 
ports of the island, and the danger obviated of their 
falling in with English cruisers, and then they are 
illegally carried into slavery. One of the largest dealers 
and importers of the island of Cuba, in African slaves, is 
the notorious house of Martiner & Co., of Havana; and for 
years past, as at present, they have been deeply engaged in 
this traffic; and the Bozal Africans, imported by these and 
all other slave traders, when brought to the Havana, are 
immediately taken to the barracoons, or slave marts; five 
of which are situated in the immediate vicinity of the 
governor's county house, about one mile and a half from the 
walls of Havana; and from these barracoons, they are taken 
and removed to the different parts of the island when sold; 
and having examined the endorsements on the back of the 
transspasso, or permits for the removal of the said negroes 
of the Amistad, the signature to that endorsement appears 
to be that of Martiner & Co.; and the document purports to 
be a permit of pass for the removal of the said negroes. 
The handwriting of Martiner & Co., I am not acquainted 
with. These barracoons, outside the city walls, are fitted 
up exclusively for the reception and sale of Bozal negroes; 
one of these barracoons or slave marts, called la 
miserecordia, or 'mercy,' kept by a man, named 'Riera,' I 
visited the 24th September last, in company with a person 
well acquainted with this establishment; and the factor or 
major domo of the master, in the absence of the latter, 
said to me, that the negroes of the Amistad had been 
purchased there; that he knew them well; that they had been 
bought by a man from Porto Principe, and had been embarked 
for that place; and speaking of the said negroes, he said, 
'che, castima,' or what pity it is, which rather surprised 
me; the man further explained himself, and said, his regret 
was for the loss of so many valuable Bozals, in the event 
of their being executed in the United States.


--- PAGE 123 ---
"One of the houses most openly engaged, and notoriously 
implicated in the slave trade transactions, it that of 
Martiner & Co.; and their practice is to remove their newly 
arrived negroes from the slave ships to these barracoons, 
where they commonly remain two or three weeks before sold, 
as these negroes of the Amistad, illegally introduced by 
Martiner & Co., were in the present instance, as is 
generally reported and believed in the Havana. Of the 
Africans which I have seen and examined, from the necessity 
which my office imposes on me at the Havana of assisting at 
the registry of the newly imported Bozals, emancipated by 
the Mixed Court, I can speak with tolerable certainty of 
the ages of these people, with the excertion of the 
children, whom I have not seen. Sa, about 17; Ba, 21; 
Luckawa, 19; Tussi, 30; Beli, 18; Shuma, 26; Nama, 20; 
Tenquis, 21; the others, I had not time to take a note of 
their ages.  
"With respect to the Mixed Commission, its jurisdiction 
extends only to cases of captured negroes brought in by 
British or Spanish cruisers; and notwithstanding the 
illegalities of the traffic in slaves, from twenty to 
twenty-five thousand slaves have been introduced into the 
island during the last three years; and such is the state 
of society, and of the administration of the laws there, 
that hopeless slavery is the inevitable result of their 
removal into the interior."  
On his cross-examination the witness stated, that he was 
not acquainted with the dialects of the African tribes, but 
was slightly acquainted with the Arabic language. Lawful 
slaves of the island are not offered for sale generally, or 
often placed in the barracoons, or man marts. The practice 
in Havana is to use the barracoons "for Bozal negroes 
only." Barracoons are used for negroes recently imported, 
and for their reception and sale. The native language of 
the Africans is not often continued for a long time on 
certain plantations. "It has been to me a matter of 
astonishment at the shortness of time in which the language 
of the negroes is disused, and the Spanish language adopted 
and acquired. I speak this, from a very intimate knowledge 
of the condition of the negroes in Cuba, from frequent 
visits to plantations, and journeys in the interior; and, 
on this subject, I think I can say my knowledge is as full 
as any person's can be.


--- PAGE 124 ---
"There are five or six barracoons within pistol shot of the 
country residence of the Captain General of Cuba. On every 
other part of the coast where the slave trade is carried 
on, a barracoon or barracoons must likewise exist. They are 
a part of the things necessary to the slave trade, and are 
for its use only; for instance, near Matanzas there is a 
building or shed of this kind and used for this purpose.  
"Any negroes landed in the island since 1820, and carried 
into slavery, have been illegally introduced; and the 
transfer of them under false names, such as calling Bozal, 
Ladinos, is, necessarily, a fraud. Unfortunately, there is 
no interference on the part of the local authorities; they 
connive at it, and collude with the slave traders; the 
governor, alone, at the Havana, receiving a bounty or 
impost on each negro thus illegally introduced, of ten 
dollars a head. As to the Mixed Commission, once the 
negroes clandestinely introduced are landed they no longer 
have cognisance of the violation of the treaty; the 
governor has cognisance of this and every other bearing of 
the Spanish law on Spanish soil. This head-money has not 
the sanction of any Spanish law for its imposition; and the 
proof of this is, it is called a voluntary contribution."  
Also a statement, given by the District Attorney, W. S. 
Holabird, Esq., of what was made to him by A. G. Vega, 
Esq., Spanish Consul, January 10th, 1840: "That he is a 
Spanish subject; that he resided in the island of Cuba 
several years; that he knows the laws of that island on the 
subject of slavery; that there was no law that was 
considered in force in the island of Cuba, that prohibited 
the bringing in African slaves; that the Court of Mixed 
Commissioners had no jurisdiction except in cases of 
capture on the sea; that newly imported African negroes 
were constantly brought to the island, and, after landing, 
were bona fide transferred from one owner to another, 
without any interference by the local authorities or the 
Mixed Commission, and were held by the owners, and 
recognised as lawful property; that slavery was recognised 
in Cuba by all the laws that were considered in force 
there; that the native language of the slaves was kept up 
on some plantations for years. That the barracoons are 
public markets, where all descriptions of slaves and sold 
and bought; that the papers of the Amistad are genuine, and 
are in the usual form; that it was not necessary to 
practise any fraud to obtain such papers from the proper 
officers of the government; that none of the papers of the


--- PAGE 125 ---
Amistad are signed by Martiner, spoken of by R. R. Madden 
in his deposition; that he (Martiner) did not hold the 
office from whence that paper issued."  
Also a deposition of James Ray, a mariner on board of the 
Washington, stating the circumstances of the taking 
possession of the Amistad, and the Africans, which 
supported the allegations in the several libels, in all 
essential circumstances.  
The documents exhibited as the passports of the Spanish 
authorities at Havana, and other papers relating to the 
Amistad, and her clearance from Havana, were also annexed 
to the decree of the Circuit Court, in the original 
Spanish. Translations of all of these, which were deemed of 
importance in the cause, are given in the decree of the 
District Court.  
Sullivan Haley stated in his deposition, that he heard Ruiz 
say, that "none of the negroes could speak Spanish; they 
are just from Africa."  
James Covey, a coloured man, deposed that "he was born at 
Berong-Mendi country; left there seven and a half years 
ago; was a slave, and carried to Lumboko. All these 
Africans were from Africa. Never saw them until now. I 
could talk with them. They appeared glad because they could 
speak the same language. I could understand all but two or 
three. They say they from Lumboke; three moons. They all 
have Mendi names, and their names all mean something; 
Carle, means bone; Kimbo, means cricket. They speak of 
rivers which I know; said they sailed from Lumboko; two or 
three speak different language from the others; the Timone 
language. Say-ang-wa rivers spoken of; these run through 
the Vi country. I learned to speak English at Sierre Leone. 
Was put on board a man-of-war one year and a half. They all 
agree as to where they sailed from. I have no doubt they 
are Africans. I have been in this country six months; came 
in a British man-of-war; have been in this town (New Haven) 
four months with Mr. Bishop; he calls on me for no money, 
and do not know who pays my board. I was stolen by a black 
man who stole ten of us. One man carried us two months' 
walk. Have conversed with Sinqua; Barton has been in my 
town, Gorang. I was sailing for Havana when the British 
man-of-war captured us."


--- PAGE 126 ---
The testimony of Cinque and the negroes of the Amistad, 
supported the statements in their answers.  
The respondents also gave in evidence the "Treaty between 
Great Britain and Spain, for the abolition of the slave 
trade, signed at Madrid, 23d September, 1817."  
 
SUMMARY OF CASE  
Summary of the Amistad Case 
The Spanish schooner amisted, on the 27th day of June, 
1839, cleared out from Havana, in Cuba, for Puerto 
Principe, in the same island, having on board, Captain 
Ferrer, and Ruiz and Montez, spanish subjects. Captain 
Ferrer had on board Antonio, a slave; Ruiz had forty-nine 
negroes; Montez had four negroes, which were claimed by 
them as slaves, and stated to be their property, in 
passports or documents, signed by the Governor General of 
Cuba. In fact, these African negroes had been, a very short 
time before they were put on board the Amistad, brought 
into Cuba, by Spanish slave traders, in direct 
contravention of the treaties between Spain and Great 
Britain, and in violation of the laws of Spain.  
On the voyage of the Amistad, the negroes rose, killed the 
captain, and took possession of the vessel. They spared the 
lives of Ruiz and Montez, on condition that they would aid 
in steering the Amistad for the coast of Africa, or to some 
place where negro slavery was not permitted by the laws of 
the country. Ruiz and Montez deceived the negroes, who were 
totally ignorant of navigation, and steered the Amistad for 
the United States; and she arrived off Long Island, in the 
state of New York, on the 26th of August, and anchored 
within half a mile of the shore.Some of the negroes went to 
shore to procure supplies of water and provisions, and the 
vessel was then discovered by the United States brig 
Washington.  
Lieutenant Gedney, commanding the Washington assisted by 
his officers and crew, took possession of the Amistad, and 
of the negroes on shore and in the vessel, brought them 
into the District of Connecticut, and there libelled the 
vessel, the cargo, and the negroes for salvage. Libels for


--- PAGE 127 ---
salvage were also presented in the District Court of the 
United States, for the District of Connecticut, by persons 
who had aided, as they alleged, in capturing the negroes on 
shore on Long Island, and contributed to the vessel, cargo, 
and negroes being taken into possession by the brig 
Washington.  
Ruiz and Montez filed claims to the negroes as their 
slaves, and prayed that they, and parts of the cargo of the 
Amistad, might be delivered to them, or to the 
representatives of the crown of Spain.  
The attorney of the District of Connecticut filed an 
information stating that the Minister of Spain had claimed 
of the government of the United States that the vessel, 
cargo, and slaves should be restored, under the provisions 
of the treaty between the United States and Spain, the same 
having arrived within the limits and jurisdiction of the 
United States, under such circumstances as made it the duty 
of the vessel of the United States, under such 
circumstances as made it the duty of the United States to 
cause them to be restored to the true owners thereof. The 
information asked that the Court would make such order as 
would enable the United States to comply with the treaty; 
or, if it should appear that the negroes had been brought 
from Africa, in violation of the laws of the United States, 
that the Court would make an order for the removal of the 
negroes to Africa, according to the laws of the United 
States.  
A claim for Antonio was filed by the Spanish consul, on 
behalf of the representatives of Captain Ferrer, and claims 
are also filed by merchants of Cuba for parts of the cargo 
of the vessel, denying salvage, and asserting their right 
to have the same delivered to them under the treaty.  
The negores, Antonio excepted, filed an answer denying that 
they were slaves, or the property of Ruiz, or Montez; and 
denying the right of the Court under the Constitution and 
laws of the United States to exercise any jurisdiction over 
their persons. They asserted that they were native free-
born Africans, and ought of right to be free; that they had 
been, in April 1839, kidnapped in Africa, and had been 
carried in a vessel engaged in the slave trade from the 
coast of Africa to Cuba, for the purpose of being sold; and 
that Ruiz and Montez, knowing these facts, had purchased 
them, put them on board the Amistad, intending to carry


--- PAGE 128 ---
them to be held as slaves for life, to another part of 
Cuba, and that, on the voyage, they rose on the master, 
took possession of the vessel, and were intending to 
proceed to Africa, or to some free state, when they were 
taken possession of by the United States armed vessel, the 
Washington.  
After evidence had been given by the parties, and all the 
documents of the vessel and cargo, with the alleged 
passports, and the clearance from Havana had been produced 
the District Court made a decree, by which all claims to 
salvage of the negroes were rejected, and salvage amounting 
to one-third of the vessel and cargo, was allowed to 
Lieutenant Gedney, and the officers and crew of the 
Washington. The claim of the representatives of Captain 
Ferrer, to Antonio, was allowed: the claims of Ruiz and 
Montez being included in the claim of the Spanish minister, 
and of the minister of Spain, to the negroes as slaves, or 
to have them delivered to the Spanish minister, under the 
treaty, to be sent to Cuba, were rejected: and the Court 
decreed that the negroes should be delivered to the 
President of the United States, to be sent to Africa, 
pursuant to the act of Congress of 3d March, 1819.  
From this decree the District Attorney of the United States 
appealed to the Circuit Court, except so far as the same 
related to Antonio. The owners of the cargo of the Amistad 
also appealed from that part of the decree which allowed 
salvage on their goods. Ruiz or Montez did not appeal, nor 
did the representatives of the owner of the Amistad. The 
Circuit Court of Connecticut, by a pro forma decree, 
affirmed the decree of the District Court, reserving the 
question of salvage on the merchandise on board the 
Amistad. The United States appealed from this decree. The 
decree of the Circuit Court was affirmed; saving that part 
of the same, which directed the negroes to be delivered to 
the President of the United States, to be sent to Africa; 
which was reversed, and the negroes were declared to be 
free.  
Summary of Decision  
The sixth article of the treaty with Spain, of 1795, 
continued in full force, in this particular, by the treaty 
ratified in 1821, seems to have had principally in view, 
cases where the property of the subjects of either state, 
had been taken possession of within the territorial


--- PAGE 129 ---
jurisdiction of the other, during war. The eighth article 
provides for cases where the shipping of the inhabitants of 
either state are forced, through stress of weather, pursuit 
of pirates, or enemies, or any other urgent necessity, to 
seek shelter in the ports of the other. There may well be 
some doubts entertained whether the case of the Amistad, in 
its actual circumstances, falls within the purview of this 
article.  
The ninth article of the treaty provides, that all ships 
and merchandise, which shall be rescued out of the hands of 
any pirates and robbers, on the high seas, which shall be 
brought into some port of either state, shall be delivered 
to the officers of the port in order to be taken care of, 
and "restored entire to the proprietary, as soon as due and 
sufficient proof shall be made concerning the property 
thereof." To bring the case of the Amistad within this 
article, it is essential to establish: First, that the 
negroes, under all the circumstances, fall within the 
description of merchandise, in the sense of the treaty. 
Secondly, That there has been a rescue of them on the high 
seas, out of the hands of pirates and robbers. Thirdly, 
That Ruiz and Montez are the true proprietors of the 
negroes, and have established their title by competent 
proofs. If those negroes were, at the time, lawfully held 
as slaves under the laws of Spain, and recognised by those 
laws as property capable of being bought and sold, no 
reason is seen why this may not be deemed, within the 
intent of the treaty, to be included under the denomination 
of merchandise, and ought, as such, to be restored to the 
claimants; for upon that point the laws of Spain would seem 
to furnish the proper rule of interpretation. But, 
admitting that to be the construction of the treaty, it is 
clear in the opinion of the Court, that neither of the 
other essential facts and requisites has been established 
by proof and the onus probandi of both lies upon the 
claimants, to give rise to the casus foederis.  
The negroes were never the lawful slaves of Ruiz, or 
Montez, or of any other Spanish subject. They are natives 
of Africa; and were kidnapped there, and wedre unlawfully 
transported to Cuba, in violation of the laws and treaties 
of Spain, and of the most solemn edicts and declarations of 
that government.  
By the laws, treaties, and edicts of Spain, the African 
slave trade is utterly abolished; the dealing in that trade


--- PAGE 130 ---
is deemed a heinous crime; and the negroes thereby 
introduced into the dominions of Spain, are declared to be 
free.  
There is no pretence to say the negroes of the Amisted are 
"pirates" and "robbers;" as they were kidnapped Africans, 
who, by the laws of Spain itself were entitled to their 
freedom.  
Although public documents of the government accompanying 
property found on board of the private ships of a foreign 
nation, are to be deemed prima facie evidence of the facts 
which they state, yet they are always open to be impugned 
for fraud; and whether that fraud be in the original 
obtaining of those documents, or in the subsequent 
fraudulent and illegal use of them, where once it is 
satisfactorily established, it over-throws all their 
sanctity, and destroys them as proof.  
Fraud will vitiate any, even the most solemn transactions; 
and any asserted title founded upon it, is utterly void.  
The language of the treaty with Spain of 1795, requires the 
proprietor "to make due and sufficient proof" of his 
property; and that proof cannot be deemed either due or 
sufficient, which is stained with fraud.  
Nothing is more clear in the laws of nations as an 
established rule to regulate their rights and duties, and 
intercourse, than the doctrine that the ship's papers are 
prima facie evidence of what they state; and that if they 
are shown to be fraudulent, they are not to be held proof 
of any valid title whatever.This rule is applied in prize 
cases; and is just as applicable to the transctions of 
civil intercourse between nations in times of peace.  
In the solemn treaties between nations it never can be 
presumed that either state intends to provide the means of 
perpetrating or protecting frauds; but all the provisions 
are to be construed as intended to be applied to bona fide 
transactions.  
The seventeenth article of the treaty with Spain which 
provides for certain passports and certificates as evidence 
of property on board of the ships of both states, is, in 
its terms, applicable only to cases where either of the 
parties is engaged in war. This article required a certain


--- PAGE 131 ---
form of passport to be agreed upon by the parties and 
annexed to the treaty. It never was annexed: and, 
therefore, in the case of The Amiable Isabella, 6 Wheaton, 
1, it is held inoperative.  
Supposing the African negroes on board the Amisted not to 
be slaves, but kidnapped, and free negroes, the treaty with 
Spain cannot be obligatory upon them; and the United States 
are bound to respect their rights, as much as those of 
Spanish subjects. The conflict of rights between the 
parties, under such circumstances, becomes positive and 
inevitable, and must be decided upon the invariable 
principles of justice and international law.  
The treaty with Spain never could have been intended to 
take away the equal rights of all foreigners who should 
assert their claims to equal justice before the Courts of 
the United States; or to deprive such foreigners of the 
protection given to them by other treaties, or by the 
general laws of nations.  
There is no ground to assert that the case of the negroes 
who were on board of the Amistad comes within the 
provisions of the act of Congress of 1799, or of any other 
of the prohibitory slave-trade acts. These negroes were 
never taken from Africa, or brought to the United States in 
contravention of these acts. When the Amistad arrived she 
was in possession of the negroes, asserting their freedom; 
and in no sense could possibly intend to import themselves 
into the United States as slaves, or for sale as slaves.  
The carrying of the Amistad and her cargo into Connecticut 
by Lieutenant Gedney, and the officers and crew of the 
Washington, was a highly meritorious and useful service to 
the proprietors of the ship and cargo, and such, as by the 
general principles of the maritime law, is always deemed a 
just foundation for salvage. The rate allowed by the Court, 
(one-third,) does not seem beyond the exercise of a sound 
discretion, under the very peculiar and embarrassing 
circumstances of the case.  
 
ARGUMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Argument of the Government


--- PAGE 132 ---
The case was argued for the United States, by Mr. 
Gilpin, the Attorney General.  
Mr. Gilpin, the Attorney General, for the United States, 
reviewed the evidence, as set out in the record, of all the 
facts connected with the case, from the first clearance of 
the schooner Amistad, at Havana, on the 18th May, 1838, 
down to the 23d January, 1840, when the final decree of the 
District Court of the United States, for the District of 
Connecticut, was rendered.  
The Attorney General proceeded to remark, that, on the 23d 
January, 1840, the case stood thus. The vessel, cargo, and 
negroes, were in possession of the Marshal, under process 
from the District Court, to answer to five separate claims; 
those of Lieutenant Gedney, and Messrs. Green and Fordham, 
for salvage; that of the United States, at the instance of 
the Spanish minister, for the vessel, cargo, and negroes, 
to be restored to the Spanish owners, in which claim those 
of Messrs. Ruiz and Montez were merged; that of the Spanish 
vice-consul, for the slave Antonio, to be restored to the 
Spanish owner; and that of Messrs. Tellincas, and Aspe and 
Laca, for the restoration of a part of the cargo belonging 
to them. The decree of the District Court found that the 
vessel, and the goods on board were the property of Spanish 
subjects, and that the passports under which the negroes 
were shipped at Havana, were signed by the Governor General 
of Cuba. It denied the claims of Lieutenant Gedney, and 
Messrs. Green and Fordham, to salvage on the slaves, but 
allowed the claims of the officers and crew of the 
Washington to salvage on the Amistad, and on the 
merchandise on board of that vessel. It also decreed that 
the residue of the goods, and the vessel, should be 
delivered to the Spanish minister, to be restored to the 
Spanish owners; and that the slave Antonio should be 
delivered to the Spanish vice-consul, for the same purpose. 
As to the negroes, claimed by Ruiz and Montez, it dismissed 
the claims of those persons, on the ground that they were 
included under that of the minister of Spain. The libel of 
the United States, claiming the delivery of the negroes to 
the Spanish minister, was dismissed, on the ground that 
they were not slaves, but were kidnapped and imported into 
Cuba; and that, at the time they were so imported, there 
was a law of Spain declaring persons so imported to be 
free. The alternative prayer of the United States, claiming 
the delivery of the negroes to be transported to Africa, 
was granted.


--- PAGE 133 ---
As soon as this decree was made, an appeal was taken by the 
United States to the Circuit Court, from the whole of it, 
except so far as it related to Antonio. At the succeeding 
term of the Circuit Court, the negroes moved that the 
appeal of the United States might be dismissed, on the 
ground that they had no interest in the negroes; and, also, 
on the ground that they have no right to prosecute claims 
to property in behalf of subjects of the Queen of Spain. 
That motion, however, was refused by the Circuit Court, 
which proceeded to affirm the decree of the District Court, 
on the libel of the United States. It is from this decree 
of the Circuit Court that the present appeal to the Supreme 
Court is prosecuted.  
Was the decree of the Circuit Court correct?  
The state of the facts, as found by the decree, and not 
denied, was this. The vessel, and the goods on board, were 
the property of Spanish subjects in Havana, on the 27th 
June, 1839. At that time slavery was recognised and in 
existence in the Spanish dominions. The negroes in question 
are certified at that time, in a document signed by the 
Governor General of Cuba, to be ladinos negroes -- that is, 
slaves -- the property of Spanish subjects. As such, 
permission is given by the Governor General, to their 
owners, to take them, by sea, to Puerto Principe, in the 
same island. The vessel with these slaves, thus certified, 
on board, and in charge of their alleged owners, regularly 
cleared and sailed from Havana, the documentary evidence 
aforesaid, and the papers of the vessel being also on 
board. During this voyage, the negroes rose, killed the 
captain, and took possession of the vessel. On the 26th 
August, the vessel, cargo, and negroes, were rescued and 
taken on the high seas, by a public officer of the United 
States, and brought into a port of the United States, where 
they await the decision of the judicial tribunals.  
In this position of things, the minister of Spain demands 
that the vessel, cargo, and negroes, be restored, pursuant 
to the 9th article of the treaty of 27th October, 1795, 
which provides (1 Laws of the United States, 268) that "all 
ships and merchandise of what nature soever, which shall be 
rescued out of the hands of any pirates or robbers, on the 
high seas, shall be brought into some port of either state, 
and shall be delivered into the custody of the officers of 
that port, in order to be taken care of and restored entire


--- PAGE 134 ---
to the true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof 
shall be made concerning the property thereof."  
The only inquiries, then, that present themselves, are,  
1. Has "due and sufficient proof concerning the property 
thereof" been made?  
2. If so, have the United States a right to interpose in 
the manner they have done, to obtain its restoration to the 
Spanish owners?  
If these inquiries result in the affirmative, then the 
decree of the Circuit Court was erroneous, and ought to be 
reversed.  
I. It is submitted that there has been due and sufficient 
proof concerning the property to authorize its restoration.  
It is not denied that, under the laws of Spain, negroes may 
be held as slaves, as completely as they are in any of the 
states of this Union; nor will it be denied, if duly proved 
to be such, they are subject to restoration as much as 
other property, when coming under the provisions of this 
treaty. Now these negroes are declared, by the certificates 
of the Governor General, to be slaves, and the property of 
the Spanish subjects therein named. That officer (1 White's 
New Rec. 369. 371; 8 Peters, 310) is the highest 
functionary of the government in Cuba; his public acts are 
the highest evidence of any facts stated by him, within the 
scope of his authority. It is within the scope of his 
authority to declare what is property, and what are the 
rights of the subjects of Spain, within his jurisdiction, 
in regard to property.  
Now, in the intercourse of nations, there is no rule better 
esablished than this, that full faith is to be given to 
such acts -- to the authentic evidence of such acts. The 
question is not whether the act is right or wrong; it is, 
whether the scope of the been done, and whether it is an 
act within the scope of the authority. We are to inquire 
only whether the power existed, and whether it was 
exercised, and how it was exercised; not whether it was 
rightly or wrongly exercised.  
The principle is universally admitted, that, wherever an 
authority is delegated to any public officer, to be


--- PAGE 135 ---
exercised at his discretion, under his own judgment and 
upon his own responsibility, the acts done in the 
appropriate exercise of that authority, are binding as to 
the subject matter. Without such a rule there could be no 
peace or comity among nations; all harmony, all mutual 
respect would be destroyed; the Courts and tribunals of one 
country would become the judges of the local laws and 
property of others. Nor is it to be supposed that so 
important a principle would not be recognisd by Courts of 
justice. They have held, that, whether the act of the 
foreign functionary be executive, legislative, or judicial, 
it is, if exercised within its appropriate sphere, binding 
as to the subject-matter; and the authentic record of such 
act is full and complete evidence thereof. In the case of 
Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch, 170, this Court held, that a 
commission was conclusive evidence of an executive 
appointment; and that a party from whom it was withheld 
might obtain it through the process of a Court, as being 
such evidence of his rights. In the case of Thompson v. 
Tolmie, 2 Peters, 167, this Court sustained the binding and 
sufficient character of a decision, made by a competent 
tribunal, and not reversed, whether that decision was in 
itself right or wrong. In the case of The United States v. 
Arredondo, 6 Peters, 719, the whole doctrine on this 
subject is most forcibly stated. Indeed, nothing can be 
clearer than the principles thus laid down; nor can they 
apply more directly to any case than the present. Here is 
the authentic certificate or record of the highest officer 
known to the spanish law, declaring, in terms, that these 
negroes are the property of the several Spanish subjects. 
We have it countersigned by another of the principal 
officers. We have it executed and delivered, as the express 
evidence of property, to these persons. It is exactly the 
same as that deemed sufficient for the vessel and for the 
cargo. Would it not have been complete and positive 
evidence in the island of Cuba? If so, the principle laid 
down by this Court makes it such here.  
But this general principle is strengthened by the 
particular circumstances of the case. Where property on 
board of a vessel is brought into a foreign port, the 
documentary evidence, whether it be a judicial decree, or 
the ship's papers, accompanied by possession, is the best 
evidence of ownership, and that to which Courts of justice 
invariably look. In the case of Bernardi v. Motteux, 
Douglas, 575, Lord Mansfield laid down the rule that a 
decree of a foreign Court was conclusive as to the right of


--- PAGE 136 ---
property under it. In that of the Vigilantia, 1 Rob. 3. 11, 
the necessity or propriety of producing the ship's papers, 
as the first evidence of her character and property, and of 
ascertaining her national character from her passport, is 
expressly recognised. In that of the Cosmopolite, 3 Rob. 
269, the title of the claimant, who was a Dane, to the 
vessel, was a decree of a French Court against an American 
vessel; the Court refused to inquire into the circumstances 
of the condemnation, but held the decree sufficient 
evidence for them. In that of the Sarah, 3 Rob. 166, the 
captors of a prize applied to be allowed to give proof of 
the property being owned by persons other than those stated 
in the ship's documents, but it was refused. In that of the 
Henrich and Maria, 4 Rob. 52, the very question was made, 
whether the Court would not look into the validity of a 
title, derived under a foreign Court of Admiralty, and it 
was refused.  
These principles are fully sustained by our own Courts.  
In the case of the Resolution, 2 Dall. 22, 23, possession 
of property on board of a vessel is held to be presumptive 
evidence of ownership; and the ship's papers, bills of 
lading, and other documents, are prima facie evidence of 
the facts they speak. It is on this evidence that vessels 
are generally acquitted or condemned. In that of the Ann 
Green, 1 Gall. 281. 284, it is laid down as the rule that 
the first and proper evidence in prize cases is the ship's 
papers; and that only in cases of doubt is further 
testimony to be received. The Court there say that as a 
general rule they would pronounce for the inadmissibility 
of such further evidence. So in that of the Diana, 2 Gall. 
97, the general rule laid down is, that no claim is to be 
admitted in opposition to the ship's papers; the exceptions 
stand upon very particular grounds. In that of Ohl v. The 
Eagle Insurance Company, 4 Mason, 172, parol evidence was 
held not to be admissible to contradict a ship's papers. In 
that of M'Grath v. Candelero, Bee, 60, a decree of 
restitution in a foreign Court of Admiralty was held to be 
full evidence of the ownership, and such as was to be 
respected in all other countries. In that of Catlett v. The 
Pacific Insurance Company, Paine, 612, the register was 
held to be conclusive evidence of the national character of 
the vessel; and a similar rule was held to exist in regard 
to a pass, in the case of Barker v. The Phoenix Insurance 
Company.


--- PAGE 137 ---
Similar principles have been adopted in this Court.  
The decree of a foreign Court of Admiralty, on a question 
of blockade, was allowed in the case of Croudson v. 
Leonard, 4 Cranch, 434, to be contradicted in the Court 
below; but this Court reversed that decision, and held it 
to be conclusive. In that of the Mary, 9 Cranch, 142, this 
Court sustained the proof of property founded on the 
register against a decree of a foreign Court of Admiralty. 
In that of the Pizarro, 2 Wheaton, 227, the Court look to 
the documentary evidence, as that to be relied on to prove 
ownership; and although the papers were not strictly 
correct, they still relied on them in preference to further 
extraneous proof. Add to all this the twelfth article of 
the treaty with Spain, (1 Laws of United States, 270,) 
which makes passports and certificates evidence of 
property; and the principle may be regarded as established 
beyond a question, that the regular documents are the best 
and primary evidence in regard to all property on board of 
vessels. This is indeed especially the case when they are 
merely coasting vessels, or such as are brought in on 
account of distress, shipwreck, or other accident. The 
injustice of requiring further evidence in such cases, is 
too apparent to need any argument on the subject. Nor is it 
a less settled rule of international law, that when a 
vessel puts in by reason of distress or any similar cause, 
she is not to be judged by the municipal law. The unjust 
results to which a different rule would lead are most 
apparent. Could we tolerate it, that if one of our own 
coasters was obliged to put into Cuba, and had regular 
coasting papers, the Courts of that country should look 
beyond them, as to proof of property?  
If this point be established, is there any difference 
between property in slaves and other property? They existed 
as property at the time of the treaty in perhaps every 
nation of the globe; they still exist as property in Spain 
and the United States; they can be demanded as property in 
the states of this Union to which they fly, and where by 
the laws they would not, if domiciliated, be property. If, 
then, they are property, the rules laid down in regard to 
property extend to them. If they are found on board of a 
vessel, the evidence of property should be that which is 
recognised as the best in other casse of property -- the 
vessel's papers, accompanied by possession. In the case of 
the Louis, 2 Dodson, 238, slaves are treated of, by Sir 
William Scott, in express terms, as property, and he


--- PAGE 138 ---
directed that those taken unlawfully from a foreigner 
should be restored:  
In the case of the Antelope, 10 Wheaton, 119, the decision 
in the case of the Louis is recognised, and the same 
principle was fully and completely acted upon. It was there 
conceded, (10 Wheaton, 124,) that possession on board of a 
vessel was evidence of property. In the case of Johnson v. 
Tompkins, 1 Baldwin, 577, it was held that, even where it 
was a question of freedom or slavery, the same rules of 
evidence prevailed as in other cases relative to the right 
of property. In the case of choat v. Wright, 2 Devereux, 
289, a sale of a slave accompanied by delivery is valid, 
though there be no bill of sale.And it is well settled, 
that a title to them is vested by the statute of 
limitations, as in other cases of property. 5 Cranch, 358. 
361. 11 Wheaton, 361.  
If, then, the same law exists in regard to property in 
slaves as in other things; and if documentary evidence, 
from the highest authority of the country where the 
property belonged, accompanied with possession, is 
produced; it follows that the title to the ownership of 
this property is as complete as is required by law.  
But it is said that this evidence is insufficient, because 
it is in point of fact fraudulent and untrue. The ground of 
this assertion is, that the slaves were not property in 
Cuba, at the date of the document signed by the Governor 
General; because they had been lately introduced into that 
island from Africa, and persons so introduced were free. To 
this it is answered that, if it were so, this Court will 
not look beyond the authentic evidence under the official 
certificate of the Governor General; that, if it would, 
there is not such evidence as this Court can regard to be 
sufficient to overthrow the positive statement of that 
document; and that, if the evidence were even deemed 
sufficient to show the recent introduction of the negroes, 
it does not establish that they were free at the date of 
the certificate.  
I. This Court will not look behind the certificate of the 
Governor General.It does not appear to be alleged that it 
is fraudulent in itself. It is found by the District Court 
to have been signed by him, and countersigned by the 
officer of the customs. It was issued by them in the 
appropriate exercise of their functions. It resembles an


--- PAGE 139 ---
American register or coasting license. Now, all the 
authorities that have been cited show that these documents 
are received as the highest species of evidence, and that, 
even if there is error in the proceedings on which they are 
founded. The correction must be made by the tribunal from 
which it emanates. Where should we stop if we were to 
refuse to give faith to the documents of public officers? 
All national intercourse, all commerce must be at an end. 
If there is error in issuing these papers, the matter must 
be sent to the tribunals of Spain for correction.  
II. But if this Court will look behind this paper; is the 
evidence sufficient to contradict it? The official 
declaration to be contradicted is certainly of a character 
not to be lightly set aside in the Courts of a foreign 
country. The question is not as to the impression we may 
derive from the evidence; but how far is it sufficient to 
justify us in declaring a fact in direct contradiction to 
such an official declaration. It is not evidence that could 
be received according to the established admiralty 
practice. Seamen (1 Peters, Ad. Dec. 211) on board of a 
vessel cannot be witnesses for one another in matters where 
they have a common interest. Again, the principal part of 
this evidence is not taken under oath. That of Dr. Madden, 
which is mainly relied upon, is chiefly heresay; and is 
contradicted, in some of its most essential particulars, by 
that of other witnesses.  
Would this Court be justified, on evidence such as this, in 
setting aside the admitted certificate of the Governor 
General? Would such evidence, in one of our own Courts, be 
deemed adequate to set aside a judicial proceeding, or an 
act of a public functionary, done in the due exercise of 
his office? How, then, can it be adequate to such an end, 
before the tribunals of a foreign country, when they pass 
upon the internal municipal acts of another government; and 
when the endeavour is made to set them aside, in a matter 
relating to their own property and people?  
III. But admit this evidence to be competent and 
sufficient; admit these negroes were brought into Cuba a 
few weeks before the certificate was given; still, were 
they not slaves, under the Spanish laws? It is not denied 
that negroes imported from Africa into Cuba, might be 
slaves. If they are not, it is on account of some special 
law or decree. Has such a law been produced in the present 
case? The first document produced is the treaty with


--- PAGE 140 ---
England, of 23d September, 1817. But that has no such 
effect. It promises, indeed, that Spain will take into 
consideration the means of preventing the slave trade, and 
it points out those means, so far as the trade on the coast 
of Africa is concerned.But it carefully limits the 
ascertainment of any infringement to two special tribunals; 
one at Sierra Leone, and the other at Havana.The next is 
the decree of December, 1817, which authorizes negroes, 
brought in against the treaty, to "be declared free." The 
treaty of 28th June, 1835, which is next adduced, is 
confined entirely to the slave trade on the coast of 
Africa, or the voyage from there. Now, it is evident that 
none of these documents show that these negroes were free 
in Cuba. They had not been "declared free" by any competent 
tribunal. Even had they been taken actually on board of a 
vessel engaged in the slave trade, they must have been 
adjudicated upon at one of the two special courts, and 
nowhere else. Can this Court, then, undertake to decide 
this question of property, when it has not even been 
decided by the Spanish Courts; and make such decision in 
the face of the certificate of the highest functionary of 
the island?  
It is submitted, then, that if this Court does go behind 
the certificate of the Governor General, and look into the 
fact, whether or not these persons were slaves on the 18th 
June, 1839, yet there is no sufficient evidence on which 
they could adjudge it to be untrue. If this be so, the 
proof concerning the property is suffiicent to bring the 
case within the intention and provisions of the treaty.  
The next question is, did the United States legally 
intervene to obtain the decree of the Court for the 
restoration of the property, in order that it might be 
delivered to the Spanish owners, according to the 
stipulations of the treaty? They did; because the property 
of foreigners, thus brought under the cognisance of the 
Courts, is, of right, deliverable to the public 
functionaries of the government to which such foreigners 
belong; because those functionaries have required the 
interposition of the United States on their behalf; and 
because the United States were authorized, on that request, 
to interpose, pursuant to their treaty obligations.  
That the property of foreigners, under such circumstances 
may be delivered to the public functionaries, is so clearly 
established, by the decisions of this Court, that it is


--- PAGE 141 ---
unnecessary to discuss the point. In the case (2 Mason, 
411, 412. 463) of La Jeune Eugenie, there was a libel of 
the vessel, as in this case, and a claim interposed by the 
French consul, and also by the owners themselves. The Court 
there directed the delivery of the property to the public 
functionary. In that of the Divina Pastora, 4 Wheat. 52, 
the Spanish consul interposed. In that of the Antelope, 10 
Wheat. 68, there where claims interposed, very much as in 
this case, by the captain as captor, and by the Vice 
Consuls of Spain and Portugal, for citizens of their 
respective countries; and by the United States. The Court 
directed their delivery, partly to the Consul of Spain, and 
partly to the United States. It is thus settled, that the 
public functionaries are entitled to intervene in such 
cases, on behalf of the citizens of their countries. In the 
present one, the Spanish minister did so intervene by 
applying to the United States to adopt, on his behalf, the 
necessary proceedings; and, upon his doing so, Ruiz and 
Montez withdrew their separate claims. The United States, 
on their part, acted as the treaty required. The executive 
is their agent in all such transactions, and on him 
devolved the obligation to see this property restored 
entire, if due proof concerning it was made. The form of 
proceeding was already established by procedent and by law. 
The course adopted was exactly that pursued in the case of 
M'Fadden v. The Exchange, 7 Cranch, 116, where a vessel was 
libelled in a port of the United States.Being a public 
vessel of a foreign sovereign, which the government was 
bound to protect, there intervened exactly in the same way. 
The libel was dismissed and the vessel restored to the 
custody of the public officers of France.  
It is, therefore, equally clear, that the United States, in 
this instance, has pursued the course required by the laws 
of nations; and if the Court are satisfied, on the first 
point, that there is due proof concerning the property, 
then it ought to be delivered entire, so that it may be 
restored to the Spanish owners. If this be so, the Court 
below has erred, because it has not decreed any part of the 
property to be delivered entire, except the boy Antonio. 
From the vessel and cargo, it has deducted the salvage, 
diminishing them by that amount; and the negroes it has 
entirely refused to direct to be delivered.


--- PAGE 142 ---
ARGUMENT FOR THE AMISTAD CAPTIVES (Roger Baldwin)  
ARGUMENT FOR THE APPELLEES 
The case was argued by Mr. Baldwin and Mr. Adams, for 
the Appellees.  
Mr. Baldwin, for the defendants in error.  
In preparing to address this honourable Court, on the 
questions arising upon this record, in behalf of the humble 
Africans whom I represent, -- contending, as they are, for 
freedom and for life, with two powerful governments arrayed 
against the, -- it has been to me a source of high 
gratification, in this unequal contest, that those 
questions will be heard and decided by a tribunal, not only 
elevated far above the influence of executive power and 
popular prejudice, but, from its very consitution, exempt 
from liability to those imputations to which a Court, less 
happily constituted, or composed only of members from one 
section of the Union, might, however unjustly, be exposed.  
This case is not only one of deep interest in itself, as 
affecting the destiny of the unfortunate Africans, whom I 
represent, but it involves considerations deeply affecting 
out national character in the eyes of the whole civilized 
world, as well as questions of power on the part of the 
government of the United States, which are regarded with 
anxiety and alarm by a large portion of our citizens.It 
presents, for the first time, the question whether the 
government, which was established for the promotion of 
JUSTICE, which was founded on the great principles of the 
Revolution, as proclaimed in the Declaration of 
Independence, can, consistently with the genius of our 
institutions, become a party to proceedings for the 
enslavement of human beings cast upon our shores, and found 
in the condition of freemen within the territorial limits 
of a FREE AND SOVEREIGN STATE?  
In the remarks I shall have occasion to make, it will be my 
design to appeal to no sectional prejudices, and to assume 
no positions in which I shall not hope to be sustained by 
intelligent minds from the south as well as from the north. 
Although I am in favour of the broadest liberty of inquiry 
and discussion, -- happily secured by our Constitution to 
every citizen, subject only to his individual


--- PAGE 143 ---
responsibility to the laws for its abuse; I have ever been 
of the opinion that the exercise of that liberty by 
citizens of one state, in regard to the institutions of 
another, should always be guided by discretion, and 
tempered with kindness.  
Mr. Baldwin here proceeded to state all the facts of the 
case, and the proceedings in the District and Circuit 
Courts, in support of the motion to dismiss the appeal. As 
no decision was given by the Court on the motion, this part 
of the argument is, necessarily, omitted.  
Mr. Baldwin continued: If the government of the United 
States could appear in any case as the representative of 
foreigners claiming property in the Court of Admiralty, it 
has no right to appear in their behalf to aid them in the 
recovery of fugitive slaves, even when domiciled in the 
country from which they escaped: much less the recent 
victims of the African slave trade, who have sought an 
asylum in one of the free states of the Union, without any 
wrongful act on our part, or for which, as in the case of 
the Antelope, we are in any way responsible.  
The recently imported Africans of the Amistad, if they were 
ever slaves, which is denied, were in the actual condition 
of freedom when they came within the jurisdictional limits 
of the state of New York. They came there without any 
wrongful act on the part of any officer or citizen of the 
United States. They were in a state where, not only no law 
existed to make them slaves, but where, by an express 
statute, all persons, except fugitives, &c., from a sister 
state, are declared to be free. They were under the 
protection of the laws of a state, which, in the language 
of the Supreme Court, in the case of Miln v. The City of 
New York, 11 Peters, 139, "has the same undeniable and 
unlimited jurisdiction over all persons and things within 
its territorial limits, as any foreign nation, when that 
jurisdiction is not surrendered or restrained by the 
Constitution of the United States."  
The American people have never imposed it as a duty on the 
government of the United States, to become actors an 
attempt to reduce to slavery, men found in a state of 
freedom, by giving extra-territorial force to a foreign 
slave law. Such a duty would not only be repugnant to the 
feelings of a large portion of the citizens of the United 
States, but it would be wholly inconsistent with the


--- PAGE 144 ---
fundamental principles of our government, and the purposes 
for which it was established, as well as with its policy in 
prohibiting the slave trade and giving freedom to its 
victims.  
The recovery of slaves for their owners, whether foreign or 
domestic, is a matter with which the executive of the 
United States has no concern. The Constitution confers upon 
the government no power to establish or legalize the 
institution of slavery. It recognises it as existing in 
regard to persons held to service by the laws of the states 
which tolerate it; and contains a compact between the 
states, obliging them to respect the rights acquired under 
the slave laws of other states, in the cases specified in 
the Constitution. But it imposes no duty, and confers no 
power on the government of the United States to act in 
regard to it. So far as the compact extends, the Courts of 
the United States, whether sitting in a free state or a 
slave state, will give effect to it. Beyond that, all 
persons within the limits of a state are entitled to the 
protection of its laws.  
If these Africans have been taken from the possession of 
their Spanish claimants, and wrongfully brought into the 
United States by our citizens, a question would have been 
presented similar to that which existed in the case of the 
Antelope. But when men have come here voluntarily, without 
any wrong on the part of the government or citizens of the 
United States, in withdrawing them from the jurisdiction of 
the Spanish laws, why should this government be required to 
become active in their restoration? They appear here 
freemen. They stand before out Courts on equal are presumed 
to be free. They stand before our Courts on equal ground 
with their claimants; and when the Courts, after an 
impartial hearing with all parties in interest before them, 
have pronounced them free, it is neither the duty nor the 
right of the executive of the United States, to interfere 
with the decision.  
The question of the surrender of fugitive slaves to a 
foreign claimant, if the right exists at all, is left to 
the comity of the states which tolerate slavery. The 
government of the United States has nothing to do with it. 
In the letter of instructions addressed by Mr. Adams, when 
Secretary of State, to Messrs. Gallatin and Rush, dated 
November 2, 1818, in relation to a proposed arrangement 
with Great Britain, for a more active co-operation in the


--- PAGE 145 ---
suppression of the slave trade, he assigns as a reason for 
rejecting the proposition for a mixed commission, "that the 
disposal of the negroes found on board the slave-trading 
vessels, which might be condemned by the sentence of the 
mixed Courts, cannot be carried into effect by the United 
States." "The condition of the blacks being in this Union 
regulated by the municipal laws of the separate states, the 
government of the United States can neither guarantee their 
liberty in the states where they could only be received as 
slaves, nor control them in the states where they would be 
recognised as free." Doc. 48, H. Rep. 2 sess. 16th Cong. p. 
15.  
It may comport with the interest or feelings of a slave 
state to surrender a fugitive slave to a foreigner, or at 
least to expel him from their borders. But the people of 
New England, except so far as they are bound by the 
compact, would cherish and protect him. To the extent of 
the compact we acknowledge our obligation, and have passed 
laws for its fulfilment. Beyond that our citizens would be 
unwilling to go.  
A state has no power to surrender a fugitive criminal to a 
foreign government for punishment; because that is 
necessarily a matter of national concern. The fugitive is 
demanded for a national purpose. But the question of the 
surrender of fugitive slaves concerns individuals merely. 
They are demanded as property only, and for private 
purposes. It is, therefore, a proper subject for the action 
of the state, and not of the national authorities.  
The surrender of neither is demandable of right, unless 
stipulated by treaty. See as to the surrender of fugitive 
criminals, 2 Brock. Rep. 493. 2 Sumner, 482. 14 Peters, 
540. Doc. 199, H.R. 26 Cong. p. 53. 70. 10 Amer. State Pap. 
151. 153. 433. 3 Hall's Law Jour. 135. An overture was once 
made by the government of the United States to negotiate a 
treaty with Great Britain for the mutual surrender of 
fugitive slaves. But it was instantly repelled by the 
british government. It may well be doubted whiether such a 
stipulation is within the treaty-making power under the 
Constitution of the United States. "The power to make 
treaties," says Chief Justice Taney, 14 Peters, 569, "is 
given in general terms, . . . and consequently it was 
designed to include all those subjects which in the 
ordinary intercourse of nations had usually been made 
subjects of negotiation and treaty; and which are


--- PAGE 146 ---
consistent with the nature of our institutions, and the 
distribution of powers between the general and state 
governments." See Holmes v. Jennison, 14 Peters, 569. But, 
however this may be, the attempt to introduce it is 
evidence that, unless provided for by treaty, the 
obligation to surrender was not deemed to exist.  
We deny that Ruiz and Montez, Spanish subjects, had a right 
to call on any officer or Court of the United States to use 
the force of the government, or the process of the law for 
the purpose of again enslaving those who have thus escaped 
from foreign slavery, and sought an asylum here. We deny 
that the seizure of these persons by Lieutenant Gedney for 
such a purpose was a legal or justifiable act.  
How would it be -- independently of the treaty between the 
United States and Spain -- upon the principles of our 
government, of the common law, or of the law of nations?  
If a foreign slave vessel, engaged in a traffic which by 
our laws is denounced as inhuman and piratical, should be 
captured by the slaves while on her voyage from Africa to 
Cuba, and they should succeed in reaching our shores, have 
the Constitution or laws of the United States imposed upon 
our judges, our naval officers, or our executive, the duty 
of seizing the unhappy fugitives and delivering them up to 
their oppressors? Did the people of the United States, 
whole government is based on the great principles of the 
Revolution, proclaimed in the Declaration of Independence, 
confer upon the federal, executive, or judicial tribunals, 
the power of making our nation assessories to such 
atrocious violations of human right?  
Is there any principle of international law, or law of 
comity which requires it? Are our Courts bound, and if not, 
are they at liberty, to give effect here to the slave trade 
laws of a foreign nation; to laws affecting strangers, 
never domiciled there, when, to give them such effect would 
be to violate the natural rights of men?  
These questions are answered in the negative by all the 
most approved writers on the laws of nations. 1 Burg. 
Confl. 741. Story, Confl. 92.  
By the law of France, the slaves of their colonies, 
immediately on their arrival in France, become free. In the 
case of Forbes v. Cochrane, 2 Barn. and Cress. 463, this


--- PAGE 147 ---
question is elaborately discussed and settled by the 
English Court of King's Bench.  
By the law of the state of New York, a foreign slave 
escaping into that state becomes free. And the Courts of 
the United States, in acting upon the personal rights of 
men found within the jurisdiction of a free state, are 
bound to administer the laws as they would be administered 
by the state Courts, in all cases in which the laws of the 
state do not conflict with the laws or obligations of the 
United States. The United States as a nation have 
prohibited the slave trade as inhuman and piratical, and 
they have no law authorizing the enslaving of its victims. 
It is a maxim, to use the words of an eminent English 
judge, in the case of Forbes v. Cochrane, 2 Barn. and 
Cress., "that which is called comitas inter communitates, 
cannot prevail in any case, where it violates the law of 
our own country, the law of nature, or the law of God." 9 
Eng. C.L.R. 149. And that the laws of a nation, proprio 
vigore, have no force beyond its own territories, except so 
far as it respects its own citizens, who owe it allegiance, 
is too familiarly settled to need the citation of 
authorities. See 9 Wheaton, 366. Apollon, 2 Mason, 151 -- 
158. The rules on this subject adopted in the English Court 
of Admiralty are the same which prevail in their Courts of 
common law, though they hae decided in the case of The 
Louis, 2 Dodson, 238, as the Supreme Court did in the case 
of the Antelope, 10 Wheaton, 66, that as the slave trade 
was not, at that time, prohibited by the law of nations, if 
a foreign slaver was captured by an English ship, it was a 
wrongful act, which it would be the duty of the Court of 
Admiralty to repair by restoring the possession. The 
principle of amoveas manus, adopted in these cases, has no 
application to the case of fugitives from slavery.  
But it is claimed that if these Africans, though "recently 
imported into Cuba," were by the laws of Spain the property 
of Ruiz and Montez, the government of the United States is 
bound by the treaty to restore them; and that, therefore, 
the intervention of the executive in these proceedings is 
proper for that purpose. It has already, it is believed, 
been shown that even if the case were within the treaty, 
the intervention of the executive as a party before the 
judicial tribunals was unnecessary and improper, since the 
treaty provides for its own execution by the Courts, on the 
application of the parties in interest. And such a resort 
is expressly provided in the twentieth article of the


--- PAGE 148 ---
treaty of 1794 with Great Britain, and in the twenty-sixth 
article of the treaty of 1801 with the French Republic, 
both of which are in other respects similar to the ninth 
article of the Spanish treaty, on which the Attorney 
General has principally relied.  
The sixth article of the Spanish treaty has received a 
judicial construction in the case of the Santissima 
Trinidad, 7 Wheaton, 284, where it was decided that the 
obligation assumed in simply that of protecting belligerent 
vessels from capture within our jurisdiction. It can have 
no application therefore to a case like the present.  
The ninth article of that treaty provides "that all ships 
and merchandise of what nature soever, which shall be 
rescued out of the hands of pirates or robbers, on the high 
seas, shall be brought into some port of either state, and 
shall be delivered to the custody of the officers of that 
port, in order to be taken care of, and restored entire to 
the true proprietors, as soon as due and sufficient proof 
shall be made concerning the property thereof."  
To render this clause of the treaty applicable to the case 
under consideration, it must be assumed that under the term 
"merchandise" the contracting parties intended to include 
slaves; and that slaves, themselves the recent victims of 
piracy, who, by a successful revolt, have achieved their 
deliverance from slavery, on the high seas, and have 
availed themselves of the means of escape of which they 
have thus acquired the possession, are to be deemed 
"pirates and robbers," "from whose hands" such "merchandise 
has been rescued."  
It is believed that such a construction of the words of the 
treaty is not in accordance with the rules of 
interpretation which ought to govern our Courts; and that 
when there is no special reference to human beings as 
property, who are not acknowledged as such by the law of 
comity of nations generally, but only by the municipal laws 
of the particular nations which tolerate slavery, it cannot 
be presumed that the contracting parties intended to 
include them under the general term "merchandise." As has 
already been remarked, it may well be doubted whether such 
a stipulation would be within the treaty-making power of 
the United States.It is to be remembered that the 
government of the United States is based on the principles 
promulgated in the Declaration of Independence by the


--- PAGE 149 ---
Congress of 1776; "that all men are created equal; that 
they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable 
rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit 
of happiness; and that to secure these rights governments 
are instituted."  
The convention which formed the Federal Constitution, 
though they recognised slavery as existing in regard to 
persons held to labour by the laws of the states which 
tolerated it, were careful to exclude from that instrument 
every expression that might be construed into an admission 
that there could be property in men. It appears by the 
report of the proceedings of the convention, (3 Madison 
Papers, 1428,) that the first clause of section 9, article 
1, which provides for the imposition of a tax or duty on 
the importation of such persons as any of the states, then 
existing, might think proper to admit, &c., "not exceeding 
ten dollars for each person," was adopted in its present 
form, in consequence of the opposition by Roger Sherman and 
James Madison to the clause as it was originally reported, 
on the ground, "that it admitted that there could be 
property in men;" an idea which Mr. Madison said "he 
thought it wrong to admit in the Constitution." The words 
reported by the committee, and stricken out on this 
objection, were: "a tax or duty may be imposed on such 
migration or importation at a rate not exceeding the 
average of the duties laid upon imports." The Constitution 
as it now stands will be searched in vain for an expression 
recognising human beings as merchandise or legitimate 
subjects of commerce. In the case of New York v. Miln, 11 
Peters, 104. 136, Judge Barbour, in giving the opinion of 
the Court, expressly declares, in reference to the power 
"to regulate commerce" conferred on Congress by the 
Constitution, that "persons are not the subjects of 
commerce." Judging from the public sentiment which 
prevailed at the time of the adoption of the Constitution, 
it is probable that the first act of the government in the 
exercise of its power to regulate commerce, would have been 
to prohibit the slave trade, if it had not been restrained 
until 1808, from prohibiting the importation of such 
persons as any of the states, then existing, should think 
proper to admit. But could Congress have passed an act 
authorizing the importation of slaves as articles of 
commerce, into any state in opposition to a law of the 
state, prohibiting their introduction? If they could, they 
may now force slavery into every state. For no state can


--- PAGE 150 ---
prohibit the introduction of legitimate objects of foreign 
commerce, when authorized by Congress.  
The United States must be regarded as comprehending free 
states as well as slave states: states which do not 
recognise slaves as property, as well as states which do so 
regard them. When all speak as a nation, general 
expressions ought to be construed to mean what all 
understand to be included in them; at all events, what may 
be included consistently with the law of nature.  
The ninth article of the Spanish treaty was copied from the 
sixteenth article of the treaty with France, concluded in 
1778, in the midst of the war of the Revolution, in which 
the great principles of liberty proclaimed in the 
Declaration of Independence were vindicated by our fathers.  
By "merchandise rescued from pirates," the contracting 
parties must have had in view property, which it would be 
the duty of the public ships of the United States to rescue 
from its unlawful possessors. Because, if it is taken from 
those who are rightfully in possession, the capture would 
be wrongful, and it would be our duty to restore it. But is 
it a duty which our naval officers owe to a nation 
tolerating the slave trade, to subdue for their kidnappers 
the revolted victims of their cruelty? Could the people of 
the United States, consistently with their principles as a 
nation, have ever consented to a treaty stipulation which 
would impose such a duty on our naval officers? a duty 
which would drive every citizen of a free state from the 
service of his country? Has our government, which has been 
so cautious as not to oblige itself to surrender the most 
atrocious criminals, who have sought an asylum in the 
United States, bound itself, under the term "merchandise," 
to seize and surrender fugitive slaves?  
The subject of the delivery of fugitives was under 
consideration before and during the negotiation of the 
Treaty of San Lorenzo; and was purposely omitted in the 
treaty. Sec. 10 Waite's State Papers, 151. 433. Our 
treaties with Tunis and Algiers contain similar 
expressions, in which both parties stipulate for the 
protection of the property of the subjects of each within 
the jurisdiction of the other. The Algerine regarded his 
Spanish captive as property; but was it ever supposed, that 
if an Algerine corsair should be seized by the captive 
slaves on board of her, it would be the duty of our naval


--- PAGE 151 ---
officers, or our Courts of Admiralty, to recapture and 
restore them?  
The phraseology of the entire article in the treaty, 
clearly shows that it was intended to apply only to 
inanimate things, or irrational animals; such as are 
universally regarded as property. It is "merchandise 
rescued from the hands of pirates and robbers on the high 
seas" that is to be restored. There is no provision for the 
surrender of the pirates themselves. And the reason is, 
because the article has reference only to those who are 
"hostes humani generis," whom it is lawful for, and the 
duty of all nations to capture and to punish. If these 
Africans were "pirates" or sea robbers, whom our naval 
officers might lawfully seize, it would be our duty to 
detain them for punishment; and then what would become of 
the "merchandise?"  
But they were not pirates, nor in any sense hostes humani 
generis. Cinque, the master-spirit who guided them, had a 
single object in view. That object was -- not piracy or 
robbery -- but the deliverance of himself and his 
companions in suffering, from unlawful bondage. They owed 
no allegiance to Spain. They were on board of the Amistad 
by constraint. Their object was to free themselves from the 
fetters that bound them, in order that they might return to 
their kindred and their home. In so doing they were guilty 
of no crime, for which they could be held responsible as 
pirates. See Bee's Rep. 273. Suppose they had been 
impressed American seamen, who had regained their liberty 
in a similar manner, would they in that case have been 
deemed guilty of piracy and murder? Not in the opinion of 
Chief Justice Marshall. In his celebrated speech in 
justicfication of the surrender by President Adams of Nash 
under the British treaty, he says: "Had Thomas Nash been an 
impressed American, the homicide on board the Hermione 
would most certainly not have been murder. The act of 
impressing an American is an act of lawless violence. The 
confinement on board a vessel is a continuation of that 
violence, and an additional outrage. Death committed within 
the United States in resisting such violence, would not 
have been murder." Bee's Rep. 290.  
The United States, as a nation, is to be regarded as a free 
state. And all men being presumptively free, when 
"merchandise" is spoken of in the treaty of a free state, 
it cannot be presumed that human beings are intended to be


--- PAGE 152 ---
included as such. Hence, whenever our government have 
intended to speak of negroes as property, in their 
treaties, they have been specifically mentioned, as in the 
treaties with Great Britain, of 1783 and 1814. It was on 
the same principle, that Judge Drayton, of South Carolina, 
decided, in the case of Almeida, who had captured, during 
the last war, an English vessel with slaves, that the word 
"property" in the prize act, did not include negroes, and 
that they must be regarded as prisoners of war, and not 
sold or distributed merchandise. 5 Hall's Law Journal, 459.  
And it was for the same reason, that it was deemed 
necessary in the Constitution, to insert an express 
stipulation in regard to fugitives from service. The law of 
comtiy would have obliged each state to protect and restore 
property belonging to a citizen of another, without such 
stipulation; but it would not have required the restoration 
of fugitive slaves from a sister state, unless they had 
been expressly mentioned.  
In the interpretation of treaties we ought always to give 
such a construction to the words as is most consistent with 
the customary use of language; most suitable to the 
subject, and to the legitimate powers of the contracting 
parties; most conformable to the declared principles of the 
government; such a construction as will not lead to 
injustice to others, or in any way violate the laws of 
nature.  
These are, in substance, the rules of interpretation as 
given by Vattel, v. ii. ch. 17. The construction claimed in 
behalf of the Spanish libellants, in the present case, is 
at war with them all.  
It would be singular, indeed, if the tribunals of a 
government which has declared the slave-trade piracy, and 
has bound itself by a solemn treaty with Great Britain, in 
1814, to make continued efforts "to promote its entire 
abolition, as a traffic irreconcilable with the principles 
of humanity and justice," should construe the general 
expressions of a treaty which since that period has been 
revised by the contracting parties, as obliging this nation 
to commit the injustice of treating as property the recent 
victims of this horrid traffic; more especially when it is 
borne in mind, that the government of Spain, anterior to 
the revision of the treaty in 1819, had formally notified 
our government that Africans were no longer the legitimate


--- PAGE 153 ---
objects of trade; with a declaration that "His majesty felt 
confident that a measure so completely in harmony with the 
sentiments of this government, and of all the inhabitants 
of this republic, could not fail to be equally agreeable to 
the President." Doc. 48. 2 sess. 16 Cong. p. 8.  
Would the people of the United States, in 1819, have 
assented to such a treaty? Would it not have furnished just 
ground of complaint by Great Britain, as a violation of the 
10th article of the treaty of Ghant?  
But even if the treaty in its terms were such as to oblige 
us to violate towards strangers the immutable laws of 
justice, it would, according of Vattel, impose no 
obligation. Vattel, c. 1, @ 9; b. ii. c. 12, @ 161; c. 17, 
@ 311.  
The law of nature and the law of nations, bind us as 
effectually to render justice to the African, as the treaty 
can to the Spaniard. Before a foreign tribunal, the parties 
litigating the question of freedom or slavery, stand on 
equal ground. And in a case like this, where it is admitted 
that the Africans were recently imported, and consequently 
never domiciled in Cuba, and owe no allegiance to its laws, 
their rights are to be determined by that law which is of 
universal obligation -- the law of nature.  
If, indeed, the vessel in which they sailed had been driven 
upon our coast by stress of weather or other unavoidable 
cause, and they had arrived here in the actual possession 
of their alleged owners, and had been slaves by the law of 
the country from which they sailed, and where they were 
domiciled, it would have been a very different question, 
whether the Courts of the United States could interfere to 
liberate them, as was done at Bermuda by the colonial 
tribunal, in the case of the Enterprise.  
But in this case there has been no possession of these 
Africans by their claimants within our jurisdiction, of 
which they have been deprived, by the act of our government 
or its officers; and neither by the law of comity, or by 
force of the treaty, are the officers or Courts of the 
United States required, or by the principles of our 
government permitted to become actors in reducing them to 
slavery.


--- PAGE 154 ---
These preliminary questions have been made on account of 
the important principles involved in them, and not from any 
unwillingness to meet the question between the Africans and 
their claimants upon the facts in evidence, and on those 
alone, to vindicate their claims to freedom.  
Suppose, then, the case to be properly here: and that Ruiz 
and Montez, unprejudiced by the decree of the Court below, 
were at liberty to take issue with the Africans upon their 
answer, and to call upon this Court to determine the 
question of liberty or property, how stands the case on the 
evidence before the Court?  
The Africans, when found by Lieutenant Gedney, were in a 
free state, where all men are presumed to be free, and were 
in the actual condition of freemen. The burden of proof, 
therefore, rests on those who assert them to be slaves. 10 
Wheaton, 66. 2 Mason, 459. When they call on the Courts of 
the United States to reduce to slavery men who are 
apparently free, they must show some law, having force in 
the place where they were taken, which makes them slaves, 
or that the claimants are entitled in our Courts to have 
some foreign law, obligatory on the Africans as well as on 
the claimants, enforced in respect to them; and that by 
such foreign law they are slaves.  
It is not pretended that there was any law existing in the 
place where they were found, which made them slaves, but it 
is claimed that by the laws of Cuba they were slaves to 
Ruiz and Montez; and that those laws are to be here 
enforced. But before the laws of Cuba, if any such there 
be, can be applied to affect the personal status of 
individuals within a foreign jurisdiction, it is very clear 
that it must be shown that they were domiciled in Cuba.  
It is admitted and proved in this case that these negroes 
are natives of Africa, and recently imported into Cuba. 
Their domicil of origin is consequently the place of their 
birth in Africa. And the presumption of law is, always, 
that the domicil of origin, is retained until the change is 
proved. 1 Burge's Conflict. 34. The burden of proving the 
change is cast on him who alleges it. 5 Vesey, 787.  
The domicil of origin prevails until the party has not only 
acquired another, but has manifested and carried into 
execution an intention of abandoning his former domicil, 
and acquiring another, as his sole domicil. As it is the


--- PAGE 155 ---
will or intention of the party which alone determines what 
is the real place of domicil which he has chosen, it 
follows that a former demicil is not abandoned by residence 
in another, if that residence be not voluntarily chosen. 
Those who are in exile, or in prison, as they are never 
presumed to have abandoned all hope of return, retain their 
former domicil. 1 Burg. 46. That these victims of fraud and 
piracy -- husbands torn from their wives and families -- 
children from their parents and kindred -- neither intended 
to abandon the land of their nativity, nor had lost all 
hope of recovering it, sufficiently appears from the facts 
on this record. It cannot, surely, be claimed that a 
residence, under such circumstances, of these helpless 
beings for ten days in a slave barracoon, before they were 
transferred to the Amistad, changed their native domicil 
for that of Cuba.  
It is not only incumbent on the claimants to prove that the 
Africans are domiciled in Cuba, and subject to its laws, 
but they must show that some law existed there by which 
"recently imported Africans" can be lawfully held in 
slavery.Such a law is not to be presumed, but the contrary. 
Comity would seem to require of us to presume that a 
traffic so abhorrent to the feelings of the whole civilized 
world is not lawful in Cuba.These respondents having been 
born free, and having been recently imported into Cuba, 
have a right to be every where regarded as free, until some 
law obligatory on them is produced authorizing their 
enslavement. Neither the law of nature nor the law of 
nations authorizes the slave-trade; although it was holden 
in the case of the Antelope, that the law of nations did 
not at that time actually prohibit it. If they are slaves, 
then, it must be by some positive law of Spain, existing at 
the time of their recent importation. No such law is 
exhibited. On the contrary, it is proved by the deposition 
of Dr. Madden, one of the British commissioners resident at 
Havana, that since the year 1820, there has been no such 
law in force there, either statute or common law.  
But we do not rest the case here. We are willing to assume 
the burden of proof. On the 14th of May, 1818, the Spanish 
government, by their minister, announced to the government 
of the United States that the slave-trade was prohibited by 
Spain; and by express command of the King of Spain, Don 
Onis communicated to the President of the United States the 
treaty with Great Britain of September 23d, 1817, by which 
the King of Spain, moved partly by motives of humanity, and


--- PAGE 156 ---
partly in consideration of four hundred thousand pounds 
sterling, paid to him by the British government for the 
accomplishment of so desirable an object, engaged that the 
slave-trade should be abolished throughout the dominions of 
Spain, on the 30th May, 1820. By the ordinance of the King 
of Spain of December, 1817, it is directed that every 
African imported into any of the colonies of Spain in 
violation of the treaty, shall be declared free in the 
first port at which he shall arrive.  
By the treaty between Great Britain and Spain of the 28th 
of June, 1835, which is declared to be made for the purpose 
of "rendering the means taken for abolishing the inhuman 
traffic in slaves more effective," and to be in the spirit 
of the treaty contracted between both powers on the 23d of 
September, 1817, "the slave-trade is again declared on the 
part of Spain to be henceforward totally and finally 
abolished, in all parts of the world." And by the royal 
ordinance of November 2d, 1838, the Governor and the naval 
officers having command on the coast of Cuba, are 
stimulated to greater vigilance to suppress it.  
Such, then, being the laws in force in all the dominions of 
Spain, and such the conceded facts in regard to the 
nativity and recent importation of these Africans, upon 
what plausible ground can it be claimed by the government 
of the United States, that they were slaves in the island 
of Cuba, and are here to be treated as property, and not as 
human beings?  
The only evidence exhibited to prove them slaves, are the 
papers of the Amistad, giving to Jose Ruiz permission to 
transport forty-nine Ladinos belonging to him, from Havana 
to Puerto Principe; and a like permit to Pedro Montez, to 
transport three Ladinos. For one of the four Africans, 
claimed by Montez, (the boy Ka-le,) there is no permit at 
all.  
It has been said in an official opinion by the late 
Attorney General, (Mr. Grundy,) that "as this vessel 
cleared out from one Spanish port to another Spanish port, 
with papers regularly authenticated by the proper officers 
at Havana, evidencing that these negroes were slaves, and 
that the destination of the vessel was to another Spanish 
port, the government of the United States would not be 
authorized to go into an investigation for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether the facts stated in those papers by


--- PAGE 157 ---
the Spanish officers are true or not;" -- "that if it were 
to permit itself to go behind the papers of the schooner 
Amistad, it would place itself in the embarrassing 
condition of judging upon Spanish laws, their force, 
effect, and application to the case under consideration." 
In support of this opinion, a reference is made to the 
opinion of this Court, in the case of Arredozdo, 6 Pet. 
729, where it is stated to be "a universal principle, that 
where power or jurisdiction is delegated to any public 
officer or tribunal over a subject-matter, and its exercise 
is confided to his or their discretion, the acts so done 
are binding and valid as to the subject-matter; and 
individual rights will not be disturbed collaterally for 
any thing done in the exercise of that discretion within 
the authority conferred. The only questions which can arise 
between an individual claiming a right under the acts done, 
and the public, or any person denying its validity, are 
power in the officer, and fraud in the party."  
The principle thus stated, was applicable to the case then 
before the Court, which related to the validity of a grant 
made by a public officer; but it does not tend to support 
the position for which it is cited in the present case. 
For, in the first place, there was no jurisdiction over 
these newly imported Africans, by the laws of Spain, to 
make them slaves, any more than if they had been white men. 
The ordinance of the king declared them free. Secondly, 
there was no intentional exercise of jurisdiction over them 
for such a purpose, by the officer who granted the permits; 
and, thirdly, the permits were fraudulently obtained, and 
fraudulently used by the parties claiming to take benefit 
of them. For the purposes for which they are attempted to 
be applied, the permits are as inoperative as would be a 
grant from a public officer, fraudulently obtained, where 
the state had no title to the thing granted, and the 
officer no authority to issue the grant. See 6 Peters, 730. 
5 Wheat. 303.  
But it is said, we have no right to place ourselves in the 
position of judging upon the Spanish laws. How can our 
Courts do otherwise, when Spanish subjects call upon them 
to enforce rights which, if they exist at all, must exist 
by force of Spanish laws? For what purpose did the 
government of Spain communicate to the government of the 
United States, the fact of the prohibition of the slave-
trade, unless it was that it might be known and acted upon 
by our Courts? Suppose the permits to Ruiz and Montez had


--- PAGE 158 ---
been granted for the express purpose of consigning to 
perpetual slavery, these recent victims of this prohibited 
trade, could the government of Spain now ask the government 
or the Courts of the United States, to give validity to the 
acts of a colonial officer, in direct violation of that 
prohibition; and thus make us aiders and abettors in what 
we know to be an atrocious wrong?  
It may be admitted that, even after such an annunciation, 
our cruisers could not lawfully seize a Spanish slaver, 
cleared out as such by the Govenor of Cuba: but if the 
Africans on board of her could effect their own 
deliverance, and reach our shores, has not the government 
of Spain authorized us to treat them with hospitality as 
freemen? Could the Spanish minister, without offence, ask 
the government of the United States to seize these victims 
of fraud and felony, and treat them as property, because a 
colonial governor had thought proper to violate the 
ordinance of his king, in granting a permit to a slaver?  
But in this case we make no charge upon the Governor of 
Cuba. A fraud upon him is proved to have been practised by 
Ruiz and Montez. He never undertook to assume jurisdiction 
over these Africans as slaves, or to decide any question in 
regard to them. He simply issued, on the application of 
Ruiz and Montez, passports for Ladino slaves from Havana to 
Puerto Principe. When under colour of those passports, they 
fraudulently put on board the Amistad, Bozals, who by the 
laws of Spain could not be slaves, we surely manifest no 
disrespect to the acts of the Governor, by giving efficacy 
to the laws of Spain, and denying to Ruiz and Montez the 
benefit of their fraud. The custom house license, to which 
the name of Espeleta in print was appended, was not a 
document given or intended to be used as evidence of 
property between Ruiz and Montez, and the Africans; any 
more than a permit from our customhouse would be to settle 
conflicting claims of ownership to the articles contained 
in the manifest. As between the government and the 
shippers, it would be evidence if the negroes described in 
the passport were actually put on board, and were, in 
truth, the property of Ruiz and Montez, that they were 
legally shipped; that the customhouse forms had been 
complied with; and nothing more.But in view of facts as 
they appear, and are admitted in the present case, the 
passports seem to have been obtained by Ruiz and Montez, 
only as a part of the necessary machinery for the 
completion of a slave voyage. The evidence tends strongly


--- PAGE 159 ---
to prove that Ruiz, at least, was concerned in the 
importation of these Africans, and that the reshipment of 
them under colour of passports obtained for Ladinos, as the 
property of Ruiz and Montez, in connection with the false 
representation on the papers of the schooner, that they 
were "passengers for the government," was an artifice 
resorted to by these slave-traders, for the double purpose 
of evading the scrutiny of British cruisers, and legalizing 
the transfer of their victims to the place of their 
ultimate destination. It is a remarkable circumstance, that 
though more than a year has elapsed, since the decree of 
the District Court denying the title of Ruiz and Montez, 
and pronouncing the Africans free, not a particle of 
evidence has since been produced in support of their 
claims. And yet, strange as it may seem, during all this 
time, not only the sympathies of the Spanish minister, but 
the powerful aid of our own government have been enlisted 
in their behalf!  
It was the purpose of the Reporter to insert the able and 
interesting argument of Mr. Adams, for the African 
appellees; and the publication of the "Reports" has been 
postponed in the hope of obtaining it, prepared by himself. 
It has not been received. As many of the points presented 
by Mr. Adams, in the discussion of the cause, were not 
considered by the Court essential to its decision: and were 
not taken notice of in the opinion of the Court, delivered 
by Mr. Justice STORY, the necessary omission of the 
argument is submitted to with less regret.  
ARGUMENT FOR THE AMISTAD CAPTIVES (John Quincy Adams) 
ARGUMENT OF JOHN QUINCY ADAMS FOR THE 
APPELLEES 
Link to Conclusion 
Argument of John Quincy Adams Before the Supreme Court of 
the United States in the case of the United States, 
Appellants, vs. Cinque, and others, Africans, captured in 
the schooner Amistad, by Lieut. Gedney, Delivered on the 
24th of February and 1st of March 1841. 
 
Originally published in 1841 by S.W. Benedict 
 
ARGUMENT OF JOHN QUINCY ADAMS


--- PAGE 160 ---
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONORS— 
 
In rising to address this Court as one of its attorneys and counselors, regularly admitted at 
a great distance of time, I feel that an apology might well be expected where I shall 
perhaps be more likely to exhibit at once the infinities of age and the inexperience of 
youth, than to render those services to the individuals whose lives and liberties aren't the 
disposal of this Court which I would most earnestly desire to render. But as I am 
unwilling to employ one moment of the time of the Court in anything that regards my 
own personal situation, I shall reserve what few observations I may think necessary to 
offer as an apology till the close of my argument on the merits of the question. 
 
I therefore proceed immediately to say that, in a consideration of this case, I derive, in the 
distress I feel both for myself and my clients, consolation from two sources—first, that 
the rights of my clients to their lives and liberties have already been defended by my 
learned friend and colleague in so able and complete a manner as leaves me scarcely 
anything to say, and I feel that such full justice has been done to their interests, that any 
fault or imperfection of mine will merely be attributed to its true cause; and secondly, I 
derive consolation from the thought that this Court is a Court of JUSTICE. And in saying 
so very trivial a thing I should not on any other occasion, perhaps, be warranted in asking 
the Court to consider what justice is. Justice, as defined in the Institutes of Justinian, 
nearly 2000 years ago, and as it felt and understood by all who understand human 
relations and human rights, is— 
 
"Constans et perpetua voluntas, jus suum cuique tribuendi." 
 
"The constant and perpetual will to secure to every one HIS OWN right." 
 
And in a Court of Justice, where there are two parties present, justice demands that the 
rights of each party should be allowed to himself, as well as that each party has a right, to 
be secured and protected by the Court. This observation is important, because I appear 
here on the behalf of thirty-six individuals, the life and liberty of every one of whom 
depend on the decision of this Court. The Court, therefore, I trust, in deciding this case, 
will form no lumping judgment on these thirty-six individuals, but will act on the 
consideration that the life and the liberty of every one of them must be determined by its 
decision for himself alone. 
 
They are here, individually, under very different circumstances, and in very different 
characters. Some are in one predicament, some in another. In some of the proceedings by 
which they have been brought into the custody and under the protection of this Court, 
thirty-two or three of them have been charged with the crime of murder. Three or four of 
them are female children, in. capable, in the judgment of our laws, of the crime of murder 
or piracy or, perhaps, of any other crime. Yet, from the day when the vessel was taken 
possession of by one of our naval officers, they have all been held as close prisoners, now 
for the period of eighteen long months, under custody and by authority of the Courts of 
the United States. I trust, therefore, that before the ultimate decision of this Court is


--- PAGE 161 ---
established, its honorable members will pay due attention to the circumstances and 
condition of every individual concerned. 
 
When I say I derive consolation from the consideration that I stand before a Court of 
Justice, I am obliged to take this ground, because, as I shall -show, another Department of 
the Government of the United States has taken, with reference to this case, the ground of 
utter injustice, and these individuals for whom I appear, stand before this Court, awaiting 
their fate from its decision, under the array of the whole Executive power of this nation 
against them, in addition to that of a foreign nation. And here arises a consideration, the 
most painful of all others; in considering the duty I have to discharge, in which, in 
supporting the action to dismiss the appeal, I shall be obliged not only to investigate and 
submit to the censure of this Court, the form and manner of the proceedings of the 
Executive in this case, but the validity, and the motive of the reasons assigned for its 
interference in this unusual manner in a suit between parties for their individual rights. 
 
At an early period of my life it was my fortune to witness the representation upon the 
stage of one of the tragic masterpieces of the great Dramatist of England, or I may rather 
say of the great Dramatist of the world, and in that scene which exhibits in action the 
sudden, the instantaneous fall from unbounded power into irretrievable disgrace of 
Cardinal Wolsey, by the abrupt declaration of displeasure and dismission from the 
service of his King, made by that monarch in the presence of Lord Surry and of the Lord 
Chamberlain; at the moment of Wolsey's humiliation and distress, Surry given vent to his 
long suppressed resentments for the insolence and injuries which he had endured from 
the fallen favorite while in power, and breaks out into insulting and bitter reproaches, till 
checked by the Chamberlain, who says: 
 
"Oh! my Lords; Press not a falling man too far: 'tis Virtue." 
 
The repetition of that single line, in the relative position of the parties, struck me as a 
moral principle, and made upon my mind an impression which I have carried with me 
through all the changes of my life, and which I trust I shall carry with me to my grave. 
 
It is, therefore, peculiarly painful to me, under present circumstances, to be under the 
necessity of arraigning before this Court and before the civilized world, the course of the 
existing Administration in this case. But I must do it. That Government is still in power, 
and thus, subject to the control of the Court, the lives and liberties of all my clients are in 
its hands. And if I should pass over the course it has pursued, those who have not kind an 
opportunity to examine the case and perhaps the Court itself, might decide that nothing 
improper had been done, and that the parties I represent had not been wronged by the 
course pursued by the Executive. In making this charge, or arraignment, as defensive of 
the rights of my clients I now proceed to an examination of the correspondence of the 
Secretary of State with the ambassador of her Catholic Majesty, as officially 
communicated to Congress, and published among the national documents. 
 
The charge I make against the present Executive administration is that in all their 
proceedings relating to these unfortunate men, instead of that Justice, which they were


--- PAGE 162 ---
bound not less than this honorable Court itself to observe, they have substituted 
Sympathy!—sympathy with one of the parties in  this conflict of justice, and antipathy to 
the other. Sympathy with the white, antipathy to the black—and in proof of this charge I 
adduce the admission and avowal of the Secretary of State himself. In the letter of Mr. 
Forsyth to the Spanish Minister d'Argaiz, of 13th of December, 1839, defending the 
course of the administration against the reproaches utterly ground. less, but not the less 
bitter of the Spanish Envoy, he says: 
 
"The undersigned cannot conclude this communication without calling the attention of 
the Chevalier d'Argaiz to the fact, that with the single exception of the vexatious 
detention to which Messrs. Montes and Ruiz have been subjected in consequence of the 
civil suit instituted against them, all the proceedings in the matter, on the part both the 
Executive and Judicial branches of the government have had their foundation in the 
ASSUMPTION that these persons ALONE were the parties aggrieved; and that their 
claims to the surrender of the property was founded in fact and in justice."  
 
At the date of this letter, this statement of Mr. Forsyth was strictly true. All the 
proceedings of the government, Executive and Judicial, in this case had been founded on 
the assumption that the two Spanish slave-dealers were the only parties aggrieved— that 
all the right was on their side and all the wrong on the side of their surviving 
self-emancipated victims. I ask your honors, was this JUSTICE, No. It was not so 
considered by Mr. Forsyth himself. It was sympathy, had he so calls it, for in the 
preceding page of the same letter referring to the proceedings of this Government from 
the very first intervention of Lieut. Gedney, he says: 
 
"Messrs. Ruiz and Montes were first found near the coast of the United States, deprived 
of their property and of their freedom, suffering from lawless violence in their persons, 
and in imminent and constant danger of being deprived of their lives also. 
 
They were found in this distressing and perilous situation by officers of the United States, 
who, moved towards them by sympathetic feeling which subsequently became as it were 
national, immediately rescued them from personal danger, restored them to freedom, 
secured their oppressor, that they might abide the consequences of the acts of violence 
perpetrated upon them, and placed under the safeguard of the laws all the property which 
they claimed as their own, to remain in safety until the competent authority could 
examine their title to it, and pronounce upon the question of ownership agreeably to the 
provisions of the 9th article of the treaty of 1795." 
 
This sympathy with Spanish slave-traders is declared by the Secretary to have been first 
felt by Lieutenant Gedney. I hope this is not correctly represented. It is imputed to him 
and declared to have become in a manner national. The national sympathy with the slave- 
traders of the baracoons is officially declared to have been the prime motive of action of 
the government: And this fact is given as an answer to all the claims, demands and 
reproaches of the Spanish minister! I cannot urge the same objection to this that was 
brought against the assertion in the libel— th at it said the thing which is not—too 
unfortunately it was so, as he said. The sympathy of the Executive government, and as it


--- PAGE 163 ---
were of the nation, in favor of the slave-traders, and against these poor, unfortunate, 
helpless, tongueless, defenseless Africans, was the cause and foundation and motive of 
all these ,proceedings, and has brought this case up for trial before your honors. 
 
I do not wish to blame the first sympathies of Lieut. Gedney, nor the first action of the 
District and Circuit Courts. The seizure of the vessel, with the arrest and examination of 
their Africans' was intended for inquiry, and to lead to an investigation of the rights of all 
parties. This investigation has ultimated in the decision of the District Court, confirmed 
by the Circuit Court, which it is now the demand of the Executive should be reversed by 
this Court. The District Court has exercised its jurisdiction over the parties in interest, and 
has found that the right was with the other party, that the decisions of JUSTICE were not 
in accordance with the impulses of sympathy, and that consequently the sympathy was 
wrong before. And consequently it now appears that everything which has flowed from 
this mistaken or misapplied sympathy, was wrong from the beginning. 
 
For I inquire by what right, all this sympathy, from Lieut. Gedney to the Secretary of 
State, and from the Secretary of State, as it were, to the nation, was extended to the two 
Spaniards from Cuba exclusively, and utterly denied to the fifty-two victims of their 
lawless violence. By what right was it denied to the men who had restored themselves to 
freedom, and secured their oppressors to abide the consequences of the acts of violence 
perpetrated by them, and why was it extended to the perpetrators of those acts of violence 
themselves' When the Amistad first came within the territorial jurisdiction of the United 
States, acts of violence had passed between the two parties, the Spaniards and Africans 
on board of her, but on which side these acts were lawless, on which side were the 
oppressors, was a question of right and wrong, for the settlement of which, if the 
government and people of the United States interfered at all, they were bound in duty to 
extend their sympathy to them all; and if they interrened at all between them, the duty 
incumbent upon this intervention was not of favor, but of impartiality—not of sympathy, 
but of JUSTICE, dispensing to every individual his own right. 
 
Thus the Secretary of State himself declares that the motive for all the proceedings of the 
government of the United States, until that time, had been governed by sympathetic 
feeling towards one of the parties, and by the assumption that all the right was on one 
side and all the wrong on the other. It was the motive of Lieut. Gedney: the same 
influence had prevailed even in the judicial proceedings until then: the very language of 
the Secretary of State in this fetter breathes the same spirit as animating the executive 
administration, and has continued to govern all its proceedings on this subject to the 
present day. It is but too true that the same spirit of sympathy and antipathy has nearly 
pervaded the whole nation, and it is against them that I am in duty bound to call upon this 
Court to restrain itself in the sacred name of JUSTICE.  
 
One of the Judges who presided in some of the preceding trials, is said to have called this 
an anomalous case. It is indeed anomalous, and I know of no law, but one which I am not 
at liberty to argue before this Court, no law, statute or constitution, no code, no treaty, 
applicable to the proceedings of the Executive or the Judiciary, except that law, (pointing 
to the copy of the Declaration of Independence, hanging against one of the pillars of the


--- PAGE 164 ---
courtroom,) that law, two copies of which are ever before the eyes of your Honors. I 
know of no other law that reaches the case of my clients, but the law of nature and of 
Nature's God on which our fathers placed our own national existence. The circumstances 
are so peculiar, that no code or treaty has provided for such a case. That law, in its 
application to my clients, I trust will be the law on which the case will be decided by this 
Court. 
 
In the sequel to the diplomatic correspondence between the Secretary of State and the 
Spanish minister Argaiz, relating to the case of the Amistad, recently communicated by 
the President of the United States to the Senate, the minister refers with great apparent 
satisfaction to certain resolutions of the Senate, adopted at the instance of Mr. Calhoun, 
on the 15th of April, 1840, as follows: 
 
1. " Resolved—That a ship or vessel on the high seas, in time of peace, engaged in a 
lawful voyage, is according to the laws of nations under the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
state to which her flag belongs as much as if constituting a part of its own domain.'' 
 
2. " Resolved-- That if such ship or vessel should be forced, by stress of weather, or other 
unavoidable cause into the port, and under the jurisdiction of a friendly power, she and 
her cargo, and persons on board, with their property, and all the rights belonging to their 
personal relations, as established by the laws of the state to which they belong, would be 
placed under the protection which the laws of nations extend to the unfortunate under 
such circumstances." 
 
Without entering into any discussion as to the correctness of these principles, let as admit 
them to be true to their fullest extent, and what is their application to the case of the 
Amistad? If the first of the resolutions declares a sound principle of national law, neither 
Lieut. Gedney, nor Lieut. Meade, nor any officer of the brig Washington had the shadow 
of a right even to set foot on board of the Amistad. According to the second resolution, 
the Africans in possession of the vessel were entitled to all the kindness and good offices 
due from a humane and Christian nation to the unfortunate; and if the Spaniards were 
entitled to the same, it was by the territorial right and jurisdiction of the State of New 
York and of the Union, only to the extent of liberating their persons from imprisonment. 
Chevalier d'Argaiz, therefore, totally misapprehends the application of the principles 
asserted in these resolutions of the Senate, as indeed Mr. Forsyth appears by his answer 
to this letter of the Chevalier to be fully aware. From the decisiveness with which on this 
solitary occasion he meets the pretensions of the Spanish Envoy, a fair inference may be 
drawn that the Secretary himself perceived that the Senatorial resolutions, instead of 
favoring the course of Montes and Ruiz, have a bearing point blank against them. 
 
The Africans were in possession, and had the presumptive right of ownership; they were 
in peace with the United States; the Courts have decided, and truly, that they were not 
pirates; they were on a voyage to their native homes—th eir dulces Argos; they kind 
acquired the right and so far as their knowledge extended they had the power of 
prosecuting the voyage; the ship was theirs, and being in immediate communication with 
the shore, was in the territory of the State of New York; or, if not, at least half the number


--- PAGE 165 ---
were actually on the soil of New York, and entitled to all the provisions of the law of 
nations, and the protection and comfort which the laws of that State secure to every 
human being within its limits. 
 
In this situation Lieut. Gedney, without any charge or authority from his government, 
without warrant of law, by force of fire arms, seizes and disarms them, then being in the 
peace of that Commonwealth and of the United States, drives them on board the vessel, 
seizes the vessel and transfers it against the will of its possessors to another State. I ask in 
the name of justice, by what law was this done 1 Even admitting that it had been a case of 
actual piracy, which your courts have properly found it was not, there are questions 
arising here of the deepest interest to the liberties of the people of this Union, and 
especially of the State of New York. Have the officers of the U. S. Navy a right to seize 
men by force, on the territory of New York, to fire at them, to overpower them, to disarm 
them, to put them on board of a vessel and carry them by force and against their will to 
another State, without warrant or form of law 1 I am not arraigning Lieut. Gedney, but I 
ask this Court, in the name of justice, to settle it in their minds, by what law it was done, 
and how far the principle it embraces is to be carried. 
 
The whole of my argument to show that the appeal should be dismissed, is founded on an 
averment that the proceedings on the part of the United States are all wrongful from the 
beginning. The first act, of seizing the vessel, and these men, by an officer of the navy, 
was a wrong. The forcible arrest of these men, or a part of them, on the soil of New York, 
was a wrong. After the vessel was brought into the jurisdiction of the District Court of 
Connecticut, the men were first seized and imprisoned under a criminal process for 
murder and piracy on the high seas. Then they were libelled by Lieut. Gedney, as 
property, and salvage claimed on them, and under that process were taken into the 
Custody of the marshal as property. Then they were claimed by Ruiz and Montes and 
again taken into custody by the court. The District Attorney of Connecticut wrote to the 
Secretary of State, September 5th, giving him an account of the matter, stating that " the 
blacks are indicted for the murder of the captain and mate," and " are now in jail at New 
Haven ;" that "the next term of our Circuit Court sits on the 17th instant, at which time I 
suppose," —that is in italics in the printe d document—" I suppose it will be my duty to 
bring them to trial, unless they are in some other way disposed of." This is the first 
intimation of the District Attorney; it is easy to understand in what "other way" he wished 
them disposed of. And he closes by saying—"sh ould you hare any instructions to give on 
the subject, I should line to receive them as soon as may be." 
 
On the 9th of September, he writes again that he has examined the law, which has 
brought him fully to the conclusion that the Courts of the United States cannot take 
cognizance of any offense these people may hare committed, as it was done on board a 
vessel belonging to a foreign state. And then he says, 
 
"I would respectfully inquire, sir, whether there are no treaty stipulations with the 
Government of Spain that would authorize our Government to deliver them up to the 
Spanish authorities; and if so, whether it could be done before our court sits".


--- PAGE 166 ---
This is the second intimation from the District Attorney. We shall find others. Now it 
appears that the Africans were fully in the custody of the Court, first on the criminal 
charge, and then on the claim to them as property. The Court was to sit in eight days, the 
District Attorney is satisfied they cannot be tried, and be is anxious to know whether they 
cannot be disposed of in some way by the Executive, so that the Courts of the United 
States may have no chance to decide upon the case. May it please your Honors, I am 
simply pursuing the chain of evidence in this case, to show the effects of the sympathy in 
favor of one of the parties and against the other, which the Secretary of State says had 
become in a manner " national." The next document is a letter of the Secretary of State to 
the District Attorney, Sept. 11, 1839: 
"SIR: Since the receipt of your letter of the 5th instant, relative to the case of the 
Spanish schooner 'Amistad,' brought into the port o, New London on the 26th 
ultimo, by Lieutenant Gedney, of the surveying brig Washington, a communication 
has been ad. dressed to this department by the minister of Her Catholic Majesty, 
claiming the vessel, cargo and blacks," [vessel, cargo and blacks, the Court will 
observe,] " on board, as Spanish property, and demanding its immediate release. 
Mr. Calderon's application will be immediately transmitted to the President for his 
decision upon it, with which you will be made acquainted without unnecessary 
delay. In the mean time you will take care that no proceeding of your Circuit Court, 
or of any other judicial tribunal, places the vessel, cargo, or slaves beyond the 
control of the Federal Executive. 
 
" I am, sir, your obedient servant, 
"JOHN FORSYTH." 
 
I know not how, in decent language, to speak of this assertion of the Secretary, that the 
minister of Her Catholic Majesty had claimed the Africans "as Spanish property." In 
Gulliver's travels, he is represented as traveling among a nation of beings, who were very 
rational in many things' although they were not exactly human, and they had a very cool 
way of using language in reference to deeds that are not laudable. When they wished to 
characterize a declaration as absolutely contrary to truth, they say the man has " said tee 
thing that is not." It is not possible for me to express the truth respecting this averment of 
the Secretary of State, but by declaring that he " has said the thing that is not." This I 
shall endeavor to prove by allowing what the demand of the Spanish minister was, and 
that it was a totally different thing from that which was represented. 
 
But I wish first to beg your Honors' special attention to some thing else in this remarkable 
letter of the Secretary of State. He says, " In the mean time, you will take care that no 
proceeding of your Circuit Court, or of any other judicial tribunal, places 
 
the vessel, cargo, or slaves beyond the control of the Federal Executive." Here is a 
ministerial officer of the Executive Government, instructing the District Attorney, before 
the Judiciary has acted upon the case, to take care that no proceeding of any court places 
these men beyond reach of the Federal Executive. How was he to do it? In what manner 
was an Executive officer to proceed, so that neither the Circuit Court of the United States, 
nor any state Court, could dispose of the vessel or the men in any manner, beyond the


--- PAGE 167 ---
control of the Federal Executive. A farther examination of the correspondence in the 
conclusion, will show how it was intended to be done. But I now come to inquire what 
was the real demand of the Spanish minister, and to show what was the duty of the 
Secretary of State on receiving such a de mend. 
 
Here we have the first letter of Mr. Calderon to Mr. Forsyth. 
 
The name of this gentleman is illustrious in the annals of Spain, and for himself 
personally, during his residence in this country, I have entertained the most friendly and 
respectful sentiments. I have enjoyed frequent interviews with him, and have found him 
intelligent, amiable, learned, and courteous. I wish therefore to say nothing respecting 
him that is personally disrespectful or unkind. But it is my duty to comment with the 
utmost plainness, and what perhaps your Honors will think severity, on his official letter 
to the American Secretary of State. His letter begins:— 
"NEW YORK, Sept. 6, 1839. 
'`The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of her 
Catholic Majesty the Queen of Spain, has the honor of calling the attention of the 
honorable John Forsyth, Secretary of State of the United States, to a recent and 
very public occurrence of which, no doubt, Mr. Forsyth is already informed, and in 
consequence of which it is the imperious duty of the undersigned to claim an 
observance of the law of nations' and of the treaties existing between the United 
States and Spain. The occurrence alluded to is the capture of the Spanish schooner ' 
Amistad.' 
 
" This vessel sailed from Havana on the 28th of June, bound to Guanaja, in the 
vicinity of Porto Principe, under the command of her owner, Don Ramon Ferrer, 
laden with sundry merchandise. and with fifty-three negro slaves on board; and, 
previous to her departure, she obtained her clearance (alijo) from the custom house, 
the necessary permit from the authorities for the transportation of the negroes, a 
passport, and all the other documents required by the laws of Spain for navigating a 
vessel and for proving ownership of property; a circumstance particularly 
important in the opinion of the undersigned." 
 
Here your Honors will observe the same distinction of "merchandise and Negroes," 
which was made by the District Attorney, showing the universal sense of the difference 
between merchandise and persons. He goes on: 
"During the night of the 30th of said month, or about daybreak on the following 
day, the slaves rose upon the crew, and killed the captain, a slave of his, and two 
sailors—sparing only two persons, after ill-treating and wounding them, namely, 
Don Jose Ruiz and Don Pedro Montes: of whom the former was owner of 
forty-nine of the slaves, and the latter of the other four. These they retained, that 
they might navigate the vessel and take her to the coast of Africa. Montes, availing 
himself of his knowledge of nautical affairs, and under favor of Divine 
Providence— 'the favor of Divine Provi dence!"—succeeded in directing the vessel 
to these shores. He was spoken by various vessels, from the captains of which the


--- PAGE 168 ---
Negroes bought provisions, but to whom, it seems, he was unable to make known 
his distress, being closely watched. At length, by good fortune, he reached Long 
Island, where the 'Amistad' was detained by the American brig-of war 
'Washington,' Captain Gedney, who, on learning the circumstances of the case, 
secured the Negroes, and took them with the vessel to New London, in the state of 
Connecticut. 
 
"The conduct of that commander and his subalterns toward the unfortunate 
Spaniards has been that which was to be expected from gentlemen. and from 
officers in the service of an enlightened nation friendly to Spain. That conduct will 
be appreciated as it deserves by my august sovereign, and by the Spanish 
government, and will be reciprocated on similar occasions by the Spaniards— a 
people ever grateful for benefits received." [We shall see some proofs of Spanish 
gratitude, as we proceed in the case.] 
 
" The act of humanity thus performed would have been complete, had the vessel at 
the same time been set at liberty, and the Negroes sent to be tried by the proper 
tribunal, and by the violated laws of the country of which they are subjects. The 
under signed is willing to believe that such would have been the case, had the 
general government been able to interpose its authority in the first instance, as it 
has probably done during the short interval between the occurrence of this affair 
and the period when the undersigned received an authentic statement of the facts." 
 
This is what the Spanish minister demanded, that the vessel should be set at liberty, and 
the Negroes sent to Cuba to be tried. And he is so confident in the disposition the United 
States in favor of this demand, that he even presumes the President of the United States 
had already immediately dispatched an order to the Court in Connecticut, to stay its 
proceedings and deliver up the Negroes, to the Government of Spain. 
 
What combination of ideas led to that conclusion, in the mind of Mr. Calderon, I am not 
competent to say. He evidently supposes the President of the United States to possess 
what we understand by arbitrary power—the pow er to decide cases and to dispose of 
persons and of property, mero motu, at his own discretion, and without the intervention 
of any court. What led him to this imagination I am unable to say. He goes on to say that 
the officers of the Washington, in the service of the United States, have presented to that 
incompetent Court,—the U. S. District Court in Connecticut—a  petition, claiming 
salvage: " a claim which, in view of existing treaties, the undersigned conceives can. not 
be allowed in the sense in which it is made." This is that most grateful nation! The 
deliverers of these two Spaniards, the representative of a most grateful nation insists, are 
not deserving of any recompense whatever! 
 
Now, I beg your Honors to see if there is, among all these specifications, any one demand 
that corresponds with that which the Secretary of State appears to have been made. He 
demands, 
 
1st. That the vessel be immediately delivered up to her owner, together with every article


--- PAGE 169 ---
found on board at the time of her capture by the Washington, without any payment being 
exacted on the score of salvage, or any charges made, other than those specified in the 
treaty of 1795, article 1st. 
 
Yet he had already said the captain, and owner, Ferrer, was killed. 
 
" 2d. That it be declared that no tribunal in the United States has the right to institute 
proceedings against, or to impose penalties upon, the subjects of Spain, for crimes 
committed on board a Spanish vessel, and in the waters of the Spanish territory." 
 
Declared, by whom? By the President of the United States. Of course, he does not 
demand that the " incompetent tribunal" in Connecticut, before which the suit was 
brought, should declare this, but that the President of the United States should issue a 
proclamation, declaring that no court in this country could hold cognizance of the case. Is 
there in this a demand that the negroes should be delivered up as Spanish property?  It is 
a direct protest against any judicial tribunal taking cognizance of the case, and that the 
President should issue a proclamation to prevent any such proceedings whatever. 
 
"3d. That the Negroes be conveyed to Havana, or be placed at the disposal of the proper 
authorities in that part of Her Majesty's dominions, in order to their being tried by the 
Spanish laws which the, have violated; and that, in the mean time, they be kept in safe 
custody, in order to prevent their evasion." 
 
In what capacity does he demand that the President of the United States should place 
himself? Is it a demand to deliver up these people as property? No. Is it that they should 
deliver them to the minister himself, as the representative of the Spanish government, to 
be disposed of according to the laws of Spain ? No. It demands of the Chief Magistrate of 
this nation that he should first turn himself into a jailer, to keep these people safely, and 
then into a tipstaff to take them away for trial among the slave-traders of the baracoons. 
Was ever such a demand made upon any government? He must seize these people and 
keep them safely, and carry them, at the expense of the United States, to another country 
to be tried for their fires! Where in the law of nations there a warrant for such a demand? 
 
May it please your Honors—If the President of the United States had arbitrary and 
unqualified power, he could not satisfy these demands. He must keep them as a jailer; he 
must then send them beyond seas to be tried for their lives. I will not recur to the 
Declaration of Independence—your Honors have it implanted in your hearts—but one of 
the grievous charges brought against George III. was, that he had made laws for sending 
men beyond areas for trial. That was one of the most odious of those acts of tyranny 
which occasioned the American revolution. The whole of the reasoning is not applicable 
to this case, but I submit to your Honors that, if the President has the power to do it in the 
case of Africans. and vend them beyond seas for trial, he could do it by the same 
authority in the case of American citizens. By a simple order to the marshal of the 
district, he could just as well seize forty citizens of the United States, on the demand of a 
foreign minister, and send them beyond seas for trial before a foreign court. The Spanish 
minister farther demands—


--- PAGE 170 ---
"4th. That if, in consequence of the intervention of the authorities of Connecticut, there 
should be any delay in the desired delivery of the vessel and the slaves, the owners both 
of the former be indemnified for the injury that may accrue to them." 
 
Now, how are all these demands to be put together? First, he demands that the United 
States shall keep them safely, and send them to Cuba, all in a lump, the children as well 
as Cinque and Grabbo. Next, he denies the power of our courts to take any cognizance of 
the case. And finally, that the owners of the slaves shall be indemnified for any injury 
they may sustain in their property. We see in the whole of this transaction, a confusion of 
ideas and a contradiction of positions from confounding together the two capacities in 
which these people are attempted to be held. One moment they are viewed as 
merchandise, and the next as persons. The Spanish minister, the Secretary of State, and 
every one who has had anything to do with the case, all have run into these absurdities. 
These demands are utterly inconsistent. First, they are demanded as persons, as the 
subjects of Spain, to be delivered up as criminals, to be tried for their lives, and liable to 
be executed on the gibbet. Then they are demanded as chattels, the same as so many bags 
of coffee, or bales of cotton, belonging to owners, who have a right to be indemnified for 
any injury to their property. 
 
I now ask if there is, in any one or in all those specifications, that demand which the 
Secretary of State avers the Spanish Minister had made, and which is the basis of the 
whole proceeding in this case on the part of the Executive. 
 
The letter of the Secretary, which is the foundation of the whole proceeding of the 
District Attorney, in making the United States a party, on the ground of a demand by the 
Spanish Minister for the delivery of these people as property, " says the thing that is not." 
The letter proceeds. 
 
"In support of these claims, the undersigned invokes the law of nations, the stipulations 
of existing treaties, and those good feelings"—[good feelings, indeed, he might well say' 
where all the feelings were in favor of his demand]—" so necessary to the maintenance of 
the friendly relations that subsist between the two countries, and are so interesting to 
both. 
 
" The undersigned would be apprehensive of offending Mr. Forsyth by supposing it in t;.e 
least degree necessary to bring to his recollection his own well-known Construction 
(disposiciones) of the law of nations, in a case analogous to the one under consideration." 
 
This is what the logicians call argumentum ad hominem—an appeal, first to the feelings 
of the individual, not to his sense of justice. He then brings up to Mr. Forsyth his own 
construction of the law of nations, as given in another case, which he deems analogous. 
Perhaps I may be justified in conjecturing to what case he alludes, and I will say that, if 
he alludes to any case of public notoriety, I shall be able to show, before I close, that 
there is no analogy to this case.


--- PAGE 171 ---
M. Calderon de la Barca then refers to several treaty stipulations in support of his 
demand, and particularly the 8th, 9th, and 10th articles of the treaty of 1795, continued in 
force by the treaty of 1819. 
"ART. 8. In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their shipping, 
whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced, through stress of 
weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent necessity, for seeking of 
shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of the rivers, bays, roads, or ports, 
belonging to the other party, they shall be received and treated with all humanity, 
and enjoy all favor, protection, and help; and they shall be permitted to refresh and 
provide themselves, at reasonable rates, with victuals and all things needful for the 
subsistence of their persons, or reparation of their ships, and prosecution of their 
voyage; and they shall no ways be hindered from returning out of the said ports or 
roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they please, without any let or 
hindrance." 
 
This is a provision for vessels with their owners, driven into port by distress. Who was 
the Spanish owner here with his ship? There was none. I say the Africans were here with 
their ship. If you say the original owner is referred to, in whose name the ship's register 
was given, he was dead, he was not on board, and would not claim the benefit of this 
article. The vessel either belonged to the Africans, in whose possession it was found, and 
who certainly kind what is everywhere the first evidence of property, or there was no 
person to whom this article could apply, and it was not casus foederis. The truth is, this 
article was not intended to apply to such a case as this, but to the common case, in regard 
to which it has doubtless been carried into execution hundreds of times, in meeting the 
common disasters of maritime life. 
The Africans, who certainly had the prima facie title to the property, did not bring the 
vessel into our waters themselves, but were brought here against their will, by the two 
Spaniards, by stratagem and deception. Now, if this court should consider, as the courts 
below have done, that the original voyage from Lomboko, in Africa, was continued by 
the Spaniards in the Amistad, and that pursuing that voyage was a violation of the laws of 
the United States, then the Spaniards are responsible for that offense. The deed begun in 
Africa was not consummated according to its original intention, until the Negroes were 
landed at their port of final destination in Porto Principe. The clandestine landing in 
Havana, the unlawful sale in the barracoons, the shipment on board the Amistad, were all 
parts of the original transaction. And it was in pursuit of that original unlawful intent that 
the Spaniards brought the vessel by stratagem into a port of the United States. Does the 
treaty apply to such voyages ? Suppose the owner had been on board, and his voyage 
lawful, what does the treaty secure to him? Why, that he might repair his ship, and 
purchase refreshments, and continue his voyage. Ruiz and Montes could not continue the 
voyage. But, suppose the article applicable, and what were the United States to do ? They 
must place those on board the ship in the situation they were in when taken, that is, the 
Africans in possession, with the two Spaniards as their prisoners, or their slaves, as the 
case might be; the Negroes as masters of the ship, to continue their voyage, which on 
their part was certainly lawful.


--- PAGE 172 ---
If any part of the article was applicable to the case it was in favor of the Africans. They 
were in distress, and were brought into our waters by their enemies' by those who sought, 
and who are still' seeking, to reduce them from freedom to slavery, as a reward for having 
spared their lives in the fight. If the good offices of the government are to be rendered to 
the proprietors of shipping in distress, they are due to the Africans only, and the United 
States are now bound to restore the ship to the Africans, and replace the Spaniards on 
board as prisoners. But the article is not applicable at all. It is not a casus federis. The 
parties to the treaty never could have had any such case in view.. The transaction on 
board of the vessel after leaving Havana entirely changed the circumstances of the 
parties, and conferred rights on my most unfortunate clients, which cannot but be 
regarded by this honorable court. 
 
Next we have article 9: 
 
ART. 9. All ships and merchandise, of what nature so ever, which shall be rescued out of 
the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be brought into some port of 
either state, and shall be delivered to the custody of the officers of that port, in order to be 
taken care of, and restored entire to the true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient 
proof shall be made concerning the property thereof." 
 
Was this ship rescued out of the hands of pirates and robbers? Is this Court competent to 
declare it ? The Courts below have decided that they have no authority to try, criminally, 
what happened on board the vessel. They have then no right to regard those who forcibly 
took possession of the vessel as pirates and robbers. If the sympathies of Lieutenant 
Gedney, which the Secretary of State says had become national, had been felt for all the 
parties, in due proportion to their sufferings and their deserts, who were the pirates and 
robbers, Were they the Africans? When they were brought from Lomboko? in the Tecora, 
against the laws of Spain, against the laws of the United States, and against the law of 
nations, so far as the United States, and Spain, and Great Britain, are concerned, who 
were the robbers and pirates? And when the same voyage, in fact, was continued in the 
Amistad, and the Africans were in a perishing condition in the hands of Ruiz, dropping 
dead from day to day under his treatment, were they the pirates and robbers ? This 
honorable Court will observe from the record that there were fiftty-four Africans who  
left the Havana. Ruiz says in his libel that nine had died before they reached our shores. 
The marshal's return shows that they were dying day after day from the effects of their 
sufferings. One died before the Court sat at New London. Three more died before the 
return was made to the Court at Hartford—only seventeen  
days—and three more between that and November. Sixteen fell victims before 
November, and from that time not one has died. Think only of the relief and benefit of 
being restored to the absolute wants of human nature. Although placed in a condition 
which, if applied to forty citizens of the United States, we should call cruel, shut up 
eighteen months in a prison, and enjoying only the tenderness which our laws provide for 
the worst of criminals, so great is the improvement of their condition from what it was in 
the hands of Ruiz, that they have perfectly recovered their health, and not one has died; 
when, before that time, they were perishing from hour to hour.


--- PAGE 173 ---
At the great day of accounts, may it please the Court, who is to be responsible for those 
sixteen souls that died I Ruiz claims those sixteen as his property, as merchandise. How 
many of them, at his last hour, will pass before him and say, " Let me sit heavy on thy 
soul to-morrow!" 
 
Who, then, are the tyrants and oppressors against whom our laws are invoked? Who are 
the innocent sufferers, for whom we are called upon to protect this ship against enemies 
and robbers Certainly not Ruiz and Montes. 
 
But, independently of this consideration, the article cannot apt ply to slaves. It says ships 
and merchandise. Is that language applicable to human beings? Will this Court so affirm? 
It says they shall be restored entire. Is it a treaty between cannibal nations, that a 
stipulation is needed for the restoration of merchandise entire, to prevent parties from 
cutting off the legs and arms of human beings before they are delivered up? The very 
word entire in the stipulation is of itself a sufficient exclusion of human beings from the 
scope of the article. But if it was intended to embrace human beings, the article would 
have included a provision for their subsistence until they are restored, and an 
indemnification for their maintenance to the officers who are charged with the execution 
of the stipulation. And there is perhaps needed a provision with regard to the institutions 
of the free states, to prevent a difficulty in keeping human beings in the custom house, 
without having them liable to the operation of the local law, the habeas corpus, and the 
rights of freedom. 
 
But with regard to article 9, I will speak of my own knowledge, for it happened that on 
the renewal of the treaty in 1819, the whole of the negotiations with the then minister of 
Spain passed through my hands, and I am certain that neither of us ever entertained an 
idea that this word merchandise was to apply to human beings. 
 
Mr. Calderon also quotes article 10. 
"ART. 10. When any vessel of either party shall be wrecked, foundered, or 
otherwise damaged, on the coasts or within the do minion of the other, their 
respective subjects or citizens shall receive, as well for themselves as for their 
vessels and effects, the same assistance which would be due to the inhabitants of 
the country where the damage happens, and shall pay the same charges and dues 
only as the said inhabitants would be subject to pay in a like case; and if the 
operations of repair should require that the whole or any part of the cargo be 
unladen, they shall pay no duties, charges, or fees, on the pelt which they shall 
relayed and carry away." 
This article, again, has nothing to do with the case. The Amistad was neither wrecked nor 
foundered, nor otherwise damaged. She came into our waters voluntarily, so far as the 
Spaniards were concerned, but involuntarily, so far as concerned the Africans, who were 
in possession of the vessel. They were intentionally prosecuting a voyage to Africa, but 
were brought to our shores by deception, and against their wills. This is not casus federis. 
The treaty has no application here. But if, by any latitude of construction, it could be


--- PAGE 174 ---
applied, its benefits belong to the Africans, for they were pursuing a lawful voyage, and 
not to the Spaniards, who were on an unlawful voyage, in the prosecution of the slave 
trade. 
 
But the article says the same assistance shall be afforded that our own citizens would be 
entitled to receive in like circumstances. Let us apply the rule. Suppose the Amistad had 
been a vessel of the United States, owned and manned by citizens of the United States, 
and in like circumstances. Say it was a Baltimore clipper, fitted for the African slave 
trade, and having performed a voyage, had come back to our shores, directly or 
indirectly, with fifty-four African victims on board, and was thus brought into port—what 
would be the assistance guarantied by our laws to American citizens, in such 
circumstances? The captain would be seized, tried as a pirate, and hung! And every 
person concerned, either as owners or on board the ship, would be severely punished. The 
law makes it a capital offense for the captain, and no appeal to this Court would save him 
from the gibbet. Is that the assistance which the Spanish minister invokes for Ruiz and 
Montes ? That is what our laws would secure to our own citizens in like circumstances. 
And perhaps it would be a reward nearer their merits than the restoration of these poor 
Negroes to them, or enabling them to complete their voyage. 
 
But my clients are claimed under the treaty as merchandise, rescued from pirates and 
robbers. Who were the merchandise, and who were the robbers? According to the 
construction of the Spanish minister, the merchandise were the robbers, and the robbers 
were the merchandise. The merchandise was rescued out of its own hands, and the 
robbers were rescued out of the hands of the robbers. Is this the meaning of the treaty ? 
Will this Court adopt a rule of construction in regard to solemn treaties that will sanction 
such conclusions, There is a rule in Vattel that no construction shall be allowed to a treaty 
which makes it absurd. Is any thing more absurd than to say these forty Africans are 
robbers, out of whose hands they have themselves been rescued? Can a greater absurdity 
be imagined in construction than this, which applies the double character of robbers and 
of merchandise to human beings ? 
 
May it please your Honors, there is not one article of the treaty that has the slightest 
application to this case, and the Spanish minister has no more ground for appealing to the 
treaty, as a warrant for his demand, than he has for relying on the law of nations. 
 
The next argument that follows is so peculiar that I find it difficult to give a distinct idea 
of its purpose or application. He says, 
 
"The crime in question is one of those which, if permitted to pass unpunished, would 
endanger the internal tranquillity and the safety of the island of Cuba, where citizens of 
the United States not only carry on a considerable trade, but where they possess territorial 
properties which they cultivate with the labor of African slaves. These, on learning that 
the crime alluded to had been committed with impunity, (and their friends would not fail 
to acquaint them with the fact) would lose none of the opportunities for attempting revolt 
and evasion, which are afforded by the frequent and daily necessity of conveying 
Negroes by sea from one quarter of the island to another; and to guard against this it


--- PAGE 175 ---
would be necessary to use additional precautions at a great expense." 
 
I believe, may it please the Court, that this is not a good argument before this court to 
determine questions of law and justice by the consideration that there are American 
citizens who own plantations in the island of Cuba, which they cultivate by the labor of 
slaves. They own their plantations and slaves there, subject to the laws of Spain, which 
laws declare the African slave trade to be felony. The Spanish minister has no right to 
appeal to our courts to pass a particular sentence between parties in a suit, by 
considerations of their personal interest, or that of other American citizens in the Island 
of Cuba. What would become of the liberties of this nation if our courts are to pass 
sentence between parties, upon considerations of the effect it may have upon the interest 
of American citizens, scattered as they may be in all parts of the world? If it is a valid 
consideration when applied to Cuba and the American owners of sugar estates and slaves 
there, it applies equally to all other countries where American citizens may have 
property; to China, Hindostan, or the Feejee Islands. It was no proper argument for the 
Spanish minister to urge upon the American Secretary of State. It was undoubtedly 
calculated and designed to influence his sympathy in the case—that sympathy with one 
of the parties which he says had become national It was calculated to excite and to 
influence the Secretary of State not only by the effect to be produced in the island of 
Cuba, but perhaps also by a reward to certain interests nearer home. But was that 
JUSTICE? Was that a ground on which courts of justice will decide cases ? I t rust not. 
 
There are a few portions of this letter, which I had rather your Honors would read when 
you are together in consultation, than to read them myself in this place. I will not trust 
myself to comment upon them as they deserve. I trust that your Honors, in the pursuit of 
JUSTICE, will read them, as the document will be in your hands, and you will see why I 
abstain from doing it. Mr. Calderon proceeds to say, 
 
"If, on the other hand, they should be condemned by the incompetent tribunal that has 
taken upon itself to try them as pirates and assassins, the infliction of capital punishment 
in this case would not be attended with the salutary effects had in view by the law when it 
resorts to this painful and terrible alternative, namely, to prevent the commission of 
similar offenses. In such case, the indemnification I officially ask for the owners would 
be n very slender compensation; for, if the property remained unimpaired, as it would 
remain, the satisfaction due to the public would not be accorded." 
 
And that is a reason why the President of the United States was to issue his lettrede 
cachet, and send these unfortunate individuals to Cuba. I abstain now from reading the 
subsequent passages. He concluded by saying, 
 
"In the islands above mentioned the citizens of the United States have always met with a 
favorable reception and kind treatment. The Spanish Government, for the protection of 
their property, would immediately accord the extradition of any slaves that might take 
refuge there from the southern states. Being itself exact in the observance of treaties, it 
claims the more justly the execution of them, and a reciprocal good correspondence, from 
a nation, the ally and neighbor of Spain, to whom so many proofs have been afforded of


--- PAGE 176 ---
the high degree in which her friendship is esteemed." 
 
They will readily yield fugitive slaves! Was this an argument, I ask the honorable Court, 
to be addressed to the Secretary of State? Is it upon these principles that cases are to be 
decided? Is it by these considerations that the action of governments? to be determined? 
Shall these men be given up on the offer of an equivalent ? " If you will deliver these 
Africans to me, for whose blood all the slave-traders of Cuba thirst, and any slave from 
the south shall make his escape and came to Cuba, we will readily deliver him up." What 
is this argument as addressed to the Secretary of State I It may be a very easy thing for 
the Governor at Havana to seize a fugitive southern slave, or a pretended fugitive, as the 
case may be, and put him on board a vessel and send him to one of our Southern states. 
The learned Attorney General, I think, read some authorities to show that this Governor 
has royal powers, about equal to those of the King, and it may be easy for him to seize 
any man, black or white, slave or free, who may be claimed as a slave, and send him 
beyond seas for any purpose. But, has the President of the United States any such powers 
Can the American Executive do such things? If he is to do them, I should hope, at least, 
that it might be under treaty stipulations rather more adapted to the object than these. It 
was going quite far enough, I should think, to require the President of the U. S. to keep 
these men safely, and send them back at the expense of this nation, without making 
this—what shall I call it? I will not undertak e to qualify it in words—this offer to send 
back the fugitive slaves of the South as an equivalent, provided the President will consent 
to deliver up these MEN, by a despotic act, to satiate the vengeance of the slave-traders at 
Havana. 
 
I have now, may it please the Court, examined at great length, and with tedious detail, the 
letter of the Spanish minister demanding the interposition of the national Executive to 
restore these unfortunate Africans to the island of Cuba. And now I may in. quire of your 
Honors, what, in your opinion, was the duty of the Secretary of State, on receiving such a 
letter. And in the first place, what did he do ? 
 
His first act was, to misrepresent the demand, and to write to the District Attorney in 
Connecticut, directing him to pursue a claim for the possession of these people on behalf 
of the United States, on the ground that the Spanish minister had demanded their delivery 
to him, as the property of Spanish subjects, and ordering him to take care that no court 
should place them beyond the control of the Executive. That is what he did. And the 
consequence is the case now before the court. The Attorney of the United States pursued 
his orders. He stated, in his claim before the District Court, that the Spanish minister had 
demanded their restoration as property; and then' as if conscious that this claim might not 
secure the other purpose, of keeping them at all events within the control of the 
Executive, he added, of his own head, (for it does not appear that he had any instructions 
on this point,) a second count, claiming, on behalf of the United States, that if the court 
should find they were not slaves by the laws of Spain, but that they were brought to our 
shores in violation of the act of Congress for the suppression of the slave trade, then they 
should be placed at the disposal of the President, to be sent to Africa, according to the 
provisions of that act. This count was undoubtedly added in consequence of the order not 
to let them be placed beyond the control of the Executive. In a subsequent term of the


--- PAGE 177 ---
court, he filed a new libel, in which this alternative demand was omitted. Why was that 
done ? I can conceive no other reason than that he had received such instructions from the 
Executive. 
 
Those instructions do not appear among the printed documents but it does not follow that 
none were given, for the communication of the President, in answer to the call of the 
House of Representatives, was not a full one, as I know of my own knowledge. The 
demand was for all information not incompatible with the public interest, and under that 
proviso many things were kept back. But there can be no doubt that it was for the purpose 
of complying with the first order of the District Attorney inserted in the second count, 
and that it was by the instructions of the department he afterward withdrew it. 
 
[Mr. Baldwin. The count was not withdrawn. A new libel was entered, having only one 
count, but the first libel was not withdrawn.] Very well—it  amounts to this: that the 
Executive did not choose to hold itself responsible for that construction of the act of 
Congress. This appears from the appeal. What have the United States appealed from? 
Why, from n decree of the court, giving them precisely what they had claimed by the 
District Attorney. The Attorney knew that the libel grounded on the demand of the 
Spanish minister, (ostensibly, for I have shown that it was a falsification of the terms of 
that demand by the Secretary of State,) was not sufficient to place the Africans beyond 
the control of the Executive, in a certain alternative, and therefore he calls upon the Court 
to put them in the hands of the President, to be sent to Africa—that is, to complete their 
own voyage. 
 
Well, the District Court investigated the case, and dissipated entirely the pretension that 
these Africans could be claimed in any way as merchandise. They went the length of 
declaring that the only lading on board, the boy Antonio, concerning whom there was the 
slightest pretext of a claim that he was a slave, should be delivered up to the Spanish 
consul, on behalf of the representatives of his late owner, Captain Ferrer. The United 
States do not appeal from that decision, and there has been no appeal, although we might 
have appealed with propriety. And I confess that, had I been of counsel in that stage of 
the proceedings, 1 should have been much disposed to appeal, on the ground that there 
was no article of the treaty which has any thing to do with the case. I conceive that this 
part of the decree of the District Court is not warranted by any law or treaty whatever. 
 
But I do not desire to argue that question now, for I perceive that the district judge, in 
giving his decision, places it partly on the ground that the boy is desirous of returning. 
And as volenti non fit injuria, I reconcile my mind to that part of the decision, for we 
could certainly have no possible motive to interfere with the wishes of the boy. If he 
really has the desire to return to slavery in Cuba, it would be far from my desire to 
interfere with his wishes, however strange and unnatural I might deem them to be. But 1 
must, at the same time, as an individual, protest against his delivery by any compulsion, 
or on any ground of obligation in the treaty; for I must maintain, that there is no one of 
the articles in the treaty cited that has any application whatever to the ease. 
 
And now, may it please your Honors, so strange and singular is every thing that happens,


--- PAGE 178 ---
connected with this most singular case, I am informed that, after all, this boy has not been 
sent to Cuba, notwithstanding his anxiety to go, and the desire of the Spanish consul for 
his restoration, with a decree of the Court agreeable to his demand. I am informed that he 
has remained a whole year in prison with the Africans, and is, at this moment, in the 
custody of the marshal, by what warrant or process I know not, or at whose expense. 
 
The reason for this extended analysis of the demand by the Spanish minister is, that we 
may be prepared to inquire what answer he ought to have received from the American 
Secretary. I aver, that it was the duty of the Secretary of State instantly to answer the 
letter, by showing the Spanish minister that all his de. minds were utterly inadmissible, 
and that the government of the United States could do nothing of what he required. It 
could not deliver the ship to the owner, and there was no duty resting on the United States 
to dispose of the vessel in any such manner. And as to the demand that no salvage should 
be taken, the Spanish minister should have been told that it was a question depending 
exclusively on the determination of the courts, before whom the case was pending for 
trial according to law. And the Secretary aught to have shown Mr. Calderon, that the 
demand for a proclamation by the President of the United States, against the jurisdiction 
of the courts, was not only inadmissible but offensive —it was demanding what the 
Executive could not do, by the constitution. It would be the assumption of a control over 
the judiciary by the President, which would overthrow the whole fabric of the 
constitution; it would violate the principles of our government generally and in every 
particular; it would be against the rights of the Negroes, of the citizens, and of the States. 
 
The Secretary ought to have done this at once, without waiting to consult the President, 
who was then absent from the city. The claim that the negroes should be delivered was 
equally inadmissible with the rest; the President has no power to arrest either citizens or 
foreigners. But even that power is almost insignificant compared with that of sending 
men beyond seas to deliver them up to a foreign government. The Secretary should have 
called upon the Spanish ambassador to name an instance where such a demand had been 
made by any government of another government that was independent. He should have 
told him, that such a demand was treating the President of the United States, not as the 
head of a nation, but as a constable, a catch pole—a character that it is not possible to 
express in gentlemanly language. That i8 what this demand makes of the President of the 
United States. 
 
The Secretary should also have set the Spanish Minister right with regard to the 
authorities before whom the question was pending. He should have told him that they 
were not the authorities of the state of Connecticut but of the United States, the courts of 
the Union in the state of Connecticut. He should have corrected this mistake of the 
minister at the beginning. It was a real misapprehension, which has continued through the 
whole proceeding to the present time, and it ought to have been corrected at first. And 
what is still more remarkable, the same mistake of calling it the court of Connecticut was 
made by Mr. Forsyth himself long after. 
 
But what did the Secretary do in fact? He barely replies to Mr. Calderon, that he had sent 
his letter to the President for his consideration, and that "no time will be needlessly lost,


--- PAGE 179 ---
after his decision upon the demand it prefers shall have reached me, in communicating to 
you his views upon the subject." 
 
And now, from that day to this, the Secretary of State has never answered one of these 
demands, nor arrested one of these misapprehensions, nor asserted the rights and the 
honor of the nation against one of these most extraordinary, inadmissible, and insolent 
demands. He has degraded the country, in the face of the whole civilized world, not only 
by allowing these demands to remain unanswered, but by proceeding, I am obliged to 
say, throughout the whole transaction, as if the Executive were earnestly desirous to 
comply with every one of the demands. In the very misrepresentations of those demands, 
in his instructions to the District Attorney, under which this case is brought here, why 
does he take such a course? The Spanish Minister pronounced the Court before which the 
Secretary brought the question, an incompetent tribunal—an d this position has been 
maintained by the Legation of Spain down to this very month, that a letter of Chevalier 
d'Argaiz officially protests against the jurisdiction of the courts before which the 
Secretary professes to be prosecuting the claim of this very minister! 
 
Why does the Spanish Minister persist- in such inadmissible pretensions? It is because 
they were not met in limine in a proper manner—because he was not told instantly, 
without the delay of an hour, that this Government could never admit much claims, and 
would be offended if they were repeated, or any portion of them. Yet all these claims, 
monstrous, absurd and inadmissible as they are, have been urged and repeated for 
eighteen months, upon our Government, and an American Secretary of State evades 
answering any of them—evades it to such an extent that the Spanish Minister reproaches 
him for not meeting his arguments. 
 
The demand of Mr. Calderon was dated September 6. The order of the Secretary to the 
District Attorney, in regard to the suit, was dated September 11, in which he says that ''a 
communication has been addressed to this department by the Minister of Her Catholic 
Majesty, CLAIMING TEE VESSEL, CARGO, AND BLACKS ON BOARD, As 
SPANISH PROPERTY, and demanding its immediate release." On the 23d of 
September, the Secretary writes to the Spanish Minister as follows: 
SIR: In the examination of the case of the Spanish schooner "Amistad," the only 
evidence at present within reach of this department is that presented by the ship's 
paper; and the proceedings of the court of inquiry held by a district judge of 
Connecticut, on board the schooner, at the time the Negroes in whose possession 
she was found, were imprisoned for the alleged murder of the captain and mate of 
the vessel. If you have any other authentic documents relating to the question or 
evidence of facts which can be useful to a proper understanding of it, I have the 
honor to request by the direction of the President, that you will communicate them 
to me with as little delay as practicable. 
Here the Secretary reiterates the error of the Spanish minister, instead of correcting it, 
with regard to the character of the Court before which the case was pending. The 
Secretary of State calls the United States District for Connecticut "a District Court of


--- PAGE 180 ---
Connecticut." The Spanish Minister could not be expected to acquire a correct 
understanding of the case, unless he was informed, but here he has his error confirmed. 
 
The Secretary further requests the ambassador, if he has any farther documents, " that 
you will communicate them to me." What had he to do with this evidence? The Spanish 
minister had made a certain demand upon the government of the United States. Whether 
it was what it appears to be, or whether it was what the Secretary represented it to be in 
his orders to the District Attorney, it was no part of the business of the American 
Secretary of State to look after the evidence. Still, if he had requested the minister to 
communicate the evidence to the Court, it might not have been exactly improper, but only 
officious. If the Spanish Minister chose to go into our courts in support of the private 
claims of Spanish subjects, he could do it, and it was his business to bring forward the 
proper evidence in support of his claim. Why, then, does the Secretary call upon him to 
furnish these documents to the Executive Department? Your Honors will judge whether 
this letter is or is not evidence of a determination then existing on the part of the 
Executive, to decide this case independently of the judiciary, and ex parte. 
 
Mr. Calderon replies that he has no other evidence to furnish. The next document is the 
letter of his successor, the Chevalier d'Argaiz: 
NEW-YORK October 3, 1839. 
 
The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of Her Catholic 
Majesty, has the honor of commencing his official correspondence with you, sir, by 
soliciting an act of justice, which, not being in any way connected with the 
principal question as yet remaining unsettled by the cabinet, relative to the 
Negroes, found on board the schooner Amistad on her arrival on these coasts, he 
does not doubt will be received by you in the manner which he has every reason to 
expect, from the circumstance that all preceding acts of the department under your 
charge have been dictated by the principles of rectitude and reciprocity. 
 
Her Majesty's vice-consul at Boston, under date of the 24th of September last, says, 
among other things: 
 
"As it appears from the papers of the schooner that she, as well as her cargo, are 
exclusively Spanish property, it seems strange that the Court of New London has 
not yet ordered the delivery of one or both to the owners, if they are present, or to 
me, as their agent, born in that part of the Union"—[This is a mis-translation; it 
means the official agent in that part of the Union]— "agreeably to the articles of 
the treaty now in force between the two countries. The delay in the delivery would 
not be of so much consequence to the proprietors if the vessel did not require 
immediate repairs, in order to preserve her from complete destruction, and if it 
were not material that a large part of the cargo should be sold on account of its bad 
condition.


--- PAGE 181 ---
Here we see the same unfortunate misapprehension continued. The new Spanish minister 
calls upon the Secretary of State to put the "Court of New London" into speedy action, to 
lessen the danger of loss to the proprietors by delay, and the Secretary of State takes no 
pains to correct the error. 
 
On the 24th of October, the Secretary of State wrote again to Mr. Argaiz, on another 
subject, which is not now before this Court,—t he arrest of Ruiz and Montes, at the suit of 
some of the Africans, in the courts of the State of New York. Mr. Argaiz protested 
against the arrest, and claims "the interposition of the Executive in procuring their 
liberation, and indemnity for the losses and injury they may have sustained. To that the 
Secretary replies: 
"It appears from the documents accompanying the note of the Chevalier d'Argaiz, 
that the two Spanish subjects referred to were arrested on process issuing from the 
Superior Court of the city of New York, at the suit of, and upon affidavits made by 
certain colored men, natives of Africa, for the purpose of securing their appearance 
before the proper tribunal, to answer for wrongs alleged to have been inflicted by 
them upon the persons of the said Africans; and, consequently, that the occurrence 
constitutes a simple case of resort by individuals against others to the judicial 
courts of the country, which are equally open to all without distinction, and to 
which it belongs exclusively to decide, as well upon the right of the complainant to 
demand the interposition of their authority, as upon the liability of the defendant to 
give redress for the wrong alleged to have been committed by him. This being the 
only light in which the subject can be viewed, and the constitution and laws having 
secured the judicial power against all interference on the part of the Executive 
authority, the President, to whom the Chevalier d'Argaiz's note has been 
communicated, has instructed the undersigned to state, that the agency of this 
government to obtain the release of Messrs. Ruiz and Montes cannot be afforded in 
the manner requested by him. The laws of the state of New York, of which the 
constitution and laws of the United States and their treaties with foreign powers 
form a part, afford to Messrs. Ruiz and Montes all the necessary means to procure 
their release from imprisonment, and to obtain any indemnity to which they may be 
justly entitled, and therefore would render unnecessary any agency on the part of 
this department for those purposes." 
There is a complete answer to all these demands of the Spanish legation. "The 
constitution and laws have secured the judicial power against All interference of the 
Executive authority." That is very true. The laws of the state of New York, of which the 
constitution and laws of the United States and their: treaties with foreign powers form a 
part, afford to Messrs. Ruiz and Montes all the necessary: means for the security of their 
rights, and therefore "render unnecessary any agency on the part of" the Executive. That 
is very correct. There is a perfect answer, worthy of an American statesman But is that 
all? No. The Secretary finds, after all these disclaimers, one Executive power yet in 
reserve, which may be put forth to take part against poor Africans, and at least afford 
evidence of the national sympathy. The Secretary says:


--- PAGE 182 ---
"But inasmuch as the imprisonment of those persons connects itself with another 
occurrence which has been brought under the President's consideration, in 
consequence of a correspondence between the Spanish legation and this 
department, instructions (of which a copy is inclosed) have been given to the 
Attorney of the United States for the District of New York to put himself in 
communication with those gentlemen, to offer them his advice (and his aid, if 
necessary) as to any measure which it may be proper for them to adopt to procure 
their release, and such indemnity as may be due to them. under our laws, for their 
arrest and detention." 
Because the case "connects itself with another occurrence." What is all this? The 
independence of the judiciary is first firmly and bravely sustained. It is a question of 
private rights between parties, with which the executive has nothing to do, and the 
Government of the United States has no power to interpose. And then the President 
instructs the District Attorney, the law officer of the government, to "put himself in 
communication" with one of the parties, to throw all the weight and influence of the 
government on their side, in order to secure a favorable decision for them in the Courts of 
the state of New York. May it please your Honors, I will not here enter into an inquiry of 
the effect of this interference of the Executive of the United States with the Courts of a 
State, or the extent and operation of the principle which would authorize such 
interference. I really do not know, my imagination cannot present to me the compass of 
its effects on the rights of the people of the United States. again ask the attention of this 
honorable court to this subject. The letter begins with a declaration of the independence 
of the judiciary of the State of New York, the sufficiency of the laws to secure justice and 
the incompetency of the Executive to interfere; and yet, because the case connects itself" 
with another case in which the Executive has considered itself entitled to act, the whole 
influence of the Government is brought to bear upon the judicial authorities of the State 
of New York. 
 
I said the Secretary of State had never to this hour undertaken to contest any one of the 
actual demands of Mr. Calderon, as preferred in his letter of 5th September. He had 
suffered both Mr. Calderon and his successor to remain under the impression that if their 
demands were not complied with, for the kidnapping of these people by the Executive, it 
was not for the want of a will to do it, or of a disposition to contest the claims put forth in 
so extraordinary a manner upon our government. Let us now see how Mr. Argaiz himself 
regarded the conduct of the Secretary. On the 5th of November, he writes again to Mr. 
Forsyth, acknowledging the receipt of Mr. Forsyth's letter, inclosing the instructions of 
the Attorney of the United States for the District of New York, " that he should offer to 
these persons his advice and assistance, if needed, with regard to the most proper means 
of obtaining their liberty." He says: 
"Although this answer did not entirely satisfy the desire expressed by the 
undersigned in the note of October 22d to which he was impelled by the sense of 
his duty, and by the terms of existing treaties, yet he received it with pleasure and 
with thanks; with pleasure, because he saw that the Secretary of State did not 
refuse to admit the reasons which the undersigned had the honor to state in that


--- PAGE 183 ---
note; and with shanks, because he saw that the sentiments which had urged him to 
request with warmth a prompt reply, had been kindly interpreted. The undersigned 
in consequence, went immediately to New York, where he visited on the 29th 
ultimo, the Attorney of the United States with whom he had a long conversation, 
which left him delighted with the affability and courtesy of Mr. Butler, although he 
did not have the happiness to remain satisfied as to the principal matter, as that 
officer of justice declared that he could find no other means of obtaining the liberty 
of Ruiz Montes being already free) than by waiting the determination of the court 
or courts, against the jurisdiction of which the undersigned had already especially 
protested." 
The Spanish ambassador was not satisfied with the letter, and yet he received it with 
pleasure, " because he saw that the Secretary did not refuse to admit his reasons." How is 
that? The Secretary of State took no measures to repel the improper demand made, or to 
correct the erroneous idea cherished by the Spanish legation; and this neglect Mr. Argaiz 
construes as a virtual admission of his " reasons ' Why should he not so construe it? Here 
is also a renewal of the protest, which has uniformly been maintained by the legation, 
against the right of any court in this country to exercise jurisdiction in the case. And yet 
this suit is carried on by the Executive, as in pursuance of a demand by the Spanish 
minister. Mr. Argaiz then refers to two personal conferences which he had with the 
Secretary, and he is well persuaded that what he had said, together with the indications in 
his note of October 22, would have been sufficient to convince " one so enlightened and 
discriminating as the Secretary, of the justice of his claim; that this persuasion has gained 
strength, from the circumstance that the Secretary of State has made no attempt in his 
answer to oppose those arguments, but has confined himself to endeavoring to explain the 
course of civil causes in the courts of this country, in order to show that the government 
of the United States could not interfere in the manner which her Catholic Majesty's 
representative requested; it becomes necessary to advance farther arguments, at the risk 
of being importunate." 
 
And a little farther on, after adverting to the various excuses and palliations which seem 
to have been presented in these confidential conferences, for not seizing these Negroes 
and sending them to Cuba by the Executive power, in which he says: "it is allowed by the 
whole world" that "petitions or accusations of slaves against their masters cannot be 
admitted in a court,', he concludes by asking— 
"As the incompetence of the courts of the United States, with regard to this matter, 
is so clearly demonstrated, is there no power in the Federal Government to declare 
it so, and to interpose its authority to put down the irregularity of these 
proceedings, which the court is not competent to perform? It seems impossible that 
there should be no such power; but unfortunately there is none" 
 
"Her Catholic Majesty's envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary, 
nevertheless, seeing that his previous protest did not produce the result which he 
expected, renews it now, declaring this government responsible for the 
consequences which may grow out of this affair; and he asks the Secretary of State


--- PAGE 184 ---
whether or not he possesses sufficient authority and force to carry into fulfillment 
the treaty of 1795. If he has not, then there cad be no treaty binding on the other 
party." 
He thinks it impossible there should not be a power in the Federal Government to put 
down these proceedings of the courts, but he admits that unfortunately there is no such 
power, and then asks the Secretary of State if he cannot find a power, somewhere, to take 
the matter out of the hands of the judiciary altogether. And if not, he shall hold this 
Government responsible for the consequences, for if it has not power to fulfill the treaty, 
no treaty is binding on either party. 
 
On the 26th of November, the trial of the case having been postponed by the District 
Court from November to January, he writes again, that he is under the necessity of 
renewing his former complaints. 
"To the first complaint, made by his predecessor, on the 6th September last, 
nothing more than an acknowledgment of its receipt was thought necessary, which 
was made on the l6th of the same month. In the answers which the Secretary has 
pleased to give to the notes of the undersigned, of the 22d of October, and the 5th 
of November last, that gentleman did not think proper to combat the argument 
advanced. Whose which the undersigned now proposes to present will be no less 
powerful, and he hopes will be such that the Secretary will not be able .o deny their 
Justice. 
 
"The undersigned has the honor to ask in what law, act, or statute, does the said 
court base its right to take cognizance of the present case? There can be no doubt as 
to the reply: on no law, act, or statute." 
Here he denies again that the Court, before which the Secretary of State had made a 
demand with the averment that it came from the Spanish minister, has any power to take 
cognizance of the case. He says there is no law, act, or statute for it, and then he goes 
on:— 
"For, if any such existed, it is, or should be, anterior or posterior to the treaty of 
1795. If anterior, it clearly became annulled, because a treaty is one of the superior 
laws of the State, or the treaty should never have been signed, or ratified, or 
sanctioned by the legislative bodies. If posterior to the treaty, the legislative bodies, 
in drawing it up, discussing it, and voting on it, must have seen that it was at 
variance with a subsisting treaty, which was already a law of the Union. All which 
serves to show that, in the existing state of the laws, this affair cannot and should 
not be decided by the common law, but by the international law." 
That is to say, the treaty stipulation has taken away the power of the courts of the United 
States to exercise jurisdiction between parties. Is that a doctrine to be heard by the 
Secretary of State of the United States from a foreign ambassador without answering it' 
The ambassador proceeds to urge that "if the General Government of the Union had


--- PAGE 185 ---
decided this matter of itself, gubernativamente"—here is a word, used several times in 
this correspondence, that no American translator has been able to translate into our 
language. It means, by the simple will or absolute fiat of the Executive, as in the case of 
the lettres de cachet—or a warrant for the BA STILE—that is what the Spaniard means by 
gubernativamente, when he asks the Executive of the United States, by his own fiat, to 
seize these MEN, wrest them from the power and protection of the courts, and send them 
beyond seas! Is there any such law at Constantinople ? Does the Celestial Empire allow a 
proceeding like this? Is the Khan of Tartary possessed of a power competent to meet 
demands like these? I know not where on the globe we should look for any such 
authority, unless it be with the Governor General of Cuba with respect to Negroes. 
 
" If the General Government had proceeded gubernativamente" —it is not necessary now 
to consider what would have followed. " But," says the Chevalier d'Argaiz, "very 
different, however, have been the results; for, in the first place the treaty of 1795 has not 
been executed, as the legation of her Catholic Majesty has solicited; and the public 
vengeance has not been satisfied." 
 
" The public vengeance! "What public vengeance ? The vengeance of African slave 
traders, despoiled of their prey and thirsting for blood! The vengeance of the barracoons! 
This " public vengeance" is not satisfied. Surely, this is very lamentable. Surely, this is a 
complaint to be made to the Secretary of State of this government. " For," says he, "be it 
recollected that the legation of Spain does not demand the delivery of slaves, but of 
assassins." 
 
How is it possible to reconcile this declaration of the Spanish minister with the libel of 
the District Attorney, entered by order of the Secretary of State, setting forth what was 
said to be the demand of the Spanish minister? It is an explicit contradiction. 
 
The Constitution of the United States recognizes the slaves, held within some of the 
States of the Union, only in their capacity of persons— persons held to labor or service in 
a State under the laws thereof—persons constituting elements  of representation in the 
popular branch of the National Legislature— persons, the migration or importation of 
whom should not be prohibited by Congress prior to the year 1808. The Constitution no 
where recognizes them as property. The words slave and slavery are studiously excluded 
from the Constitution. Circumlocutions are the fig-leaves under which these parts of the 
body politic are decently concealed. Slaves, therefore, in the Constitution of the United 
States are recognized only as persons, enjoying rights and held to the performance of 
duties. 
 
But, in all countries where men are held as slaves, when they are charged with the 
commission of crimes, the right of their owners to their persons is, and must necessarily 
be, suspended; and when they are convicted of capital crimes, the right of the owner is 
extinguished. Throughout the who]e correspondence between the Spanish ministers and 
our Department of State, concerning the surrender of these most unfortunate persons, this 
broad distinction appears to have been entirely and astonishingly overlooked, not only by 
the Spanish ministers, but by the Secretary of State and by the Attorney General.


--- PAGE 186 ---
Mr. Calderon demands that the President should keep these persons all—all—adult males 
and children of both sexes included— in clos e custody, and convey them to Cuba to be 
tried for their lives. Is it not palpable that if this demand had been complied with, they 
could not have been restored to their pretended owners, Ruiz and Montes, as merchandise 
of what nature soever? With what face, then, could the 9th article of the treaty with Spain 
be alledged to support a demand for the safekeeping and delivery of the captives, not as 
slaves, but as assassins—not as merchandise, but as men&#151; as infant females, with 
flesh, and blood, and nerves, and sinews, to be tortured, and with lives to be forfeited and 
consumed by fire, to appease the public vengeance of the lawless slave-traders in Cuba. 
 
Mr. Forsyth, by a most unaccountable oversight of this distinction between persons and 
things, misrepresents this demand of Mr. Calderon. 
 
He instructs the District Attorney, Mr. Holabird, (11th Sept., 1839, Doc. p. 39, 40,) that 
the Spanish minister had addressed a communication to the Department of State, 
claiming the vessel, cargo, AND BLOCKS on board, as Spanish property, and 
demanding its immediate release. 
 
The District Attorney, on the 19th of September, files, accordingly, his libels, (Record, p. 
13,) stating the demand of the Spanish minister, not as it had really been made, but 
according to the statement of it in his instructions from the Department of State; and he 
prays the Court that, if the claim of the Spanish minister is well founded and conformable 
to treaty, the Court should make such order for the disposal of the said vessel, cargo, 
AND SLAVES, as may best enable the United States, in all respects, to comply with their 
treaty stipulations, and preserve the public faith inviolate. 
 
But if it should be made to appear that the persons aforesaid, described as slaves are 
Negroes and persons of color, who have been transported from Africa in violation of the 
laws of the United States, and brought into these United States contrary to the same laws, 
he claims that, in such case, the Court shall make such further order as may enable the 
United States, if deemed expedient, to remove such persons to the coast of Africa, to be 
delivered there to such agent or agents as may be authorized to receive and provide for 
them, pursuant to the laws of the United States; or to make such other order as to the 
court should seem fit, right, and proper in the premises. 
 
Here were three alternatives prayed for—1s t. That the vessel, cargo, and blacks, assumed 
to be slaves, should be so disposed of as to enable the United States to comply with their 
treaty stipulations, and preserve the public faith inviolate. It was stated that this demand 
was made at the instance of the Spanish minister, but that was true only of the vessel and 
cargo, but not of the persons. Of them, he had demanded, by necessary implication, that 
they should not be restored to their pretended owners, but kept in close custody, and, in 
defiance of all judicial authority, conveyed to the Havana Govermnentally, that is, by the 
arbitrary mandate of the President of the United States, to satisfy public vengeance. The 
Court could not have complied with this alternative of restoring the Negroes, as property, 
to their owners, but by denying and defying the real demand of the Spanish minister, that


--- PAGE 187 ---
they should be sent to Cuba as criminals. 
 
The second alternative was, that the Court should enable the United States to send the 
Negroes home to Africa, if deemed expedient; and to this the decree of the Court said, 
soit fait comme il est desire&#151; it as the District Attorney desires. Let the said 
Africans, in the custody of the Marshal, be delivered to the President of tile United States 
by the Marshal of the District of Connecticut, to be by him transported to Africa, in 
pursuance of the law of Congress passed March 3, 1829, entitled " An act in addition to 
the acts prohibiting the slave-trade." 
 
Yet, from this sentence, claimed by the District Attorney, the representative of the 
Executive Administration before the Court, it is he himself that appeals. Should the Court 
sustain that apt peal, what judgment could they possibly render? Should they reverse the 
decision of the District and Circuit Courts, they would indeed determine that these forty 
persons should not be delivered to the President of the United States, to be sent home to 
Africa —but what shall the Court decree to be done with them ? Not surely, that they 
should be delivered up to their pretended owners, for against that the Spanish minister 
solemnly protests ! He demands not even that they should be delivered up to himself! He 
demands that it should be declared, that no tribunal in the United States has the right even 
to institute proceedings against them. Be declared— by whom? He demands of the 
Executive Administration—(will the Court please  to consider what the purport of this 
demand is?) --that the President of the United States should issue n proclamation, that no 
tribunal of the United States has the right to institute proceedings against the subjects of 
Spain for crimes committed on board a Spanish vessel, and in the waters of the Spanish 
territory. 
 
When this demand was made, the Africans of the Amistad were in the custody of a 
judicial tribunal of the United States, upon proceedings instituted against them as 
criminals charged with piracy and murder. They were also claimed by two Spaniards as 
merchandise, their property; and the faith of a treaty was solemnly invoked to sustain the 
claim that this merchandise, rescued out of the hands of pirates or robbers, (that is to say, 
out of the hands of itself,) should be taken care of by the officers of the port into which 
they had been brought, and restored entire to them—Ruiz and Montes—as soon as due 
and sufficient proof should be made concerning the property thereof. 
 
Now, if no tribunal in the United States had the right to institute proceedings against the 
subjects of Spain for crimes committed on board a Spanish vessel and in the waters of the 
Spanish territory, how could the Court know that these same Spanish subjects were, at the 
same time, the merchandise rescued out of the hands of pirates and robbers and the 
pirates or robbers out of whose hands the merchandise was rescued? How could the Court 
know that they were subjects of Spain—that they were pira tes or robbers—or that they 
were merchandise—if the Court had no right to institute proceedings against them ? 
 
The very phraseology of the 9th article of the treaty with Spain proves, that it was not and 
could not be intended to include persons under the denomination of merchandise, of what 
nature soever, for it provides that the merchandise shall be delivered to the custody of the


--- PAGE 188 ---
officers of the port, in order to be taken care of and restored entire to the true proprietor. 
Now, this provision, that the merchandise shall be restored entire, is absurd if applied to 
human beings, and the use of the word conclusively proves that the thought and intention 
of the parties could not be construed to extend to human beings. A stipulation to restore 
human beings entire might suit two nations of cannibals, but would be absurd, and worse 
than absurd, between civilized and Christian nations. Again, the article provides that the 
rescued merchandise shall be delivered to the custody of the officers of the port into 
which it is brought, in order to be taken care of; but, by what Constitution or law of the 
United States, or of Connecticut, could the officers of the port of hew London receive 
into their custody, and take care of, the Africans of the Amistad? 
 
The demand of the Spanish minister, Calderon, was, that the President of the United 
States should first turn man-robber; rescue from the custody of the Court, to which they 
had been committed, those forty odd Africans, males and females, adults and children; 
next turn jailer, and keep them in his close custody, to prevent their evasion; and lastly, 
turn catchpoll and convey them to the Havana, to appease the public vengeance of the 
African slave-traders of the barracoons. 
 
Is it possible to speak of this demand in language of decency and moderation? Is there a 
law of Habeas Corpus in the land? Has the expunging process of black lines passed upon 
these two Declarations of Independence in their gilded frames? Has the 4th of July, '76, 
become a day of ignominy and reproach? Is there a member of this Honorable Court of 
age to remember the indignation raised against a former President of the United States for 
causing to be delivered up, according to express treaty stipulation, by regular judicial 
process, a British sailor, for murder on board of a British frigate on the high seas? At 
least, all your Honors remember the case of the Bambers? You all remember your own 
recent decision in the case of Dr. Holmes ? And is it for this Court to sanction such 
monstrous usurpation and Executive tyranny as this at the demand of a Spanish minister? 
And can you hear, with judicial calmness and composure, this demand of despotism, 
countenanced and supported by all the Executive authorities of the United States, though 
not yet daring to carry it into execution? 
 
The third alternative prayed for in the name and behalf of the United States in the libel of 
the 19th of September, 1839, is, that the court should make such other order in the 
premises as it should think fit, right, and proper. 
 
To this expedient it was necessary for the court to resort. The court did not know—it 
could not know that the demand of the Spanish Minister, Calderon, was not only widely 
different from that which the libel of the District Attorney represented it to be, but 
absolutely incompatible with it. The court took it for granted that the statement in the 
libels, at least so far as concerned the demand of the Spanish Minister, was true—and so 
far as respected the only Ladino on board the Amistad, the boy Antonio, did accede to the 
supposed demand of the Minister—did actually ad mit the treaty stipulation as applicable 
to him—and did decree that he should be re stored to the legal representatives of his 
deceased master. The judge of the District Court relieved Antonio from his right of 
appeal&#151; from that decision by stating that Antonio himself desired to be restored to


--- PAGE 189 ---
his widowed mistress. But as the whole decree was the result of a deception practiced 
upon the court, and as in that part of it relating to Antonio, are involved principles of the 
deepest interest to human freedom, and to the liberties of my country, I will only express 
my most earnest hope, with profound respect for the court, that that portion of its decision 
will never tee adduced as authority for the surrender of any other individual situated as 
Antonio was on that trial. 
 
And here I must avail myself of the occasion to state my objections to the admission of 
the case of the Antelope as an authoritative precedent in this or any other court of the 
United States— I had almost said for any thing, cer tainly for the right of the court itself to 
deliver up to slavery any human individual at the demand of any diplomatic or consular 
agent of any foreign power. And that I may be enabled to set forth at large, my reasons 
for resisting the application of that case as precedent or authority for the settlement of any 
principle now under the consideration of the Court, I must ask the permission of the 
Court to review the case of the Antelope itself, as it appears on the face of the Reports. 
 
[See the review of the case of the Antelope, at the close of the argument.] 
 
And this declaration of the Spanish minister not only contradicts it, but shows that it was 
impossible any such demand should have been made. "For, let it be remembered," he 
says, "that the Spanish legation demands not slaves but assassins." No despotism could 
comply with both demands, had they been made, but the Spanish Minister explicitly 
declares that only one demand was made by the legation, and that not the one affirmed by 
the Secretary of State—not pr operty but assassins—not for th e benefit of individuals, but 
to satisfy "public vengeance." There is something follows in the letter about " 
fanaticism," which I will not read to the Court, for reasons that will be obvious. Indeed, I 
do not know as I understand it, and it is possible that I have indulged, or may indulge in 
what, in certain dialects, may be called "fanaticism," myself. The Chevalier proceeds to 
reason: 
 
"Thus it appears that a court of one of the States of the confederacy has assumed the 
direction of an affair over which it has no jurisdiction; that there can be no law, either 
anterior or posterior to the treaty, upon which a legal sentence can be based; that this 
court, by the repeated delays which it orders, contributes to delay the satisfaction 
demanded by public justice; and that, in consequence, the affair should only be 
determined by reference to international right, and, therefore, by the exercise of the 
power of the government, (gubernativamente) that, for its determination, the treaty exists 
to which Spain appeals; that, from the delay on this determination have proceeded 
injuries requiring indemnification, to demand which the undersigned reserves his right for 
a future occasion. The undersigned may, without indiscretion, declare that this must be 
the opinion of the cabinet, which, possessing already the necessary and even 
indispensable powers, may immediately act (gubernativamente) in this matter, in virtue 
of the actual state of the law, and without awaiting the decision of any court. Not to do so 
may give rise to very complicated explanations with regard to reciprocity in the execution 
and fulfillment of treaties."


--- PAGE 190 ---
Here it is. "Gubernativamente," again; that is the idea which was in the mind of the 
Spanish minister all the while, gubernativamente. That is what he was insisting on, that 
was the demand which the Secretary of State never repelled as he ought, by telling Mr. 
Argaiz that it was not only inadmissible under our form of government, but would be 
offensive if repeated. But where will your Honors find any thing like a demand for 
property' under the treaty, and by the decision of a court of the United States? He says, if 
the Executive does not at once act gubernativamente, and take the case out of the 
judiciary, and send these people to Cuba. it "may give rise to complicated explanations 
with regard to reciprocity in the execution and fulfillment of treaties.)" Is that language 
for a foreign minister to use to the American Secretary of State, and not to be answered. 
He then says: 
 
"The undersigned flatters himself with the hope that his Excellency the President will 
take into his high consideration this communication, to which the undersigned hopes for a 
speedy answer, as a new proof of the scrupulousness and respect with which this nation 
fulfills the treaties existing with other nations. If, contrary to this hope, the decision 
should not be such as the undersigned asks, he can only declare the General Government 
of the Union responsible for all and every consequence which the delay may produce.'' 
 
There is the language used by the representative of her Catholic Majesty to the Secretary 
of State of the United States, and to which the Secretary never thought it necessary to 
make a suitable reply. There is another correspondence published among the documents 
of the present session of Congress, connected too with this very case, which shows that 
the Secretary knows how to be very sensitive with regard to any thing that looks like 
foreign interference with the action of our courts and government. It is in his answer to 
Mr. Fox the British ambassador, who addressed a letter to Mr. Forsyth, January 20th, 
1841, saying he had been instructed to represent to the President that the attention of his 
government " has been seriously directed to the case" of these Africans, and in 
consequence of the treaty between Great Britain and Spain, in which the former paid a 
valuable consideration for the abandonment of the trade, it is "moved to take a special 
and peculiar interest in the fate of these unfortunate Africans." And he says: 
 
"Now the unfortunate Africans, whose case is the subject of the present representation, 
have been thrown by accidental circumstances into the hands of the authorities of the 
United States; and it may probably depend upon the action of the United States 
Government, whether these persons shall recover the freedom to which they are entitled, 
or whether they shall be reduced to slavery, in violation of the known laws and contracts 
publicly passed, prohibiting the continuance of the African slave trade by Spanish 
subjects. 
 
"It is under these circumstances that Her Majesty's Government anxiously hope that the 
President of the United States will find himself empowered to take such measures in 
behalf of the aforesaid Africans as shall secure to them the possession of their liberty, to 
which, without doubt, they are by law entitled." 
 
The Secretary of State, in his reply, consents to receive the communication, " as an


--- PAGE 191 ---
evidence of the benevolence of her Majesty's Government, under which aspect alone," he 
says, " it could be entertained by the Government of the United States." What a different 
tone is here! Mr. Fux merely referred to the relations of his own government with that of 
Spain, and to the 10th article of the treaty of Ghent, between Great Britain and the United 
States, in which both nations bound themselves " to use their best endeavors for the entire 
abolition of the African slave trade." His letter was courteously worded throughout. It 
casts no imputations upon any branch of our government, it pronounces no part of it 
incompetent to its functions, it asks no unconstitutional and despotic interference of the 
Executive with the judiciary gubernativamente, but simply, announces the interest his 
government feels in the case, and its "anxious hope that the President of the United States 
will find himself empowered to take such measures in behalf of the aforesaid Africans as 
shall secure to them their liberty, to which," he says, "without doubt, they are by law 
entitled." To this the Secretary of State replies: 
 
" Viewing this communication as an evidence of the benevolence of her Majesty's 
Government—under which aspect alone it could be entertained by the Government of the 
United States— I proceed, by direction of th e President, to make, in reply, a few 
observations- suggested by the topics of your letter. The narrative presented therein, of 
the circumstances which brought these Negroes to our shores, is satisfactory evidence 
that her Majesty's Government is aware that their introduction did not proceed from the 
wishes or direction of the Government of the United States. A formal demand having 
been made by the Spanish minister for the delivery of the vessel and property, including 
the Negroes on board, the grounds upon which it is based have become the subject of 
investigation before the judicial tribunals of the country, which have not yet pronounced 
their final decision thereupon You must be aware, sir, that the Executive has neither the 
power nor the disposition to control the proceedings of the local tribunals when acting 
within their own appropriate jurisdiction." 
 
How sensitive the Secretary is now! How quick to perceive an impropriety! How slave to 
the honor of the country—much more so, ind eed, than the case required. How different 
his course from that pursued toward the Spanish minister, who had been from the 
beginning to the end pressing upon our government demands the most inadmissible, the 
most unexampled, the most offensive, and yet received from the Secretary no answer, but 
either a prompt compliance with his requirements, or a plain demonstration of regret that 
compliance was impracticable. Not one attempt do we find by the Secretary to vindicate 
the honor of the country, or to press the Spanish minister to bring forward his warrant for 
such unexampled, such humiliating demands. Neither does he intimate in the case of the 
Spanish claim, that it i8 received on the ground of "benevolence." Indeed he could not 
very well offer that as an apology. Benevolence ! The burning of these forty Africans at 
the stake, as the result of a compliance by our Executive with the Spanish demand, would 
hardly tend to exhibit or inspire " benevolence."—No, it was for vengeance that they 
were demanded, admitted to be so in this very letter. 
 
In the same letter the Secretary of State does not undertake to controvert the principles set 
forth by Mr. Calderon, nor the arguments urged by Mr. Argaiz; but repeats that they had 
been submitted to the President for consideration. And that is all the answer ever given to


--- PAGE 192 ---
the Spanish legation. He then refers to various personal conversations with the minister of 
Spain. 
 
It was hoped that, in the various conversations which have since taken place with the 
Chevalier d'Argaiz at this department, on the same subject, he would have discovered 
additional evidence of the desire of the United States Government to do justice to the 
demand and representation addressed to it in the name of that of Spain, as fully and as 
promptly as the peculiar character of the claim admitted. From the repeated 
communications of the Chevalier d'Argaiz, pressing for the disposal of the question; from 
his reiterated over of suggestions as to the course by which he deems it incumbent upon 
this Government to arrive at a final decision; and from the arguments in support of those 
suggestions, which the undersigned does not perceive the utility of combating at the 
present stage of the transaction.  
 
The Secretary makes no pretension to contest the claims of Spain—not even a suggestion 
of the idea that these claims are inadmissible, or that, if pressed, they would be offensive. 
In these conversations, many things may hare been said which perhaps it would not have 
been deemed compatible with the public interest to make public. I shall justify this 
intimation before I am through with this remarkable correspondence. But it is evident 
there was no resistance of the claims in question as to their justice, no examination of 
their principles. The Secretary says he does not perceive the utility of combating any of 
these demands or allegations, and he refers to these private conversations as evidence that 
the Government is perfectly disposed to do all that is demanded. He continues by 
saying— 
 
" The Government of the United States cannot but perceive with regret that the Chevalier 
d'Argaiz has not formed an accurate conception of the true character of the question, nor 
of the rules by which, under the constitutional institutions of the country, the examination 
of it must be conducted; nor a correct appreciation of the friendly disposition toward Her 
Catholic Majesty's Government, with which that examination was so promptly entered 
upon. In connection with one of the points in the Chevalier d'Argaiz's last note, the 
undersigned will assure him, that whatever be, in the end, the disposal of the question, it 
will be in consequence of a decision emanating from no other source than the 
Government of the United States; and that, if the agency of the judicial authority shall 
have been employed in conducting the investigation of the case, it is because the 
judiciary is, by the organic law of the land, a portion, though an independent one, of that 
Government." 
 
That is to say, so it is, and we can't help it, the judiciary is independent, it must have its 
course, and we cannot help it. He proceeds: 
 
" As to the delay which has already attended, and still may attend, a final decision, and 
which the Chevalier d'Argaiz considers as a legitimate subject of complaint, it arises from 
causes which the undersigned believes that it would serve no useful purpose to discuss at 
this time, farther than to say that they are beyond the control of this department, and that 
it is not apprehended that they will affect the course which the Government of the United


--- PAGE 193 ---
States may think it fit ultimately to adopt." 
 
The Spanish minister is here given to understand, in his ear, that care had been taken to 
prevent the Africans from being placed beyond the control of the Executive, and 
therefore he need be under no apprehension that the decision of the courts, whatever it 
may be, " will affect the course which the Government of the United States may think it 
fit ultimately to adopt." What other construction can possibly he given to this paragraph? 
If any other is possible from the words there are facts in the case which prove that this 
was what was intended. The Secretary proceeds with his explanations and apologies. 
" The undersigned indulges the hope that, upon a review of the circumstances of 
the case, and the questions it involves, the Chevalier d'Argaiz will agree with him 
in thinking that the delay which has already occurred is not more than 
commensurate with the importance of those questions; that such delay is not 
uncommon in the proceedings and deliberations of governments desirous of taking 
equal justice as the guide of their actions; and that the caution which it has been 
found necessary to observe in the instance under consideration, is yet far from 
having occasioned such procrastination as it has been the lot of the United States 
frequently to encounter in their intercourse with the Government of Spain." 
"With regard to the imprisonment of Don Jose Ruiz, it is again the misfortune of 
this Government to have been entirely misapprehended by the Chevalier d'Argaiz, 
in the agency it has had in this, an entirely private concern of a Spanish subject. It 
was no more the intention of this department, in what has already been done, to 
draw the Chevalier d'Argaiz into a polemical discussion with the Attorney of the 
United States for the district of New York, than to supply Don Jose Ruiz, gratis, 
with counsel in the suit in which he had been made a party. The offer made to that 
person of the advice and assistance of the District Attorney, was a favor— an 
entirely gratuitous one—since it was not the province of the United States to 
interfere in a private litigation between subjects of a foreign state, for which Mr. 
Ruiz is indebted to the desire of this government to treat with due respect the 
application made in his behalf in the name of her Catholic Majesty, and not to any 
right he ever had to be protected against alleged demands of individuals against 
him or his property." 
Here, then, it is avowed that the Executive government of this nation had interposed in a 
suit between two parties, by extending a favor entirely gratuitous to one of the parties, 
who, it is at the same time admitted, had no claim whatever to this gratuitous aid. And 
then comes the exhibition which I have already read, of the national sympathy, in which 
all the authorities of the country are alleged to have participated, and the assumption, 
under which all the proceedings have been carried on, that there was but one party 
aggrieved in the case, and that party was the Spanish slave traders. 
 
On the 25th of December the Chevalier d'Argaiz addressed a long letter to the Secretary 
of State, in which he acknowledges the receipt of the last letter, to which " it would be 
superfluous" —the word is ocioso, idle—to reply, inasmuch as the Secretary of State 
does not seem to have considered it requisite in the present situation of the affair, to


--- PAGE 194 ---
combat the arguments adduced by the undersigned. The delicacy of the undersigned does 
not, however, allow him to pass over (desoir) certain insinuations (remarks) contained in 
the said note; and it will, perhaps, be difficult for him to avoid adducing some new 
argument in support of his demands." 
 
The Secretary had never met these claims and arguments, as it was his duty to do, nod the 
Spanish minister is continually reminding him that he does not answer his arguments. He 
then refers him to his own course, and says, "The undersigned would not have troubled 
the Government of the Union with his urgent demand, if the two Spaniards (who, as the 
Secretary of State, in his note of the 12th, says, 'were found in this distressing and 
perilous situation by officers of the United States, who, moved by sympathetic feelings, 
which subsequently became national,') had not been the victims of an intrigue, as 
accurately shown by Mr. Forsyth, in the conference which he had with the undersigned 
on the 21st of October last." 
 
He here refers to a private conference in which the Secretary of State had accurately 
shown that the two Spaniards in New York were the "victims of an intrigue." The 
Secretary of State of the United States, then, had confidentially and officially informed 
the Spanish minister that the two Spaniards, in being arrested at the suit of some of these 
Africans, were the victims of an intrigue." What the Secretary meant by " victims of an 
intrigue, "is not for me to say. These Spaniards had been sued in the courts of the state of 
New York by some of my clients, for alleged wrongs done to them on the high seas—for 
cruelty, in fact, so dreadful, that many of their number had actually perished under the 
treatment 'These suite were commenced by lawyers of New York—men of character in 
their profession. Possibly they advised with a few other individuals—fanatics, perhaps, I 
must call them, according to the general application of language, but if I were to speak 
my own language in my own estimate of their character, so far as concerns this case, and 
confining my remarks exclusively to this present case, I should pronounce them the 
FRIENDS OF HUMAN NATURE—men who were  unable to see these, their fellow 
men, in the condition of these unfortunate Africans, seized, imprisoned, helpless, 
friendless, without language to complain, without knowledge to understand their situation 
or the means of deliverance—I say they could not see human beings in this condition and 
not undertake to save them from slavery and death, if it was in their power—not by a 
violation of the laws, but by securing the execution of the laws in their favor. These are 
the men whom the American Secretary of State arraigns in a confidential conversation 
with the minister of Spain, as the instigators of "an intrigue" of which he holds these 
disappointed slave-holders to be the unfortunate victims. The Chevalier goes on: 
"The Secretary of State, however, says that 'he cannot but perceive with regret that 
the Chevalier d'Argaiz has not formed an accurate conception of the true character 
of the question, nor of the rules by which, under the constitutional institutions of 
this country, the examination of it must be conducted.' Possibly the undersigned 
may not have formed such an accurate conception, of this affair, since it has been 
carried within the circle of legal subtleties, as he has not pursued the profession of 
the law; but he is well persuaded that, if the crew of the Amistad had been 
composed of white men, the court, or the corporation to which the Government of


--- PAGE 195 ---
the Union might have submitted the examination of the question, would have 
observed the rules by which it should be conducted under the constitutional 
institutions of the country, and would have limited itself to the ascertainment of the 
facts of the murders committed on the 30th of June; and the undersigned does not 
comprehend the privilege enjoyed by Negroes, in favor of whom an interminable 
suit is commenced, in which everything is deposed by every person who pleases; 
and, for that object, an English doctor, who accuses the Spanish government of not 
complying with its treaties, and calumniates the Captain General of the island of 
Cuba, by charging him with bribery." 
Here it is made the subject of complaint from a foreign ambassador to the Executive 
Government of the United States, that in a court of the United States, in a trial for the life 
and liberty of forty human beings, the testimony, of "an English doctor" was received. 
And this complaint also was received without a reply. The "English doctor," thus spoken 
of, was Doctor Madden, a man of letters, and in the official employ of the British 
Government, in a post of much importance and responsibility, as the superintendent of 
liberated Africans at Havana. His testimony was highly important in the case and was 
admitted in the court below, and now forms a part of the record now before your Honors. 
He does not use the word bribery in reference to the Governor General of Cuba. 
 
[DEATH OF JUDGE BARBOUR—THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COURT 
SUSPENDED. 
 
Washington, Feb. 25, 1841. 
 
The proceedings of the Court in this solemn case have been interrupted by the solemn 
voice of death. One of the learned and honorable judges of the Court, who sat yesterday 
in his place, listening with profound and patient attention to the argument of a counselor 
many years older than himself, reasoning eloquently in behalf of justice on earth, has 
been summoned to his own dread account, at the bar of Eternal Justice above. Judge 
Barbour, of Virginia, the seventh in rank on the bench, died last night in his bed—in his 
sleep, it is probable, without a groan or a struggle. The servant at his lodgings went at 
the usual hour this morning to the rooms of the different Judges, to call them to breakfast. 
4s the Chief Justice was passing the door of Judge Barbour's room, the man said to him, 
"Chief Justice, will you please to come here, sir—I think Judge Barbour is dead." Judge 
Taney went to the bed, and there saw his associate lying on his side, as if in a gentle 
sleep, but dead and cold, with the exception of a slight remaining warmth at the chest. 
Not a muscle was distorted, nor were the bed-clothes in the slightest degree disturbed, so 
that it is probable his heart ceased to beat in an instant, while he was asleep. 
 
At the usual hour for opening the Court this morning, none of the Judges were seen in the 
court-room, which was already filled with persons come to hear the continuation of Mr. 
Adams' speech.] 
 
At length the Judges came in together, and their countenances looked pale, distressed, 
and sorrowful. As soon as they had taken their seats, the Crier opened the Court in the


--- PAGE 196 ---
usual form, and the Chief Justice addressed the gentlemen of the bar—"Gentlemen a 
painful event has occurred—Judge Barbour died  suddenly last night—and the Court is 
therefore adjourned until Monday." 
 
The Crier then made proclamation to that effect, the Judges all rose, and retired again to 
their private apartment, and the assembly withdrew. 
 
I did not expect an announcement of so overwhelming a Providence in a manner so 
severely simple and subdued, but it struck me as eminently appropriate for the Supreme 
Court of this nation. It was in keeping with the strictest propriety and suitableness. It was 
sublime. 
 
RESUMPTION OF THE TRIAL. 
 
Washington March 1, 1841. 
 
On the re-opening of the Court, the Attorney General of the United States, H. D. Gilpin, 
Esq. presented a series of appropriate resolutions in reference to the decease of Judge 
Barbour, which had been adopted on Friday, at a meeting of the Bar of officers of the 
court, and which he moved to have entered on the records of the court. The Chief Justice 
responded in a short address, and concluded with ordering the resolutions to be entered 
on the records.  
Mr. Adams then resumed his argument, as follows:— 
 
May it please your Honors, 
 
The melancholy event which has occurred since the argument of this case was begun, and 
which has suspended for a time the operations of the Court itself, and which I ask 
permission to say that I give my cordial, and painful concurrence in the sentiments of the 
Bar of this Court—has imposed on me the necess ity of re- stating the basis and aim of the 
argument which I am submitting to the Court, in behalf of the large number of 
individuals, who are my unfortunate clients. 
 
I said that my confidence in a favorable result to this trial rested mainly on the ground 
that I was now speaking before a Court of JUSTICE. And in moving the dismissal of the 
appeal taken on behalf of the United States, it became my duty, and was my object to 
show, by an investigation of all the correspondence of the Executive in regard to the case 
that JUSTICE had not been the motive of its proceedings, but that they had been 
prompted by sympathy with one of the two patties and against the other. In support of 
this, I must scrutinize, with the utmost severity every part of the proceedings of the 
Executive Government. And in doing it, I think it proper for me to repeat, that in 
speaking of the impulse of sympathies, under which the government acted, I do not wish 
to be understood to speak of that sympathy as being blamable in itself, or as inducing me 
to feel unfriendly sentiments towards the Head of the Government, or the Secretary of 
State, or any of the Cabinet. I feel no unkind sentiments towards any of these gentlemen.


--- PAGE 197 ---
With all of them, I am, in the private relations of life, on terms of intercourse, of the most 
friendly character. As to our political differences, let them pass for what they are worth, 
here they are nothing. At the moment of the expiration of this administration, I feel 
extreme reluctance at the duty of bringing its conduct before the court in this manner, as 
affecting the claims of my clients to JUSTICE. My learned friend, the Attorney General, 
knows that I am not voluntary in this work. I here descended to personal solicitation with 
the Executive, that by the withdrawal of the appeal, l might be spared the necessity of 
appearing in this cause. I have been of the opinion that the case of my clients was so 
clear, so just, so righteous, that the Executive would do well to cease its prosecution, and 
leave the matter as it was decided by the District Court, and allow the appeal to be 
dismissed. But I did not succeed, and now I cannot do justice to my clients, whose lives 
and liberties depend on the decision of this Court—however painful it may be, to myself 
or others. 
 
In my examination of the first proceedings of the Executive in this case, I did scrutinize 
and analyze most minutely and particularly, the four demands first made upon our 
government by the late Spanish minister, Mr. Calderon, in his letter to the Secretary of 
State of Sept. 5, 1839. I tested the principles there laid down, both by the laws of nations 
and by the treaties between the two Nations to which he had appealed. And I showed that 
every one of these demands was inadmissible, and that every principle of law and every 
article of the treaty, he had referred to, was utterly inapplicable. At the close of my 
argument the other day, I was commenting upon the complaint of the present minister, 
the Chevelier d'Argaiz, addressed to the Secretary of State on the 25th of December, 
1839, in relation to the injustice he alledges to have been done to the two Spanish 
subjects, Ruiz and Montes, by their arrest and imprisonment in New York, at the suit of 
some of the Africans. He says he "does not comprehend the privilege enjoyed by 
Negroes, in favor of whom an interminable suit is commenced, in which everything is 
deposed by every person who pleases; and, for that object, an English doctor who accuses 
the Spanish Government of not complying with its treaties, and calumniates the Captain 
General of the island of Cuba, by charging him with bribery." 
 
This English Doctor is Dr. Madden, whose testimony is given in the record. He certainly 
does not charge the Captain General with bribery, although he says that both he and the 
other authorities of Cuba are in the habit of winking or conniving at the slave trade. That 
this is the actual state of affairs, I submit to the Court, is a matter of history. And I call 
the attention of the Court to this fact, as one of the most important points of this case. It is 
universally known that the trade is actually carried on, contrary to the laws of. Spain, but 
by the general connivance of the Governor General and all the authorities and the people 
of the island. The case of this very vessel, the visit of Ruiz and Montes to the barracoon 
in which these people were confined, the vessel in which they were brought from Africa, 
are all matters of history. I have a document which was communicated by the British 
government to the Parliament, which narrates the whole transaction. Mr. A. here read 
from the Parliamentary documents, a letter from Mr. Jerningham, the British Minister at 
Madrid, to the Spanish Secretary of State, dated January 5th, 1840, describing the voyage 
of the Tecora from Africa, the purchase of these Africans who were brought in her, with 
the subsequent occurrences, and urging the Spanish Government to take measures both


--- PAGE 198 ---
for their liberation, and to enforce the laws of Spain against Ruiz and Montes. 
 
He says " I have consequently been instructed by my government to call upon the 
government of her Catholic Majesty to issue, with as little delay as possible, strict orders 
to the authorities of Cuba, that, if the request of the Spanish minister at Washington be 
complied with, these Negroes may be put in possession of the liberty of which they were 
deprived, and to the recovery of which they have an undeniable title. 
 
"I am further directed to express the just expectations of Her Majesty's government that 
the Government of her Catholic Majesty will cause the laws against the slave-trade to be 
enforced against Messrs. Jose Ruiz and Pedro Montes, who purchased these newly 
imported negroes, and against all such other Spanish subjects as have been concerned in 
this nefarious transaction." 
 
These facts, said Mr. A., must be well known to the Spanish minister. If he complains of 
injustice in the charge of general connivance made by Dr. Madden why has he not 
undertaken to prove that it is a calumny? Not the slightest attempt has been made to bring 
forward any evidence on this point, for the very plain reason that there could be none. 
The fact of the slave trade is too notorious to be questioned. I will read, said he, from 
another high authority, a book filled with valuable and authentic information on the 
subject of the slave trade' written by one of the most distinguished philanthropists of 
Great Britain, Sir Thomas Fowel1 Buxton. Mr. A. then read as follows:— 
 
"It is scarcely practicable to ascertain the number of slaves imported into Cuba: it can 
only be a calculation on, at best, doubtful data. We are continually told by the 
Commissioners, that difficulties are thrown in the way of obtaining correct information in 
regard to the slave trade in that island. Everything that artifice, violence, intimidation, 
popular countenance, and official connivance can do, is done, to conceal the extent of the 
traffic. Our ambassador, Mr. Villiers, April, 1837, says, 'That a privilege (that of entering 
the harbor after dark) denied to all other vessels, is granted to the slave-trader; and, in 
short, that with the servants of the Government, the misconduct of the persons concerned 
in this trade finds favor and protection. The crews of captured vessels are permitted to 
purchase their liberation; and it would seem that the persons concerned in this trade have 
resolved upon setting the government of the mother country at defiance.' Almost the only 
specific fact which I can collect from the reports of the Commissioners, is the statement 
'that 1835 presents a number of slave vessels (arriving at the Havana) by which there 
must have been landed, at the very least, 15,000 Negroes.' But in an official letter, date 
28th May, 1836, there is the following remarkable passage: 'I wish I could add, that this 
list contains even one fourth of the number of those which have entered after having 
landed cargoes, or sailed after having refitted in this harbor.' This would give an amount 
of 69,000 for the Havana alone; but is Havana the only port in Cuba in which Negroes are 
landed? The reverse is notoriously true. The Commissioner says, 'I have every reason to 
believe that several of the other ports of Cuba, more particularly the distant city of St. 
Jago de Cuba, carry on the traffic to a considerable extent.' Indeed, it is stated by Mr. 
Hardy, the consul at St. Jago, in a letter to Lord Palmerston, of the 18th February, 1837, 
'That the Portuguese brig Boca Negra, landed on the 6th inst. at Juragua, a little to


--- PAGE 199 ---
windward of this port, (St. Jago,) 400 Africans of all ages, and subsequently entered this 
port.' But in order that we may be assuredly within the mark, no claim shall be made on 
account of these distant ports. Confining ourselves to the Havana, it would seem 
probable, if it be not demonstrated, that the number for that port, a fortiori, for the whole 
island, may fairly be estimated at 60,000." 
 
This evidence is important to show what is the real value of this certificate of the 
Governor General. There is one other proof which I will read to the court, and leave it to 
your Honors to judge of its bearing, and of the conclusion to which it arrives It is the 
statement of the Spanish vice consul, Mr. Vega. 
"The following statement was made to me by A. G. Vega, Esq., Spanish consul, as 
near as l can now recollect, and according to my best knowledge and belief, l0th 
January, 1840. 
 
W. S. HOLABIRD. 
 
"That he is a Spanish subject; that he resided in the Island of Cuba several years; 
that he knows the laws of that island on the subject of slavery; that there was no 
law that was considered in force in the Island of Cuba, that prohibited the bringing 
in African slaves; that the court of mixed commissioners had no jurisdiction except 
in case of capture on the sea; that newly imported African Negroes were constantly 
brought to the island, and after landing were bona fide transferred from one owner 
to another, without any interference by the focal authorities or the mixed 
commission? and were held by the owners and recognized as lawful property; that 
slavery was recognized in Cuba by all the laws that were considered in force there; 
that the native language of the slaves was kept up on some plantations for years. 
That the barracoons are public markets, where all descriptions of slaves are sold 
and bought; that the papers of the Amistad are genuine, and are in the usual form; 
that it was riot necessary to practice any fraud to obtain such papers from the 
proper officers of the government; that none of the papers of the Amistad are 
signed by Martinez, spoken of by R. R. Madden, in his deposition; that he 
(Martinez) did not hold the office from whence that paper issued." 
This is the statement given to the District Attorney by Mr. Yega, and by him made a part 
of this case. This Spanish functionary declares positively, that he knows there is no law in 
force in Cuba against the African slave trade, and that recent Africans are held and sold 
bona fide as slaves. It is conclusive to prove this fact, that the illegal importation and 
purchase of Africans is openly practiced in Cuba, although it is contrary to the laws of 
Spain, but those laws are not considered in force, that is, the violation of them is 
constantly connived at by the authorities. 
 
It may not be universally known, but is doubtless known to members of this court, that 
there is a volume of correspondence 
 
this subject, by our consul at Havana, which will be communicated to Congress for 
publication in a few days, and I can state from my personal knowledge that it confirms


--- PAGE 200 ---
every word of Mr. Madden's statements on this point, and will show how much reliance 
is to be placed on this certificate of the Governor-General. 
 
But I will return to the letter of the Chevalier d'Argaiz. I have not the honor of knowing 
this gentleman personally, as I knew his predecessor, but I certainly entertain no feeling 
of unkindness towards him. And in examining his correspondence, al. though it is my 
duty to show that his demands are utterly inadmissible and unprecedented, yet it must be 
admitted that his sympathy and partiality for his own countrymen are at least natural; and 
if his zeal and earnestness are somewhat excessive, they are at least pardonable. There is 
in this letter, I must say, a simplicity, what the French call bonhommie, which gives me a 
favorable impression of his character, and l certainly feel the farthest possible from a 
disposition to pass any censure on him. I repeat that, so far as this sympathy is concerned, 
if it is not entirely excusable, it is much more reasonable than it is in some others who 
have not the same interests to defend. He goes on to express his pleasure at the assurance 
received from, the Secretary, that " whatever may be the final settlement of the question, 
it will be in consequence of a decision emanating from the government, and not from any 
other source ;" and he adds, that " he doubts not such decision will be conformable with 
the opinion which was confidentially communicated to him at the Department of State on 
the 19th of November, as founded on that of a learned lawyer, and which he was assured 
had been adopted by the cabinet." 
 
I take it for granted that the opinion referred to is the opinion of the Attorney-General of 
that time, Mr. Grundy, contained in the Congressional document.. It will be necessary for 
me to examine that document before I close, as well as the other papers, and I wish to say 
that the decease of that gentleman, under the circumstances in which it occurred, has 
made such an impression on my mind, as could not have but disarmed me of any 
disposition to censure him, if I had before entertained it. It will be a painful duty to me to 
examine, as I must, with the utmost severity, that document. And I shall show that it is 
such, that neither the courts nor the cabinet ought ever to have acted on it. 
 
In another part of his letter, M. d'Argaiz says of Ruiz and Montes, that they were not 
exempted from the persecutions of an atrocious intrigue, and the undersigned Is not the 
first who has so styled this persecution.' This is a pretty plain intimation that the 
American Secretary of State was the first who called the suit of my clients for legal 
redress " an atrocious intrigue," in his " confidential conversation" with the Spanish 
minister. This is followed by an idea so novel and ingenious that it is necessary to repeat 
the whole of it. After complaining that Negroes should be allowed to be complainants, he 
goes on to argue that they ought to be considered, "morally and legally, as not being in 
the United States," and of course, if they should be delivered up physically, I suppose it 
was to be inferred that the Executive would not incur any responsibility. 
 
"They are morally and legally not in the United States, because the court of Connecticut 
has not declared whether or not it is competent to try them. If it should declare itself 
incompetent, it declares that they are under the cover of the Spanish flag; and, in that 
case, they are physically under the protection of a friendly government, but morally and 
legally out of the territory and jurisdiction of the United States; and, so long as a doubt


--- PAGE 201 ---
remains on this subject, no judge can admit the complaint. If this argument be of any 
value to the Secretary of State of the Government of the Union, the undersigned entreats 
him to prevail on the President to cause a protest, founded on this argument, to be 
officially addressed to the court of New York." 
 
His predecessor, M. Calderon, called upon the President for a proclamation forbidding 
the courts to take up the case, and the present minister of Spain insists that he shall send 
forth his protest to take it out of the hands of the courts—and this on the ground, that my 
clients, although personally imprisoned for eighteen months by the U.S. Marshal, under 
order of the U. S. Court, yet are "not morally and legally in the United States." There is 
another argument of the same gentleman, very much of the same character. The court will 
find it in his first letter after the arrest of Ruiz and Montes at New York. He says: 
"It would be easy to demonstrate the illegality of these arrests, the orders for which 
have possibly been obtained from the attorney by surprise: as it would also be easy 
to show the ignorance of the declarant, Tappan, in declaring that Ruiz is known by 
the name of Pipi, whereas he would have been known and distinguished throughout 
Spain, as all other Joses are, by the diminutive of Pepe, and thus it appears that a 
Pepe has been imprisoned instead of a Pipi, which I believe the law does not 
permit." 
 
The argument is certainly ingenious, and if it is sound at all, it is worth more in favor of 
the Africans than of the Spaniards, as I may hereafter have occasion to show, when I 
come to consider the case of nine-and forty persons with Spanish names, who have been 
arrested and brought into court by African names. 
 
The Chevalier d'Argaiz, in the close of this letter, exhibits his loyalty towards the then 
acting sovereign of his nation. 
"At the moment when the heart of the august Queen Governess is filled with 
delight on account of the termination of a civil war, and the assurance of the throne 
of her august daughter, her minister in the United States has to perform the painful 
duty of diminishing her happiness by communicating to her, as he did by letter on 
the 19th instant, the disagreeable event which forms the subject of this 
communication, The desire of calming the disquiet which this news may occasion 
in the mind of her Majesty, together with that of alleviating the lot of the two 
prisoners, urge the undersigned to entreat you, Mr. Secretary of State, to take into 
consideration what he has here set forth, and to afford him the means, in a prompt 
reply, of satisfying those just desires, which will be completely done if he is able to 
transmit such a reply to his Government by the packet sailing for Havre on the 1st 
of November next." 
 
It must doubtless, said Mr. A., be some consolation to this loyal minister, to reflect that 
before the august Queen Governess could have received the painful intelligence of the 
imprisonment of two such meritorious subjects as Ruiz and Montes to diminish her 
happiness her heart had been gratified in a much better manner. In the pursuit of that 
happiness for which she longed, it seems that she retired altogether from the cares of


--- PAGE 202 ---
state, into the comforts of domestic life, with a husband that, I hope has calmed her 
disquiet, and if it should ultimately turn out that the lives of these poor Africans are 
saved, there will be no further occasion to diminish the happiness of the august 
Queen-Governess. 
 
On the 30th of December, five days after the date of the letter I have been commenting 
upon, the Chevalier d'Argaiz wrote again to the Secretary of State. 
(WASHINGTON, December 30, 1839.) 
 
"SIR—In the conversation which I had with  you on the morning of the day before 
yesterday, you mentioned the possibility that the Court of Connecticut might, at its 
meeting on the 7th of January next, declare itself incompetent, or order the 
restitution of the schooner Amistad, with her cargo, and the Negroes found on 
board of her; and you then showed me that it would be necessary for the legation of 
her Catholic Majesty to take charge of them as soon as the Court should have 
pronounced its sentence or resolution; and, although I had the honor to state to you 
that this legation could not possibly transfer the said Negroes to Havana, still it 
appears proper for me now to declare that— 
 
"Considering that the schooner Amistad cannot make a voyage, on account of the 
bad condition in which she is, of her being entirely without a crew: 
 
"Considering that it would be difficult to find u vessel of the United States willing 
to take charge of these Negroes, and to transport them to Havana; and, also, that 
these Negroes have declared before the Court of Connecticut that they are not 
slaves; and that the best means of testing the truth of their allegation is to bring 
them before the Courts of Havana: 
 
"Being at the same time desirous to free the Government of the United States from 
the trouble of keeping the said Negroes in prison, I venture to request you to 
prevail upon the President to allow to the Government of her Catholic Majesty the 
assistance which it asks under the present circumstances from that of the United 
States, by placing the Negroes found on board of the said schooner, and claimed by 
this legation, at the disposition of the Captain General of the Island of Cuba, 
transporting them thither in a ship belonging to the United States. Her Catholic 
Majesty's Government, I venture to assert, will receive this act of generosity as a 
most particular favor, which would serve to strengthen the bonds of good and 
reciprocal friendship now happily reigning between the two nations." 
 
Here is no longer a demand for the delivery of slaves to their owners, nor for the 
surrender of the Africans to the Spanish minister as assassins, but an application to the 
President of the United States to transport forty individuals beyond the seas, to be tried 
for their lives. Is there a member of this Honorable Court that ever heard of such a 
demand made by a foreign minister on any government? Is there in the whole history of 
Europe an instance of such a demand made upon an independent government? I have 
never in the whole course of my life, in modern or ancient history, met with such a


--- PAGE 203 ---
demand by one government on another. Or, if such a demand was ever made, it was when 
the nation on which it was made was not in the condition of an independent power. 
 
What was this demand? It was that the Executive of the United States, on his own 
authority, without evidence, without warrant of law, should seize, put on board a national 
armed ship, and send beyond seas, forty men, to be tried for their lives. I ask the learned 
Attorney General in his argument on this point of the case, to show what is to be the 
bearing of this proceeding on the liberties of the people. I ask him to tell us what 
authority there is for such an exercise of power by the Executive. I ask him if there is any 
authority for such a proceeding in the case of these unfortunate Africans, which would 
not be equally available, if any President thought proper to exercise it, to seize and send 
off forty citizens of the United States. Will he vindicate such an authority? Will this 
Court give it a judicial sanction ? 
 
But, may it please your Honors, what was the occasion, the cause, the motive, which 
induced the Secretary of State to hold this personal communication with the Spanish 
minister on the 28th of December ? What had occurred, to induce the Secretary of State 
to send for the Chevalier d'Argaiz, and tell him that the court of Connecticut was about to 
pass a decree that these Africans should be delivered up, and that our government would 
be ready to deliver them to him! What induced the Secretary of State to come to the 
conclusion that there was any sort of probability that the Court of Connecticut would so 
adjudge? The documents do not inform us at whose suggestion or by what information 
the Secretary of State acted in this remarkable manner. We are left to infer, that his 
course was founded, probably, on the opinion of the late Attorney General, with a 
suggestion from the District Attorney' of Connecticut. I refer to a letter of the Secretary 
of - State to Mr. Holabird, January 6, 1840, in connection with this letter of the Spanish 
minister, of December 30. The Secretary says—"  Your letter of the 20th ultimo," that is, 
the 20th of December, " was duly received." Now, said Mr. Adams, it is a remarkable 
fact, that this letter of the District Attorney, of December 20 1839, was not 
communicated with the rest of the documents. Why it was not communicated is not for 
me to say. The call of the House of Representatives was in the usual form, for 
information "not incompatible with the public interest ;" which, of course, gives the 
President the right to withhold any documents that he thinks proper. That letter, therefore, 
is not communicated, and I cannot reason from it, any farther than its contents may be 
presumed, from the intimations in the letter of the Spanish minister, in connection with 
the subsequent proceedings. The Secretary says— 
(WASHINGTON, January 6, 1840) 
 
" Sir—Your letter of the 20th ultimo was duly received, and has been laid before 
the President. The Spanish minister having applied to this department for the use of 
n vessel of the United States in the event of the decision of the circuit court in the 
case of the Amistad being favorable to his former application, to convey the 
Negroes to Cuba, for the purpose of being delivered over to the authorities of that 
island, the President has, agreeably to your suggestion taken in connection with the 
request of the Spanish minister, ordered a vessel to be in readiness to receive the


--- PAGE 204 ---
Negroes from the custody of the marshal as soon as their delivery shall have been 
ordered by the court " 
 
Now, what could that suggestion have been? It will be remembered that the Secretary of 
State had before directed the District Attorney, Sept. 1l, "In the mean time you will take 
care that no proceeding of your circuit court' or of any other judicial tribunal places the 
vessel, cargo, or slaves, beyond the control of the Federal Executive." The District 
Attorney had repeatedly inquired of the Secretary if they could not be disposed of by an 
Executive act, or before the court met. Until this time he had received no orders from the 
Department. From the intimation now given, it is evident that the purport of that 
suppressed letter was an intimation that the district court would undoubtedly deliver them 
up, and the difficulty then was, how to get them out of the way. There might be a Habeas 
Corpus from the State courts at the moment of their delivery to the Spaniards, and some 
new difficulties would intervene. There must have been some such suggestion to warrant 
or account for the subsequent proceedings. The Secretary goes on to say— 
"As the request of the Spanish minister for the delivery of the Negroes to the 
authorities of Cuba has, for one of its objects, that those people should have an 
opportunity of proving, before the tribunals of the island, the truth of the 
allegations made in their behalf in the course of the proceedings before the circuit 
court, that they are not slaves, the President, desirous of affording the Spanish 
courts every facility that may be derived from this country towards a fair and full 
investigation of all the circumstances, and particularly of the allegations referred to 
with regard to the real condition of the Negroes, has directed that Lieutenants 
Gedney and Meade be directed to proceed to Cuba, for the purpose of giving their 
testimony in any proceedings that may be instituted in the premises; and that 
complete records of all those which have been had before the circuit court of your 
district, including the evidence taken in the cause, be, with the same view, 
furnished to the Spanish colonial authorities. In obedience to this last mentioned 
order, you will cause to be prepared an authentic copy of the records of the court in 
the case, and of all the documents and evidence connected with it, so as to have it 
ready to be handed over to the commander of the vessel which is to take out the 
Negroes, who will be instructed as to the disposition he is to make of them.'' 
 
In every thing I have said of the arguments, and the zeal of the Spanish minister, I have 
admitted that the principles which may be supposed to govern him might go far to justify 
the sympathy he has shown for one party exclusively. But I cannot give the same credit 
for the sympathy shown by our own government. In this letter we meet, for the first time, 
something that might appear like sympathy for the poor wretches whose liberties and 
lives were in peril. Here is a desire intimated that they might go to Cuba, for the purpose 
of having an opportunity to prove in the courts of Spain their right to be free by the laws 
of Spain. And the President, in the abundance of his kindness, orders Lieutenants Gedney 
and Meade to be sent along with them, as witnesses in the case, " particularly," the 
Secretary says, "with regard to the real condition of the Negroes, "that is, whether they 
were free or slaves. But what did Lieutenants Gedney and Meade know about that? They 
could testify to nothing but the circumstances of the capture. And as to the other idea, that 
these people should have an opportunity to prove their freedom in Cuba, how could that


--- PAGE 205 ---
be credited as a motive, when it is apparent that, by sending them back in the capacity of 
slaves, they would be deprived of all power to give evidence at all in regard to their 
freedom! I cannot, therefore, give the Executive credit for this sympathy towards the 
Africans. It was a mere presence, to blind the public mind with the idea that the Africans 
were merely sent to Cuba to prove they were not slaves. So far from giving any credit for 
this sympathy, the letter itself furnishes incontestable evidence of n very different 
disposition, which I will not qualify in words. 
 
Pursuing the case chronologically, according to the course of the proceedings, I now call 
the attention of the Court to the opinion of the late Attorney General of the United States, 
which the Secretary of the State told Mr. Argaiz had been adopted by the Cabinet, and 
which has been the foundation, to this day, of all the proceedings of the Executive in the 
case. Before considering this, however, I will advert to the letter of Messrs. Staples and 
Sedgwick; to the President These gentlemen were counsel for those unfortunate men. 
There had been reports in circulation, which is by no means surprising, considering the 
course of the public sympathy, that the President intended to remove these people to 
Cuba, by force, gubernativamente, by virtue of his Executive authority—that inherent 
power which I suppose has been discovered, by which the President. at his discretion? 
can seize men, and imprison them, and send them beyond seas for trial or punishment by 
a foreign power. 
 
Hear Messrs. Staples and Sedgwick to the President of the United States. 
NEW YORK, September 13, 1839. 
 
"Sir—We have been engaged as counsel of  the Africans brought in by the Spanish 
vessel, the Amistad; and, in that capacity, take the liberty of addressing you this 
letter. 
 
" These Africans are now under indictment in the circuit court of the second circuit, 
on a charge of piracy, and their defense to this accusation must be established 
before that tribunal. But we are given to understand, from authority not to be 
doubted, that a demand has already been made upon the Federal Government, by 
the Spanish minister, that these Negroes be surrendered to the authorities of his 
country; and it is on this account that we now address you. 
 
" We are also informed, that these slaves are claimed under the 9th article of the 
treaty of 1795, between this country and Spain by which all ships and merchandise 
rescued out of the hands of pirates and robbers on the high seas are to be restored 
to the true proprietor, upon due and sufficient proof. 
 
" We now apply to you, sir, for the purpose of requesting that no order may be 
made by the Executive until the facts necessary to authorize its interposition are 
established by the judicial authority in the ordinary course of justice. We submit 
that this is the true construction of the treaty; that it is not a mere matter of 
Executive discretion; but that, before the Government enforces the demand of the 
Spanish claimant, that demand must be substantiated in a court of justice.


--- PAGE 206 ---
" It appears to us manifest that the treaty could never have meant to have submitted 
conflicting rights of property to mere official discretion; but that it was intended to 
subject them to the same tribunals which, in all other cases, guard and maintain our 
civil rights. Reference to the 7th article, in our opinion, will confirm this position. 
 
" It will he recollected that, that if we adopt this as the true construction of the 
treaty, should any occasion ever arise when our citizens shall claim the benefit of 
this section, Spain would be at liberty to give it the same interpretation; and that the 
rights of our citizens will be subjected to the control of subordinate ministerial 
 
agents, without any of those safeguards which courts of justice present for the 
establishment of truth and the maintenance of rights. We submit, further, that it 
never could be intended that the Executive of the Union should be harassed by the 
investigation of claims of this nature, and yet, assuredly, if the construction 
contended for be correct, such must be the results for, if he is to issue the order 
upon due and sufficient proof, the proof must be sufficient to his mind. 
 
''We further submit, that, in regard to the Executive, there are no rules of evidence 
nor course of proceeding established; and that, in all such cases, unless the 
claimant be directed to the courts of justice, the conduct of the affair must, of 
necessity, be uncertain. vague, and not such as is calculated to inspire confidence in 
the public or the parties. We can find nothing in the treaty to warrant the delivery 
of these individuals as offenders; and the Executive of the Union has never thought 
itself obliged, under the laws of nations, to accede to demands of this nature. 
 
" Those suggestions are of great force in this case, because we, with great 
confidence, assert, that neither according to the law of this, nor that of their own 
country, can the pretended owners of these Africans establish any legal title to 
them as slaves. 
 
" These Negroes were, it is admitted, carried into Cuba contrary to the provisions 
of the treaty between Spain and Great Britain of 1817, and of the orders made in 
conformity therewith; orderes which have been repented, at different times, to as 
late a date as the 4th November, 1838, by which the trade is expressly prohibited; 
and if they had been taken on board the slaver, they would have been 
unquestionably emancipated. 
 
" They were bought by the present claimants, Messrs. Ruiz and Montes, either 
directly from the slaver, or under circumstances which must beyond doubt, have 
apprised them that they were illegally introduced into the Havana; and on this state 
of facts we, with great respect, insist that the purchasers of Africans illegally 
introduced into the dependencies of a country which has prohibited the slave trade, 
and who make the purchase with knowledge of this fact, can acquire no right. We 
put the matter on the Spanish law and we affirm, that Messrs. Ruiz and Montes 
hare no title, under that law, to these Africans.


--- PAGE 207 ---
"If this be so, then these Negroes have only obeyed the dictates of self-defense. 
They have liberated themselves from illegal restraint; and it is superfluous to say, 
that Messrs. Ruiz and Montes have no claim whatever under the treaty. 
 
" It is this question, sir, fraught with the deepest interest, that we pray you to 
submit for adjudication to the tribunals of the land. It is this question that we pray 
may not be decided in the recesses of the cabinet, where these unfriended men can 
have no counsel and can produce no proof, but in the halls of Justice, with the 
safeguards that she throws around the unfriended and oppressed. 
 
" And, sir, if you should not be satisfied with the considerations here presented, we 
then submit that we are contending for a right upon a construction of a treaty: that 
this point, at least, should be presented to the courts of justice; and, should you 
decide to grant an order surrendering these Africans, we beg that you will direct 
such notice of it to be given, as may enable us to test the question as we shall be 
advised, by habeas corpus or otherwise. 
 
"We have only, sir, to add, that we have perfect confidence that you will decide in 
this matter with a single regard to the interests of justice and the honor of the 
country, and that we are, with the greatest respect, your most obedient servants, 
 
' SETH P. STAPLES, 
 
"THEODORE SEDGWICK, JR. "  
 
MARTIN VAN BUREN, ESQ. 
 
" President of the United States." 
 
I read the whole of this letter, said Mr. Adams, to show that this extraordinary course of 
proceeding was not entered upon by the Executive without warning and counsel. The 
President of the United States was informed, on the receipt of that letter, in the month of 
September, 1839, of the deep principles, involving the very foundation of the liberties of 
this country, that were concerned in the disposal which the Executive might make of 
these men. That letter was with the late Attorney General when he examined the case, 
and when he made up his opinion. His opinion, addressed to the Secretary of State, 
begins thus: 
"Sir,—I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of yours of the 24th of 
September, in which, by direction of the President, you refer to this office the letter 
of the Spanish minister of the 6th of September, addressed to you; also the letter of 
Seth P. Staples and Theodore Sedgwick, Jr. Esqrs., who have been engaged as 
counsel for the Negroes. taken on board the schooner Amistad, addressed to the 
President of the United States; and asking my opinion upon the different legal 
questions presented by these papers.


--- PAGE 208 ---
" I have given to the subject all the consideration which its importance demands, 
and now present to you, and through you to the President, the result of my 
reflections upon the whole subject. 
 
" The following is the statement of facts contained in your communication: 'Fine 
Amistad is a Spanish vessel; was regularly cleared from Havana, a Spanish port in 
Cuba, to Guanaja, in the neighborhood of Puerto Principe, another Spanish port; 
that her papers were regular; that the cargo consisted of merchandise and slaves, 
and was duly manifested as belonging to Don Jose Ruiz and Don Pedro Montes; 
that the Negroes after being at sea a few days, rose upon the white persons on 
board; that the captain, his slave and two seamen, were killed, and the vessel taken 
possession of by the Negroes, that two white Spaniards, after being wounded, were 
compelled to assist in navigating the vessel, the Negroes intending to carry her to 
the coast of Africa; that the Spaniards contrived, by altering the courts of steering 
at night, to keep her on the coast of the United States; that on seeing land off 
New-York, they come to the coast, and some of the Negroes landed to procure 
water and provisions; that being on the point of leaving the coast, the Amistad was 
visited by a boat from Captain Gedney's vessel, and that one of the Spaniards, 
claiming protection from the officer commanding the boat, the vessel and cargo, 
and all the persons on board, were sent into New London for examination, and such 
proceedings as the laws of nations and of the United States warranted and 
required." 
 
Here the Court will see he assumes, through the whole argument that these Negroes were 
slaves. This corresponds with the assumption of the Executive, which Mr. Forsyth, in his 
letter to the Spanish minister afterwards declared the Government had carried out, that 
the Negroes were slaves, and that the only parties injured were Montes and Ruiz. The late 
Attorney General says it appears that the "cargo consisted of merchandise and slaves," 
that the papers were " all regular," that after the capture of the vessel by the Negroes, the 
two white Spaniards " were compelled to assist in navigating the vessel, the Negroes 
intending to carry her to the coast of Africa, "but" the Spaniards contrived, by altering the 
course of steering at night, to bring her to the United States." This last is an admission of 
some importance, as the Court will easily see, in deciding upon the character of the 
voyage which the vessel was pursuing when taken by Lieutenant Gedney. He proceeds to 
say: 
 
In the intercourse and transactions between nations, it has been found indispensable that 
due faith and credit should be given by each to the official acts of the public functionaries 
of others. Hence the sentences of prize courts under the laws of nations, or admiralty, and 
exchequer or other revenue courts, under the municipal law, are considered as conclusive 
as to the proprietary interest in, and title to, the things in question; nor can the same be 
examined into in the judicial tribunals of another country. Nor is this confined to judicial 
proceedings! The acts of other officers of a foreign nation, in the discharge of their 
ordinary duties, are entitled to the like respect. And the principle seems to be universally 
admitted, that, whenever power or jurisdiction is delegated to any public officer or 
tribunal, and its exercise is confided to his or their discretion, the acts done in the exercise


--- PAGE 209 ---
of that discretion, and within the authority conferred, are binding as to the subject matter; 
and this is true, whether the officer or tribunal be legislative, executive, judicial, or 
special.—Weaton's Elements of International Law, page 121; 6th Peter's, page 729." 
 
There is the basis of his opinion; that the comity of nations requires, that such a paper, 
signed by the Governor General of Cuba, is conclusive to all the world as a title to 
property. If the life and liberty of men depends on any question arising out of these 
papers, neither the courts of this country nor of any other can examine the subject, or go 
behind this paper. In point of fact, the voyage of the Amistad, for which these papers 
were given, was but the continuation of the voyage of the slave trader, and marked with 
the horrible features of the middle passage. That is the fact in the case, but this 
government and the courts of this country cannot notice that fact, because they must not 
go behind that document. The Executive may send the men to Cuba, to be sold as slaves, 
to be put to death, to be burnt at the stake, but they must not go behind this document, to 
inquire into any facts of the case. That is the essence of the who]e argument of the late 
Attorney-General. At a subsequent part of my argument I shall examine this document, 
and I undertake to show that it is' not even valid for what it purports to be, and that as a 
passport it bears on its face the insignia of imposture. But at present I will only observe 
that it is n most unheard-of thing, that in a question of property, a passport should be 
supposed to give a valid title. Papers of foreign courts and functionaries are to be credited 
for that which they intend to do. A passport, if it is regular, is to be credited as a passport. 
But when was it ever supposed that a passport stating what a person carries with him is 
evidence of his property in that which is described ? All the decisions of this court agree 
that foreign papers are good only for that which they propose and purport, but not as 
evidence of property. And yet the opinion of the late Attorney-General rests on that 
ground. In a case involving the lives and liberties of a large number of men, he has not a 
word to say of the principles of justice or humanity concerned, but goes entirely on the 
force of this document, on the ground that we cannot go behind the certificate of the 
Spanish Captain General. He says: 
 
"Were this otherwise, all confidence and comity would cease to exist among nations; and 
that code of international law, which now contributes so much to the peace, prosperity 
and harmony of the world, would no longer regulate and control the conduct of nations." 
 
This principle of national comity, I have no desire to contest, so far as it is applicable to 
this case. The Attorney says:— 
" In the case of the Antelope, (10 Wheaton, page 66,) this subject was fully 
examined, and the opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States establishes 
the following points:— 
 
"1. That, however unjust and unnatural the slave trade- may be, it is not contrary to 
the law of nations. 
 
" 2. That, having been sanctioned by the usage and consent of almost all civilized 
nations, it could not be pronounced illegal, except so far as each nation may have 
made it so by its own acts or laws; and these could only operate upon itself, its own


--- PAGE 210 ---
subjects or citizens; and, of course, the trade would remain lawful to those whose 
Government had not forbidden it. 
 
"3. That the right of bringing in and adjudicating upon the case of a vessel charged 
with being engaged in the slave trade, even where the vessel belongs to a nation 
which has prohibited the trade, cannot exist. The courts of no country execute the 
penal laws of another, and the court of the American Government on the subject of 
visitation and search would decide any case in which that right had been exercised 
by an American cruiser, on the vessel of a foreign nation not violating our 
municipal laws, against the captors. 
 
" It follows, that a foreign vessel engaged in the African slave trade, captured on 
the high seas in time of peace, by an American cruiser, and brought in for 
adjudication, would be restored. 
 
" The opinions here expressed go far beyond the present case; they embrace cases 
where the Negroes never have been within the territorial limits of the nation of 
which the claimant is a citizen." 
 
Here reference is made to the case of the Antelope, in 10 Wheaton, to which I shall 
hereafter solicit the particular attention of the Court, as I purpose to examine it in great 
detail, as to all the principles that have been supposed to be decided by that case, and 
especially on the point here alluded to, concerning which Chief Justice Marshall says that 
the Court was divided, therefore , no principle is decided. That was the most solemn and 
awful decision that ever was given by any Court. The Judges did not deliver their 
opinions for publication, or the reasons, because the court was divided. This case is laid 
at the foundation of the argument or opinion of the Attorney-General on which this whole 
proceeding is based, and it is appealed to in all the discussions as authority against the 
rights of these unfortunate people. I shall, therefore, feel it to be my duty to examine it to 
the bottom. 
 
The second principle drawn by the late Attorney General, if he had reasoned on the 
subject as men ought to reason, is in favor of the claims of the Africans. The Antelope 
was engaged in the slave trade south of the Line, where it was not then prohibited by the 
laws of Spain. The decision of the Supreme Court, such as it was, was in affirmance of 
the decree of the court below. Judge Davies, in the District Court of Georgia, and Judge 
Johnson, of the Circuit Court, said that, if the slave trade had at that time been abolished 
by Spain, their decision would have been otherwise. That trade is now abolished by 
Spain. 
 
The late Attorney General says ii the courts of no country execute the penal laws of 
another." I may ask, does any nation execute the slave laws of another country ? Is not 
the slave system, the Code Noir, as peculiar as the revenue system or the criminal code? 
These men were found free, and they cannot now be decreed to be slaves, but by making 
them slaves. By what authority will this court undertake to do this ? What right has Ruiz 
to claim these men as his property, when they were free, and so far from being in his


--- PAGE 211 ---
possession when taken, he was in theirs. If there is no right of visitation and search by the 
cruisers of one nation over those of another, by what right has this ship been taken from 
the men who had it in their possession? The captors in this case, are Gedney and Meade, 
the owners are the Africans. The Attorney says, 
"This vessel was not engaged in the slave trade; she was employed lawfully in 
removing these Negroes, as slaves, from one part of the Spanish dominions to 
another, precisely in the same way that slaves are removed, by sea, from one slave 
State to another in our own country. I consider the facts as stated, so far as this 
government is concerned, as establishing a right of ownership to the Negroes in 
question, in the persons in whose behalf the minister of Spain has made a demand 
upon the government of the U. States." 
 
Now, here I take issue The vessel was engaged in the slave trade. The voyage in the 
Amistad was a mere continuation of the original voyage in the Tecora. The voyage in its 
original intention was not accomplished until the slaves had reached their final 
destination on the plantation. This is the principle universally applicable to coasting 
vessels. I say further, that the object of Ruiz and Montes was illegal, it was a part of the 
voyage from Lomboko, and when they fell into the hands of Lieutenant Gedney, they 
were steering in pursuance of that original voyage. Their object was to get to Porto 
Principe, and of course the voyage was to them an unlawful one. The object of the 
Africans was to get to a port in Africa, and their voyage was lawful. And the whole 
character of the affair was changed by the transactions that fool; place on board of the 
ship. The late Attorney, however, comes to the conclusion that the courts of the United 
States cannot proceed criminally against these people, that the provisions of the Acts of 
Congress against the slave trade are not applicable to Ruiz and Montes, and so he recurs 
to the 9th Article of the Treaty of 1795. I have nothing to add to what I have before said 
respecting the treaty. It can have no possible application in this case. 
 
The late Attorney General now comes to a conclusion as to what is to be done—a 
conclusion which it is not in my power to read to the Court without astonishment, that 
such an opinion should ever have been maintained by an Attorney General of the United 
States. 
"My opinion further is, that the proper mode of executing this article of treaty, in 
the present case, would be for the President of the United States to issue his order, 
directed to the Marshal in whose custody the vessel and cargo are, to deliver the 
same to such persons as may be designated by the Spanish minister to receive 
them. The reasons which operate in favor of a delivery to the order of the Spanish 
minister are— 
 
" 1. The owners of the vessel and cargo are not all in this country and, of course, a 
delivery cannot be made to them. 
 
"2. This has become a subject of discussion between the two Governments, and, in 
such a case, the restoration should be made to that agent of the Government who is 
authorized to make, and through whom the demand is made.


--- PAGE 212 ---
" 3. These Negroes are charged with an infraction of the Spanish laws; therefore, it 
is proper that they should be surrendered to the public functionaries of that 
Government, that if the laws of Spain have been violated, they may not escape 
punishment. 
 
" 4. These Negroes deny that they are slaves; if they should be delivered to the 
claimants, no opportunity may be afforded for the assertion of their right to 
freedom. For these reasons, it seems to me that a delivery to the Spanish minister is 
the only safe course for this Government to pursue." 
 
That is the opinion, which the Secretary of State told the Spanish minister the American 
Cabinet had adopted! That these MEN, being at that time in judicial custody of the Court 
of the United States, should be taken out of that custody, under an order of the President, 
and sent beyond seas by his sole authority! The Cabinet adopted that opinion; why, then, 
did they not act upon it? Why did not the President send his order to the Marshal to seize 
these men, and ship them to Cuba, or deliver them to the order of the Spanish Minister? I 
am ashamed ! I am ashamed that such an opinion should ever have been delivered by any 
public officer of this country, executive or judicial. I am ashamed to stand up before the 
nations of the earth, with such an opinion recorded as official, and what is worse, as 
having been adopted by the government:—an op inion sanctioning a particular course of 
proceeding, unprecedented among civilized countries, which was thus officially 
sanctioned, and yet the government did not dare to do it. Why did they not do it? If this 
opinion had been carried into effect, it would have settled the matter at once, so far as it 
related to these unfortunate men. They would have been wrested from that protection, 
which above all things was their due after they had been taken into custody by order of 
the Court, and would have been put into the power of " public vengeance" at Havana. Yet 
there was not enough. There seems to have been an impression that to serve an order like 
that would require the aid of a body of troope.&#151; The people of Connecticut never 
would, never ought to have suffered it to be executed on their soil, but by main force. So 
the Spanish minister says his government has no ship to receive these people, and the 
President must therefore go further, and as he is responsible for the safekeeping and 
delivery of the men, he must not only deliver them up, but ship them off in a national 
vessel, so that there may be no Habeas Corpus from the State Courts coming to the rescue 
as soon as they are out of the control of the judiciary. The suggestion, which first came 
from the District Attorney, that the Court would undoubtedly place the Africans at the 
mercy of the Executive, is carried out by an announcement from the Secretary of State, of 
an agreement with Mr. Argaiz to send them to Cuba in a public ship. Here is the 
memorandum of the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Navy. 
"DEPARTMENT OF STATE, January 2, 1840. 
 
" The vessel destined to convey the Negroes of the Amistad to Cuba, to be ordered 
to anchor off the port of New Haven, Connecticut, as early as the 10th of January 
next, and be in readiness to receive said Negroes from the marshal of the United 
States, and proceed with them to Havana, under instructions to be hereafter 
transmitted.


--- PAGE 213 ---
" Lieutenant Gedney and Meade to be ordered to hold themselves in readiness to 
proceed in the same vessel, for the purpose of affording their testimony in any 
proceedings that may be ordered by the authorities of Cuba in the matter. 
 
" These orders should be given with special instructions that they are not to be 
communicated to any one." 
 
Well, the order was given by the Secretary of the Navy, that the schooner Grampus 
should execute this honorable service. 
The Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of State. 
 
" NAVY DEPARTMENT, Jan. 2, 1840. 
 
" SIR,—I have the honor to state that, in pursuance of the memorandum sent by 
you to this department, the United States schooner Grampus, Lieutenant 
Commanding John S. Paine, has been ordered to proceed to the bay of New Haven, 
to receive the Negroes captured in the Amistad. The Grampus will probably be at 
the point designated a day or two before the 10th inst., and will there await her 
final instructions in regard to the Negroes." 
 
A celebrated state prisoner, when going to the scaffold, was led by the statue of Liberty, 
and exclaimed, " O, Liberty! how many crimes are committed in thy name!" So we may 
say of our gallant navy, "What crimes is it ordered to commit! To what uses is it ordered 
to be degraded!" 
 
On the 7th of January, the Secretary of State writes to the Secretary of the Navy, 
acknowledging the receipt of his letter of the 3d, informing him that the schooner 
Grampus would receive the Negroes of the Amistad, " for the purpose of conveying them 
to Cuba, in the event of their delivery being adjudged by the circuit court, before whom 
the case is pending." This singular blunder, in naming the court, shows in what manner 
and with how little care the Department of State allowed itself to conduct an affair, 
involving no less than the liberties and lives of every one of my clients. This letter 
inclosed the order of the President to the Marshal of Connecticut for the delivery of the 
Negroes to Lieut. Paine. Although disposing of the lives of forty human beings, it has not 
the form or solemnity of a warrant, and is not even signed by the President in his official 
capacity. It is a mere order. 
"The Marshal of the United States for the district of Connecticut will deliver over 
to Lieut. John S. Paine, of the United States Navy, and aid in conveying on board 
the schooner Grampus, under his command, all the Negroes, late of the Spanish 
schooner Amistad, in his custody, under process now pending before the Circuit 
court of the United States for the district of Connecticut. For so doing, this order 
will be his warrant. 
 
" Given under my hand, at the city of Washington, this 7th day of January, A. D.


--- PAGE 214 ---
1840. 
 
" M. VAN BUREN. 
 
"By the President: 
 
"JOHN FORSYTH, Sec. of State."  
 
That order is good for nothing at all. It did not even describe the court correctly, under 
whose protection these unfortunate people were. And on the 11th of January, the District 
Attorney had to send n special messenger, who came, it appears all the way to 
Washington in one day, to inform the Secretary that the Negroes were not holden under 
the order of the Circuit Court but of the District Court. And he says, "Should the 
pretended friends of the Negroes"—the pr etended friends!—" obtain a writ of Habeas 
Corpus, the Marshal could not justify under that warrant." And he says, " the Marshal 
wishes me to inquire "—a most amiable a nd benevolent inquiry—" whether in the event 
of a decree requiring him to release the Negroes, or in case of an appeal by the adverse 
party, it is expected the Executive warrant will be executed " that is, whether he is to 
carry the Negroes on board of the Grampus in the face of a decree of the court. And he 
requests instructions on the point. What a pretty thing it would have been, if he had 
received such instructions, in the face of a decree of the court! I should like to ask him 
which he would have obeyed. At least, it appears, he had such doubts whether he should 
obey the decree of the court' that he wanted instructions from the President. I will not say 
what temper it shows in the Marshal and the District Attorney. 
 
On the 12th of January, the very next day after the letter of the District Attorney was 
written at New Haven, the Secretary of State replies in a dispatch which is marked " 
confidential." 
[CONFIDENTIAL.] 
 
" DEPARTMENT OP STATE, Jan. 12, 1840. 
 
" SIR,—Your letter of the 11th instant has just been received. The order for the 
delivery of the Negroes of the Amistad is here with returned, corrected agreeably to 
your suggestion. With reference to the inquiry from the Marshal, to which you 
allude, I have to state, by direction of the President, that, if the decision of the court 
is such as is anticipated, the order of the President is to be carried into execution, 
unless an appeal shall actually have been interposed. You are not to take it for 
granted that it will be interposed. And if, on the contrary, the decision of the court 
is different, you are to take out an appeal, and allow things to remain as they are 
until the appeal shall have been decided. 
 
" I am, sir, your obedient servant, 
 
" W. S. HOLABIRD, Esq.,


--- PAGE 215 ---
Attorney U. S. for Dist. of Conn." 
 
"JOHN FOR FORSYTH. 
 
Now, may it please your Honors, this corrected order, the final order of the President of 
the United States, is not in evidence, it does not appear among the documents 
communicated to Congress, and I feel some curiosity to know how it was corrected I 
have heard it intimated that the President of the United States never knew it had been 
changed, and that the alternative was made, perhaps by a clerk in the State Department, 
just by drawing his pen through the word circuit, and interlining the word district. I put it 
to your Honors to say what sort of regard is here exhibited for human life and for the 
liberties of these people. Did not the President know, when he signed that order for the 
delivery of MEN to the control of an officer of the navy to be carried beyond seas, he was 
assuming a power that no President had ever assumed before, It is questionable whether 
such a power could have been exercised by the most despotic government of Europe. Yet 
this business was coolly dispatched by a mere informal order, which order was afterwards 
altered by a clerk. 
 
The Secretary of State further instructs the District Attorney, that " if the decision of the 
Court shall be such as is anticipated, the order of the President is to be carried into 
execution, unless an appeal is actually interposed," and he is " NOT TO TAKE IT FOR 
GRANTED THAT IT WILL BE INTERPOSED." The Government then confidently 
"anticipated" that the Negroes would be delivered up; and the Attorney was directed not 
to allow them a moment of time to enter an appeal. They were to be put on board of the 
Grampus instantly, and deprived, if possible, of the privilege of appealing to the higher 
Courts. Was this JUSTICE ? 
 
But after all, the order did not avail. The District Judge, contrary to all these anticipations 
of the Executive, decided that the thirty-six Negroes taken by Lieut. Gedney and brought 
before the Court on the certificate of the Governor General of Cuba, were FREEMEN; 
that they had been kidnapped in Africa; that they did not own these Spanish names; that 
they were not ladinos, and were not correctly described in the passport, but were new 
Negroes bought by Ruiz in the depot of Havana, and fully entitled to their liberty. 
 
Such was the disposal intended, deliberately intended, by a President of the United States 
to be made, of the lives and liberty of thirty-six human beings!—Th e Attorney General of 
the United States, at once an Executive and a judicial officer of the American people, 
bound in more than official duty to respect the right of personal liberty and the authority 
of the Judiciary Department had given a written opinion, that, at the instigation of a 
foreign minister, the President of the United States should issue his order, directed to the 
marshal to whose custody these persons had been committed, by order of the judge, as 
prisoners and witnesses, and commanding that marshal to wrest them from the hands of 
justice, and deliver them to such persons as should be designated by that same foreign 
minister to receive them. Will this Court please to consider for one moment, the essential 
principle of that opinion ? Will this Court inquire, what, if that opinion had been


--- PAGE 216 ---
successfully carried into execution, would have been the tenure by which every human 
being in this Union, man, woman, or child, would have held the blessing of personal 
freedom? Would it not have been by the tenure of Executive discretion, caprice or 
tyranny? Had the precedent once been set and submitted to, of a nameless mass of 
judicial prisoners and witnesses, snatched by Executive grasp from the protective 
guardianship of the Supreme Judges of the land, (gubernativamente,) at the dictate of a 
foreign minister, would it not have disabled forever the effective power of the Habeas 
Corpus? Well was it for the country—well V/OS  it for the President of the United States 
himself that he paused before stepping over this Rubicon !—[hat he said—"We will 
proceed no further in this business." And yet, he did not discard the purpose, and yet he 
saw that this executive trampling at once upon the judicial authority and upon personal 
liberty would not suffice, either to satisfy the Spanish Minister or to satiate the public 
vengeance of the barracoon slave traders. Had the unfortunate Africans been torn away 
from the protection of the Court, and delivered up to the order of the Spanish Minister, he 
possessed not the means of shipping them off to the Island of Cuba. The indignation of 
the freemen of Connecticut, might not tamely endure the sight, of thirty-six free persons, 
though Africans, fettered and manacled in their land of freedom, to be transported beyond 
the seas, to perpetual hereditary servitude or to death, by the servile submission of an 
American President to the insolent dictation of a foreign minister. There were judges of 
the State Courts in Connecticut, possessing the power of issuing the Writ of Habeas 
Corpus, paramount even to the obsequiousness of a federal marshal to an Executive 
mandate. The opinion of the Attorney General, comprehensive as it was for the 
annihilation of personal liberty, carried not with it the means of accomplishing its object. 
What then was to be done? To save the appearance of a violent and shameless outrage 
upon the authority of the judicial courts, the moment was to be watched when the Judge 
of the District Court should issue his decree, which it was anticipated would be 
conformable to the written opinion of the Attorney General. From that decree the 
Africans would be entitled to an appeal, first to the Circuit and eventually to the Supreme 
Court of the United States—but with su itable management, by one and the same 
operations they might be choused out of that right, the Circuit and Supreme Courts ousted 
of their jurisdiction, and the hapless captives of the Amistad delivered over to slavery and 
to death. 
 
For this purpose at the suggestion of the District Attorney Holabird, and at the requisition 
of the dictatorial Spanish Minister, the Grampus, one of the smallest public vessels of the 
United States, a schooner of burden utterly insufficient to receive and contain under the 
shelter of her main deck, thirty-six persons additional to the ship's company, was in the 
dead of winter, ordered to repair from the navy yard at Brooklyn to New Haven where 
the Africans were upon trial, with this secret order which I have read to the Court, signed 
" Martin Van Buren," commanding the Marshal of the District of Connecticut to deliver 
over to Lieut. John S. Paine, commander of the Grampus, and aid in conveying on board 
that schooner all the Negroes, late of the Spanish schooner Amistad, in his custody, under 
process [now] pending before the Circuit Court of the United States for the District of 
Connecticut. 
 
Of this ever memorable order, this Court will please to observe that it is in form and


--- PAGE 217 ---
phraseology, perfectly conformable to the written opinion which had been given by the 
Attorney General. It is not conditional, to be executed only in the event of a decision by 
the court against the Africans, but positive and unqualified to deliver up all the Africans 
in his custody, under process now pending. There was nothing in the order itself to 
prevent Lieut. Paine from delivering it to the marshal, while the trial was pending; it 
carries out in form the whole idea of the Attorney General's opinion, that the President's 
order to the marshal is of itself all sufficient to supersede the whole protective authority 
of the judiciary—and with this pretension on the face of the order, i6 associated another, 
if possible still more outrageous upon every security to personal liberty, in the direction 
to the marshal to deliver over to Lieut. Paine all the Negroes, late of the Amistad, under 
his custody. 
 
Is it possible that a President of the United States should be ignorant that the right of 
personal liberty is individual. That the right to it of every one, is his own—JUS SUMM; 
and that no greater violation of his official oath to protect and defend the Constitution of 
the United States, could be committed, than by an order to seize and deliver up at a 
foreign minister's demand, thirty-six persons, in a mass, under the general denomination 
of all, the Negroes, late of the Amistad. That he was ignorant, profoundly ignorant of this 
self-evident truth, inextinguishable till under gilt framed Declarations of Independence 
shall perish in the general conflagration of the great globe itself. I am constrained to 
believe—for to that ignorance, the only al ternative to account for this order to the 
Marshal of the District of Connecticut, is willful and corrupt perjury to his official 
presidential oath. 
 
But ignorant or regardless as the President of the United States might be of the 
self-evident principles of human rights, he was bound to know that he could not lawfully 
direct the delivery up to a foreign minister. even of slaves, of acknowledged undisputed 
slaves, in an undefined, unspecified number. That the number must be defined, and 
individuals specifically designated, had been expressly decreed by the Supreme Court of 
the united States in that very case of the Antelope so often, and as I shall demonstrate so 
erroneously quoted as a precedent for the captives of the Amistad. 
 
"Whatever doubts (said in that case Chief Justice Marshall) may attend the question 
whether the Spanish claimants are entitled to restitution of all the Africans taken out of 
their possession with the Antelope we cannot doubt the propriety of demanding ample 
proof of the extent of that possession. Every legal principle which requires the plaintiff to 
prove his claim in any case, applies with full force to this point; and no countervailing 
consideration exists. The onus probandi, as to the number of Africans which were on 
board, when the vessel was captured, unquestionably lies on the Spanish libellants. Their 
proof is not satisfactory beyond 93. The individuals who compose this number must be 
designated to the satisfaction of the Circuit Court." l0 Wheaton 128. And this decision 
acquires double authority, as a precedent to establish the principles which it affirms, 
inasmuch as it was given upon appeal, and reversed the decision of the Circuit Court, 
which had resorted to the drawing of lots; both for the designation of the number' and for 
the specification of individuals.


--- PAGE 218 ---
Lawless and tyrannical; (may it please the Court—Truth, Justice, and the Rights of 
humankind forbid me to qualify these epithets) Lawless and Tyrannical, as this order thus 
was upon its face, the cold blooded cruelty with which it was issued—was altogether 
congenial to its spirit—I have said that it was issued in the dead of winter—and that the 
Grampus was of so small a burden as to be utterly unfit for the service upon which she 
was ordered. I now add that the gallant officer who commanded her remonstrated, with 
feelings of indignation' controlled only by the respect officially due from him to his 
superiors against it. That he warned them of the impossibility of stowing this cargo of 
human flesh and blood beneath the deck of the vessel, and that if they should be shipped 
in the month of January, on her deck, and the almost certain casualty if a storm should 
befall them on the passage to Cuba, they must all inevitably perish. He remonstrated in 
vain! He was answered only by the mockery of an infraction, to treat his prisoners with 
all possible tenderness and attention.— If the whirlwind had swept them all into the 
ocean he at least would have been guiltless of their fate. 
 
But although the order of delivery was upon its face absolute and unconditional, it was 
made conditional, by instructions from the Secretary of State to the District Attorney. It 
was to be executed only in the event of the decision of the court being favorable to the 
pretended application of the Spanish minister, and Lieutenant Paine was to receive the 
Negroes from the custody of the marshal as soon as their delivery should have been 
ordered by the court. 
 
" Letting I dare not wait upon I would," a direct collision with the authority of the judicial 
tribunals was cautiously avoided; and a remarkable illustration of the thoughtless and 
inconsiderate character of the whole Executive action in this case, appears in the fact, that 
with all the cunning and intricate stratagems to grab and ship off these poor wretches to 
Cuba, neither the President of the United States who signed, nor the Secretary of State 
who transmitted the order knew, but both of them mistook the court, before which the 
trial of the Africans was pending. The supposed it was the Circuit, when in fact it was the 
District Court. 
 
The Grampus arrived at New Haven three days before the decision of Judge Judson was 
pronounced. Her appearance there, in January, when the ordinary navigation of Long 
Island Sound is suspended, coming from the adjoining naval station at Brooklyn, 
naturally excited surprise, curiosity, suspicion. What could be the motive of the Secretary 
of the Navy for ordering a public vessel of the United States upon such a service at such a 
time 
 
Why should her commander, her officers and crew be exposed, in the most tempestuous 
and the coldest month of the year, at once to the snowy hurricanes of the northeast, and 
the ice-bound shores of the northwest? These were questions necessarily occurring to the 
minds of every witness to this strange and sudden apparition. Lieut. Paine and his officers 
were questioned why they were there, and whither they were bound ? They could not tell. 
The mystery of iniquity sometimes is but a transparent veil and reveals its own secret. 
The fate of the Amistad captives was about to be decided as far as it could be by the 
judge of a subordinate tribunal. The surrender of them had been demanded of the


--- PAGE 219 ---
Executive by a foreign minister, and earnestly pressed upon the court by the President's 
officer, the District Attorney. The sudden and unexpected appearance of the Grampus, 
with a destination unavowed, was a very intelligible signal of the readiness' of the 
willingness, of the wish of the President to comply with the foreign minister's demand. It 
was a signal equally intelligible to the political sympathies of a judge presumed to be 
congenial to those of a northern President with southern principles, and the District 
Attorney in his letter of 20th December had given soothing hopes to the Secretary of 
State, which he in turn had communicated in conference, on the 28th of December, to the 
Spanish minister, that the decree of the judge, dooming the Africans to servitude and 
death in Cuba, would be as pliant to the vengeful thirst of the barracoon slave-traders, as 
that of Herod was in olden times to the demand of his dancing daughter for the head of 
John the Baptist in a charger. 
 
But when Lieut. Paine showed to the District Attorney the Executive warrant to the 
marshal for the delivery of the Negroes, he immediately perceived its nullity by the 
statement that they were in custody under a process from the " Circuit Court" and that the 
same error had been committed in the instructions to the marshal. "In great haste," 
therefore, he immediately dispatched Lieut. Meade, as a special messenger to 
Washington, requesting a correction of the error in the warrant and instructions; giving 
notice that if the pretended friends of the Negroes obtain a writ of habeas corpus, the 
marshal could not justify under the warrant as it was; and that the decision of the court 
would undoubtedly be had by the time the bearer of the message would be able to return 
to New Haven. 
 
This letter was dated the 11th of January, 1840. The trial had already been five days 
"progressing." The evidence was all in, and the case was to be submitted to the court on 
that day. Misgivings were already entertained that the decision of the judge might not be 
so complacent to the longings of the Executive department as had been foretold and 
almost promised on the 20th of December. Mr. Holabird, therefore, at the desire of the 
Marshal propounds that decent question, and requests precise instructions,'` whether in 
the event of a decree by the court requiring the Marshal to release the Negroes, or in case 
of an appeal by the adverse party, it was expected the EXECUTIVE warrant [to ship off 
the prisoners in the Grampus to Cuba,] would be executed?" These inquiries may account 
perhaps for the fact that the same Marshal, after the District and Circuit Courts had both 
decided that these Negroes were free, still returned them upon the census of the 
inhabitants of Connecticut as Slaves. 
 
The Secretary of State was more wary. The messenger, Lieut. Meade, bore his dispatch 
from New Haven to Washington in one day. On the 12th of January, Mr. Forsyth in a 
confidential letter to Mr. Holabird informs him that his missive of the day before had 
been received. That the order for the delivery of the Negroes to Lieut. Paine of the 
Grampus was returned, corrected agreeably to the District Attorney's suggestion—by 
whom corrected no uninitiated man can tell. Of the final warrant of Martin Van Buren, 
President of the United States, to the Marshal of the District of Connecticut, to ship for 
transportation beyond the seas, an undefined, nameless number of human beings, not a 
trace remains upon the records or the files of any one of the Executive Departments, and


--- PAGE 220 ---
when nearly three months after this transaction the documents relating to it were, upon a 
call from the House of Representatives, communicated to them by massage from Mr. Van 
Buren himself, this original, erroneous, uncorrected order of the 7th of January, 1810, 
was the only one included in the communication. 
 
But in the confidential answer of the Secretary of State of the 12th of January to the 
inquiries of the Marshal, he says, " I have to state by direction of the President, that if the 
decision of the Court is such as is anticipated, (that is, that the captives should be 
delivered up as slaves,) the order of the President is to be carried into execution, unless an 
appeal shall actually have been interposed, you are not to take it for granted that it will be 
interposed. And if on the contrary the decision of the Court is different, you are to take 
out an appeal, and allow things to remain as they are until the appeal shall have been 
decided." The very phraseology of this instruction is characteristic of its origin, and might 
have dispensed the Secretary of State from the necessity of stating that it emanated from 
the President himself. The inquiry of the Marshal was barefaced enough; whether, if the 
Executive warrant and the judicial decree should come in direct conflict with each other, 
it was expected that he should obey the President, or the Judge ? No ! says the Secretary 
of State. If the decree of the Judge should be in our favor, and you can steal a march upon 
the Negroes by foreclosing their right of appeal, ship them off without mercy and without 
delay: and if the decree should be in their favor, fail not to enter an instantaneous appeal 
to the Supreme Court where the chances may be more hostile to self- emancipated slaves. 
 
Was ever such a scene of Liliputian trickery enacted by the rulers of a great, 
magnanimous, and Christian nation? Contrast it with that act of self emancipation by 
which the savage, heathen barbarians Cinque and Grabeau liberated themselves and their 
fellow suffering countrymen from Spanish slave-traders, and which the Secretary of 
State, by communion of sympathy with Ruiz and Montes, denominates lawless violence. 
Cinque and Grabeau are uncouth and barbarous names. Call them Harmodius and 
Aristogiton, and go back for moral principle three thousand years to the fierce and 
glorious democracy of Athens. They too resorted to lawless violence, and slew the tyrant 
to redeem the freedom of their country. For this heroic action they paid the forfeit of their 
lives: but within three years the Athenians expelled their tyrants themselves, and in 
gratitude to their self-devoted deliverers decreed, that thenceforth no slave should ever 
bear either of their names. Cinque and Grabeau are not slaves. Let them bear in future 
history the names of Harmodius and Aristogiton. 
 
This review of all the proceedings of the Executive I have made with the utmost pain, 
because it was necessary to bring it fully before your Honors, to show that the course of 
that department had been dictated, throughout, not by justice but by sympathy—and a 
sympathy the most partial and unjust. And this sympathy prevailed to such a degree, 
among all the persons concerned in this business, as to have perverted their minds with 
regard to all the most sacred principles of law and right, on which the liberties of the 
people of the United States are founded; and a course was pursued, from the beginning to 
the end, which was not only an outrage upon the persons whose lives and liberties were at 
stake, but hostile to the power and independence of the judiciary itself.


--- PAGE 221 ---
I am now, may it please your Honors, obliged to call the attention of the Court to a very 
improper paper, in relation to this case, which was published in the Official Journal of the 
Executive Administration, on the very day of the meeting of this Court, and introduced 
with a commendatory notice by the editor, as the production of one of the brightest 
intellects of the South. I know not who is the author, but it appeared with that almost 
official sanction, on the day of meeting of this Court. It purports to be a review of the 
present case. The writer begins by referring to the decision of the District Court and says 
the case is " one of the deepest importance to the southern states." I ask, may it please 
your Honors, is that an appeal to JUSTICE ? What have the southern states to do with the 
case, or what has the case to do with the southern states ? The case, as far as it is known 
to the courts of this country, or cognizable by them, presents points with which the 
southern states have nothing to do It is a question of slavery and freedom between 
foreigners; of the lawfulness or unlawness of the African slave trade; and has not, when 
properly considered, the remotest connection with the interests of the southern states. 
 
What was the purpose or intent of that article, I am not prepared to say, but it was 
evidently calculated to excite prejudice, to arouse all the acerbities of feeling between 
different sections of this country, and to connect them with this case, in such a manner as 
to induce this Court to decide it is favor of the alledged interests of the southern states, 
and against the suppression of the African slave trade. It is not my intention to review the 
piece at this time. It has been done, and ably done, by more than one person. And after 
infinite difficulty, one of these answers has been inserted in the same official journal in 
which the piece appeared. I now wish simply, to refer your Honors to the original 
principle of slavery' as laid down by this champion of the institution. It is given by this 
writer as a great principle of national law and stands as the foundation of his argument. I 
wish, if your Honors deem a paper of this kind, published under such circumstances, 
worthy of consideration in the decision of a case, that your Honors would advert to that 
principle, and say whether it is a principle recognized by this Court, as the ground on 
which it will decide cases. 
 
" The truth is, that property in man has existed in all ages of the world, and results from 
the natural state of man, which is war. When God created the first family and gave them 
the fields of the earth as an inheritance, one of the number, in obedience to the impulses 
and passions that had been implanted in the human heart, rose and slew his brother. This 
universal nature of' man is alone modified by civilization and law. War, conquest, and 
force, have produced slavery, and it is state necessity and the internal law of self 
preservation, that will ever perpetuate and defend it." 
 
There is the principle, on which a particular decision is demanded from this Court, by the 
Official Journal of the Executive, on behalf of the southern states? Is that a principle 
recognized by this Court? Is it the principle of that DECLARATION? [Here Mr. A. 
pointed to the Declaration of Independence, two copies of which hang before the eyes of 
the Judges on the bench.] It is alleged in the Official Journal, that war gives the right to 
take the life of our enemy, and that this confers a right to make him a slave, on account of 
having spared his life. Is that the principle on which these United States stand before the 
world?. That DECLARATION says that every man is "endowed by his Creator with


--- PAGE 222 ---
certain inalienable rights," and that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of 
happiness.'' if these rights are inalienable, they are incompatible with the rights of the 
victor to take the life of his enemy in war, or to spare his life and make him a slave. If 
this principle is sound, it reduces to brute force all the rights of man. It places all the 
sacred relations of life at the power of the strongest. No man has a right to life or liberty, 
if he has an enemy able to take them from him. There is the principle. There is the whole 
argument of this paper. Now I do not deny that the only principle upon which a color of 
right can be attributed to the condition of slavery is by assuming that the natural state of 
man is war The bright intellect of the South, clearly saw, that without this principle for a 
corner stone, he had no foundation for his argument. He assumes it therefore without a 
blush, as Hobbes assumed it to prove that government and despotism are synonymous 
words. I will not here discuss the right or the rights of slavery, but I say that the doctrine 
of Hobbes, that War is the natural state of man, has for ages been exploded, as equally 
disclaimed and rejected by the philosopher and the Christian. That it is utterly 
incompatible with any theory of human rights, and especially with the rights which the 
Declaration of Independence proclaims as self-evident truths. The moment you come, to 
the Declaration of Independence, that every man has a right to life and liberty, an 
inalienable right, this case is decided. I ask nothing more in behalf of these unfortunate 
men, than this Declaration. The opposite principle is ]aid down, not by an unintelligent or 
unthinking man, but is given to the public and to this Court, as coming from one of the 
brightest intellects of the South. Your Honors see what it comes to, when carried out. I 
will call the attention of the Court to one more paragraph:— 
"Instead of having the Negroes placed in a situation to receive punishment for what 
offenses they may have committed against their masters, those who have been in 
Cuba in undisputed possession of property under the Spanish flag were instantly 
deprived of that possession, and their final title to the property peremptorily 
decided upon by an American court, in defiance of the plainest treaty stipulations. 
Not only that, but Ruiz and Montes, Spanish citizens, thus forced into our territory 
under appalling circumstances, where common humanity, independent of all law, 
demanded that they should be treated with hospitality as unfortunate guests were 
actually thrown into prison under charges which the Negroes were instigated to 
make, for offenses committed against the Negroes while they were in Cuba, under 
the Spanish jurisdiction. This is the justice of an American court, bowed down in 
disgraceful subserviency before the bigoted mandates of that blind fanaticism 
which prompted the Judge upon the bench to declare in his decree, in reference to 
one of these Negroes, that, 'Although he might be stained with crime, yet he should 
not sigh in vain for Africa ;' and all because his hands were reeking with the blood 
of murdered white men! ! It is a base outrage (I can use no milder language,) upon 
all the sympathies of civilized life." 
 
That is the complimentary manner in which the courts of the United States are treated by 
the brightest intellects of the South, in the Official Journal, and under the immediate 
supervision of the Executive Administration of the Government. 
 
During the present session, a further correspondence between the Secretary of State and 
the Spanish minister has been communicated to Congress. The Spanish minister seems to


--- PAGE 223 ---
be ever attentive to all that is going on, in all the departments of Government, with 
relation to this case. In a letter dated the 20th of March, 1840, he observes that the 
Secretary of State had confidently asked him to furnish a copy of the existing laws of 
Cuba relative to Negro slavery. What was this for? Was the President of the United States 
under the impression that before he carried into effect this exercise of despotic power, to 
seize MEN, by his own warrant, and send them to foreign countries for punishment by 
his own order—there would be some sort of  decency, at least, in having a show of 
evidence to show that the Spanish law required that they should be delivered up? The 
Secretary of State asked Mr. Calderon for evidence in the case, but he had none to give 
He then "confidently" asked Mr. Argaiz for the law of Spain in the case—the law, be it 
remembered, on which the United States were presenting a suit against individuals, 
solely, as they alledge, in pursuance of a demand made by the minister of Spain to that 
effect. What is the reply ? Mr. Argaiz says he cannot communicate the law officially 
because he cannot recognize the jurisdiction of the Court over the case. Here is another 
point-blank contradiction of the serial averment of the claim which the United States 
Government is prosecuting here— that the su it is in pursuance of the demand of Spain 
now pending against the Government. Mr. Argaiz, therefore, communicates a certain 
memorandum, "confidentially." This memorandum begins. 
"Mr. Forsyth way pleased, some time since, to state to the Chevalier de Argaiz, that 
it would be expedient to obtain a copy of the laws now in force in the island of 
Cuba relative to slavery The Chevalier de Arnaiz therefore immediately requested 
from the Captain General of that island every thing on the subject, which has been 
determined since the treaty concluded in 1818, between Spain and England." 
 
Now, may it please the Court, may I inquire why this demand was limited to laws 
subsequent to the treaty of 1818? The decree for abolishing the slave trade was issued in 
18l7. Why did the Spanish minister limit his request to laws passed after 1818? Why was 
not the decree of 1817 brought forward? Was it kept back because he thought, with Mr. 
Vega, that the laws had been broken so much in Cuba, that they were not in force ? Or 
did he think the authentication of that Decree might have some injurious effect in the trial 
here ? Whatever was the reason, it is certain that, to Mr. Forsyth's request for " a copy of 
the laws now in force in the Island of Cuba relative to slavery," only the laws since 1818 
were communicated, and the Decree of 1817, making the slave trade unlawful and its 
victims free, was kept beck. Even the treaty of 1835, which was communicated, " the 
Chevalier de Argaiz requests maybe returned to him," and consequently it does not 
appear among these papers. 
 
In another letter, dated April 24th, 1840, the Chevalier de Argaiz refers to certain 
resolutions of the United States Senate passed the 15th of the same month, commonly 
called Mr. Calhoun's resolutions. I showed the other day, that if these principles are just, 
and if they have any application to this case, Lieut. Gedney had no right to seize the 
vessel at all. The resolution declares that— 
" A ship or vessel on the high seas, in time of peace, engaged in a lawful 
commerce, is, according to the laws of nations, under the exclusive jurisdiction of 
the State to which her flag belongs; as much so as if constituting a part of its own


--- PAGE 224 ---
domain ;" and " if such ship or vessel should be forced, by stress of weather, or 
other unavoidable cause, into the port and under the jurisdiction of a friendly 
power, she, and her cargo, and persons on board, with their property, and all the 
rights belonging to their personal relations as established by the laws of the state to 
which they belong, would be placed under the penalty which the laws of nations 
extend to the unfortunate under such circumstances." 
 
Here it is plain that the vessel was in the hands of the Africans, it was not under the 
Spanish flag, they were at peace with the United States, their voyage is lawful, the 
personal relations established among the persons Oh board were that the Africans were 
masters and the Spaniards captives subjects;—perhaps by the laws of Mendi they were 
slaves. So much for the resolutions, which the Secretary of State says coincide "with 
principles which the President considers as founded in law and justice," but which does 
not alter "the determination he found himself obliged to make on the reclamation" made 
for the Amistad " and the property found on board of her." 
 
I will now make a few observations on the passport, or permit, as it has been called, 
which is relied on as of authority sufficient to bind this Court and Government to deliver 
up my clients irrevocably as slaves, on a claim of property by Ruiz and Montes... Here 
we have what appears to be a blank passport, filled up with forty-nine Spanish names of 
persons, who are described as ladinos and as being the property of Don Jose Ruiz. Now, 
this on the face of it is an imposture. It is not a passport, that can be inspected as such by 
this Court, or by any tribunal. It appears on the face of it to be a passport designed for one 
person, a man, as there are blanks in the margin, to be filled up with a description of the 
person, as to his height, age, complexion, hair, forehead, eyebrows, eyes, nose, mouth, 
beard, and particular marks. This particular description of the person is the very essence 
of a passport, as it is designed to identify the individual by the conformity of his person to 
the marks given; and a passport is nothing, and is good for nothing, if it does not accord 
with the marl;s given. The man who presents it must show by this accordance that he is 
the person named Every body who has ever had occasion to use passports knows this. We 
are not in the habit of using passports in this country; you may go through the country 
from State to State, freely without any passport to show who and what you are and what 
is your business. But throughout the continent of Europe, passports are everywhere 
necessary. At every town you show your passport to a public officer, who instantly 
compares your person with the description' and if it corresponds, you proceed, but if the 
description varies from the reality, you cannot pass. That is the nature of a passport. It 
says, let the person who bears these marks pass the custom-house, or the guard, as the 
case may be. And its validity depends on the accuracy of the description. 
 
I once had occasion, many years ago to see the operation of these things in a very 
remarkable case. I was a passenger in n merchant vessel, bound to the north of Europe. In 
passing through the Sound, at Elsinore, we were arrested by a British squadron, who 
brought us to, and sent a lieutenant on board to examine our crew. He ordered all the men 
to be mustered on deck, and the captain had no alternative but to comply. It was a most 
mortifying scene to an American. Every American seaman was obliged to show his 
protection, the same thing at sea as a passport on the land, to secure him from


--- PAGE 225 ---
impressment by British cruisers. The officer examined every man carefully, to see 
whether his person corresponded with the description in his protection. He finally found 
one young man, who was a native of Charlestown, Massachusetts, within ten miles of 
where I was born; but his description was not correct, whether through the blunder of the 
man who wrote it, or because he had taken another man's protection, I do not know, but 
the officer said he had a good mind to take him, and if I had not been on board, as the 
bearer of a public commission in the service of the Government, I have no doubt that man 
would have been taken, and compelled to serve on board a British man of war, solely for 
the want of correspondence of the description with his person. I mention this to show that 
the value of a passport, according to the rules of those countries where such things are 
used, depends on the description of the person, and this is all left blank in the paper here 
presented us as a passport. There is not a particle of description by which even a single 
individual named could be identified. It is not worth a cent. I do not say it is a forgery, 
but I say its incompetency to answer the purpose of n passport is apparent on the face of 
it. Who knows, or how is this Court to ascertain, that the persons named in this paper are 
the same with those taken in the Amistad? No court, no tribunal, no officer, would accept 
such a document as a passport. And will this Court grant its decree in a case affecting 
both liberty and life on that paper ? It is impossible. 
I now come to the case of the Antelope, as reported in 10 Wheaton, 66, and I ask 
particular attention to this case, not only because it brings a show of authority in favor of 
the delivery up of slaves, but because I feel bound to entreat the Court, whether they find 
a principle settled by that case or not, to settle the question now upon further and mature 
consideration. Chief Justice Marshall said, expressly, in delivering the opinion of the 
Court, that, as the Court was divided, " no principle is settled." If there was a principle 
settled, and that was in favor of delivering up persons held as slaves by foreign laws, I 
ask this Court to re-examine that principle and settle it anew. And if, upon 
re-examination, by what [ should deem the greatest misfortune to this country, the Court 
should be divided in this case, as it was in that, I respectfully ask your Honors to give 
your separate opinions, with the reasons. I would not call in question the propriety of the 
determination of the Court in that day, severally, to withhold their reasons from the 
public; the state of the matter is now materially altered. It has become a point in which 
the morals, as well as the liberties of this country, are deeply interested. The public mind 
acquiesced before, in postponing the discussion, but now it is no longer a time for this 
course, the question must be met, and judicially decided. 
 
THE CASE OF THE ANTELOPE REVIEWED. 
 
The case of the Antelope was of so very extraordinary a character, and the decisions of 
the District, Circuit, and Supreme Courts of the United States, on the principles involved 
in it, were so variant from and conflicting with one another, that a review of its history 
will disclose, eminently, the progress of that moral, religious, and political revolution in 
the opinions of mankind which has been, from a period coeval with that of North 
American Independence, struggling against the combined powers and dominions of the 
earth and of darkness for the suppression of the African slave-trade.


--- PAGE 226 ---
In the month of December, 1819, at a time when piracy, from her sympathetic and 
favorite haunts of Chesapeake bay, and of Cuba, was habitually sallying forth against the 
commerce of the world, but chiefly under the many-colored banners of the newly 
emancipated colonies of Spain, transformed into a multitude of self-constituted sovereign 
and disunited States, capturing wherever they could be found the trading vessels of 
Portugal and of Spain, a privateer, named the Columbia, commanded by a citizen of the 
United States named Metcalf, came into the port of Baltimore under the flag of 
Venezuela—there clandestinely shipped a crew of thirty or forty men, not one of whom 
had ever owed allegiance to the Republic of Venezuela, and sailed in search of adventure, 
to pounce upon the defenseless upon any and every ocean for the spoils. She had scarcely 
got beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the United States when she changed her name of 
Columbia for that of Arraganta, hoisted the flag of Artigas, then ruler of the Oriental 
Republic of La Plata, and proceeded for the slave-coast of Africa—a mighty huntress, 
and her prey was man. There she fell in with sister pirates in abundance—first an 
American, from Bristol, Rhode Island, and borrowed twenty-five Negro captives from 
her; then sundry ostensible Portuguese vessels, from which she took nearly two hundred; 
and lastly, a Spaniard from Cuba, fitted out some months before by a slave trading house 
at the Havana, to catch a yet lawful human cargo from a region south of the equator; for 
the trade north of the equator had even then been declared unlawful by Spain. The name 
of this vessel was, at that time, the Antelope; and with her and her living merchandise the 
Arraganta steered for the coast of Brazil, for a market. There the Arraganta was 
shipwrecked; her master, Metcalf, either drowned, or made prisoner with the greater part 
of his crew; while the remainder, under the command of John Smith, a citizen of the 
United States, transhipping themselves and all their surviving African captives into the 
Antelope, changed her name to that of the General Ramirez, and stood for the southern 
coast of the United States, and a market. 
 
In the month of June, 1820, this vessel, thus freighted, was found hovering on the coast of 
Florida, with the evident intention of surreptitiously introducing the Negroes and 
effecting the sale of them within the United States. She was there in flagrant violation of 
two classes of their laws—t hose intended to suppress the unlawful interference of our 
citizens in the civil war then raging between Spain and her South American Colonies 
contending for their independence, and those prohibiting their participation in the slave 
trade, and denouncing it as piracy. 
 
She was reported to Captain John Jackson, then cruising on the same coast in the 
Revenue Cutter Dallas, as a vessel of piratical appearance. He, thereupon, boarded her; 
and finding her full of Negro slaves, and commanded by John Smith, holding forth at 
once a privateering commission from Artigas, and a protection as an citizen and seaman 
of the United States, he took possession of her, and brought her into the port of Savannah, 
in the judicial district of Georgia, for adjudication. 
 
Upon this plain and simple statement of facts, can we choose but exclaim, if ever soul of 
an American citizen was polluted with the blackest and largest participation in the 
African slave-trade, when the laws of his country had pronounced it piracy, punishable 
with death, it was that of this same John Smith He had renounced and violated those


--- PAGE 227 ---
rights, by taking a commission from Artigas to plunder the merchants and mariners of 
nations in friendship with his own; and yet he claimed the protection of that same country 
which he had abandoned and betrayed. Why was he not indicted upon the act of 15th 
May, 1820, so recently enacted before the commission of his last and most atrocious 
crime? 
 
And can we choose but further exclaim—if ev er hapless African, Kidnapped into slavery 
by one gang of ruffians, and then stolen by another, and by them attempted to be 
smuggled into our country as slaves, and by n fortunate casualty brought within our 
jurisdiction and the beneficent operation of our emancipating law, was entitled to the 
blessing of freedom, and the right of being transported under our national protection to 
his native land, so was every individual African found by Captain Jackson on board of 
the Antelope, and brought within the jurisdiction of this Federal Union. Why were they 
not instantly liberated and sent home to Africa by the act of March 3d, 1819. Alas! far 
other. wise was, in the judicial district of Georgia, the disposal of this pirate, robber, and 
traitor to his country! Instead of being indicted for all or any one of his many violations 
of the laws of the United States, of nations, and of humanity, he was not only suffered to 
go at large, entirely unmolested, but was permitted to file his claim, before the District 
Court of the United States in Georgia, for the restitution to him of the Antelope and all 
her living cargo, as captured jure beli), by virtue of his commission from Artigas. This 
claim was, indeed, dismissed, with costs, by the judge of the District Court, William 
Davis. Smith appealed from that decision to the Circuit Court, the presiding judge of 
which, William Johnson, confirmed the decision of the District Court, and spoke with 
suitable severity, not of the wickedness, but of the absurdity of Smith's pretension. And 
here, and in freely commenting hereafter upon the opinions and decisions upon this case, 
of these two judges, William Davis and William Johnson, both long since deceased, truth 
and justice require the remark, with all the respect due to their memories as upright 
judges and honorable men, that they were both holders of slaves, adjudicating in a State 
where slavery is the law of the land. If this circumstance may account for the fact, that 
the ministers of national justice in Georgia slumbered over the manifold transgressions of 
John Smith, for, which he never was prosecuted, it will account no less for that division 
of opinion in the Supreme tribunal of the Union, which veiled from public examination 
and scrutiny the reasons of each judge for his own opinion, because, as the Chief Justice 
declared, NO PRINCIPLE WAS SETTLED. John Smith did not venture to appeal from 
the decisions of the District and Circuit Courts against his claim to the Supreme Court of 
the United States. His plunder slipped from his hands; but his treachery to his country for 
a commission from Artigas, his buccanier and slave- trade piracies, though not even 
undivulged crimes, yet remained unwhipped of justice. 
 
On the 27th of July, 1820, Captain John Jackson, in behalf of himself, and of the officers 
and crew of the Revenue Cutter Dallas, filed in the District Court a libel against the 
Antelope, or General Ramirez, for forfeiture, under the act of Congress of 20th April, 
1818, prohibiting American citizens from engaging in the African slave trade. 
 
At the same Court, Charles Mulvey, vice-consul of Spain, and Francis Sorell, vice-consul 
of Portugal, at Savannah, filed each a libel for restitution, the former of 150, the latter of


--- PAGE 228 ---
130 African Negroes, composing the cargo of the Antelope. To these two libels Richard 
Habersham, district attorney of the United States, interposed in their name a claim to the 
freedom of all the Negroes, on the ground that some American citizen was interested or 
engaged in their transportation from Africa. 
 
The Spanish vice-consul claimed the vessel and all the Negroes in behalf of the original 
fitters out of the Antelope, for the slave trading voyage, at the Havana. 
 
And Captain Jackson claimed salvage for all the Negroes who might be adjudged to the 
Spanish and Portuguese vice-consuls; and twenty-five dollars a head for all those who 
might be declared free, according to the act of Congress. 
 
The judge of the District Court, after rejecting the claim of John Smith, on the ground of 
the illegality of the fitting out of the Columbia, or Arraganta, at Baltimore, and thereby 
settling the principle, that no capture made by that vessel could be legal, seems to have 
forgotten, or overlooked, the violation by the same John Smith of the laws of the United 
States for the suppression of the slave-trade; at least, so far as concerned all the Negroes 
on board the Antelope, excepting only a small remnant of twenty-five, which had been 
taken from the American slave-trader, the Exchange, from Bristol, Rhode Island. John 
Smith had made no attempt to smuggle these into the United States separate from the rest. 
His attempt had been to smuggle them all in. Why, then, should those taken from the 
American vessel alone be declared free, and those taken from the Spaniards and 
Portuguese doomed to perpetual slavery? 
 
The judge hunted up sundry old decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States, and, 
finally, the case of the Josafa et Segunda, 5 Wheaton, 338, for a principle "that, upon a 
piratical or illegal capture, the property of the original owners cannot be forfeited for the 
misconduct of the captors in violating the municipal laws of the country where the vessel 
seized by them is carried." The application of which principle to the rights of the 
respective parties in the case of the Antelope was, that the property of the Spanish owners 
of the Antelope could not be forfeited by the misconduct of John Smith in capturing it, in 
violation of the laws of the United States, by virtue of a commission from Artigas. Thus 
far the principle was correctly applied; but to that other misconduct of John Smith, the 
attempt to smuggle these Negroes into the United States, by which they became forfeited, 
and made free by the law, whoever might have been their owner; to that misconduct, the 
precedent of the Josafa et Segunda had no application whatever, and it was altogether 
overlooked in the decision of the district judge, although he decreed freedom to the 
chance chosen survivors of the twenty-five Negroes of the very same cargo, taken from 
the American vessel, though forfeited and liberated by the very same attempt of John 
Smith to smuggle them into the United States for sale. It was perfectly immaterial to the 
question of forfeiture and liberation to whom all or any of the Negroes had originally 
belonged. It was the attempt to smuggle them which induced their forfeiture by the rigor, 
and their consequent liberation by the beneficence, of the law. 
 
But having once introduced this entirely extraneous question, to whom the Negroes on 
board the Antelope, when captured by Captain Jackson, had originally belonged the


--- PAGE 229 ---
District Judge proceeded, upon such evidence as he deemed sufficient, to decide, that 
those captured in her by the Arraganta, were the property of Spaniards, and without one 
title of evidence, to infer, that all the Negroes taken from vessels under Portuguese 
colors, had been the property of Portuguese subjects, unknown; and upon these 
conclusions and assumptions, to adjudge all the Negroes, save the scanty surviving 
remnant of twenty- five taken from the Exchange of Rhode Island, to the Spanish and 
Portuguese Vice Consuls. 
 
At this distance of time, who can read such an adjudication of an American judge, 
without amazement. 
 
The claim of C. Mulvey [Spanish Vice Consul] was therefore sustained to the Antelope, 
and to as many of the Negroes, as should appear to be remaining of those found on board 
of her at the time of her capture by the Arraganta. 
 
The libel of F. Sorrell, the Portuguese Vice Consul, was sustained against so many of the 
slaves as should appear to remain of those taken by the Arraganta from Portuguese 
vessels. 
 
And it was further ordered with assent of parties, (that is, of these two parties the Spanish 
and Portuguese Vice Consuls, and well they might assent!) that the chim of John Jackson 
to salvage, should be sustained as regarded the Negroes claimed by and adjudged to 
them—and as regarded those adjudged to the United States, to an allowance of twenty 
five dollars for each according the Act of Congress of 3d March, 1819. 
 
This decree was pronounced on the 2lst of February 1821— and the clerk of the court 
was directed on or before the 26th day of the same month to report to the court the 
number of Spanish and Portuguese Negroes in the hands of the marshal, distinguishing 
the Negroes respectively belonging to each. He was also required to designate the very 
small number adjudged to the United States, that is, to the blessed enjoyment of 
themselves and their own liberty; and associating with himself two resident merchants, 
was at the same time to report the quantum or proportion of salvage to be allowed to 
Captain Jackson for the Negroes thus reputably and substantially sold by the judicial 
authority of the United States to the Spanish and Portuguese Vice Consuls. 
 
This unblushing bargain and sale of human captives, entitled at least by the intention of 
the United States laws to their freedom' was the first incident which brought to a pause 
the legal standard of morality of a Connecticut District Judge of the United States in the 
case of the Amistad captives. An estimate in dollars and cents of the value at New Haven, 
of from two to three hundred living men and women, for the purpose of allowing salvage 
upon them as merchandise, was too much for the nerves of a Yankee judge. The authority 
of the case of the Antelope was in this particular no precedent for him. The very proposal 
shocked his moral sense, and he instantly decided that men and women were not articles 
for a price current in the markets overt of Connecticut. 
 
In the markets of Savannah, nothing was more simple. The clerk of the District Court,


--- PAGE 230 ---
with his two associated resident merchants, in obedience to the order of the judge 
appraised the Negroes taken from the Spanish and Portuguese vessels at three hundred 
dollars per head, making the aggregate of sixty-one thousand five hundred dollars [for 
205 souls]; and they were of opinion that there should be an allowance of one fourth of 
said sum to Captain Jackson, his officers and crew, for salvage on the said Negroes. 
 
Seventy-five dollars per head! Fifteen thousand three hundred and seventy five dollars for 
two hundred and five men and women! What a revolution in the relative value of slaves 
and of freemen, since the age of Homer! In the estimate of that Prince of Grecian Poets. 
 
Jove fix'd it certain that whatever day 
 
Makes man a slave, takes half his worth away— 
 
and in the political statistics of the author of the Declaration of Independence the 
degradation of the character of man, by the infliction upon him of slavery is far greater 
than is asserted by the blind old rhapsodist of Smyrna. But here we have an inverted 
proportion of relative value, and Captain Jackson, by the decree of a Judicial Court of the 
United States receives twenty-five dollars a head for redeeming one parcel of Africans 
from slavery to freedom, while at the same time he was to receive seventy-five dollars a 
head for reducing by the same act two other parcels of the same company from freedom 
to slavery! 
 
Nor was the manner in which the clerk of the District Court executed the order to report 
the relative numbers of the three classes of the captured Africans, the least extraordinary 
part of these proceedings. 
 
He reported that two hundred and fifty-eight Negroes had been delivered by Captain John 
Jackson, Commander of the Revenue Cutter Dallas, on the 25th of July, 1820, to the 
marshal of Georgia, from on board the General Ramirez [the Antelope.] That of that 
number forty-four had died in the space of seven months —one was missing and one 
discharged by order of court, and that the marshal returned two hundred and twelve 
Negroes which remained to be apportioned. 
 
What kind become of the missing one neither the clerk nor the judge seems to have 
thought it worth his while to inquire—why should they ? it was but one man—and that 
man a Negro ! no further trace of him appears upon the record. 
 
Neither was it thought necessary to record the reason of the favor bestowed by the court 
upon one other man in ordering his discharge. The very nature of the order is its own 
justification. 
 
But mark the mortality of the Negroes! out of 258, four deaths in the space of seven 
months! and that, not while crammed between the decks of a slaver in the middle 
passage, but on the soil of the American Union, in the mild and healthy climate of 
Georgia—in the custody of an officer comm issioned by the President of the United


--- PAGE 231 ---
States, and under the protection of their judicial magistracy. In the case of the Amistad, 
the mortality ceased, as soon as the captives were admitted to the privilege of breathing in 
the atmosphere of freedom. 
 
But if the death of one man in six, in the space of seven months, is deeply distressing to 
the sympathies of our nature, what shall we say to a mortality of eighteen out of twenty 
five, which the clerk reported as the proportion of deaths among the Negroes taken from 
the American vessel, the Exchange, and who were by the final decree of the judge to be 
liberated? The clerk in his report denominates them American Negroes, and he reduces 
their number to SEVEN. Seven African captives out of two hundred and fifty-eight, was 
the number to whom the benignity of the laws of the American Union enacted for the 
suppression of the African slave trade, and expounded by the District Court of the United 
States in Georgia, would have extended the inestimable blessings of freedom and 
restoration to their country! 
 
The clerk had been required to report the number of Spanish, Portuguese, and American 
Negroes— distinguishing those respectively belonging to each of the se classes. He could 
obtain no evidence worth a straw upon which to found his report, the Negroes were all 
huddled together in one crowd- John Smith, the pirate, was the only witness who could 
tell him which were the Negroes taken out of the American vessel, and he told him that 
sixteen out of the twenty-five had died, before the capture of the Antelope by Capt. 
Jackson. The clerk reported accordingly, and added two to the number of deaths, as the 
average loss since the 25th of July; that is, since they had been in the custody of the 
marshal. 
 
It further appears from his report that the whole number captured by the Arraganta had 
been 331, of which 213 were Portuguese, 93 Spanish, and 25 American. That of the 
whole number 119 had died, but in what proportions from the general classes he could 
not ascertain. John Smith testified that sixteen of the 25 American Negroes had died 
before the Antelope was taken by Captain Jackson, and the clerk guessed that two more 
had died since, because that was the average loss of 9 to 44 out of 258. But neither John 
Smith nor any one else could point out the individual survivors of each separate class, 
and the clerk therefore reported that there had been captured by the Arraganta 213 
Portuguese Negroes, of which the average loss was 71;—93 Spanish Negroes of which 
the average loss was 30, and 25 American Negroes, of whom the deaths attested by John 
Smith were 16, and the subsequent average loss 2, leaving as before stated 212 to be 
apportioned—that is, 142 to the Portuguese Vi ce Consul, 63 to the Spanish Vice Consul, 
and 7 to the United States, to be sent home to Africa; freemen by the mandate of our 
laws. 
 
That the whole 212 were entitled to the benefit of the same laws, I cannot possibly 
doubt—but such was not the decision of the Di strict Judge. Exceptions were taken to the 
report of the clerk, by the District Attorney of the United States, Richard W. Habersham, 
and by Spanish Vice Consul Mulvey. The District Attorney still claiming the freedom of 
all the Negroes, and objecting to the allowance of 75 dollars a head to Captain Jackson 
for salvage, though not to the allowance of 25 dollars a head for their liberation. The


--- PAGE 232 ---
Spanish Vice Consul insisting that the number of slaves allowed to the Spanish claimants 
was too few and not supported by any testimony in the case—and that  the allowance to 
Captain Jackson for salvage was too high, and ought to be regulated by the act of 
Congress in relation to the compensation given in case the said slaves had been decreed 
to be delivered to the United States. 
 
The Judge confirmed the report of the Clerk in all its parts; and the District Attorney, in 
behalf of the United States, and the Spanish Vice Consul, in behalf of the Spanish 
claimants, appealed to the Circuit Court, then next to be held at Milledgeville on the 8th 
day of May, 1821. 
 
In these decisions of the District Court, is it possible to avert one's eyes from the glaring 
light of an over-ruling propensity to narrow down, if not wholly to nullify, the laws of the 
United States for the suppression of the African slave trade? To sustain the claim of the 
Spanish Vice Consul, the irrelevant question to whom the Antelope had originally 
belonged, was introduced; and upon that was engrafted the deeply controverted question, 
whether the African slave trade was or was not contrary to the law of nations. To redeem 
from forfeiture the Antelope and the Negroes captured in her by the Arraganta, the judge 
resorted to an argument of counsel in the recently reported case of she Josefa Segundas, 
(Wheaton, 338,) where it was said, that as piracy can neither divest nor convey property, 
a pirate cannot, by a subsequent violation of the laws of his own country, forfeit the 
property of which he has acquired possession by preceding piracy. This seems equivalent 
to a principle that a second act of piracy protects the pirate from punishment for the first. 
However conformable this maxim may be to the legal standard of morality, the Supreme 
Court did not so decide in the case of the Josefa Segunda. They decided, that the capture 
of a Spanish vessel and Negroes by privateer, with a commission from Arismendi, under 
the Republic of Venezuela, was not piracy; and that the Josefa Segunda, a Spanish vessel, 
and her cargo of Negroes, captured by authority of such a commission, were forfeited by 
a subsequent attempt of the captors to smuggle them into the United States, though taken 
from the Spanish owners only by the Venezuelan commission from Arismendi. Now the 
Columbia had entered Baltimore, and there enlisted her crew under those identical colors 
of Venezuela, and, DO doubt, with a commission from the same Arismendi. When 
metamorphosed into the Arraganta, she took the Antelope and her Negroes, by a 
commission from Artigas, quite as efficient to legitimate a prize as that of Arismendi; and 
John Smith, when captured with the Antelope and her Negroes, by Captain Jackson, 
produced this commission from Artigas as his warrant for his possession of the vessel and 
the slaves. As between the Arraganta and the Antelope, therefore, the capture of the latter 
by a commission from Artigas was not piratical but belligerent, it did divest the Spanish 
owners of the property and vest it in the captors, at least sufficiently to make it forfeitable 
by their subsequent attempt to smuggle it into the United States; and the decision of the 
Supreme Court, in the case of the Josefa Segunda, instead of sustaining that of the 
District Judge, in the case of the Antelope, is an authority point blank against it. 
 
For the allotment of 142 of the Negroes to the Portuguese Vice Consul, there was not 
even the apology of a Portuguese claimant, other than the Vice Consul himself to the 
property. There was not a shadow of evidence that they were the property of Portuguese


--- PAGE 233 ---
subjects, and none were ever found to claim them. He took the testimony of the capturing 
crew, that some of them were taken from vessels under Portuguese colors; and as he had 
no evidence that Portugal had then prohibited the slave trade, he took it for granted that 
the Negroes were all slaves, and, as such, he decreed that they should be delivered to the 
Vice Consul. 
 
With regard to the question, whether Slavery was or was not contrary to the laws of 
nations, his decision was such as might be expected from a judge, himself a holder of 
slaves, in a land where slavery has the sanction of law. The question, as I have 
endeavored to show, did not belong to the case. "But it is contended," (says the District 
judge) " on the authority of some recent decisions in the British Admiralty Court, that 
Africans are to be considered free, until it is shown that they are slaves, and that the 
burden of proof is with those who set up a claim to them. The doctrine may be correct in 
England, since there Negroes have al. ways been held to be free, except in cases where 
they have voluntarily entered into engagements binding them to service. And yet, 
inconsistent and contradictory as it may be, slavery has been recognized in all the British 
American colonies. 
 
 But it does not appear to me that I can admit the proposition in the form and manner in 
which it is here presented. The period is not very remote when all the Governments of 
Europe, and the several States of the United States when they were British colonies, and 
many of them after they became independent, recognized slavery. But a few years have 
elapsed since the Government of the United States permitted her citizens to engage in the 
African trade. Under such a state of things, it appears to me that this Court is bound to 
consider the unfortunate Africans, when found in the possession of the subjects or 
citizens of any Government which has heretofore permitted this traffic as slaves, until the 
contrary be shown. That this trade, however inhuman it may be, and however obnoxious 
it is to every benevolent feeling, must now be considered legal, notwithstanding its 
injustice, until it is shown to have been prohibited by that Government whose subjects 
claim the right of- engaging in it. 
"When it shall have been ascertained that the different Governments of the 
civilized world have consented to abolish the trade or after it shall have been 
ascertained that any particular State or Government has determined to abolish it, 
this Court would consider the claims set up in favor of Africans found in the 
situation of those before the Court, in a different point of view. In the one case they 
would, I think, uniformly be considered free, until the contrary was shown; in the 
other case, they would be so considered when they were found in the possession of 
the subjects or citizens of that Government which had determined to abolish the 
trade. 
 
" If it could be made to appear to this Court that, at the time these Africans were 
taken from the possession of the Spanish and Portuguese claimants Spain and 
Portugal had agreed to prohibit their subjects from engaging in the trade, this 
Court, I think, would be bound to restore to these people their liberty.


--- PAGE 234 ---
"It is true this Court will not enforce the municipal laws of another country, by 
punishing the subjects of that country for the infraction of them; but this Court 
could feel bound to respect the rights of Africans no less than it could respect the 
rights of any other class of persons. Spain, however' had not, at the time I am 
speaking of, abolished the trade to Africa, although she had placed it under certain 
restrictions. Can it be permitted to this Court to examine the commercial 
regulations or the conventional engagement of Spain?" 
It is unnecessary further to repeat verbatim et literatim this argument of the District judge 
to sustain his decree. Every word and letter of it teems with anxiety to sustain the 
institution of Slavery, and to prostrate instead of enforcing the laws of the United States 
for the suppression of the slave trade. What he calls certain restrictions placed on the 
trade by Spain, was the total prohibition of it north of the equator, even then stipulated by 
Spain in a treaty with Great Britain, and enacted accordingly by her law. But what of 
that? The judge admits that the trade is inhuman, that it is obnoxious to every benevolent 
feeling, but he is bound to consider it legal, notwithstanding its injustice, because many 
years before it had been practiced by Great Britain' and not many years before by the 
United States themselves." Is this reasoning for a Court of JUSTICE? When all the 
civilized nations of the earth shall have abolished the African slave trade, the judge thinks 
that captured Africans would be considered free, unless proved to be slaves: and if Spain 
and Portugal should abolish the slave trade, he thinks the burden of proof that Negroes 
captured in their vessels were slaves, would rest upon their captors. In that case, the Court 
would respect the rights of Africans as much as those of any other class of persons; but, 
until then, how could the Court be permitted to examine into treaty stipulations of Spain, 
or into any restriction imposed by Spain upon the traffic of her subjects in slaves ? 
 
Such was the reasoning of a slave-holding judge upon slavery and the slave trade, and by 
such reasoning did he' out of two hundred and twelve Africans, forfeit to the United 
States, to receive from them the blessing of freedom, and restoration to their native 
country reduce the number who should enjoy that privilege to seven individuals, 
consigning all the rest to perpetual, hopeless Spanish and Portuguese slavery!—Seven 
freemen to two hundred and five slaves! 
 
The appeal from these decrees to the Circuit Court of the United States came up before 
Judge William Johnson, in May, 1821. His opinions differed toto coelo from those of the 
District judge. He increased the number of the Africans to be liberated, as survivors of 
the twenty-five taken from the American vessels, from seven to sixteen: he rejected the 
incredible testimony of the pirate, John Smith, that while the mortality of the whole cargo 
of Negroes had averaged not more than one in three, the number of deaths among those 
taken from the American vessel had amounted to two-thirds of the whole. He reversed 
the decree of the District judge, which had allotted one hundred and forty-two Negroes to 
the Portuguese Vice Consul; and reserved his claim for further proof, which never was 
produced. He reduced the allowance of salvage to Captain Jackson, and the crew of the 
revenue cutter, to fifty dollars a head for the Negroes to be delivered to the Spanish Vice 
Consul, and expressed a strong doubt whether it was a case for salvage at all. He 
intimated, very significantly, an opinion, that if a claim had been interposed by an agent


--- PAGE 235 ---
of Venezuela, or of the Oriental Republic, the capture of the Antelope, by Captain 
Jackson, must have been pronounced illegal—a  mere marine trespass—punishable in 
damages rather than rewardable for salvage; and yet he allowed him a salvage of fifty 
dollars a head for the Negroes surrendered to the Spanish Vice Consul. He concurred, 
however in the most exceptionable of all the opinions of the District judge; namely, that 
because John Smith had no forfeitable interest in the Antelope and in the Negroes, 
originally belonging to Spanish owners, but then in his possession, and which he was 
when captured, in the act of smuggling into the United States; therefore they were not 
forfeited at all, and must be delivered up to the Spanish Vice Consul. The judge of the 
Circuit Court, sitting alone, after stating the circumstances of the capture by Captain 
Jackson, and the claims of the respective parties, promptly and without hesitation 
pronounces, that John Smith was taken in the act of violating the laws of the United 
States for the suppression of the slave trade; and that, " if the case rested here there would 
be no difficulty in adjudging the vessel forfeited, for taking these Africans on board at 
sea, with intent to dispose of them as slaves. But this, although perhaps literally within 
the provisions of the statute, is obviously not within the intent and meaning." Why 
perhaps, literally within the provisions of the statute? No reader of the English language 
can read the provisions of the statute and entertain a doubt that they extend literally to the 
case—why not within its intent and meaning?  Never was an obiter dictum of a judge 
more peremptory or more gratuitous! There is not a word, not a letter in the statute to 
authorize the intention of shielding from forfeiture a slave trading smuggler, because the 
captain was not her owner. The forfeiture attaches to the action, the violation of the laws 
against the slave trade, and to the instrument used for that violation, without inquiring to 
whom that instrument belongs. The mischief to be remedied by the law, was the 
introduction of African slaves into the United States.—The vessel is the instrument with 
which the violation of the law was effected, and by which the forfeiture was incurred. 
Neither justice nor policy could require an exemption from the forfeiture, because the 
captain in possession of the vessel and employing her in violation of the law, was not her 
lawful owner. The judge says, there are reiterated decisions of the American courts, that a 
capture made under an illegal American outfit is not belligerent, but void, and producing 
no change of right; and from this it followers, that Smith had no interest on which the 
forfeiture inflicted by law for this offense could attach. The judge names no one of these 
reiterated decisions, and we have seen that the only one specifically cited by the District 
judge, in support of the same principle, was a clear authority against it. There were no 
doubt decisions that captures of friendly foreign vessels, by American privateers illegally 
fitted out in our ports) and bearing South American commissions, did not so divest the 
property, but that it might be restored by our courts, in controversy between the captors 
and the original owners—but that the laws of  the United States, prescribing penalties of 
forfeiture for crimes, should be violated with impunity, because the slave smuggler had 
stolen the instrument with which he committed the crime! No! l trust the Antelope is, and 
will for ever remain, the solitary case in which such a principle can claim the sanction of 
the courts of the United States! 
 
The wild and glaring inconsistency not only between the opinions and decrees of the 
District and Circuit Courts of the United States, in the case of the Antelope, but between 
the opinions and decrees of each of those Courts and itself discloses in crystal


--- PAGE 236 ---
transparency an internal conflict of mind between the duty of suppressing the African 
slave trade, and the desire to maintain and fortify the institution of slavery, little 
auspicious to the composure of justice or to the impartial exercise of the judicial faculty. 
Both the Judges profess a sentimental abhorrence of the trade. The Circuit Judge 
discusses at great length the question whether the slave trade is contrary to the Law of 
Nations. He admits that the British Court of Admiralty have of latter years asserted a 
doctrine of this nature; but after commenting sarcastically upon the motive of the British 
Judges and Government, and descanting upon mental dependence, and interference with 
the family concerns of others, in which no nation has a right to volunteer, he quotes a 
passage from the decision of the British Court in the case of the Amedee [Actor, 240,] 
and says, "I must until better advised assume an opposite language." 
 
" I feel," says he, " no inclination to justify or even palliate the trade. I thank God I have 
lived to see its death-blow. But it was from religion or policy, not from national 
humanity, that the blow was received. On the contrary, British policy struggled against 
the effort to abolish it, and all the efforts of the Quakers, the Methodists and Mr. 
Wilberforce proved abortive until the horrors acted in St. Domingo opened the eyes of 
Government to consequences that it became political to guard against. From that time, 
philanthropy like the pent up vapor, began freely to diffuse itself, and extended its spread 
even to the British Court of Admiralty." 
 
"That slavery, (says again the Judge of the Circuit Court,) is a national evil no one will 
deny except him [he] who would maintain that national wealth is the supreme national 
good. But what" ever it be, it was entailed upon us by our ancestors, and actually 
provided for in the constitution first received from the Lords Proprietors under which the 
southern colonies were planted. During the Royal government it was fostered as the 
means of improving the colonies, and affording a lucrative trade to the mother country, 
and however revolting to humanity, may be the reflection, the laws of any country on the 
subject of the slave trade are nothing more in the eyes of any other nation than a class of 
the trade laws of the nation that enacts them.', 
 
Both the Judges acknowledge the inherent, inextinguishable wickedness of the trade, and 
both have an invincible repugnance to consider it contrary to the laws of nations. The 
Judge of the District Court admits that the doctrine that Africans taken at sea must be 
presumed to be free, until proved to be slaves, may be correct in England, but cannot 
entirely recognize it in the State of Georgia. The Judge of the Circuit Court, repudiates it 
altogether—says he must until better advise d hold opposite language— assails with great 
bitterness the decision of Sir William Grant in the case of the Amedee: thanks God that 
he has lived to see the death blow of the African slave trade; but allows no credit to Great 
Britain on the score of humanity for striking it. No! it was religion or policy. The horrors 
of the scenes in St. Domingo had alarmed the British Government for the safety of their 
West Indian colonies, and so the pent up vapor of philanthropy was let loose and 
extended even to the British Courts of Vice Admiralty. As for slavery, every one knows it 
an evil, but it was entailed upon us by our ancestors; it was provided for by the 
constitution granted by the Lords Proprietors; it was encouraged from motives of policy 
by the Royal Government, and what right has any one to question our practice of it now?


--- PAGE 237 ---
It was once lawful— who shall say it shall not be lawful forever ? 
 
Upon the tone of this judicial argumentation I shall not indulge myself in commenting; 
but in comparing the spirit of the reasoning of these two judges with that of Sir William 
Grant in the decision which they reject and oppose, how stands the account of moral 
principle ? The reasons of the British Judge glow with the flame of human liberty, those 
of the American Judges are wedged in thrilling regions of thick ribbed ice. Vituperation 
of the slave trade in words, with a broad shield of protection carefully extended over it in 
deeds. Slavery acknowledged an evil, and the inveteracy of its abuse urged as an 
unanswerable argument for its perpetuity: the best of actions imputed to the worst of 
motives, and a bluster of mental energy to shelter a national crime behind a barrier of 
national independence; these are the characteristics exhibited by American in collision 
with British Admiralty Courts. Or again, examine the respective opinions and decrees in 
their beating upon the trade itself: those of the British Court went directly to its suppress 
sign; those of the American Courts, to its encouragement, security and promotion. The 
British Court has at least the consistency of harmonizing practice and profession. The 
American Courts profess humanity and practice oppression. 
 
The decrees of the American Circuit Court are if possible more extraordinary than its 
opinions. After deciding that the Negroes taken by the Arraganta in the Antelope, and 
from the Portuguese vessels shall be delivered to the Spanish and Portuguese Vice 
Consuls, because he must maintain that it is A question altogether inter altos, whether the 
Spanish and Portuguse nations had authorized the traffic in which their vessels were 
engaged, the Judge adds: " Not so as to the American vessel. I have a law to direct me as 
to that, and the slaves taken out of her must be liberated." The laws had literally directed 
that all the Negroes whom John Smith had attempted to smuggle into the United States 
for sale, should be liberated, but the Judge had pronounced that this was not its intent and 
meaning. But now another difficulty occurs. No competent witness can tell which of the 
surviving Negroes were taken from the American vessels, which from the Portuguese 
vessels, and which from the Antelope. The individuals belonging to each of the three 
vessels cannot be identified. How shall he distribute his doom of freedom and of slavery 
among the prize goods and the pirated merchandise of John Smith? With a full 
consciousness of the gross and glaring injustice of the decree he says, THE LOT MOST 
DECIDE ! Where did he get his law for that? He says he has a law to direct him, and he 
flies in the face of that law to enslave hundreds and emancipate sixteen human beings on 
the cast of a die. Let me do no wrong to his words—hear them. 
" I would that it were in my power to do perfect justice in their behalf. BUT THIS 
IS HOW IMPOSSIBLE. I can decree freedom to a certain number, but I may 
decree that to A, which is the legal right of B. It is impossible to identify the 
individuals who were taken from the American vessel, and yet it is not less certain 
that the benefit of this decree is their right end theirs alone. Poor would be the 
consolation to them to know that because we could not identify them we had given 
away their freedom to others.— Yet shall we  refuse to act because not gifted with 
the power of divination? We can only do the best in our power. The lot must decide 
their fate, and the Almighty will direct the hand that acts in the selection. But I


--- PAGE 238 ---
cannot consent to reduce this number from twenty-five to nine, [to seven,] for this 
depends upon testimony that was interested to deceive, since in those twenty-fire, 
Smith could have no hope to sustain his claims though he might succeed as to the 
residue. The reduction of the number must therefore be averaged upon a scale with 
the rest, and as they consisted of twenty-three men and two boys, the lot must 
select them accordingly from the men and boys. 
 
"Some doubts have been stated as to the national character of the vessel and as to 
the Spanish and Portuguese interest in the slaves. On the vessel I entertain no 
doubt. She was captured as Spanish, and the evidence is sufficient to prove the 
Spanish interest in her—and the slaves taken on board of her, must necessarily 
follow her fate. But I am induced to think that the evidence preponderates to prove 
that there were but ninety-three, and, that number must also be reduced by the 
general scale of loss. Concerning the residue, the evidence appears so conclusive, 
that reluctant as I feel to keep the case open I cannot adjudge them to the 
Portuguese Consul, without further proof." 
In examining the claim of Capt. Jackson to salvage, the judge becomes exceedingly 
doubtful whether it is a case for salvage at all, and enters a caveat against his own decree 
for allowing it. He thinks if a Venezuelan agent had interposed a claim to the property as 
prize of war, he should have been still more puzzled how to shape his decree than he was. 
He does not appear to be at all aware that if a Venezuelan agent could have claimed the 
property as prize of war there could have been no Spanish claimant to whom it could hare 
been restored. The decree of restoration to Spanish owners was therefore ipso facto 
equivalent to a decree for salvage, the quantum of which alone remained for 
consideration. His caveat against his allowance for salvage, was therefore a caveat 
against his whole decree, and thus far was an approach to the definition of justice—Jus 
suum cuique. 
 
The decrees of the Circuit Court (for there were two) like the state of mind disclosed by 
these opinions of the judge, were a chaos of confusion. By the first, delivered on the 11th 
of May, 1803, the Decree of the District Court, so far as related to the vessel, the 
Antelope, was affirmed, and so far as related to the slaves imported in her was reversed 
and annulled. The District Court had decreed the restoration of the Antelope to the 
Spanish claimants, on the ground that she had not been forfeited to the United States, for 
the violation of the laws for the suppression of the slave trade. She had not been forfeited, 
though taken by Captain Jackson in the act of smuggling into the United States for sale 
near three hundred Africans, and though the law literally declares all Africans thus 
imported free, and the vessel in which they are imported forfeited to the United States. 
From this forfeiture the Decree of the District Court, exempted the Antelope, because 
before the commission of this smuggling piracy she had been taken by another act of 
piracy, from certain virtuous Spanish slave traders, whose property in her, and 
consequently in the slaves with which she was laden, was too sacred to be divested either 
by piratical capture or by the laws of the United States against the importation of slaves, 
or against the African slave trade. With this part of the Decree of the District Court, the 
judge of the Circuit Court concurs. The laws of the United States for the suppression of


--- PAGE 239 ---
the execrable slave trade, and against the importation of African slaves are baffled, 
defeated, prostrated, nullified— three hundred wretched vict ims of that trade, are 
deprived of the benefit of that just and generous provision that the very act of importing 
them shall operate in their favor as an act of emancipation. They are re- consigned to 
hopeless and perpetual slavery, from mere reverence for the property of Spanish slave 
traders! Well might such a decision divide the opinions of the judges of the Supreme 
tribunal when it came up to them for adjudication. Well might Chief Justice Marshall 
declare that upon this point no principle was settled, and well may every friend of human 
liberty, and every sincere wishes for the suppression of that detested traffic indignantly 
deny that the case of the Antelope can ever be cited as authority for any such principle of 
law. 
But as the Circuit Court, reversed and annulled every part of the decree of the District 
Court for the disposal and distribution of the slaves, so the final decree of the Supreme 
Court passed the same sweeping sentence of reversal, upon all the dispositions of the 
Circuit Court, not excepting that reliance upon an Almighty hand to direct that 
designation by lot, which was to give to one man what was the right of another, and to 
emancipate a slave as an equivalent for enslaving a freeman. 
 
The judge of the Circuit Court at first decreed the manner, in which the sixteen freemen 
should be drawn by lot from the whole surviving cargo of the Antelope, as taken by 
Captain Jackson. He allowed a certain average portion of the survivors of 93 to the whole 
number j to be delivered to the Spanish Vice Consul, together with the proceeds of the 
vessels, and with suitable deductions for the salvage, forthwith—and he reserved for 
further consideration, and further evidence, till the next term of the court, the final 
distribution of the residue of the slaves between the Spanish and Portuguese Vice 
Consuls. 
 
On the 16th of July, 1821, the designation was accordingly made by lot of the sixteen 
persons drawn from 204, and delivered to the marshal of the United States to abide the 
order of the court—that is, for emancipation. It does not appear that the Spanish Vice 
Consul received those which had been provisionally assigned to him. On the 27th day of 
December, 1821, the judge of the Circuit Court held, together with Jeremiah Cuyler, the 
newly appointed judge of the District Court in the p]ace of William Davis deceased, a 
special court, at which the case was argued, and further evidence filed—and on the next 
day, the court " Ordered and decreed, that the residue of the Negroes imported in the 
General Ramirez [Antelope] be divided between the Spanish and Portuguese claimants in 
the ratio of one hundred and sixty-six on be half of the Spanish claimants, and one 
hundred and thirty on behalf of the Portuguese claimants, and that they be delivered up to 
the agents of the individuals as soon as their respective powers of attorney shall be duly 
authenticated and filed with the clerk of this court; and they shall respectively comply 
with the Decorated Order of this court, in paying the expenses incurred on said Negroes 
in the ratio above stated, and in giving bond and security as therein directed for 
transporting them beyond the limits of the United States to some permitted port, allowing 
however six months from the date of the bond instead of three months as in that decretal 
order aforesaid' and that the proceed sales of the vessel, after deducting the costs of court,


--- PAGE 240 ---
exclusive of marshal's bills for maintenance, be paid over to the Spanish claimants." 
 
On the 2d of January, 1822, the District Attorney of the United States, appealed in their 
behalf to the Supreme Court of the United States from so much of the said decree, of the 
said Circuit Court as decreed the said African Negroes to the Portuguese Vice Consul. 
 
And thus, in February, 1822, the case of the Antelope, and her cargo, came up for 
adjudication of the Supreme Court of the United States, the result of which is reported in 
the 10th, 11th, and 12th volumes of Wheaton's Reports. 
 
Three long years passed away before the first judgment of the court in the case was 
pronounced. Nearly two years before had elapsed from the capture of the Antelope by 
Captain Jackson. For little short of the space of five years, nearly three hundred captured 
Africans had been kept as prisoners of the United States, and to abide the decision of 
their tribunals for the enjoyment of their inalienable right to liberty. What had they been 
doing, during this long captivity ? They had been maintained at the cost of the United 
States, we shall see hereafter to what tune. While the slow, solemn and majestic march of 
the law was progressing in the search " for the legal standard of morality" to fix the 
destiny of these human victims, time and chance had disposed of them more mercifully 
than the decrees of the District or of the Circuit Court. The marshal had bound most of 
them out to labor in the sweat of their brows, at the erection of fortifications, for the 
defense of the LIBERTIES of this, our beloved country. The judges who passed upon the 
fate of these their fellow men—the wive s—the children—the property the neighbors—
the country, of those judges were armed in panoply against foreign aggression by the 
daily labor of these stolen Africans, whose lives, and liberty American judges were 
committing by the legal standard of morality to the cast of a die. During those five years 
it may be well conjectured that the condition of those captives of the Antelope thus 
employed was less rigorous and afflicted than it was made by the lottery judgment of the 
court. 
 
The judgment of the Supreme Court in 1825, reversed this lottery judgment of the Circuit 
Court. It reversed the whole allotment of one hundred and thirty to the Portuguese Vice 
Consul, and awarded to them the blessing of liberty intended for them by the law, and yet 
so harshly denied them by the decrees of the courts below. It reduced the number to be 
delivered to the Spanish claimants from a ratio of 166 to 93 to the whole number, and 
vigorously exacted proof to the satisfaction of the Circuit Court of the identity of every 
individual to be delivered up, as having been of the number taken by the Arraganta in the 
Antelope. The allowances of salvage and of gratuity to Captain Jackson and the crew of 
the Revenue Cutter were confirmed. One step further and the case of the Antelope would 
have conferred unfading glory on the Supreme Court. One step more and the heartless 
sophistry would have beep silenced, and the cold blooded apathy to human suffering 
would have been stung into sensibility, which delivered up to Spanish slave traders, a 
vessel, forfeited by the just severity, and thirty-nine Africans emancipated by the 
benignly, of the laws of this Union for the suppression of the African slave trade. 
 
That step was not taken; there lacked one voice in a divided court to reverse the whole of


--- PAGE 241 ---
that decree of the Circuit Court of which so many parts were annulled. One obnoxious 
principle was left to have its sway in that particular case, because there wanted a casting 
vote to reverse it—but Chief Justice Marsha ll himself, in announcing the affimation of 
the sentence on this point of the Circuit Court, guarded against any and every future 
attempt to allege it as an authority by explicitly declaring that in this judgment of the 
court NO PRINCIPLE WAS SETTLED. 
 
The opinion delivered by him on this first decision of the case in the Supreme Court, 
must be considered as that of the Chief Justice himself. It is in a tone entirely different 
from that in which the judges of the lower courts had indulged themselves. It contains no 
angry invective, no sneering sarcasm, no direct defiance, on the motives of the British 
government, and the solicitude of the British tribunals, for the suppression of the slave 
trade. It states with a sincere and painful effort of impartiality the reasons for and against 
the principle that the trade is contrary to the laws of nations. It admits and emphatically 
declares it contrary to the laws of nature. It cites and analyzes the general decisions upon 
the same point in the British Courts of Admiralty, and examines them with freedom, but 
without asperity. The Chief Justice says that as no principle was settled by the affirmance 
of the decree of the Circuit Court, the judges had concluded not to assign their respective 
reasons for their conflicting opinions; but was to him was assigned the duty of 
pronouncing the decree of the court, his argumemt was necessarily on the side of that 
division which sustained the decree of the Circuit Court, and consequently there is no 
coumteracting opinion upon the records to balance it. But it almost balances itself. The 
argument with much hesitation concludes that the African slave trade is not contrary to 
the Law of Nations —but it begins with admitti ng, also with hesitation, that it is contrary 
to the law of nature. He says—" That it is c ontrary to the law of nature will scarcely be 
denied. That every man has a natural right to the fruits of his own labor, is generally 
admitted; and that no other person can rightfully deprive him of those fruits, and 
appropriate them against his will seems to be the necessary result of this admission. 
"Seems, Madam—Nay it is—I know not seems." 
 
Surely never was this exclamation more suitable than on this occasion; but the 
cautious and wary manner of stating the moral principle, proclaimed in the 
Declaration of Independence, as self-evident truth, is because the argument is 
obliged to encounter it with matter of fact. To the moral principle the Chief Justice 
opposes general usage—fact against right. " From the earliest times war has 
existed, and war confers rights in which all have acquiesced. Among the most 
enlightened nations of antiquity, one of these was, that the victor might enslave the 
vanquished—— 
 
"Slavery, then, has its origin in force; but as the world has agreed that it is a 
legitimate result of force, the state of things which is thus produced by general 
consent cannot be pronounced unlawful. 
 
" Throughout Christendom, this harsh rule has been exploded, and war is no longer 
considered as giving a right to enslave cap. tires. But this triumph of humanity has 
not been universal The parties to the modern law of nations do not propagate their


--- PAGE 242 ---
principles by force; and Africa has not yet adopted them. Throughout the whole 
extent of that immense continent, so far as we know its history, it is still the law of 
nations that prisoners are slaves. Can those who hare themselves renounced this 
law, be permitted to participate in its effects, by purchasing the beings who are its 
victims ? 
 
"Whatever might be the answer of a moralist to this question, a jurist must search 
for its legal solution in those principles of action which are sanctioned by the 
usages, the national acts, and the general assent, of that portion of the world of 
which he con. eiders himself a part, and to whose law the appeal is made. If we 
resort to this standard as the test of international law, the question as has already 
been observed, is decided in favor of the legality of the trade. Both Europe and 
America embarked in it; and for nearly two centuries, it -was carried on without 
opposition and without censure." 
 
With all possible reverence for the memory of Chief Justice Marshall, and with all due 
respect for his argument in this case, I must here be permitted to say, that here begins its 
fallacy. He admits that throughout all Christendom, the victors in war have no right to 
enslave the vanquished. As between Christian nations therefore, slavery as a legitimate 
consequence of war is totally abolished. So totally abolished that slaves captured in war, 
cannot be held by the captors, as slaves; but must be emancipated, or exchanged as 
prisoners of war. 
 
But Africa, says the Chief Justice, still enslaves her captives in war, and for nearly two 
centuries, Europe and America purchased African slaves without " opposition and 
without censure." This may prove that the African slave-trade was heretofore, not 
contrary to the international law of Europe and of Christendom. But how was it, when the 
Antelope was in judgment before Christian Admiralty Courts in 1820&#151;01, and '25? 
How is it now? 
 
For nearly forty years it has been prohibited by the laws of the United States, as a crime 
of enormous magnitude—and when the Antelope was tried by their judicial Courts, it was 
proclaimed piracy, punishable with death— 
 
It was piracy by the laws of Great Britain. 
 
By the 10th Article of the Treaty of Ghent, concluded on the 84th of December, 1814, 
between Great Britain and the United States, the traffic in slaves had been declared 
irreconcilable with the principles of humanity and justice, and both parties did there by 
stipulate and contract to use their best endeavors to promote Its entire abolition. 
 
On the 8th of February, 1815, the Ambassadors at the Congress of Vienna, from Austria, 
France, Great Britain, Portugal, Prussia, Russia, and Sweden, had issued a Declaration, " 
in the face of Europe, that considering the universal abolition of the slave-trade as n 
measure worthy of their attention, conformable to the spirit of the times, and to the 
generous principles of their august Sovereigns, they are animated with the sincere desire


--- PAGE 243 ---
of concurring in the most prompt and effectual execution of this measure, by all the 
means at their disposal, and of acting in the employment of those means with all the zeal 
and perseverance which is due to so noble a cause." And again, 
" In communicating this Declaration to the knowledge of Europe, and of all 
civilized countries, the said plenipotentiaries hope to prevail on every other 
Government, and particularly on those which in abolishing the slave-trade have 
already manifested the same sentiments, to give them their support in a cause, the 
final triumph of which will be one of the noblest monuments of the age which 
embraced it, and which shall have brought it to a glorious termination." 
 
On the 20th of May, 1814, Louis the 18th, on his first restoration, had stipulated by treaty 
with Great Britain, to unite all his efforts with hers, at this then approaching Congress of 
Vienna, to induce all the Powers of Christendom to decree the abolition of the 
slave-trade, so that the said trade should cease, universally, as it should cease definitely, 
under any circumstances, on the part of France, within five years. 
 
Within one year from that time, the Emperor Napoleon, on the 29th of March, 1815, upon 
his return from Elba, within the hundred days of his authority, decreed the immediate and 
total abolition of the slave-trade on the part of France—which decree Louis the 18th, 
upon his second restoration, repeated and confirmed—and on the 20th of November, 
1815, a Treaty, of which the following was one of the Articles, was concluded between 
Great Britain and France. 
" The high contracting powers, sincerely desiring to give effect to the measures on 
which they deliberated at the Congress of Vienna, relative to the complete and 
universal abolition of the slave-trade, and having each in their respective 
dominions, prohibited without restriction, their colonies and subjects from taking 
any part whatever in this traffic, engage to renew conjointly their efforts, with the 
view of securing signal success to those principles, which they proclaimed in the 
Declaration of the 8th of February, 1815, and of concerning without loss of time, 
through their ministers at the Courts of London and of Paris, the most effectual 
measures for the active and definitive abolition of a commerce so odious and so 
strongly condemned by the laws of religion and of nature." 
 
Spain had not been a party to the Declaration of the Allied Powers, at the Congress of 
Vienna, of 8th of February, 1815—but in a tr eaty with Great Britain, concluded on the 
20th of August, 1814, his Catholic Majesty, concurring in the fullest manner in the 
sentiments of his Britannic Majesty with respect to the injustice and inhumanity of the 
traffic in slaves, stipulated that he would take into consideration with the deliberation 
which the state of his possessions in America demanded, the means of acting in 
conformity with those sentiments. 
 
And on the 23d of September, 1817, by a treaty concluded between the same two powers, 
his Catholic Majesty engaged, that the slave-trade should be abolished throughout the 
entire dominions of Spain, on the 30th day of May, 1820; and that from and after that 
period, it shall not be lawful for any of the subjects of the crown of Spain, to purchase


--- PAGE 244 ---
slaves, or to carry on the slave trade, on any parts of the coast of Africa, upon any pretext, 
or in any manner whatever; provided, however, that a term of five months from the said 
date of the 30th of May, 1820, should be allowed for completing the voyages of vessels 
cleared out lawfully, previously to the said 30th of May. 
 
A decree of the King of Spain, of December, 1817, conformable to the above 
treaty-stipulation, prohibited all Spanish subjects from engaging in the African 
slave-trade, from and after the 30th of May, 1820. 
 
The case of the Antelope first came before the District Court of the United States for 
adjudication, on the 27th of July, 1820. At that time the African slave-trade was 
forbidden to all Spanish subjects throughout the world, by a decree issued nearly three 
years before. But the Antelope had been fitted out at the Havana, upon her slave--trading 
expedition, and had even been captured by the Arraganta, before the 20th of May, 1820, 
and consequently before the legal prohibition had taken effect. The capture of her by the 
Arraganta had been made, not for breach of laws against the slave- trade, but as prize of 
war under a commission from the Oriental Republic. It was her captor who had incurred 
her forfeiture, and the liberation of the Africans taken in her by the violation of the laws 
of the United States against the slave-trade—not by purchasing or shipping the Negroes 
in Africa, but for importing them into the United States contrary to law.— To the 
question of that forfeiture, that of the original property of the vessel and cargo was 
altogether foreign. That was res inter alios, with which the Courts of the United States 
had nothing to do. The smuggler was a citizen of the United States. He had proprietary 
possession of the vessel and of the Negroes, which he was smuggling in to be sold as 
slaves. It was the identical offense against which the laws of Congress had provided, and 
the Negroes had by those laws, and by the violation of them committed by John Smith, 
acquired a right to freedom, infinitely more sacred, one would have thought, in an 
American Court of Justice, than the property in and to them, of the Spanish slave-traders 
who had kidnapped or bought them in Africa, and had not yet consummated their 
property by bringing them within the exclusive jurisdiction of Spain. 
 
All the Courts of the United States did however think proper to go back to the proprietary 
right of the Spanish slave-trader; and two of them to sanctify that at the expense of the 
freedom of the captives, and of the vital spirit of the laws of the Union for the 
suppression of the African slave trade. This sacrifice was made, by the District and 
Circuit Courts of the United States, in Georgia. It was never sanctioned by the Supreme 
Court of the Union. On this single point, the judgment of the Circuit Court, was saved 
from reversal, by a divided Court; but on all the collateral points the decisions of both the 
lower Courts were reversed, and on the single point of the Circuit Court, affirmed: the 
Chief Justice in affirming it gave explicit and emphatic warning, that no principle was 
settled. 
 
In all the three courts, the restoration of the Antelope, and of the Africans captured by the 
Arraganta on board of her to the Spanish claimants, was explicitly decreed on the fact 
that at the time of her expedition from the Havana, and of her capture by the Arraganta 
the prohibition of the slave trade by the King of Spain had not yet taken effect. All the


--- PAGE 245 ---
courts agreed that if the case had occurred after the abolition of the trade by Spain, the 
judgment would have been cliff renu That is, it must and would have been the 
emancipation and the restoration to their native country as freemen, of every individual 
African captured by Captain Jackson in the Antelope. 
 
With what color of reason then was the case of the Antelope made the corner stone of the 
Attorney General's report to the President of the United States, that the captives of the 
Amistad should be, by mere Executive warrant, delivered up in a mass, untold and 
unidentified, to the Spanish minister. Whatever there was or could be of authority in the 
case of the Antelope led directly to the opposite conclusion. The Supreme Court had 
toppled down headlong the decree of the Circuit Court for the distribution of the victims 
between the Spanish and Portuguese Vice Consuls by lot. They had scattered to the winds 
this gambling of human bones, this cross and pile distribution of justice between liberty 
and bondage. They had rescued from the grasp of the overseer all the prisoners taken 
from the vessels bearing Portuguese colors, they had exacted proof of the number and 
identification of the individuals, to be given up to the Vice Consul of Spain. They had 
allowed salvage for them to captain Jack. son, to be deducted from their estimated value; 
and from two hundred and ninety-six adjudicated by the courts below, to perpetual 
slavery, they had reduced the number to an estimate which could not exceed thirty-nine. 
The only principle to which half the court adhered, and thereby left the decree of the 
Circuit Court unreversed was, that the Spanish prohibition of the slave trade had not 
quickened into life quite in time to save these thirty-nine unfortunates from the clutches 
of their oppressors. 
 
Apply these principles to the case of the Amistad captives. They had been imported into 
the Havana in open and undisguised defiance of the Spanish prohibition of the slave trade 
enacted nearly twenty years before; but connived at by the Spanish authorities in Cuba 
for gold—for a doubloon a head. They had been  shipped coast-wise, in continuance and 
for consummation of the slave-trading voyage from Africa. They had been clandestinely 
transferred to Ruiz and Montes, who were furnished with printed pretended passports, 
false and fraudulent upon their face, and these were the only title to property they could 
show. The captives of the Amistad were, when taken by Lieut. Gedney, not even in the 
condition of slaves; they were freemen, in possession not only of themselves, but of the 
vessel with which they were navigating the common property and jurisdiction of all 
nations, the Ocean: in possession of the cargo of the vessel, and of the Spaniards Ruiz 
and Montes themselves. Lieut. Gedney seized them as charged with the crimes of piracy 
and murder. The captives of the Antelope were taken by Captain Jackson in the condition 
of slaves. The courts of the United States were not called on to change their condition. 
The courts of the United must have enslaved the captives of the Amistad before they 
could restore them to their pretended masters. 
 
The decision of the courts of the United States against the captives of the Antelope were 
all apologetic. They leaned almost entirely upon a decision of Sir William Scott in the 
case of the Louis, apparently if not really conflicting with that of Sir William Grant in the 
case of the Amedee. It is apparent that the Admiralty Courts of Great Britain have been 
divided on the question not less than those of the United States. Sir William Scott, who,


--- PAGE 246 ---
during the war of the French Revolution, had been the main pillar of belligerent rights 
and arbitrary searches and visitations of neutral vessels, after the peace and the agitation 
of the slavery question among all the nations of Europe, took a very different lurch, and 
became the most fervent champion of the slave trade and of the unqualified exemption of 
all merchant vessels from visitation or search by the armed ships of every nation other 
than their own. In the case of the slave Grace, he decided that a West Indian female slave 
following her mistress to England, and emancipated by mere contact with English soil, 
became re-enslaved by returning to the West Indian Islands,—a decision the reverse of 
which has been repeatedly decided in one of the principal slave states of this Union. In 
the case of the Louis he laid it down in most unqualified terms, which Chief Justice 
Marshall in the case of the Antelope repeats with seeming approbation, that the right of 
search is confined to a state of war. That it is a right strictly belligerent in its character, 
which can never be exercised by a nation at peace, except against professed pirates, who 
are the enemies of the human race: a position which, if true, would at once decide that 
both the capture of the Antelope by Captain Jackson, and of the Amistad by Lieut. 
Gedney, were unlawful and unjustifiable. I must pause before I assent to the doctrine to 
that extent. 
 
In the same case of the Louis, Sir William Scott travels out of his record, to start a 
hypothetical objection to the universality of this exemption of foreign vessels from 
visitation and search. " It is pressed as a difficulty," says the Judge, " what is to be done, 
if a French ship laden with slaves is brought in ? I answer without hesitation, restore the 
possession which has been unlawfully divested: rescind the illegal act done by your own 
subject, and leave the foreigner to the justice of his own country." 
 
Chief Justice Marshall, in the case of the Antelope, cites also this passage of the decision 
of Sir William Scott; but besides that it is a mere obiter dictum upon an imaginary case 
not before the court, it is assuredly not law within these United States. By the act of 
Congress of 2d of March, 1799, to regulate the collection of duties, &c., [section 99. U. 
S. Laws 3, 226,] " the officers of the revenue cutters are authorized, required and directed 
to go on board all ships or vessels which shall arrive within the United States, or within 
four leagues of the coast thereof' if bound for the United States, and to search and 
examine the same, and every part thereof," for the purposes of revenue. 
 
By the act of 2d of March, 1807, to prohibit the importation of slaves into the United 
States, [section 7, U. S. Laws 2, 96,] it is provided that " if any ship or vessel shall be 
found, from and after the first day of January, 1808, in any river, port, bay, or harbor, or 
on the high seas, within the jurisdictional limits of the United States, or hovering on the 
coast thereof, having on board any Negro, mulato, or person of color, for the purpose of 
selling them as slaves, or with intent to land the same in any port or place within the 
jurisdiction of the United States, contrary to the prohibition of this act, every such ship or 
vessel, together with her tackle, apparel and furniture, and the goods or effects which 
shall be found on board the same, shall be forfeited to the use of the United States, and 
may be seized, prosecuted and condemned in any court of the United States having 
jurisdiction thereof. And it shall be lawful for the President of the United States, and he is 
hereby authorized, should he deem it expedient, to cause any of the armed vessels of the


--- PAGE 247 ---
United States, to be manned and employed to cruise on any part of the coast of the United 
States or territories thereof, where he may judge attempts will be made to violate the 
provisions of this act, and to instruct and direct the commanders of armed vessels of the 
United States, to seize, take, and bring into any port of the United States all such ships or 
vessels, and moreover to seize, take and bring into any port of the United States, all ships 
or vessels of the United States wheresoever found on the high seas, contravening the 
provisions of this act, to be proceeded against according to law," &c. 
 
Here then are two very extensive limitations, by the laws of the United States, upon the 
doctrines of Sir William Scott, pronounced in the case of the Louis. These limitations 
embrace both the cases of the Antelope and of the Amistad. Yet in the case of the 
Antelope, Chief Justice Marshall cites the opinions of Sir William Scott in the case of the 
Louis, without any notice whatever of the statute laws of the United States contradictory 
to those opinions, and the Attorney General Grundy cites, in the case of the Amistad, the 
opinions of Chief Justice Marshall in that of the Antelope, as authority for a principle 
which in that very opinion the Chief justice declares not settled. 
 
The truth is, that the opinions of Sir William Scott in the case of the Louis, have 
reference only to the slave trade, and the shipment of slaves on the coast of Africa: the 
case of the Antelope was for the violation of the laws of the United States against the 
importation of slaves into the United States for sale. In all these cases the right of 
visitation and search of foreign vessels is not a merely belligerent right; it is exercised at 
all times, in peace or war, and if a French ship laden with slaves were found hovering on 
the coast of the United States, or within at least four leagues of their shores, and brought 
in, neither would the possession be unlawfully divested, nor would the foreigner be left to 
the justice of his own country. There is no act of Parliament against the importation of 
slaves into England for sale: the opinions of Sir William Scott look to no such case, for 
no such crime could then be committed. They had no application therefore to the case of 
the Antelope, and were very erroneously cited as warranting the surrender of that vessel 
and her cargo of Africans to the Spanish claimants. 
 
I have said that the decisions of all the courts of the United States in that case directing 
that surrender, are apologetic. They admit that the traffic in slaves is contrary to the law 
of nature; that it is inhuman, cruel, odious, detestable; but that it is not contrary to the law 
of nations, and therefore must be acknowledged, defended, protected and carried into 
execution for other nations by the Courts of the United States, although as abhorrent to 
our laws as to the laws of nature. For this distinction also, our courts are indebted to Sir 
William Scott, whose ingenuity in that same case of the Louis, lays down the following 
position, cited also approvingly, by Chief Justice Marshall, in his opinion upon the case 
of the Antelope. 
"A court," says the British Judge, " in the administration of law, cannot attribute 
criminality to an act where the law imputes none. It must look to the legal standard 
of morality; and upon a question of this nature, that standard must be found in the 
law of nations, as fixed and evidenced by general and ancient and admitted 
practice, by treaties, and by the general tenor of the laws and ordinances, and the


--- PAGE 248 ---
formal transactions of civilized states: and looking to these authorities, he found a 
difficulty in maintaining that the transaction was legally criminal." 
 
In the Declaration of Independence the Laws of Nature are announced and appealed to as 
identical with the laws of nature's God, and as the foundation of all obligatory human 
laws. But here Sir William Scott proclaims a legal standard of morality, differing from, 
opposed to, and transcending the standard of nature and of nature's God. This legal 
standard of morality must, he says, in the administration of law, be held, by a Court, to 
supersede the laws of God, and justify, before the tribunals of man, the most atrocious of 
crimes in the eyes of God. With such a principle it is not surprising that Sir William Scott 
should have found a difficulty in maintaining that the African slave trade was legally 
criminal, nor that one half the Supreme Court of the United States should have adopted 
his conclusions. It is consolatory to the friends of human virtue and of human freedom to 
know, that this error of the first concoction, in the moral principle of a British judge, has 
been, so far as relates to the African slave trade, laid prostrate by the moral sense of his 
own country, which has overcome the difficulty of finding the slave trade criminal, by the 
legal and national abolition of slavery itself. 
 
The decree of the Supreme Court, in 1825, " proceeding to give such decree as the Circuit 
Court ought to have given, did direct and order that the restitution to be made to the 
Spanish claimant should be according to the ratio which 93 (instead of 166) bears to the 
whole number, comprehending as well those originally on board the Antelope as those 
which were put on board that vessel by the captain of the Arraganta. After making the 
apportionment according to this ratio, and deducting from the number the rateable loss 
which must fall on the slaves, to which the Spanish claimants were originally entitled, the 
residue of the said 93 were to be delivered to the Spanish claimant, on the terms 
mentioned in the decree of the Circuit Court: and all the remaining Africans were to be 
delivered to the United States, to be disposed of according to law." 
 
A mandate issued to the Circuit Court for the district of Georgia for the execution of this 
decree. One would suppose that the Supreme Court had sufficiently manifested its 
disapprobation of the mode of settling the question of freedom and slavery, by lot; and 
yet was their decree, on this point, not 80 explicit, but that one of the two judges of the 
Circuit Court believed that the selection between the Africans to be delivered to the 
Spanish claimants as slaves, and those claimed by the Portuguese Vice Consul, but whom 
the Supreme Court had declared free, might still be made by lot. The other judge 
understood better the spirit of the Supreme tribunal; and hence arose a dilberence of 
opinion between the two judges of the Circuit Court, which sent the case back for a 
second judgment of the appellate court. The second judgment of the Supreme Court, in 
the case of the Antelope, was rendered at their February term, 1826, and is reported (11 
Wheaton, 413) as follows:—" Certificate.—A manda te having issued to the Circuit Court 
for the District of Georgia, to carry into execution the decree of this Court, pronounced at 
the February term, 1825, to deliver certain Africans, in the said decree mentioned, to the 
Spanish Consul for Spanish claimants; and the judges of that court having been divided in 
opinion respecting the mode of designating the said slaves to be delivered, and separating 
them from others to be delivered to the United States, whether the same should be made


--- PAGE 249 ---
by lot, or upon proof on the part of the Spanish claimant, it is ordered to be certified to 
the said Circuit Court of Georgia, that, in executing the said mandate, the Africans to be 
delivered must be designated by proof made to the satisfaction of the Court." 
 
To understand this difference of opinion, with regard to the mode of designating the 
Africans to be delivered up to the Spanish claimant and to slavery, it is to be 
remembered, that the libel of the Spanish Vice Consul before the District Court had 
claimed 150 of the Africans captured by Captain Jackson, and the libel of the Portuguese 
Vice Consul 130. That the decree of the District Court, founded on the report of the clerk, 
had awarded 142 of the 212 surviving Africans to the Portuguese, and 63 to the Spanish 
Vice Consul; while the subsequent decree of the Circuit Court, after a delay of one term 
and the admission of further evidence, had allotted in the ratio of 166 to the Spanish, and 
130 to the Portuguese claimants. That is, deducting from the Spanish number the 16 
persons drawn by lot and liberated, this decree gave to the Spanish and Portuguese Vice 
Consuls the ratio of the full number claimed by each of them in his respective libel. The 
Supreme Court, reversing this decree of the Circuit Court, had directed that the ratio of 
the whole number, to be delivered up to the Spanish Vice Consul should be reduced from 
166 to 93; and that number was still to be reduced by the rateable loss, which the clerk of 
the District Court had reported to be 30. And all the rest, by the decree of the Supreme 
Court, were to be liberated. If, then, the Africans to be delivered to the Spanish Vice 
Consul had been drawn from the whole number by lot, he would have received 63; but 
the Supreme Court having, upon this second appeal, decreed that the Spanish claimant 
must identify by proof of having been taken by the Arraganta, in the Antelope, every 
individual, to be delivered up to him, explicitly rejected, for the second time, the lot, as a 
mode of ascertaining freemen among slaves, and actually diminished the number of 
victims delivered up to the Spaniard, from 63 to 39. And this was the number finally 
delivered up by the decree of the Supreme Court of the United States of the captives of 
the Antelope to the Spanish Vice Consul. But this was not the last decision of the 
Supreme Court in the case. 
 
It was remanded to the Circuit Court, with directions to make a final disposition of the 
controversy between the parties pursuant to the principles of the decrees of 1825 and 
1826. And now came up the question, to use a vulgar but significant phrase, Who should 
pay the piper ? 
 
"The Circuit Court, [says the Report, 12 Wheaton, 547,] in order to enable it to decree 
finally in the case, directed the register to take and report an account of the costs, and also 
of the expenses of keeping, maintaining, &c. of the Africans, by the marshal, and which 
account (amounting to upwards of thirty-six thousand dollars) was accordingly reported. 
Exceptions were filed to the report by both the Portuguese and Spanish claimants. The 
Circuit Court also caused proofs to be taken, for the purpose of identifying. individually 
the Africans to be delivered to the Spanish claimants, as directed by the decree of 1816. 
 
Thus circumstanced, the case came on for final hearing before the Circuit Court. The 
Court decreed that the Portuguese claimant should not be made liable for costs, or any 
proportion of the expenses and charges of the marshal, for maintaining, &c. the Africans:


--- PAGE 250 ---
and being of opinion that 39 of the Africans were sufficiently identified, by proof, as 
being the property of the Spanish claimants, directed the 39 Africans, so identified, to be 
delivered to the Spanish claimants, upon their paying a proportion of the costs and 
expenses reported by the registrar, in the ratio of the number of Africans delivered to the 
whole number. And the Circuit Court was further of opinion, that the residue of the 
Africans not directed to be delivered to the Spanish claimants should be delivered to the 
United States, to be disposed of according to law: but on the question, whether they shall 
be delivered absolutely, or on condition of payment of the balance of the expenses which 
will remain unsatisfied, after charging the Africans adjudged to the Spanish claimants in 
their due ratio, the Judges of the Circuit Court being divided in opinion, ordered this 
difference of opinion to be ''certified to this Court." 
 
The United States District Attorney appealed from so much of this final order of the 
Circuit Court as related to the apportionment among the several parties of the costs and 
expenses in the preservation, maintenance, and custody of the said Africans, and of the 
costs and expenses of the various proceedings had in relation to the said Africans; and 
also from so much of said order as decreed 39 of the said Africans to the Spanish 
claimants. 
 
So extraordinary, so anti-judicial is every thing upon the records in this case of the 
Antelope, that the Supreme Court actually did not know what was the question upon 
which the judges of the Circuit Court were opposed in opinion—they supposed it was, 
whether the Africans not directed to be delivered to the Spanish claimants should be 
delivered by the marshal to the United States, absolutely and unconditionally, to be 
disposed of according to law, that is, to be liberated and sent home; or whether it should 
be imposed on the United States, as a condition precedent to their delivery, that the 
United States should pay to the marshal his claim for expenses, at the rate of sixteen cents 
a day for each African, (for several years) in the ratio of the number to be delivered to the 
United States. 
 
This, it will be perceived, was still the question of freedom or slavery to the poor 
Africans. If the decree had been, that the payment of these expenses, amounting to about 
350 dollars a head, was a condition precedent to their delivery to the United States, in the 
event of nonpayment, the marshal had a lien upon the Africans, and they would have 
been his slaves. 
 
The mode of proof admitted by the Circuit Court to identify the individuals to be doomed 
to slavery and delivery to the Spanish claimants cannot commend itself to the sense of 
justice, of humanity, or of freedom. Fifty of them, employed upon the fortifications, had 
been selected by the marshal, and recognized by a man named Grondona, who had been 
second officer on board the Antelope when the slaves were purchased and shipped in 
Africa. Grondona had since disappeared, and was said to be dead; but there were 
witnesses in Court who had been present at the examination when Grondona recognized 
thirty-four of the Negroes and they him, by speaking together, and by signs, though the 
witnesses knew no. thing of the language in which they spoke. Other witnesses testified 
to his having recognized five more. The Africans had no notice that their fate, as freemen


--- PAGE 251 ---
or slaves, was to depend on this recognition. They had no one to defend them, and protest 
for them, against the manner of disposing of their free dom. The examination was in open 
court, but the only evidence furnished was testimony to individuals whom Grondona had 
recognized and who had recognized him. Hearsay evidence of one whose language the 
witnesses did not understand! 
 
Yet the Supreme Court thought this evidence sufficient, under the very peculiar 
circumstances of this case, reasonably to satisfy the mind of the identity of thirty-nine of 
the Africans, as belonging to the Spanish claimants, and affirmed the decree of the 
Circuit Court for their delivery up to the Spanish Vice Consul. 
 
Under the very peculiar circumstances of the case, in order to enslave 39 human beings, 
otherwise entitled to freedom, evidence was deemed sufficient, which, upon an ordinary 
question of property, of five dollars value, between man and man, would have been 
rejected as inadmissible. 
 
The very peculiar circumstances of the case are quite as strongly masked, in the opinion 
of the judge of the Circuit Court, in December, 1826, as they had been in his preceding 
opinion, delivered in l821. In apologizing for the enormous amount of the marshal's bill, 
allowed by the court, which he is aware must expose the court, and the administration of 
justice in the country, to certain imputations, he says, "What could the court do? The 
United States regard the subjects of this suit as men and not things. They could not be 
sold, and the money lodged fin the registry. They were then prisoners, and necessarily to 
be kept and treated as such." Had he judge allowed his reason to advance one step 
further, he would have seen, that precisely because they were men and not things, 
precisely because they could not be sold, precisely because they must be kept and treated, 
if at all, as prisoners they could not be restored entire as merchandize, nor therefore, 
come within the purview of the 9th article of our treaty with Spain. 
" The next question," says the judge of the Circuit Court, " is, by whom these costs 
are to be paid? That the maintenance of the Africans was n legal charge on the 
United States, in the first instance, is perfectly clear. By the act of February 28, 
1799, in forcing them into the hands of the marshal, the United States became 
bound for their subsistence." 
 
The judge of the Circuit Court further affirms, that the Supreme Court, by its 
decree of 1825, and explanatory decree of 1826, established seven principles; the 
first of which, in his enumeration, is—" That the lay of nations recognized both 
slavery and the slave-trade." 
 
But Chief Justice Marshall, in delivering the opinion and pronouncing the decree of 
the Supreme Court in 1825, declared that, on the question of the restitution to the 
Spanish claimant, which depended entirely upon the recognition of the slave-trade 
by the LAW of nations, " the Court divided on it, and, consequently, NO 
PRINCIPLE IS SETTLED. '


--- PAGE 252 ---
The judge of the Circuit Court was, therefore, in manifest error when he said that the 
Supreme Court had, by the decrees of 1825 and 1826, established the principle, that the 
law of nations recognized both slavery and the slave-trade. And this mistake discloses the 
source of that great perplexity, which troubles him, to find a consistency between the 
principle which he erroneously supposes them to have established, and their decree for 
carrying it into execution. It is not our business to inquire into the reasons of that Court. " 
We must give effect to it according to what we understand to be its meaning. And, upon 
collating and combining their decree of 1825 with the explanatory decree of 1826, the 
two will be found to amount to this—that the rights of the Spaniards shall be recognized; 
but, in reducing that right to possession, they shall be held to have established a claim 
originally to ninety-three, which number shall be reduced by the average of deaths; and to 
the number so ascertained, they shall be held to produce proof of individual identity. But 
all the cargo, with the exception of those to be thus identified, shall be delivered over to 
the United States. This will be doing what that Court certainly intended to do: it will 
make a final disposition of a most troublesome charge. It is our duty (says he) to find out 
the meaning of the decree of the Supreme Court, and to obey it. And here it is evident, 
that although their reasoning, and the principles recognized, would seem to go fully up to 
the maintenance of the Spanish right, yet the decree, in its details, sustains those rights 
under very important limits and modifications." 
 
And such is the history of the case of the Antelope in the judicial tribunals of the United 
States. That vessel, commanded by a citizen of the United States, was taken in the very 
act of smuggling 258 Africans into the United States for sale as slaves, and by the plain, 
unquestionable letter of the 4th section of an act of Congress of 20th April, 1818, was 
forfeited; while, by an act in addition to the acts prohibiting the slave-trade, of 3d March, 
1819, every African thus imported in the Antelope was made free, —subject only to safe 
keeping, support, and removal beyond the limits of the United States, by direction of their 
President. 
 
After seven years of litigation in the Courts of the United States, and, of course, of 
captivity to nearly all of these Africans who survived the operation; after decrees of the 
District Court, reversed by the Circuit Court, and three successive annual reversals by the 
Supreme Court of the decrees of the Circuit Court; what was the result of this most 
troublesome charge ? 
 
The vessel was restored to certain Spanish slave-traders in the island of Cuba. Of the 
Africans, about fifty had perished by the benignity of their treatment in this land of 
liberty, during its suspended animation as to them; sixteen, drawn by lot from the whole 
number, (by the merciful dispensation of the Circuit Court, under the arbitrary 
enlargement of the tender mercies of the District Judge, which had limited the number to 
seven,)—sixteen had drawn the prize of libert y, to which the whole number were entitled 
by the letter of the law; and of the remainder, THIRTY-NINE upon evidence 
inadmissible upon the most trifling question of property in any court of justice, were, 
under the very peculiar circumstances of the case, surrendered! delivered up to the 
Spanish vice-consul—AS SLAVES! To the rest was at last extended the benefit of the


--- PAGE 253 ---
laws which had foreordained their emancipation. They were delivered over to safe 
keeping, support, and transportation, as freemen, beyond the limits of the United States, 
by the Chief Magistrate of the Union. 
 
And now, by what possible process of reasoning can any decision of the Supreme Court 
of the United States in the case of the Antelope, be adducedas authorizing the President 
of the United States to seize and deliver up to the order of the Spanish minister the 
captives of the Amistad? Even the judge of the District Court in Georgia, who would 
have enslaved all the unfortunates of the Antelope but seven, distinctly admitted, that, if 
they had been bought in Africa after the prohibition of the trade by Spain, he would have 
liberated them all. 
 
In delivering the opinion of the Supreme Court, on their first decree in the case of the 
Antelope, Chief Justice Marshall, after reviewing the decisions in the British Courts of 
Admiralty, says, " The principle common to these cases is, that the legality of the capture 
of a vessel engaged in the slave-trade depends on the law of the country to which the 
vessel belongs. If that law gives its sanction to the trade, restitution will be decreed: if 
that law prohibits it, the vessel and cargo will be condemned as good prize." 
 
It was by the application of this principle, to the fact, that, at the time when the Antelope 
was taken by the Arraganta, the slave-trade, in which the Antelope was engaged, had not 
yet been made unlawful by Spain, that the Supreme Court affirmed so much of the decree 
of the Circuit Court as directed restitution to the Spanish claimant of the Africans found 
on board the Antelope when captured by the Arraganta. 
 
But by the same identical principle, applied to the case of the Amistad, if, when captured 
by Lieutenant Gedney, she and her cargo had been in possession of the Spaniards, and the 
Africans in the condition of slaves, the vessel would have been condemned, and the 
slaves liberated, by the laws of the United States; because she was engaged in the 
slave-trade in violation of the laws of Spain. She was in possession of the Africans, 
self-emancipated, and not in the condition of slaves. That, surely, could not legalize the 
trade in which she had been engaged. By the principle asserted in the opinion of the 
Supreme Court, declared by Chief Justice Marshall, it would have saved the vessel, at 
once, from condemnation and from restitution, and would have relieved the Court from 
the necessity of restoring to the Africans their freedom. Thus the opinion of the Supreme 
Court, as declared by the Chief Justice, in the case of the Antelope, was a fact, an 
authority in point, against the surrender of the Amistad, and in favor of the liberation of 
the Africans taken in her, even if they had been, when taken, in the condition of slaves. 
How monstrous, then, is the claim upon the Courts of the United States to re-inslave 
them, as thralls to the Spaniards, Ruiz and Montes! or to transport them beyond the seas, 
at the demand of the Minister of Spain! 
 
I said, when I began this plea, that my final reliance for success in this case was on this 
Court as a court of JUSTICE; and in the confidence this fact inspired that, in the 
administration of justice, in a case of no less importance than the liberty and the life of a 
large number of persons, this Court would not decide but on a due consideration of all the


--- PAGE 254 ---
rights, both natural and social, of every one of these individuals. I have endeavored to 
show that they are entitled to their liberty from this Court. l have avoided, purposely 
avoided, and this Court will do justice to the motive for which I have avoided, a 
recurrence to those first principles of liberty which might well have been invoked in the 
argument of this cause. I have shown that Ruiz and Montes, the only parties in interest 
here, for whose sole benefit this suit is carried on by the Government, were acting at the 
time in a way that is forbidden by the laws of Great Britain, of Spain, and of the United 
States, and that the mere signature of the Governor General of Cuba ought not to prevail 
over the ample evidence in the case that these Negroes were free and had a right to assert 
their liberty. I have shown that the papers in question are absolutely null and insufficient 
as passports for persons, and still more invalid to convey or prove a title to property. 
 
The Conclusion of the Argument of John Quincy Adams 
 
The review of the case of the Antelope, and my argument in behalf of the captives of the 
Amistad, is closed. 
 
May it please your Honors: On the 7th of February, 1804, now more than thirty-seven 
years past, my name was entered, and yet stands recorded, on both the rolls, as one of the 
Attorneys and Counsellors of this Court. Five years later, in February and March, 1809, I 
appeared for the last time before this Court, in defence of the cause of justice' and of 
important rights, in which many of my fellow -citizens had property to a large amount at 
stake. Very shortly afterwards, I was called to the discharge of other duties—first in 
distant lands, and in later years, within our own country, but in different departments of 
her Government. 
 
Little did I imagine that I should ever again be required to claim the right of appearing in 
the capacity of an officer of this Court; yet such has been the dictate of my destiny—and 
I appear again to plead the cause of justice, and now of liberty and life, in behalf of many 
of my fellow men, before that same Court, which in a former age I had addressed in 
support of rights of property I stand again, I trust for the last time, before the same 
Court— 'hic caestus, artemque repono." I stand before the same Court, but not before the 
same judges—nor aided by the same associat es —nor resisted by the same opponents. As 
I cast my eyes along those seats of honor and of public trust, now occupied by you, they 
seek in vain for one of those honored and honorable persons whose indulgence listened 
then to my voice. Marshall—Cushin g—Chase—Washington—Johnson—Livingston— 
Todd—Where are they ? Where is that eloqu ent statesman and learned lawyer who was 
my associate counsel in the management of that cause, Robert Goodloe Harper? Where is 
that brilliant luminary, so long the pride of Maryland and of the American Bar, then my 
opposing counsel, Luther Martin? Where is the excellent clerk of that day, whose name 
has been inscribed on the shores of Africa, as a monument of his abhorrence of the 
African slave-trade, Elias B. Caldwell, Where is the marshal—where are the criers of the 
Court I Alas! where is one of the very judges of the Court, arbiters of life and death, 
before whom I commenced this anxious argument, even now prematurely closed? Where 
are they all I Gone ! Gone ! All gone!— Gone from the serv ices which, in their day and 
generation, they faithfully rendered to their country. From the excellent characters which


--- PAGE 255 ---
they sustained in life, so far as I have had the means of knowing, I humbly hope, and 
fondly trust, that they have gone to receive the rewards of blessedness on high. In taking, 
then, my final leave of this Bar, and of this Honorable Court, I can only ejaculate a 
fervent petition to Heaven, that every member of it may go to his final account with as 
little of earthly frailty to answer for as those illustrious dead, and that you may, every 
one, after the close of a long and virtuous career in this world, be received at the portals 
of the next with the approving sentence— "Well done, good and faithful servant; enter 
thou into the joy of thy Lord." 
Mr. Justice STORY delivered the opinion of the Court.  
This is the case of an appeal from the decree of the 
Circuit Court of the District of Connecticut, sitting in 
admiralty. The leading facts, as they appear upon the 
transcript of the proceedings, are as follows: On the 27th 
of June, 1839, the schooner L'Amistad, being the property 
of Spanish subjects, cleared out from the port of Havana, 
in the island of Cuba, for Puerto Principe, in the same 
island. On board of the schooner were the captain, Ransom 
Ferrer, and Jose Ruiz, and Pedro Montez, all Spanish 
subjects. The former had with him a negro boy, named 
Antonio, claimed to be his slave. Jose Ruiz had with him 
forty-nine negroes, claimed by him as his slaves, and 
stated to be his property, in a certain pass or document, 
signed by the Governor General of Cuba. Pedro Montez had 
with him four other negroes, also claimed by him as his 
slaves, and stated to be his property, in a similar pass or 
document, also signed by the Governor General of Cuba. On 
the voyage, and before the arrival of the vessel at her 
port of destination, the negroes rose, killed the captain, 
and took possession of her. On the 26th of August, the 
vessel was discovered by Lieutenant Gedney, of the United 
States brig Washington, at anchor on the high seas, at the 
distance of half a mile from the shore of Long Island. A 
part of the negroes were then on shore at Culloden Point, 
Long Island; who were seized by Lieutenant Gedney, and 
brought on board. The vessel, with the negroes and other 
persons on board, was brought by Lieutenant Gedney into the 
district of Connecticut, and there libelled for salvage in 
the District Court of the United States. A libel for 
salvage was also filed by Henry Green and Pelatiah Fordham, 
of Sag Harbour, Long Island. On the 18th of September, Ruiz 
and Montez filed claims and libels, in which they asserted 
their ownership of the negroes as their slaves, and of 
certain parts of the cargo, and prayed that the same might 
be "delivered to them, or to the representatives of her 
Catholic majesty, as might be most proper." On the 19th of


--- PAGE 256 ---
September, the Attorney of the United states, for the 
district of Connecticut, filed an information or libel, 
setting forth, that the Spanish minister had officially 
presented to the proper department of the government of the 
United States, a claim for the restoration of the vessel, 
cargo, and slaves, as the property of Spanish subjects, 
which had arrived within the jurisdictional limits of the 
United States, and were taken possession of by the said 
public armed brig of the United States; under such 
circumstances as made it the duty of the United States to 
cause the same to be restored to the true proprietors, 
pursuant to the treaty between the United States and Spain: 
and praying the Court, on its being made legally to appear 
that the claim of the Spanish minister was well founded, to 
make such order for the disposal of the vesel, cargo, and 
slaves, as would best enable the United States to comply 
with their treaty stipulations. But if it should appear, 
that the negroes were persons transported from Africa, in 
violation of the laws of the United States, and brought 
within the United States contrary to the same laws; he then 
prayed the Court to make such order for their removal to 
the coast of Africa, pursuant to the laws of the United 
States, as it should deem fit.  
On the 19th of November, the Attorney of the United States 
filed a second information or libel, similar to the first, 
with the exception of the second prayer above set forth in 
his former one. On the same day, Antonio G. Vega, the vice-
consul of Spain, for the state of Connecticut, filed his 
libel, alleging that Antonio was a slave, the property of 
the representatives of Ramon Ferrer, and praying the Court 
to cause him to be delivered to the said vice-consul, that 
he might be returned by him to his lawful owner in the 
island of Cuba.  
On the 7th of January, 1840, the negroes, Cinque and 
others, with the exception of Antonio, by their counsel, 
filed an answer, denying that they were slaves, or the 
property of Ruiz and Montez, or that the Court could, under 
the Constitution or laws of the United States, or under any 
treaty, exercise any jurisdiction over their persons, by 
reason of the premises; and praying that they might be 
dismissed. They specially set forth and insist in this 
answer, that they were native born Africans; born free, and 
still of right ought to be free and not slaves; that they 
were, on or about the 15th of April, 1839, unlawfully 
kidnapped, and forcibly and wrongfully carried on board a


--- PAGE 257 ---
certain vessel on the coast of Africa, which was unlawfully 
engaged in the slave trade, and were unlawfully transported 
in the same vessel to the island of Cuba, for the purpose 
of being there unlawfully sold as slaves; that Ruiz and 
Montez, well knowing the premises, made a pretended 
purchase of them: that afterwards, on or about the 28th of 
June, u839, Ruiz and Montez, confederating with Ferrer, 
(captain of the Amistad,) caused them, without law or 
right, to be placed on board of the Amistad, to be 
transported to some place unknown to them, and there to be 
enslaved for life; that, on the voyage, they rose on the 
master, and took possession of the vessel, intending to 
return therewith to their native country, or to seek an 
asylum in some free state; and the vessel arrived, about 
the 26th of August, 1839, off Montauk Point, near Long 
Island; a part of them were sent on shore, and were seized 
by Lieutenant Gedney, and carried on board; and all of them 
were afterwards brought by him into the district of 
Connecticut.  
On the 7th of January, 1840, Jose Antonio Tellincas, and 
Messrs. Aspe and Laca, all Spanish subjects, residing in 
Cuba, filed their claims, as owners to certain portions of 
the goods found on board of the schooner L'Amistad.  
On the same day, all the libellants and claimants, by their 
counsel, except Jose Ruiz and Pedro Montez, (whose libels 
and claims, as stated of record, respectively, were pursued 
by the Spanish minister, the same being merged in his 
claims,) appeared, and the negroes also appeared by their 
counsel; and the case was heard on thie libels, claims, 
answers, and testimony of witnesses.  
On the 23d day of January, 1840, the District Court made a 
decree. By that decree, the Court rejected the claim of 
Green and Fordham for salvage, but allowed salvage to 
Lieutenant Gedney and others, on the vessel and cargo, of 
one-third of the value thereof, but not on the negroes, 
Cinque and others; it allowed the claim of Tellincas, and 
Aspe and Laca with the exception of the above-mentioned 
salvage; it dismissed the libels and claims of Ruiz and 
Montez, with costs, as being included under the claim of 
the Spanish minister; it allowed the claim of the Spanish 
vice-consul for Antonio, on behalf of Ferrer's 
representatives; it rejected the claims of Ruiz and Montez 
for the delivery of the negroes, but admitted them for the 
cargo, with the exception of the above-mentioned salvage;


--- PAGE 258 ---
it rejected the claim made by the Attorney of the United 
States on behalf of the Spanish minister, for the 
restoration of the negroes under the treaty; but it decreed 
that they should be delivered to the President of the 
United States, to be transported to Africa, pursuant to the 
act of 3d March, 1819.  
From this decree the District Attorney, on behalf of the 
United States, appealed to the Circuit Court, except so far 
as related to the restoration of the slave Antonio. The 
claimants, Tellincas, and Aspe and Laca, also appealed from 
that part of the decree which awarded salvage on the 
property respectively claimed by them. No appeal was 
interposed by Ruiz or Montez, or on behalf of the 
representatives of the owners of the Amistad. The Circuit 
Court, by a mere pro forma decree, affirmed the decree of 
the District Court, reserving the question of salvage upon 
the claims of Tellincas, and Aspe and Laca. And from that 
decree the present appeal has been brought to this Court.  
The cause has been very elaborately argued, as well upon 
the merits, as upon a motion on behalf of the appellees to 
dismiss the appeal. On the part of the United States, it 
has been contended, 1. That due and sufficient proof 
concerning the property has been made to authorize the 
restitution of the vessel, cargo, and negroes to the 
Spanish subjects on whose behalf they are claimed pursuant 
to the treaty with Spain, of the 27th of October, 1795. 2. 
That the United States had a right to intervene in the 
manner in which they have done, to obtain a decree for the 
restitution of the property, upon the application of the 
Spanish minister. These propositions have been strenuously 
denied on the other side. Other collateral and incidental 
points have been stated, upon which it is not necessary at 
this moment to dwell.  
Before entering upon the discussion of the main points 
involved in this interesting and important controversy, it 
may be necessary to say a few words as to the actual 
posture of the case as it now stands before us. In the 
first place, then, the only parties now before the Court on 
one side, are the United States, intervening for the sole 
purpose of procuring restitution of the property as Spanish 
property, pursuant to the treaty, upon the grounds stated 
by the other parties claiming the property in their 
respective libels. The United States do not assert any 
property in themselves, or any violation of their own


--- PAGE 259 ---
rights, or sovereignty, or laws, by the acts complained of. 
They do not insist that these negroes have been imported 
into the United States, in contravention of our own slave 
trade acts. They do not seek to have these negroes 
delivered up for the purpose of being transported to Cuba 
as pirates or robbers, or as fugitive criminals against the 
laws of Spain. They do not assert that the seizure, and 
bringing the vessel, and cargo, and negroes into port, by 
Lieutenant Gedney, for the purpose of adjudication, is a 
tortious act. They simply confine themselves to the right 
of the Spanish claimants to the restitution of their 
property, upon the facts asserted in their respective 
allegations.  
In the next place, the parties before the Court on the 
other side as appellees, are Lieutenant Gedney, on his 
libel for salvage, and the negroes, (Cinque, and others,) 
asserting themselves, in their answer, not to be slaves, 
but free native Africans, kidnapped in their own country, 
and illegally transported by force from that country; and 
now entitled to maintain their freedom.  
No question has been here made, as to the proprietary 
interests in the vessel and cargo. It is admitted that they 
belong to Spanish subjects, and that they ought to be 
restored. The only point on this head is, whether the 
restitution ought to be upon the pyament of salvage or not? 
The main controversy is, whether these negroes are the 
property of Ruiz and Montez, and ought to be delivered up; 
and to this, accordingly, we shall first direct our 
attention.  
It has been argued on behalf of the United States, that the 
Court are bound to deliver them up, according to the treaty 
of 1795, with Spain, which has in this particular been 
continued in full force, by the treaty of 1819, ratified in 
1821. The sixth article of that treaty, seems to have had, 
principally, in view cases where the property of the 
subjects of either state had been taken possession of 
within the territorial jurisdiction of the other, during 
war. The eighth article provides for cases where the 
shipping of the inhabitants of either state are forced, 
through stress of weather, pursuit of pirates, or enemies, 
or any other urgent necessity, to seek shelter in the ports 
of the other. There may well be some doubt entertained, 
whether the present case, in its actual circumstances, 
falls within the purview of this article. But it does not


--- PAGE 260 ---
seem necessary, for reasons hereafter stated, absolutely to 
decide it. The ninth article provides, "that all ships and 
merchandise, of what nature soever, which shall be rescued 
out of the hands of any pirates or robbers, on the high 
seas, shall be brought into some port of either state, and 
shall be delivered to the custody of the officers of that 
port, in order to be taken care of and restored entire to 
the true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof 
shall be made concerning the property thereof." This is the 
article on which the main reliance is placed on behalf of 
the United States, for the restitution of these negroes. To 
bring the case within the article, it is essential to 
establish, First, That these negroes, under all the 
circumstances, fall within the description of merchandise, 
in the sense of the treaty. Secondly, That there has been a 
rescue of them on the high seas, out of the hands of the 
pirates and robbers; which, in the present case, can only 
be, by showing that they themselves are pirates and 
robbers; and, Thirdly, That Ruiz and Montez, the asserted 
proprietors, are the true proprietors, and have established 
their title by competent proof.  
If these negroes were, at the time, lawfully held as slaves 
under the laws of Spain, and recognised by those laws as 
property capable of being lawfully bought and sold; we see 
no reason why they may not justly be deemed within the 
intent of the treaty, to be included under the denomination 
of merchandise, and, as such, ought to be restored to the 
claimants: for, upon that point, the laws of Spain would 
seem to furnish the proper rule of interpretation. But, 
admitting this, it is clear, in our opinion, that neither 
of the other essential facts and requisites has been 
established in proof; and the onus probandi of both lies 
upon the claimants to give rise to the causes foederis. It 
is plain beyond controversy, if we examine the evidence, 
that these negroes never were the lawful slaves of Ruiz or 
Montez, or of any other Spanish subjects. They are natives 
of Africa, and were kidnapped there, and were unlawfully 
transported to Cuba, in violation of the laws and treaties 
of Spain, and the most solemn edicts and declarations of 
that government. By those laws, and treaties, and edicts, 
the African slave trade is utterly abolished; the dealing 
in that trade is deemed a heinous crime; and the negroes 
thereby introduced into the dominions of Spain, are 
declared to be free. Ruiz and Montez are proved to have 
made the pretended purchase of these negroes, with a full 
knowledge of all the circumstances. And so cogent and


--- PAGE 261 ---
irresistible is the evidence in this respect, that the 
District Attorney has admitted in open Court, upon the 
record, that these negroes were native Africans, and 
recently imported into Cuba, as alleged in their answers to 
the libels in the case. The supposed proprietary interest 
of Ruiz and Montez, is completely displaced, if we are at 
liberty to look at the evidence of the admissions of the 
District Attorney.  
It, then, these negroes are not slaves, but are kidnapped 
Africans, who, by the laws of Spain itself, are entitled to 
their freedom, and were kidnapped and illegally carried to 
Cuba, and illegally detained and restrained on board of the 
Amistad; there is no pretence to say, that they are pirates 
or robbers. We may lament the dreadful acts, by which they 
asserted their liberty, and took possession of the Amistad, 
and endeavoured to regain their native country; but they 
cannot be deemed pirates or robbers in the sense of the law 
of nations, or the treaty with Spain, or the laws of Spain 
itself; at least so far as those laws have been brought to 
our knowledge. Nor do the libels of Ruiz or Montez assert 
them to be such.  
This posture of the facts would seem, of itself, to put an 
end to the Whole inquiry upon the merits. But it is argued, 
on behalf of the United States, that the ship, and cargo, 
and negroes were duly documented as belonging to Spanish 
subjects, and this Court have no right to look behind these 
documents; that full faith and credit is to be given to 
them; and that they are to be held conclusive evidence in 
this cause, even although it sould be established by the 
most satisfactory proofs, that they have been obtained by 
the grossest frauds and impositions upon the constituted 
authorities of Spain.To this argument we can, in no wise, 
assent. There is nothing in the treaty which justifies or 
sustains the argument.We do not here meddle with the point, 
whether there has been any connivance in this illegal 
traffic, on the part of any of the colonial authorities or 
subordinate officers of Cuba; because, in our view, such an 
examination is unnecessary, and ought not to be pursued, 
unless it were indispensable to public justice, although it 
has been strongly pressed at the bar. What we proceed upon 
is this, that although public documents of the government, 
accompanying property found on board of the private ships 
of a foreign nation, certainly are to be deemed prima facie 
evidence of the facts which they purport to state, yet they 
are always open to be impugned for fraud; and whether that


--- PAGE 262 ---
fraud be in the original obtaining of these documents, or 
in the subsequent fraudulent and illegal use of them, when 
once it is satisfactorily established, it overthrows all 
their sanctity, and destroys them as proof. Fraud will 
vitiate any, even the most solemn transactions; and an 
asserted title to property, founded upon it, is utterly 
void. The very language of the ninth article of the treaty 
of 1795, requires the proprietor to make due and sufficient 
proof of his property. And how can that proof be deemed 
either due or sufficient, which is but a connected, and 
stained tissue of fraud? This is not a mere rule of 
municipal jurisprudence. Nothing is more clear in the law 
of nations, as an established rule to regulate their 
rights, and duties, and intercourse, than the doctrine, 
that the ship's papers are but prima facie evidence, and 
that, if they are shown to be fraudulent, they are not to 
be held proof of any valid title. This rule is familiarly 
applied, and, indeed, is of every-days occurrence in cases 
of prize, in the contests between belligerents and 
neutrals, as is apparent from numerous cases to be found in 
the Reports of this Court; and it is just as applicable to 
the transactions of civil intercourse between nations in 
times of peace. If a private ship, clothed with Spanish 
papers, should enter the ports of the United States, 
claiming the privileges, and immunities, and rights 
belonging to bona fide subjects of Spain, under our 
treaties or laws, and she should, in reality, belong to the 
subjects of another nation, which was not entitled to any 
such privileges, immunities, or rights, and the proprietors 
were seeking, by fraud, to cover their own illegal acts, 
under the flag of Spain; there can be no doubt, that it 
would be the duty of our Courts to strip off the disguise, 
and to look at the case according to its naked realities. 
In the solemn treaties between nations, it can never be 
presumed that either state intends to provide the means of 
perpetrating or protecting frauds; but all the provisions 
are to be construed as intended to be applied to bona fide 
transactions. The seventeenth article of the treaty with 
Spain, which provides for certain passports and 
certificates, as evidence of property on board of the ships 
of both states, is, in its terms, applicable only to cases 
where either of the parties is engaged in a war. This 
article required a certain form of passport to be agreed 
upon by the parties, and annexed to the treaty. It never 
was annexed; and, therefore, in the case of the Amiable 
Isabella, 6 Wheaton, 1, it was held inoperative.


--- PAGE 263 ---
It is also a most important consideration in the present 
case, which ought not to be lost sight of, that, supposing 
these African negroes not to be slaves, but kidnapped, and 
free negroes, the treaty with Spain cannot be obligatory 
upon them; and the United States are bound to respect their 
rights as much as those of Spanish subjects. The conflict 
of rights between the parties under such circumstances, 
becomes positive and inevitable, and must be decided upon 
the eternal principles of justice and international law. If 
the contest were about any goods on board of this ship, to 
which American citizens asserted a title, which was denied 
by the Spanish claimants, there could be no doubt of the 
right of such American citizens to litigate their claims 
before any competent American tribunal, notwithstanding the 
treaty with Spain. A fortiori, the doctrine must apply 
where human life and human liberty are in issue; and 
constitute the very essence of the controversy. The treaty 
with Spain never could have intended to take away the equal 
rights of all foreigners, who should contest their claims 
before any of our Courts, to equal justice; or to deprive 
such foreigners of the protection given them by other 
treaties, or by the general law of nations. Upon the merits 
of the case, then, there does not seem to us to be any 
ground for doubt, that these negroes ought to be deemed 
free; and that the Spanish treaty interposes no obstacle to 
the just assertion of their rights.  
There is another consideration growing out of this part of 
the case, which necessarily rises in judgment. It is 
observable, that the United States, in their original 
claim, filed it in the alternative, to have the negroes, if 
slaves and Spanish property, restored to the proprietors; 
or, if not slaves, but negroes who had been transported 
from Africa, in violation of the laws of the United States, 
and brought into the United States contrary to the same 
laws, then the Court to pass an order to enable the United 
States to remove such persons to the coast of Africa, to be 
delivered there to such agent as may be authorized to 
receive and provide for them. At a subsequent period, this 
last alternative claim was not insisted on, and another 
claim was interposed, omitting it; from which the 
conclusion naturally arises that it was abandoned. The 
decree of the District Court, however, contained an order 
for the delivery of the negroes to the United States, to be 
transported to the coast of Africa, under the act of the 3d 
of March, 1819, ch. 224. The United States do not now 
insist upon any affirmance of this part of the decree; and,


--- PAGE 264 ---
in our judgment, upon the admitted facts, there is no 
ground to assert that the case comes within the purview of 
the act of 1819, or of any other of our prohibitory slave 
trade acts. These negroes were never taken from Africa, or 
brought to the United States in contravention of those 
acts. When the Amistad arrived she was in possession of the 
negroes, asserting their freedom; and in no sense could 
they possibly intend to import themselves here, as slaves, 
or for sale as slaves. In this view of the matter, that 
part of the decree of the District Court is unmaintainable, 
and must be reversed.  
The view which has been thus taken of this case, upon the 
merits, under the first point, renders it wholly 
unnecessary for us to give any opinion upon the other 
point, as to the right of the United States to intervene in 
this case in the manner already stated. We dismiss this, 
therefore, as well as several minor points made at the 
argument.  
As to the claim of Lieutenant Gedney for the salvage 
service, it is understood that the United States do not now 
desire to interpose any obstacle to the allowance of it, if 
it is deemed reasonable by the Court. It was a highly 
meritorious and useful service to the proprietors of the 
ship and cargo; and such as, by the general principles of 
maritime law, is always deemed a just foundation for 
salvage. The rate allowed by the Court, does not seem to us 
to have been beyond the exercise of a sound discretion, 
under the very peculiar and embarrassing circumstances of 
the case.  
Upon the whole, our opinion is, that the decree of the 
Circuit Court, affirming that of the District Court, ought 
to be affirmed, except so far as it directs the negroes to 
be delivered to the President, to be transported to Africa, 
in pursuance of the act of the 3d of March, 1819; and, as 
to this, it ought to be reversed: and that the said negroes 
be declared to be free, and be dismissed from the custody 
of the Court, and go without day.  
Mr. Jusitce BALDWIN dissented.  
This cause came on to be heard on the transcript of the 
record from the Circuit Court of the United States, for the 
District of Connecticut, and was argued by counsel. On 
consideration whereof, it is the opinion of this Court,


--- PAGE 265 ---
that there is error in that part of the decree of the 
Circuit Court, affirming the decree of the District Court, 
which ordered the said negroes to be delivered to the 
President of the United States, to be transported to 
Africa, in pursuance of the act of Congress, of the 3d of 
March, 1819; and that, as to that part, it ought to be 
reversed: and, in all other respects, that the said decree 
of the Circuit Court ought to be affirmed. It is therefore 
ordered adjudged, and decreed by this Court, that the 
decree of the said Circuit Court be, and the same is 
hereby, affirmed, except as to the part aforesaid, and as 
to that part, that it be reversed; and that the cause be 
remanded to the Circuit Court, with directions to enter, in 
lieu of that part, a decree, that the said negroes be, and 
are hereby, declared to be free, and that they be dismissed 
from the custody of the Court, and be discharged from the 
suit and go thereof quit without day.  
LETTER FROM LEWIS TAPPAN (SEPT. 9, 1839) 
I arrived here last Friday evening, with three men who are natives of Africa, and 
who were joined the next day by two others, to act as interpreters in conversing with 
Joseph Cinquez and his comrades. On going to the jail, the next morning, we found 
to our great disappointment, that only one of the men, J. F. was able to converse 
with the prisoners. He is about 30 years of age, a native of Geshee or Gishe, which is 
about 100 or 150 miles from the mouth of the river Gallinas, in the interior, which is 
about a day’s journey south of Sierra Leone. He was kidnapped when about 12 
years of age, and was liberated in Colombia, by Bolivar. He is able to converse a 
little in the Mandingo dialect, but understands better that of Gallinao, which some 
of the prisoners can speak. Most of the prisoners can understand him, although 
none of them can speak his Geshee dialect. You may imagine the joy manifested by 
these poor Africans, when they heard one of their own color address them in a 
friendly manner, and in a language they could comprehend!  
The prisoners are in comfortable rooms.--They are well clothed in dark striped 
cotton trowsers, called by some of the manufacturers “hard times,” and in striped 
cotton shirts. The girls are in calico frocks, and have made the little shawls that 
were given them into turbans. The prisoners eyed the clothes some time, and 
laughed a good deal among themselves before they put them on. Their food is 
brought to them in separate tin pans, and they eat it in an orderly manner. In 
general, they are in good health. One of their number, however, died on Tuesday 
last, and two or three more are on the sick list and considered dangerous. They 
probably suffer for want of exercise in the open air. The four children are 
apparently from 10 to 12 years of age. The boy and two of the girls (who appeared 
to be sisters) are Mandingos, and the other girl is from Congo. They are robust, are 
full of hilarity, especially the Mandingos. The sheriff of the county took them to ride


--- PAGE 266 ---
in a wagon on Friday. At first their eyes were filled with tears, and they seemed to 
be afraid, but soon they enjoyed themselves very well, and appeared to be greatly 
delighted. The children speak only their native dialects. Neither Cinquez nor any of 
his comrades have been manacled since they have been here. Their demeanor is 
altogether quiet, kind, and orderly.  
Most of the prisoners told the interpreter that they are from Mandingo. The district 
of Mandingo, in the Senegambia country, is bounded by the Atlantic Ocean, and is 
directly north of Liberia. Two or three of the men, besides one of the little girls, are 
natives of Congo, which is on the coast just south of the equator. The man with some 
of his teeth like tusks, is from Gahula in Congo. The teeth are said to be sharpened 
and made thus prominent by artificial means. One of the men from Mandingo, 
named Dama, talks Mandingo, and is a good looking and intelligent man. Cinquez is 
about 5 feet 8 inches high, of fine proportions, with a noble air. Indeed, the whole 
company, although thin in flesh, and generally of slight forms, and limbs, especially, 
are as good looking and intelligent a body of men as we usually meet with. All are 
young, and several are quite striplings. The Mandingos are described in books as 
being a very gentle race, cheerful in their dispositions, inquisitive, credulous, simple 
hearted, and much given to trading propensities. The Mandingo dialects are spoken 
extensively, and it is said to be the commercial language of nearly the whole coast of 
West Africa. We found that the following words are nearly the same in the Gallinas 
of the interpreter, in the Mandingo of the prisoners, in the Mandingo of Mungo 
Park, and in Jallowka of the German author Adeburg, viz: --Sun, moon, woman, 
child, father, head, hand, and foot. The numerals do not agree so well. If any person, 
who reads this statement, can furnish the Committee information concerning the 
Mandingo language, and its different dialects, particularly for vocabularies, they 
may render important service in the future examination of these unfortunate 
Africans. Professor Gibbs, of Yale College, has Adeburg’s Mithridates, Park’s 
Travels, and Mollien’s Travels in Africa, and Professor Silliman has Prichard’s 
Physical History of Mankind, which are at the service of the Committee.  
Senegambia extends 800 miles in length, and where widest is about 700 miles. It is 
inhabited by different tribes, all negroes, living under petty sovereigns. Among these 
nations, the Foulahs, Jalcops, and Mandingoes, are the most numerous. Others less 
prominent are the Feloops, Naloes, Pagoes, Susoos, Timmancis, &c. The Foulahs are 
Mahomedans . The Mandingoes are the most numerous people of this region. These 
are partly Mahomedans and partly Pagans. Their original country is Manding, of 
which the government is said to be a species of republicanism. Nearly all the 
prisoners appear to be people of this description. The physician says they have 
nearly all been circumcised. No person will be able to converse with them well until 
he can speak the dialect of Manding. Persons, however, born on the Gallinas river 
may be able to converse with some of them. Although there are many native 
Africans in New York, and some of them came probably from places not remote 
from the native places of most of these prisoners, yet it is difficult to find an 
interpreter who can converse with them readily and intelligently. The tribes in


--- PAGE 267 ---
Africa are very numerous, almost every tribe has a distinct language, and it often 
varies, it is said, from village to village.  
After conversing awhile, through the interpreter with the men, who are in three 
different rooms, and with the four children, who are in a room by themselves, we 
went to the door of the room where Joseph Cinquez is confined: He is with several 
savage looking fellows, black and white, who are in jail on various charges. Visitors 
are not allowed to enter this strong hold of the jail, and the inmates can only be seen 
and conversed with through the aperture of the door. The jailer is fearful that some 
of them would escape if the door was opened in frequently. Even the other African 
prisoners are not permitted to hold converse with their Chief. Before they and he 
were deprived of this privilege, and when he occasionally came among them, they 
gathered around him, all talking at once, and shaking hands, as if they rejoiced to 
see him among them. They appeared to look up to him, I am told, with great respect. 
We found Cinquez stretched upon his bedding on the floor, wholly unclothed, with a 
single blanket partly wrapped around him. He arose at the call of the jailer, rather 
reluctantly, and came towards us with a good degree of gracefulness and native 
dignity. Afterwards we saw him well clothed; but he does not seem to like the tight 
dress of this country. At first he seemed adverse to answering the questions of the 
interpreter, and made the impression that he could not speak the Mandingo dialect. 
But after the interpreter had told him that he had conversed freely with his 
comrades, he conversed very freely, and with much energy of expression and action. 
R. S. Baldwin, Esq., of counsel for the prisoners, and Professor Gibbs having 
accompanied the interpreter.  
Joseph Cinquez, as the Spaniards have named him, but who pronounces his name in 
his own language, Shinquau, says he is a native of the Mandingo country. His father 
is neither a king nor a chief, but one of the principal men. Shinquau was kidnapped 
and sent down to the town of Gendema or Geduma, in the Gallina country. The 
interpreter knows the place, says it is from ten to fifteen miles from the ocean. It is a 
small town on an inconsiderable river. Here he was put into the hands of King 
Sharka, and after staying a while was delivered by this king “to a great man” 
named Fulekower, belonging to Manu, near the mouth of the river Gambia , who 
disposed of him to the Spaniards. By them he was sent on board a ship, where he 
met, for the first time, the persons who are now with him in prison. From Shinquau 
and his comrades we gathered the following statements, nearly in their very words, 
as translated by the interpreter:--They demanded of the slavers where they were 
going to take them, but got no satisfactory answer. In one and a half moons, they 
said, we arrived at Havana. Here they were put ashore, and confined one moon in a 
house very close. Then they were put on board the schooner which brought them to 
this country, and continued on board of her about one moon or a month. After 
being on board the schooner sometime, they agreed to take the schooner and go 
back to their own country. Previous to this the Captain was very cruel and beat them 
severely. They would not take it, to use their own expression, and therefore turned to 
and fought for it. After this they did not know which way to go. But at length they 
told the Spaniards to take them to Sierra Leone. “They made fools of us,” said


--- PAGE 268 ---
Shinquau, “and did not go to Sierra Leone.” In the day time, they said they could 
tell very well which way to go by the sun, but at night the Spaniards deceived them, 
and put the vessel the other way. After this said they, we got here, and did not know 
where we were.  
Captain Green, of Sag Harbor, who was one of the first men the prisoner met 
ashore, before their capture by Lieut. Gedney, of the U.S. brig Washington, and 
who has given me a circumstantial account, differing in many respects from what 
has been published, of all that took place, says that the Africans asked him, by one 
of their number who speaks a little broken English, “What country is this?” He 
replied, this is America. They immediately asked, “Is it a slave country?” Captain 
Green answered, it is free here, and safe, and there are no Spanish laws here. 
Shinquau then gave a sort of whistle, when they all sprang upon their feet and 
shouted. Captain Green and his associates sprang to their wagon for their guns, 
supposing the Africans were about to attack them. But Shinquau came up, delivered 
his cutlass and gun, and even offered his hat, &c, and the rest did the same, 
indicating that they would give all up, that Capt. G. might take charge of the 
schooner and everything on board. They however begged of him to take them to 
Sierre Leone. Shinquau positively assured Capt. G. at the time, and he repeats it 
now, that they threw nothing overboard. The stories about his loosening his girdle, 
and letting three or four hundred doubloons drop into the sea, and of diving and 
keeping under water forty minutes, are considered fabulous. The Africans assert 
that there was a quantity of doubloons in the trunks that were carried on shore on 
Long Island, and Captain Green says he heard the money rattle as the trunks were 
returned to the schooner by order of Lieut. Gedney. On examining the contents of 
the trunks afterwards no gold was found! Some person, or persons, are supposed to 
have the money, but who, is a secret.. While on shore, at Long Island, Shinquau and 
his companions, although hungry, and with arms in their hands, would not kill a 
single animal, or take an article even to satisfy their hunger, without paying 
generously for it. They appeared, it is true, to know very little about the value of 
money, and gave a doubloon for a dog, and a small gold piece for some victuals.  
The African prisoners are orderly and peaceable among themselves. Some of them 
sing well, and appear to be in good spirits and grateful for the kindness shown them. 
Col. Stanton Pendleton, at whose house I stop, is the jailer, and is kind and attentive 
to the prisoners. He provides them wholesome food in sufficient quantities, and gives 
every reasonable indulgence to the numerous visitors, from the neighboring towns 
and elsewhere, who throng the prison continually to see these interesting strangers 
from a distant land. Col. P. has allowed me to take copies of the warrants of 
commitment. The little girls, and the negro boy, Antonio, are committed as 
witnesses, “for neglecting to become recognized to the United States with surety,” 
and Shinquau and his comrades are bound over “for murder on the high seas.”  
I have read an ingenious and well written article in the Evening Post signed Veto, in 
which the learned writer presents a pretty full examination of the case of the 
schooner Amistad. He says that it seems but too probable that the slave holders,


--- PAGE 269 ---
Messrs. Ruez and Montez, conscious of the invalidity of their claim in the Civil 
Courts, have drawn this criminal prosecution (the charge of murder) to give time to 
their government to make a demand: and he rather singularly says “ this raises a 
far more difficult question. ” If Veto will turn to Niles’ Register for 1823, he will 
find an elegantly written and very able opinion of Chief Justice Tilghman, of Pa., on 
this subject, in which that eminent jurist, in giving his own judgment against the 
claim of a foreign government in the case of a fugitive charged with treason or 
murder, where there exists no treaty stipulation, as there does not at present 
between the United States and Spain, refers also to the corroborative opinions of all 
the preceding Presidents of the United States, (with the exception of the elder 
Adams, who had not given an opinion) very clearly and satisfactorily shows that the 
government of this country ought not to surrender persons situated as are Joseph 
Shinquau and his unfortunate countrymen, who are, by the act of God, thrown 
upon these shores to find, I trust, that protection and relief of which they had been, 
probably, forever deprived had it not been for this remarkable and providential 
interposition.  
I remain, very truly, yours,  
LEWIS TAPPAN.  
P. S. Sabbath evening. The Rev. H. G. Ludlow prayed for the poor Africans this 
forenoon, very feelingly, at the service in his church. The outer door of the jail was 
closed today, and visitors generally were not admitted. I distributed some religious 
tracts, in the morning, to the convicts, and attempted to instruct the African 
prisoners, especially the children. They pronounce words in English very distinctly, 
and have already nearly the numerals. In showing them some books containing 
pictures of tropical animals, birds, &c., they seemed much pleased to recognize 
those with whose appearance they were acquainted, endeavoring to imitate their 
voices and actions. With suitable instruction these intelligent and docile Africans 
would soon learn to read and speak our language, and I cannot but hope that some 
of the benevolent inhabitants of this city will diligently continue to improve the 
opportunity to impart instruction to these pagans, brought by the providence of 
God to their very doors. Towards evening we made a visit to Shinquau, and 
conversed with him a considerable time. He drew his hand across his throat, as his 
room mates said he had done frequently before, and asked whether the people here 
intended to kill him. He was assured that probably no harm would happen to him--
that we were his friends--and that he would be sent across the ocean towards the 
rising sun, home to his friends. His countenance immediately lost the anxious and 
distressed expression it had before, and beamed with joy. He says he was born about 
two days travelling from the ocean; that he purchased some goods, and being unable 
to pay for only two thirds of the amount, he was seized by the traders, his own 
countrymen, and sold to king Sharka for the remaining third. “I dont tell a bit of a 
lie about it,” he said.--He says he left in Africa both his parents, a wife and three 
children. Two of the children, he remarked, are a little larger than the African girls 
who are prisoners, and the other about as large. We endeavored to ascertain what 
his ideas were about a Supreme Being, if he had any. He said, “God is good.” His 
countrymen, he says, know nothing about reading or writing. Tomorrow we expect


--- PAGE 270 ---
to have him taken out of his cell, and examined, through the interpreter, by Messrs. 
Staples and Baldwin. L. T.  
   
LETTER FROM KA-LE TO ADAMS 
Dear Friend Mr. Adams,  
I want to write a letter to you because you love Mendi people and you talk to 
the Great Court. Want to tell you one thing. Jose Ruiz say we born in havanna, 
he tell lie . . . we all born in Mendi--we no understand Spanish language . . . we 
want you to ask the court what we have done wrong. What for Americans keep 
us in prison. Some people say Mendi people crazy dolts because we no talk 
American language. Americans no talk Mendi. American people crazy dolts? 
They tell bad things about Mendi people and we no understand. . . . Dear friend 
Mr. Adams you have children and friends you love them you feel very sorry if 
Mendi people come and take all to Africa. . . .  
LETTER FROM KIN-NA TO ADAMS 
. . . Judge Judson say you be free, but Government say No . . . If man have 
knife and come to American people and say I kill I eat what America people 
do? . . . Dear friend Mr. Adams we love you very much we ask we beg you to 
tell court let Mendi people be free. . . .  
LETTER FROM KIN-NA TO TAPPAN 
Dear Sir:  
We have reached Sierra Leone and one little while after we go Mendi and we 
get land very safely. Oh dear friend, pray to God. God will hear your prayer. 
We will pray for you; and God is very great, very good and kind. We have been 
on great water. Not any danger fell upon us. Oh, no. We never forget glorious 
God for these great blessings. How joyful we shall be. I never forget you. May 
God be blessed. Our blessed saviour Jesus Christ have done wondrous works. 
Dear Mr. Tappan, how I feel for these wondrous things. I pray Jesus will hear 
you; if I never see you in this world, we will meet in heaven.  
Your true friend,  
Kin-na


--- PAGE 271 ---
Images of the Amistad Case  
Paintings  
Hale Woodruff Series  
Woodruff #1: The Mutiny  
 
Woodruff #2: The Trial  
 
Woodruff #3: Return to Mendeland


--- PAGE 272 ---
Other Paintings  
Amistad at Sea  
 
Cinque


--- PAGE 273 ---
John Quincy Adams  
 
Photos and Sketches  
Lewis Tappan


--- PAGE 274 ---
Kinna  
 
Roger Baldwin


--- PAGE 275 ---
Secretary of State John Forsyth  
 
Josiah Gibbs  
 
 Smith Thompson


--- PAGE 276 ---
Justice Joseph Story  
 
President Martin Van Buren  
 
House where Africans stayed after trial


--- PAGE 277 ---
Movie Scenes  
Scene #1: Cinque in chains  
 
Scene #2: Trial


--- PAGE 278 ---
Salvaging Amistad  
by DOUGLAS 0. LINDER*  
[This essay was originally published in Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce, Vol. 31, 
No. 4, October, 2000.]  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Moviemakers believe that history can be made more dramatic. They add and subtract 
characters, invent dialogue and scenes, make heroes more heroic, make villains more 
villainous, correct incorrectness, make ends happier, and turn shades of gray into black or 
white. They even tell lies--all in the interest of providing a good show, of course. Steven 
Spielberg, producer-director of the 1997 historical drama "Amistad," is no exception.(1)  
Whether Hollywood's reshaping of history is good or bad depends upon whether one 
believes it is more important to be thoroughly entertained or to have a clear sense of 
history. Right now, on this side of the Millennium, few people seem worked up about the 
fictionalizing of history.  
The Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce is probably not the first source that most 
viewers of "Amistad" will consult to see if they got their history straight from Spielberg, 
but it is the aim of this article to make it a good choice for those who do. As the title of


--- PAGE 279 ---
this journal suggests--and as its editor insists--special attention will be given in this 
article to the role admiralty law played in the improbable drama that began in 1839.  
II  
SPIELBERG'S VERSION OF HISTORY 
Spielberg opens "Amistad" with a blue and strobe-lighted scene of escape and mutiny. 
An African-born slave (we later find out his name is Cinque) is shown in the hold of a 
Spanish schooner, a few days out of the port of Havana, using a nail to free himself from 
his shackles. We feel his pain. Cinque frees the other slaves from their iron chains. A box 
of sugar cane knives is found and the knives are distributed among the Africans. The 
knife-wielding men climb the hatchway and surprise a light-skinned man (who history 
tells us was the vessel's cook). Cinque kills him with a single blow. The next victim is the 
schooner's captain. Fighting with other crew members ensues, but soon it is clear that the 
mutiny is successful. The Africans direct an old Spanish-looking man whose life they 
spared to sail towards Africa--towards their home.  
The schooner, called La Amistad, does not, of course, sail to Africa. A good thing too: it 
would have made for far too short of a movie. Instead, the Spaniards trick the Africans, 
heading east during the day, then reversing course and heading west at night. The 
schooner zig-zags for weeks, eventually coming in sight of land off the eastern tip of 
Long Island, New York. It is the morning of August 26, 1839. Spielberg shows several 
Africans--including Cinque, by now obviously one of the heroes of this adventure--on 
shore, gathering food and water to take back to the Amistad. Before they can make it 
back, however, a brig of the United States Coast Guard, the Washington, comes alongside 
what must have seemed a suspicious vessel, sitting at anchor, flagless, and with its sails 
in tatters. Soon a contingent of Americans is off in a smaller boat to intercept a rowboat 
full of black men, now headed back to the Amistad. A shot is fired over the heads of the 
Africans. Cinque, one of the men in the rowboat, dives into the Atlantic. Spielberg's 
images of a slowly sinking Cinque and music with a distinctly mystic quality suggest that 
Cinque will drown, but we know he won't. He decides to face the Americans, reverses 
course, and surfaces near the Americans' boat. In the next scene, we watch the Amistad 
get pulled into port.  
The port turns out to be New London in the state of Connecticut, not New York, where 
the Africans had first touched shore. The tow across the state line is a point of some 
significance in the real case, though one would not know it from the movie. Spielberg 
emphasizes the strangeness of the mysterious arrival of 44 very black, non-English 
speaking, rag-tag foreigners with African music that contrasts eerily with the grayness of 
a 19th century New England town. The Africans are paraded through the town's streets 
and lodged in the local jail.  
Spielberg next applies his political spin. A prepubescent Queen Isabella II is informed of 
events. She couldn't care less. Martin Van Buren is shown on the campaign trail--a bit 
early, as the 1840 election is over 14 months away--receiving word of the now-bubbling 
controversy in Connecticut. He doesn't want to hear about it. "I'm trying to drink my


--- PAGE 280 ---
brandy after a very long day," he explains. Van Buren doesn't care what happens to the 
Amistad captives: "There are what?three, four million Negroes in this country? Why on 
earth should I concern myself with these 44?”  He wants the matter settled quickly. "I 
don't care how," the President demands, "you just do it." The scene cuts to a newspaper 
press room where we finally meet history's real hero (but not Spielberg's): Lewis Tappan, 
an ardent abolitionist and editor of an anti-slavery publication known as the Emancipator. 
As the headline "Freedom Fight at Sea" appears on screen, Tappan announces his 
determination to make sure the black captives "have good counsel."  
The next thing viewers know they are in the middle of a wildly chaotic judicial 
proceeding of some sort. District Court Judge Andrew T. Judson is shown attempting to 
maintain some semblance of order as the Amistad blacks talk animatedly in a strange 
tongue. District Attorney William S. Holabird rises to "present the court with charges of 
piracy and murder." Then Lewis Tappan pops up with a petition for a writ that would 
require release of the blacks from custody. Holabird tells Tappan to "kindly refrain from 
impersonating a lawyer." Answering Tappan's petition, Secretary of State John Forsyth 
makes a surprise appearance--a surprise, at least, to anyone familiar with the real facts of 
the proceeding. Forsyth asserts, on behalf of the President, that the slaves must be 
returned to Spain pursuant to Article IX of the 1795 treaty between the United States and 
Spain commonly known as Pinckney's Treaty (2).   An officer of the brig Washington 
adds to the confusion by leaping up with another naval officer to proclaim that "these 
slaves belong to me and my mate, Your Excellency." The officer, Lieutenant Thomas 
Gedney, contends that their actions in rescuing the Amistad entitle them "to claim salvage 
of the Amistad and all its cargo." An incredulous Judge Judson asks Gedney whether he 
makes his claim "above the claim of the Queen of Spain." The actor (Ralph Brown) 
playing Thomas Gedney demands to know, "Where was she when we were busy spiking 
the winds to bring her in?" Finally, a lawyer for the two Spanish slave owners, Jose Ruiz 
and Pedro Montes, gets his two sentences in. The slaves should, of course, the lawyer 
says, be returned to his clients--they're property, bought and paid for--and he even has the 
receipt.  
Mercifully, the raging confusion ends, and Lewis Tappan walks down the steps of the 
courthouse only to be accosted by an earnest young man, who introduces himself as 
"Roger S. Baldwin, attomey-at-law." Baldwin volunteers to represent the Amistad 
captives as a "property lawyer," only to be told by a dour and dismissive Tappan that he 
is not needed: Tappan says he needs "a criminal attorney; a trial lawyer."  
Of course, Tappan finally has the good sense to hire Baldwin, although they continue to 
argue over legal strategy. Baldwin, seeing the case as potentially involving "the wrongful 
transfer of stolen goods," asks Tappan whether the captives "were born slaves or were 
illegally acquired." An indignant Tappan responds by insisting that the legal fight "must 
be waged on the battlefield of righteousness." Tappan adds, "These are people, Mr. 
Baldwin, not livestock."  
Soon we again find ourselves in a crowded courtroom. Holabird treats us to his obviously 
one-sided description of the mutiny aboard the Amistad.  He recounts the "savagery" of


--- PAGE 281 ---
the black "villains" and the "bravery" of Ruiz and Montes. The address to the court of 
Baldwin ("Dung-Scraper") appears complete with imagined subtitled Mendi translations 
of his arguments. Baldwin addresses Judge Judson as one might a kindergartner: "You 
know the difference between a cow and a cabbage?" he asks. This case, he goes on, is 
"about knowing the difference between here and there." What Baldwin has on his mind, it 
soon becomes obvious, is the difference between Cuba and Africa. He demonstrates that 
the captives know nothing of Spanish--at least they don't respond positively to his 
commands in Spanish--and we hope that convinces Judge Judson that the captives were 
born in Africa and therefore taken to Cuba in violation of an 1817 treaty between Great 
Britain and Spain prohibiting the importation of slaves into Spanish territories (3). It 
doesn't. Judson tells Baldwin that it will take something "more than circumstantial 
evidence" to persuade him the captives are Africans--just where he thinks they might 
come from if not Africa, viewers are left on their own to guess.  
The judge's comment sends Baldwin scurrying to find interpreters and locate evidence 
that might prove his clients' origins. Rummaging around in the hold of the Amistad, 
Baldwin finds the smoking gun: a manifest from the Portuguese slave ship that carried 
the blacks across the Middle Passage. Somehow it ended up in the hands of Ruiz and 
Montes and was left aboard the battered schooner for an enterprising young attorney to 
discover.  
Back in court again, Baldwin announces confidently, "My clients' journey did not begin 
in Havana; it began much farther away." Tappan finally shows some respect for his 
lawyer. Meanwhile, the trial begins to take on important political dimensions. President 
Van Buren concludes that if the Africans are freed, voters in southern states will turn 
against him. "The jury appears to be disposed to freeing them," his Secretary of State 
informs him, but "we can replace the judge." Sure enough, the judge is replaced with a 
younger, more handsome, and presumably more obedient judge. Just how this gross 
violation of separation of powers was accomplished, movie viewers are left to guess. The 
“switcheroo" infuriates Baldwin, of course. He overturns heavy office furniture just to 
make his anger obvious.  
After a powerful and disturbing depiction of the Middle Passage (following John Quincy 
Adams' sage advice to "discover who they are," Baldwin and interpreters uncovered the 
full story of their clients' sufferings and adventure), we are back in court with the younger 
and more handsome handpicked judge. Cinque tells the judge his story. Holabird attacks 
Cinque's credibility, commenting snidely (Holabird is very snide), "Like all good works 
of fiction it was entertaining." But Baldwin has other tricks up his sleeve. He calls on 
Captain Fitzgerald, an officer on a British vessel patrolling African coasts, to corroborate 
Cinque's story. Soon a chant breaks out in the African section of the courtroom. Led by 
Cinque, the Africans begin repeating, increasingly loudly, in their broken English, "Give 
us free!" The young judge appears moved. He might not be a tool of the Executive after 
all.  
At last, the decision. After announcing--to build up the suspense--that he has found it 
"impossible to deny the power of the government's position," he denies the power of the


--- PAGE 282 ---
government's position. Ruiz and Montes, he concludes, "misrepresented" the origins of 
the captives. "Were they born in Africa?" he asks twice to build more suspense. "I believe 
they were," he says finally. He rejects the claims of Spain. More surprisingly, at least to 
students of the real Amistad case, he rejects the salvage claims of Gedney and Meade. 
Then, in a case of monumental judicial overreaching, he orders the arrest of Montes and 
Ruiz on charges of slave trading. Joyous celebration and more chanting breaks out in the 
courtroom.  
The actions of the young judge are discussed by the powers-that-be. Van Buren and his 
advisors are upset. Spanish ministers are bewildered by this defiant act of judicial 
independence. Senator John Calhoun declares that if the Amistad captives are freed the 
South might have to begin the Civil War 20 years early. The government decides to 
appeal.  
Lewis Tappan, for some reason, holds out little hope that the Supreme Court will affirm 
the favorable ruling below. He confides, darkly, to another abolitionist, "The truth is that 
they [the Africans] may be more valuable to our struggle in life than in death." Baldwin 
visits the jail where--contrary to historical evidence--the captives are still being kept and 
breaks the news: "Our Big Man" has appealed the decision.  
Only John Quincy Adams might be able to save the day. Baldwin writes Adams an 
impassioned letter asking him to assist in the appeal. Adams rolls the letter into a ball. 
Baldwin begins to act like he is in need of psychiatric attention. Then, when all seems 
lost, "Old Man Eloquent" shows up at the jail cell door and says he is ready for action. 
Soon Adams and Cinque are trading legal advice about applicable laws and treaties. 
Cinque travels to Massachusetts for a tour of Adams' home and greenhouse. They have a 
heart-to-heart talk in the living room. Adams tells Cinque, "We are about ready to do 
battle with a lion that is threatening to rip our country in two."  
Suddenly we are in the Supreme Court. A gavel falls. John Quincy Adams begins his 
argument, as Cinque and Baldwin watch in frozen silence. Adams, played by Anthony 
Hopkins, gives us quite a performance. He pleads for judicial independence and courage. 
He tells the Court that Cinque, who he asks to stand, is "the only hero in this room." He 
tells the Court it should decide in Cinque's favor even if it means war between the States: 
"If there be civil war, let it come--and let it be, finally, the last battle of the American 
Revolution." He sits down.  
After a performance like that, what could the Court do? Justice Harry Blackmun, playing 
Justice Joseph Story, announces the Court's decision. Section 9 of Pinckney's Treaty is 
inapplicable. The Africans are not cargo, nor are they slaves. They are "free individuals 
with certain moral and legal rights," including the right of insurrection. The Africans are 
free. Cinque's shackles finally come off. Handshakes and thanks all around for the 
lawyers. After a brief epilogue, the movie ends.  
III  
THE REAL HISTORY


--- PAGE 283 ---
The real history of the Amistad controversy is every bit as interesting as Spielberg's 
history--it's just different. Admiralty law plays a part in this real history--and I promise to 
get to that--but first let's try to straighten out some other parts of this unlikely story (4).  
.  
It turns out that the most historically accurate portion of "Amistad" is the movie's opening 
scene, depicting Cinque's nail-aided escape and the subsequent bloody killings of the 
cook (Celestino) and Captain Ferrar. True, there was some artistic license--Ferrar actually 
died of strangulation after first being struck with a cane knife, rather than from the knife 
attack itself--but he's about as dead either way (5).  
The Amistad, sailing eastward during daylight and generally westward at night, did zig-
zag its way to Long Island. In his testimony before the grand jury, Lieutenant Meade of 
the U.S. brig Washington offered his account of the vessel's discovery:  
We were running a line from Gardner's Island Point to Montauk. I was on 
the watch. We discovered the vessel, and as we approached, we saw 
wagons on shore. At my instance a boat was manned with six men, and I 
took possession of L'Amistad. Joseph [Cinque] was a part of the negroes 
on shore. I drove those on board below, and fastened on the hatch. Those 
on shore were shortly after secured. The hatch was subsequently removed, 
and Joseph bounded on the deck, and sprang overboard. He dove and 
swam with great dexterity, and was only caught after severe chase of 
twenty minutes. While overboard, he appeared to be working at his throat 
and waist. When captured again he was put in irons (6). 
Gedney ordered the Amistad towed to New London, Connecticut, where the arrival of the 
mysterious schooner dominated the local news. On August 26th, a sensational story ran 
in the New London Gazette:  
   
[Pedro Montes] is the most striking instance of complacency and 
unalloyed delight we have ever witnessed, and it is not strange since only 
yesterday his sentence was pronounced by the chief of the bucanniers 
[sic], and his death song chanted by the grim crew, who gathered with 
uplifted sabres around his devoted head, which, as well as his arms, bear 
the scars of several wounds inflicted at the time of the murder of the ill-
fated captain and crew. He sat smoking his Havana on the deck, and to 
judge from the martyr-like serenity of his countenance, his emotions are 
such as rarely stir the heart of man.  
On board the brig we also saw Cinques [sic], the master spirit and hero of 
this bloody tragedy, in irons. He is about five feet eight inches in height, 
25 or 26 years of age, of erect figure, well built, and very active. He is said 
to be a match for any two men aboard the schooner. His countenance, for a 
native African, is unusually intelligent, evincing uncommon decision and 
coolness, with a composure characteristic of true courage, and nothing to


--- PAGE 284 ---
mark him a malicious man. He is a negro, who could command in New 
Orleans, under the hammer, at least $1500.  
[W]e visited the schooner, which is anchored within musket shot of the 
Washington and there we saw a sight as we never saw before and never 
wish to see again. The bottom and sides of this vessel are covered with 
barnacles and sea-grass, while her rigging and sails presented an 
appearance worthy of the Flying Dutchman, after her fabled cruise. On her 
deck were grouped amid various goods and arms, the remnant of her 
Ethiop [sic] crew, some decked in the most fantastic manner, in silks and 
finery, pilfered from the cargo, while others, in a state of nudity, 
emaciated to mere skeletons, lay coiled upon the decks. Around the 
windlass were gathered the three little girls, from eight to thirteen years of 
age, the very images of health and gladness.  
Over the deck were scattered in the most wanton and disorderly profusion, 
raisins, vermicelli, bread, rice, silk, and cotton goods. In the cabin and 
hold were the marks of the same wasteful destruction. Her cargo appears 
to consist of silks, crepes, calicoes, cotton, and fancy goods of various 
descriptions, glass and hard ware, bridles, saddles, holsters, pictures 
looking-glasses, books, fruit, olives and olive oil, and other things too 
numerous to mention--which are now all mixed up in a strange and 
fantastic medley. On the forward hatch we unconsciously rested our hand 
on a cold object, which we soon discovered to be a naked corpse, 
enveloped in a pall of black bombazine. On removing its folds, we beheld 
the rigid countenance and glazed eye of a poor negro who died last night. 
His mouth was unclosed and still wore the ghastly expression of his last 
struggle. Near him like some watching fiend sat the most horrible creature 
we ever saw in human shape, an object of terror to the very blacks, who 
said that he was a cannibal. His teeth projected at almost right angles from 
his mouth, while his eyes had a most strange and demoniac [sic] 
expression. We were glad to leave this vessel, as the exhalations from her 
hold and deck, were like any thing but "gales washed over the gardens of 
Gul (7).” 
The arrival of the Africans, according to a story in the New York Herald, "created a 
greater excitement in Connecticut than any event there since the close of the last 
century." The story had "all the romance of an eastern fairy tale." According to the 
Herald, "parsons go to preach to them [the Africans], philosophers to experiment on 
them, professors to pick up knowledge of their language, phrenologists to feel their 
heads, and young ladies to look and laugh at them." In the days leading up to the first trial 
in September, 4,000 persons a day paid 12 cents each to catch a glimpse of the Africans. 
Perhaps surprisingly, Spielberg seems to have understated the level of local interest in the 
Africans (8).  
It is about at this point that Spielberg starts running with his artistic license. He puts 
words into the mouths of presidents and queens, invents a conflict between Lewis Tappan


--- PAGE 285 ---
and the lawyers he hired, and misleads viewers into believing that there existed for weeks 
or months on end a serious question as to the continent of origin of the Amistad's black 
passengers.  
Moviegoers expect to see presidents and queens, not just secretaries of state and foreign 
ministers, so Spielberg may be forgiven for inventing dialogue between President Martin 
Van Buren and his advisors and between Queen Isabella and her advisors. Moreover, Van 
Buren's words are consistent with our knowledge of him as one to whom electability and 
good relations were almost everything. He doubtless did not wish to anger either 
Southerners or Spaniards unnecessarily (9).  
Somewhat more troubling to those who like their history straight is the largely invented 
conflict between Lewis Tappan and his able lawyer, Roger Baldwin. There is almost 
nothing in the historical record to indicate that Tappan had anything but respect--even at 
the earliest stages of the legal battle--for Baldwin's efforts (10).  
Another significant distortion in the movie concerns the role played by Cinque in the 
Amistad case. While no doubt the central figure in the mutiny and the public imagination, 
Cinque neither was the best English speaker of the Africans nor a budding legal 
superstar, as Spielberg suggests. Unlike in the movie, Cinque never visited John Quincy 
Adams' home in Massachusetts and he certainly did not become the ex-President's 
unpaid, part-time law clerk (11).  
Most of Spielberg's distortions, simplifications, and omissions--especially as they relate 
to legal issues, which I'll get to later (as I promised)--can be excused: he wanted people to 
go to his movie. Less forgivable is his treatment of abolitionist Lewis Tappan. Tappan 
did more than anyone to save the Africans of the Amistad, yet in Spielberg's portrayal he 
is demoted to a religious fanatic whose obtuseness must be overcome before Baldwin and 
John Quincy Adams can get about the business of rescue. It was Tappan who helped put 
together the Africans' defense team, worked to improve their conditions of confinement, 
arranged for their education and housing after their release from jail, and raised the 
money for their eventual return to Africa (12).  
John Quincy Adams understood that Tappan, not he, was the real hero of the story. On 
the day of victory in the Supreme Court, Adams wrote to Tappan: "The captives are free! 
Thanks! in the name of humanity and justice, to you." Later, Adams would thank Tappan 
for a gift presented to him by the courageous abolitionist:  
Dear Sir,  
I received and accept with thanks the elegant Bible, presented me by 
Cinque, Kinna, Kale and the thirty-two other Mendians, who are indebted 
to you, and your benevolent associates, probably for their lives, certainly 
for their deliverance from unjust prosecution, and long protracted 
imprisonment and finally for the means of returning to their own country. 
I hope for the consummation of your kindness to them in the 
accomplishment of their restoration in freedom and safety to their native


--- PAGE 286 ---
land. I am, with great respect, dear sir,  
faithfully yours,  
JOHN QUINCY ADAMS (13). 
The significance of Tappan's contribution also becomes apparent from letters written 
from Africa by the Africans he worked so hard to save. In a letter to Tappan, Cinque 
wrote:  
Dear Sir:  
[M]endi people love Mr. Tappan. Mr. Tappan, pray for Cinque and all 
Mendi people all time, and Cinque and Mendi people pray for Mr. Tappan 
all time. Cinque love Mr. Tappan very much, and all Mendi people love 
Mr. Tappan very much. I no forget Mr. Tappan forever and ever; and I no 
forget God, because God help Mr. Tappan and Mendi people. I thank all 
'merica people for they send Mendi people home. I shall never forget 
'merica people.  
Your friend,  
CINQUE (14). 
Americans love their happy endings, so Spielberg gave them one. The Africans in the 
movie return to Africa, presumably to be reunited with loved ones and live in peace and 
harmony. The reality is somewhat different. Some of the Amistad blacks struggled to deal 
with the pull of two very different worlds, one modem and Christian, one primitive and 
pagan. Others were pained to discover that their loved ones had been victims of the civil 
war raging in their homeland.  
Life was equally difficult for the Christian missionaries that accompanied the Amistad 
blacks to Freetown harbor. It didn't take them long to realize they had their work cut out 
for them. Moments after disembarking in Freetown, some of the Africans stripped and 
engaged in what the missionaries called "heathenish dancing." Soon the missionaries 
wrote letters complaining of their Amistad students: some fell back to their "licentious 
habits," some disappeared, some were just trouble. In addition to the frustrations of their 
work, missionaries contended with rats (one missionary reported killing 164 in a single 
day), 175 inches of annual rainfall, and diseases such as malaria and yellow fever. One by 
one, the missionaries died. The mission, however, lived on. The last of the Amistad 
Africans to have contact with the Christian outpost was Cinque. In 1879, old and 
emaciated, he came to die. He was buried among the graves of the mission called Mo 
Tappan (15).  
IV  
ADMIRALTY LAW 
So what role did admiralty law play in the Amistad case? A large one. The controversy 
that unfolded in three American courts from 1839 to 1841 involved politics, criminal law, 
international law, and property law. But throughout it all, admiralty law added an 
additional level of complexity to this very complex case (16).


--- PAGE 287 ---
Three days after the Amistad was towed into port in New London, federal district judge 
Andrew T. Judson conducted an inquiry on board the Washington. The main focus of that 
inquiry concerned the adult male Africans and their possible guilt in connection with 
murder and mutiny aboard the Amistad. District Attorney Holabird filed a complaint 
against the Africans. As the alleged crimes took place on the high seas, they fell within 
the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction of the United States. On August 29, 1839, Judson 
ordered the 39 adult males to be transported to the New Haven jail where they would be 
held for the next meeting of the grand jury of the United States Circuit Court scheduled 
for the following month in Hartford. The four black children were ordered held as 
witnesses to the possible crime (17).  
Ruiz and Montes contended at the inquiry that the blacks were their lawful slaves and 
asked that they, as their property, be returned to them. Judson announced that property 
issues would be resolved along with the criminal questions at the September hearing in 
Hartford (18).  
The fact that the Amistad case was tried in Connecticut courts may have been the result of 
a calculation by Lieutenant Gedney that he would receive a higher salvage award in 
Connecticut, a slave state, than in New York, a free state. When discovered, the Amistad 
was at anchor a half mile from the shore of Long Island, but Gedney towed the schooner 
to New London, Connecticut rather than a convenient New York port (19).  
A description (using the run-on sentences popular in opinions of the day) of Gedney's 
libel for salvage, filed in the District Court for Connecticut on behalf of himself, Richard 
Meade, and the officers and crew of the brig Washington appears in the Supreme Court's 
1841 decision:  
Thomas R. Gedney ... filed a libel in the District Court of the United 
States, for the District of Connecticut, stating that off Culloden Point, near 
Montauck [sic] Point, they took possession of a vessel which proved to be 
a Spanish schooner called the Amistad, of Havana, in the island of Cuba, 
of about 120 tons burden; and the said libellants found said schooner was 
manned by forty-five negroes, some of whom had landed near the said 
point for water; and there were also on board, two Spanish gentlemen, 
who represented themselves to be, and, as the libellants verily believe 
were part owners of the cargo, and of the negroes on board, who were 
slaves, belonging to said Spanish gentlemen; ... that the schooner had on 
board and was laden with a large and valuable cargo, and provisions, to 
the amount, in all, of forty thousand dollars, and also money to the sum 
and amount of about two hundred and fifty dollars; and also fifty-four 
slaves, to wit, fifty-one male slaves, and three young female slaves, who 
were worth twenty-five thousand dollars.... That the schooner was 
accordingly taken possession of, and recaptured from the hands and 
possession of the negroes who had taken the same; that the schooner was 
brought into the port of New London, where she now is; and the schooner 
would with great difficulty, exposure, and danger have been taken by the


--- PAGE 288 ---
libellants, but for the surprise upon the blacks who had possession thereof, 
a part of whom were on shore; and but for the aid and assistance and 
services of the libellants, the vessel and cargo would have been wholly 
lost to the respective owners thereof. . . .  
The libellants stated, that having saved the schooner Amistad and cargo, 
and the slaves, with considerable danger, they prayed that process should 
be issued against the same, and that the usual proceedings might be had by 
the Court, by which a reasonable salvage should be decreed out of the 
property so saved. (20) 
 
Henry Green and Peletiah Fordham soon joined the parade of interested parties when 
they filed a petition and answer to Gedney's libel, claiming salvage out of the property 
proceeded against by Gedney and others off the brig Washington. Green and Fordham 
stated that "before the Amistad was seen or boarded by the officers and crew of the 
Washington, they had secured a portion of the negroes who had come on shore, and had 
thus aided on saving the vessel and cargo." (21)  
Lewis Tappan and the abolitionist lawyers representing the Africans cared little, of 
course, whether Gedney or Green or anyone else received salvage for the cargo of the 
Amistad. Nonetheless, they soon found themselves immersed in admiralty law. It was 
important, they concluded, to determine whether admiralty law provided a basis for the 
court assuming jurisdiction over the Africans, and whether it dictated that the 
proceedings that would determine the fate of the Africans must be in Connecticut, or--as 
they preferred--in New York.(22)  
When the Circuit Court convened in Hartford on September 19th before Judge Smith 
Thompson, Roger Baldwin argued that the Africans were "human beings, not property" 
and therefore not within the jurisdiction of the district court which--at the time--had no 
jurisdiction to try criminal cases. Moreover, Baldwin argued, even if the district court did 
have admiralty jurisdiction over those Africans found on board the Amistad, it could not 
have jurisdiction over those Africans taken on shore in New York. Finally, Baldwin 
contended, even if there was admiralty jurisdiction over the Africans, it must be in New 
York, not Connecticut, as Lieutenant Gedney had no authority to transport them into any 
district court other than the one located in the state in which they were found. Lewis 
Tappan, writing in the New York Commercial Advertiser, described Baldwin as being 
"very severe upon Lieut. Gedney--not for taking the vessel, but for setting up a claim of 
salvage, which, he said, should be scouted from the tribunals of a free country.”(23)  
Baldwin asked Judge Thompson to grant a writ of habeas corpus ordering the release of 
the three African girls against whom no criminal charges were pending. The application 
for the writ became the first vehicle for publicizing the inhumanity of slavery. Its 
purpose, according to Joshua Leavitt--one of the three members of the Amistad Defense 
Committee--was "to test [the Africans'] right to personality.” (24)


--- PAGE 289 ---
Meanwhile, on the same day in the same courthouse, Andrew Judson convened the 
District Court to consider admiralty claims arising out of the capture of the Amistad. 
Judge Judson strongly suggested that the salvage claims against the blacks were invalid. 
The blacks could not be regarded as property in Connecticut and therefore the court 
lacked authority to order their sale for salvage.(25)  
Lawyers for the Africans, for the slave owners, for the libel claimants, and for the United 
States offered up their best legal arguments. Spectators heard more than they probably 
wanted about such matters as Pinckney's Treaty, the Treaty of Ghent (which ended the 
War of 1812), (26)  and Chief Justice Marshall's holding in The Antelope.(27)  On 
September 20th, Judge Thompson rendered his decision on the jurisdictional issues. He 
ruled that neither his court nor any American court had jurisdiction to try the blacks for 
an alleged crime that took place "on board a Spanish vessel, with a Spanish crew and 
commander, and Spanish papers, as a mere coasting vessel, on the island of Cuba." The 
next day, however, Judge Thompson handed a victory to the Administration, ruling that 
the district court could retain jurisdiction over the blacks to resolve the property claims--
"however abhorrent it may be to keep these persons in prison, or to view them in the light 
of property."  
On September 23rd, Thompson denied the writ of habeas corpus. Suits to resolve the 
property issues must proceed in the district court. Thompson added his suggestion that 
one of the defense attorneys and District Attorney Holabird travel to Montauk Point to 
determine the precise location of the seizure of the Amistad by Lieutenant Gedney. 
Immediately after Thompson adjourned the Circuit Court, Judson convened the District 
Court. He directed that counsel for the blacks and the district attorney go to Montauk 
Point and set the matter for trial in November. The Africans returned to their temporary 
home in the New Haven jail.(28)  
When Judge Judson called court to order at 10 o'clock on November 19th, Roger Baldwin 
appeared to argue again that the case should be dismissed on jurisdictional grounds: 
Lieutenant Gedney had seized the blacks in New York and had illegally taken them to 
Connecticut. In the free state of New York, Baldwin argued, Gedney's salvage action 
would be considered a wrongful attempt to reduce the Africans to slavery. The blacks 
were entitled, he claimed, to a jury trial in New York. General Isham, representing 
Gedney and Meade, objected. Baldwin, he said, should stop interfering with salvage 
questions and concentrate instead on securing his clients' freedom.(29)  
Judge Judson asked for argument on the schooner's location at the time of seizure. Judson 
said that if he determined the Amistad was seized in New York, he would dismiss the 
case. On the other hand, if the Amistad was taken on the high seas, he would proceed to 
arguments on the merits of the salvage claims and other related matters. Interestingly, the 
salvage claim of Green and Fordham, based on their action in seizing a number of the 
Africans while they were on Long Island, worked to the advantage of the abolitionists. 
Green testified that the schooner was no more than 500 feet from shore and that at least 
20 blacks were on the beach when Gedney came alongside the Amistad. Green said that 
by the time the brig Washington arrived on the scene, the situation was well under


--- PAGE 290 ---
control. Peletiah Fordham testified: "So we determined to have the vessel at all hazards--
forcibly if we can, peaceably if we must." (30)  
Gedney and Meade, sharply dressed in naval uniforms, contradicted the testimony of 
their rival salvage claimants, Green and Fordham. Both testified that the Amistad had 
been at least half a mile from shore and that no more than eight or nine blacks had been 
ashore at the time they came alongside the schooner. A Cuban cabin boy, Antonio, and 
half a dozen of the Africans supported their version of the story. So too did the men 
Judge Judson had sent to determine the Arnistad's exact location.(31)  
Attorneys for the blacks argued that the Amistad was anchored in New York territorial 
waters--"within hailing distance" of the shore--and that therefore Cinque and the other 
Africans were subject to the laws and protections of New York, not Connecticut. Gedney, 
they claimed, seized the Amistad "without any lawful warrant or authority whatever." He 
performed no "meritorious act," because there was no danger. Moreover, he wrongfully 
took the Africans from New York to Connecticut. The Africans were free when they 
arrived in New York and they should be free now.(32)  
Judge Judson adjourned the proceedings until January 7th in New Haven, then returned to 
his chambers in the City Hotel where lawyers took the deposition of Dr. Richard Madden, 
the British superintendent of liberated Africans. (33)  
The trial resumed amid great excitement in New Haven. Students from Yale Law School 
and members of the community jockeyed for seats. Judge Judson frequently had to rap 
for order after applause brought on by Roger Baldwin's impassioned appeals for liberty. 
It by now was apparent to all neutral observers that the blacks found on shore and aboard 
the Amistad were recently from Africa, and therefore could not have been lawfully 
bought and sold in Havana. Nonetheless, much of the testimony was designed to make 
that fact irrefutably clear in the record. Two men testified that Ruiz had admitted the 
blacks "were just from Africa." Two African interpreters testified that the blacks were 
from Africa, and that all but three were Mende. Josiah Gibbs, a Yale professor of 
linguistics, agreed and offered his insights into the language of the blacks. Then, with the 
crowded courtroom in "breathless attention," Cinque--wrapped in a blanket--told the 
story of his capture, his voyage across the Atlantic, his being bought at a Cuban slave 
market, his being chained and inadequately fed on the Amistad, and his participation in 
the successful mutiny.(34)  
Lawyers representing Gedney and Meade reversed the position they had taken in the libel 
claim filed in September. General Isham complained that he had been subjected to 
"insinuations and taunts" for seeking salvage for "human flesh." He said (in a statement 
contradicted by his earlier claim) that his clients never wanted salvage for the Africans. 
The Africans should be surrendered to the Spanish minister and salvage awarded for the 
Amistad and its other cargo.(35)  
Governor William W. Ellsworth, counsel for Green, whose claims had been called absurd 
by Gedney's attorney, said that Green did not ask that the Africans be sold for salvage.


--- PAGE 291 ---
But "if it becomes the duty of the Court to place these Africans to become the subject of 
salvage," the salvage should be Green's--and Green's alone. Green's attorneys contended 
that naval officers are not entitled to one cent for salvage for the performance of duty. If 
their actions merited salvage, then the money should go the government, not them 
personally. Judge Judson remarked that it was news to him that naval officers were 
entitled to salvage and asked the attorneys to submit authorities on the issue.  
On Monday morning, January 13, 1840, Judson announced his decision. He ruled that the 
Amistad had been discovered where the tide "ebbs and lows," less than one half mile off 
Culloden Point, Long Island. Was the Amistad seized on the high seas? Judson turned to 
Daniel Webster's argument in the Supreme Court case of United States v. Bevans for a 
definition of "high seas": the "open ocean, where the dominion of the winds and waves 
prevails without check or control." (36) A "place of refuge" protected from the open 
ocean by "inclosures and projections of the land" would be a port or harbor, not the high 
seas. A study of maps showed "scarcely an indentation on the coast between Montauk 
and Culloden Point." The distance from shore was not critical. The Amistad was seized 
on the high seas. The fact that a number of Africans were on shore did not remove them 
from admiralty jurisdiction. Their "temporary object" had been to locate water and 
provisions. They were still "attached" to the Amistad. (37)  
Judson rejected the salvage claims of Green and Fordham. They never took possession of 
the Amistad and they provided no "meritorious service." Gedney, Meade, and the crew of 
the Washington, however, had rendered "highly praiseworthy" services and were entitled 
to salvage for the schooner and its cargo--the inanimate cargo. Judson noted that when 
Gedney arrived the Antistad was "in perilous condition." It was "at the mercy of the 
winds and the waves" and under the control of people who knew next to nothing about 
navigation and had no hope of making a successful voyage across the Atlantic to their 
homeland. Gedney and his associates should receive one-third the appraised value of the 
schooner and its cargo.(38)  
As for the blacks, they "were born free and ever since have been and still of right are free 
and not slaves." They had been "kidnapped" in violation of "their own rights and the laws 
of Spain." They had been "unlawfully sold as slaves" in Cuba in violation of the 1817 
English-Spanish treaty prohibiting the importation of slaves into Spanish possessions. 
They mutinied out of a desire of "returning to their families and kindred." Judson 
announced that he would place the blacks under the control of the Executive, until such 
time as their passage home to Africa could be arranged. Contrary to Spielberg's 
suggestion, Judson did not order the arrest of Ruiz and Montes for slave trading. In fact, 
that feat had been accomplished months earlier in New York, after Lewis Tappan filed 
charges of assault and battery and false imprisonment against the two Cubans. (39)  
Two weeks after Judge Judson's decision, the Van Buren Administration decided to 
appeal to the Circuit Court. Judge Thompson, sitting on the Circuit Court, saw the case--
involving as it did the claims of two world powers and questions with significant 
domestic political implications--as one calling for Supreme Court attention. He therefore 
affirmed the district court ruling "pro forma." A May 1840 letter written by Lewis


--- PAGE 292 ---
Tappan to John Scoble in London reveals that abolitionists remained concerned about the 
fate of the Africans:  
The cause goes up to the Supreme Court of the United States which will 
sit at Washington January 1841. As Judge Thompson learned that the case 
would go up, whichever side he decided, he advised the counsel not to 
argue the matter at length, but to let it go to the highest judicial tribunal in 
the country with as little delay as possible. The action of this government 
is decidedly against these Africans and they will send them to Cuba if they 
dare.(40) 
On Monday, February 22, 1841, arguments began in the Supreme Court's crowded 
chamber in the U.S. Capitol. Cinque, unlike in the movie, is nowhere to be seen. Attorney 
General Henry Gilpin, arguing for the government, told the Court that it should not "go 
behind" the Amistad's papers and make inquiry as to their accuracy, but should accept 
them on their face in order to show proper respect for another sovereign nation.(41)  
Accepting the fraudulent papers would have meant, of course, that the Africans were 
slaves to be returned to Cuba. Roger Baldwin followed Gilpin, making many of the same 
arguments that been persuasive in the district and circuit courts. (42)  
John Quincy Adams began his eagerly anticipated argument on February 24th. Justice 
Story would later call Adams' argument extraordinary for its power, for its bitter sarcasm, 
and for its dealing with topics far beyond the record and points of discussion. It was at 
times eloquent, at times a harangue, and at times a political declamation. Adams argued 
that if the President had the power to send the Africans to Cuba, he would equally have 
the power to seize 40 Americans and send them overseas for trial. Spain was asking the 
President to "first turn man-robber ... next turn jailer ... and lastly turn catchpole and 
convey them to Havana, to appease the vengeance of the African slave-traders of the 
barracoons” (43) He attacked the President for his sending a naval vessel to anchor in 
New Haven harbor with orders to transport the Africans to Cuba immediately, should 
Judge Judson's decision go against the Africans. He quoted the Declaration of 
Independence: "The moment you come to the Declaration of Independence, that every 
man has a right to life and liberty, an inalienable right, this case is decided. I ask nothing 
more in behalf of these unfortunate men than this Declaration." (44)  
On March 9, 1841, the Supreme Court announced its decision. The Court's decision 
rested principally on the arguments of Roger Baldwin. Justice Story, speaking for the 
Court, said that the Negroes were "kidnapped Africans, who, by the laws of Spain itself, 
are entitled to their freedom....”(45)  The Court had every right to examine the 
authenticity of the papers provided in Cuba. "Fraud will vitiate any, even the most 
solemn transactions; and an asserted title to property, founded on it, is utterly void.” (46) 
The Africans were not criminals: the ultimate right of human beings in extreme cases is 
to apply force against ruinous injustice. The Africans could stay or they could return to 
Africa.(47)


--- PAGE 293 ---
As for the claim that began the lengthy legal battle, Lieutenant Gedney's claim for 
salvage service, the Court was sympathetic. Justice Story noted that the United States did 
not object to an award. He called Gedney's actions "a highly meritorious and useful 
service to the proprietors of the ship and cargo." By "the general principles of maritime 
law," that made it "a just foundation for salvage." The Court found the one-third rate 
awarded by Judge Judson to be within his "sound discretion, under the very peculiar and 
embarrassing circumstances of the case.” (48)  
From what one can gather from a viewing of Steven Spielberg's "Amistad," the African 
passengers of the schooner that left Havana in June 1839 owed their freedom primarily to 
the lofty and silver-tongued oratory of John Quincy Adams. In addition, many viewers of 
the film must have left theaters wondering how the same Court that handed down such a 
smashing victory for civil rights in 1841 could, just a decade-and-a-half later, produce the 
infamous Dred Scott decision.(49)  In fact, the decision of the Supreme Court in the 
Amistad case rested not upon broad principles of justice, but on much narrower 
arguments rooted in treaty interpretation, property, and admiralty law.(50)  
The arguments of John Quincy Adams--the climactic centerpiece in Spielberg's telling of 
the story--received only this brief mention in the official Court reports:  
It was the purpose of the Reporter to insert the able and interesting 
argument of Mr. Adams, for the African appellees; and the publication of 
the "Reports" has been postponed in the hope of obtaining it, prepared by 
himself. It has not been received. As many of the points presented by Mr. 
Adams, in the discussion of the cause, were not considered by the Court 
essential to its decision and were not taken notice of in the opinion of the 
Court, delivered by Mr. Justice STORY, the necessary omission of the 
argument is submitted to with less regret.(51) 
 
V  
CONCLUSION 
Writing in the San Francisco Chronicle, Edward Guthmann said Spielberg's film "veers 
between stoic political correctness and mushy popHollywood platitudes." Despite the 
"excesses of Spielberg's showy technique" it is "a wonderful story that needed to be told." 
(52) I agree. Somebody should do a documentary.  
Interestingly, however, many of the "Amistad" critics complained that the movie had too 
much history. Philip Wuntch of the Dallas Morning News wrote that because of the "rush 
of historical detail" the movie lacked "a strong emotional current to flow gracefully." The 
result, he said, was that there were "few characters to care about." Steven Rosen in the 
Denver Post agreed, writing that the "complex" story caused the movie to lose "the kind 
of thrillingly direct narrative thrust that captivates moviegoers." Janet Maslin of the New 
York Times called the movie "diffuse," noting that it "divides its energies among many 
concerns: the pain and strangeness of the captives' experience, the Presidential election in


--- PAGE 294 ---
which they become a factor, the stirrings of civil war, the great many bewhiskered 
abolitionists and legal representatives who argue about their fate.” (53)  
History, unlike movies, is none the worse for being "complex" and "diffuse." We can 
choose for ourselves how to divide our energies among its many characters and concerns. 
We can pick up a character such as Lewis Tappan and follow his pre-Amistad efforts to 
end slavery. We can admire his gutsy response to the pro-slavery rowdies who ransacked 
his New York home and burned his furniture. Let the house stand unrepaired, he said, as 
a "silent anti-slavery preacher to the crowds that will flock to see it." We can leave him, if 
we wish, on the brisk morning of December 4, 1841, as he watched the Africans he had 
come to love sail eastward into the Atlantic aboard the Gentleman. "The spirit of liberty," 
he would write to a friend that day, "I am happy to say is rising."  
Or we can tell a different story, one that begins with the arrival of the first slave ships on 
American shores in the 1600s, continues through the debates about slavery at the 
Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, includes a chapter on the Amistad case, then 
continues with Dred Scott, the Emancipation Proclamation, Reconstruction, Jim Crow, 
Plessy v. Ferguson (54),  Charles Hamilton Houston's and the NAACP's campaign to end 
segregation culminating in Brown v. Board of Education (55),  Rosa Parks, "I Have a 
Dream," "Freedom Summer," and ends with the passage of the civil rights acts of the 
1960s--or maybe it goes on. History, unconstrained by the limits faced by filmmakers, is 
full of compelling stories.(56)  
The admiralty law that came out of the Amistad case also beats the movie. Who can 
doubt the correctness of the courts' two rulings that freed the Africans? No American 
court should have jurisdiction to try foreigners for crimes alleged to have been committed 
against other foreigners on a foreign ship outside U.S. waters. Nor should an American 
court have ordered free human beings to be sold at a salvage sale or award salvage based 
upon their market value. As for the other admiralty law issues in the case, whether the 
matter should have been tried in New York or Connecticut and whether Thomas Gedney 
performed "meritorious service" justifying an award of one-third of the value of the 
Amistad and its non-human cargo, those are questions outside my competence to answer. 
Interested readers wanting answers to those two questions should call the editor of this 
journal at his office or home.  
Endnotes 
1.   The cast for Spielberg's production, which was released by DreamWorks SKG, included Djimon 
Hounsou (Cinque), Matthew McConaughey (Roger Baldwin), Anthony Hopkins (John Quincy Adams), 
Morgan Freeman (Theodore Joadson), Stellan SkarsgArd (Lewis Tappan), Nigel Hawthorne (President 
Martin Van Buren), Austin Pendleton (Professor Josiah Gibbs), Arliss Howard (Senator John C. Calhoun), 
Justice Harry A. Blackmun (Justice Joseph Story), Anna Paquin (Queen Isabella), David Paymer (Secretary 
of State John Forsyth), Pete Postlethwaite (District Attorney William Holabird), and Peter Firth (Captain 
Fitzgerald).
  
2.  Treaty of Friendship, Limits, and Navigation Between the United States of America and the King of 
Spain, Oct. 27, 1795, U.S.-Spain, art. ix, 8 Stat. 138, 142 (requiring both countries to restore property taken 
from pirates to the rightful owner).


--- PAGE 295 ---
3.  Treaty for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, Sept. 23, 1817, Gr. Brit.-Spain, 68 Consol. T.S. 45 (1817).  
4.  A number of books have been written about the Amistad case, including: M. Cable, Black Odyssey: The 
Case of the Slave Ship Amistad (1971); H. Jones, The Mutiny on the Amistad: The Saga of a Slave Revolt 
and its Impact on American Abolition, Law, and Diplomacy (1987); S. Jurmain, Freedom's Sons: The True 
Story of the Amistad Mutiny (1998); W. Myers, Amistad: A Long Road to Freedom (1998); W. Owens, 
Slave Mutiny: The Revolt on the Schooner Amistad (1953); K. Zeinert, The Amistad Slave Revolt and 
American Abolition (1997). The best of these sources for general background is probably the book written 
by Howard Jones.  
An extensive history of the legal proceedings related to the Amistad case can be found in the Supreme 
Court's opinion: United States v. The Schooner Amistad, 40 U.S. (15 Pet.) 518 (1841). Large collections of 
primary materials (including newspaper articles from 1839 to 1841), maps, images, and essays concerning 
the case can be found on the following web sites: Mystic Seaport, Exploring Amistad 
(http://amistad.mysticseaport.org/welcome.html); National Archives and Record Administration, The 
Amistad Case (http://www.nara.gov/education/teaching/aniistadihome.html); Doug Linder, Famous Trials: 
The Amistad Trials (http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/amistad/AMISTD.HTM),  
 5.  Jones, supra note 4, at 22-26.  
 6.  Record of the Circuit Court Trial, N.Y. Herald, Sept. 23, 1839.  
 7.  The Suspicious Looking Schooner Captured and Brought Into This Port, New London Gazette, Aug. 
26, 1839. This account is also reported in J. Barber, History of the African Captives (1840).  
 8.  The Captured Africans of the Amistad; Teaching Philosophy to Lewis Tappan & Co. in the Prison at 
Hartford, N.Y. Herald, Oct. 4, 1839.  
 9.  Jones, supra note 4, at 133-65.  
10.  See, e.g., Lewis Tappan's reports from the trials, published in the New York Commercial Advertiser 
from September 1839 to January 1840. Tappan's reports are entirely complimentary of Baldwin's efforts.  
11.  Cable, supra note 4, at 77-106.  
12.  B. Wyatt-Brown, Lewis Tappan and the Evangelical War Against Slavery 205-25 (1969).  
13.  Letter from John Quincy Adams to Lewis Tappan, Nov. 19, 1841 (republished in Mendis Depart, J. 
Com., Nov. 27, 1841).  
14.   Letter from Cinque to Lewis Tappan, Jan. 13, 1842 (read by Tappan at the anniversary of the 
American and Foreign Anti Slavery Society). This letter was among those republished by Oberlin College 
in a brochure entitled "The Mendi Mission" (June 22, 1842).
  
15.  See generally Cable, supra note 4, at chs. 11-12.  
16. 1n an otherwise excellent article, Professor Roger S. Clark appears to have overlooked this point. He 
describes the case as involving homicide law, property law, public international law, conflict of laws, and 
criminal slave-trading law, but mentions admiralty law only briefly in a footnote dealing with federalism. 
See Clark, Steven Spielberg's Amistad and Other Things I Have Thought About in the Past Forty Years: 
International (Criminal) Law, Conflict of Laws, Insurance, and Slavery, 30 Rutgers L.J. 37 1, 387, 393 n.62 
(1999).


--- PAGE 296 ---
17.  According to the Journal of Commerce, Sept. 10, 1839, the order of Judge Judson read as follows:  
To the Marshal of the District of Connecticut-- greeting.--Whereas upon the complaint and information of 
the United States by William S. Holabird, District Attorney of the United States for said District, against 
Simon, Lucis, Joseph, Peter, Mortine, Manuel and fifty two others (whose names are enumerated) for the 
murder of Ramon Ferrer, on the 20th day of June 1839, on the high seas, within the admiralty and maritime 
jurisdiction of the United States, it was ordered and adjudged by the undersigned that they against whom 
said information and complaint was made, stand committed to appear before the Circuit Court of the United 
States for the District of Connecticut, to be holden at Hartford, in said District on the 17th day of 
September, 1839, to answer to the said crime of murder, as set forth in said information and complaint.
  
You are therefore commanded to take the said persons, named as above, and charged with said crime, and 
them safely keep in the jail in New Haven in said District, and them have before the Circuit Court of the 
United States to be holden at Hartford, in said District, on the 17th day of September A. D. 1839. Hereof 
fail not, &c. Dated at New London. August 29, 1839.  
18.  An account of the initial inquiry aboard the Washington appears in Jones, supra note 4, at 28-29.  
19.  Id.  
20.  40 U.S. at 521-23.  
21.  N.Y. Comm. Advertiser, Sept. 23, 1839. In a letter written from New Haven on Sept. 9, 1839, after 
meeting with Captain Green, Lewis Tappan offered the following account of the Africans' arrival and 
encounter with Green:  
Captain Green, of Sag Harbor, who was one of the first men the prisoners met ashore, 
before their capture by Lieut. Gedney, of the U.S. brig Washington, and who has given 
me a circumstantial account, differing in many respects from what has been published, of 
all that took place, says that the Africans asked him, by one of their number who speaks a 
little broken English, "What country is this?" He replied, this is America. They 
immediately asked, "Is it a slave country?" Captain Green answered, it is free here, and 
safe, and there are no Spanish laws here. Shinquau then gave a sort of whistle, when they 
all sprang upon their feet and shouted. Captain Green and his associates sprang to their 
wagon for their guns, supposing the Africans were about to attack them. But Shinquau 
came up, delivered his cutlass and gun, and even offered his hat, &c, and the rest did the 
same, indicating that they would give all up, that Capt. G. might take charge of the 
schooner and everything on board. They however begged of him to take them to Sierre 
Leone. Shinquau positively assured Capt. G. at the time, and he repeats it now, that they 
threw nothing overboard. The stories about his loosening his girdle, and letting three or 
four hundred doubloons drop into the sea, and of diving and keeping under water forty 
minutes, are considered fabulous. The Africans assert that there was a quantity of 
doubloons in the trunks that were carried on shore on Long Island, and Captain Green 
says he heard the money rattle as the trunks were returned to the schooner by order of 
Lieut. Gedney. On examining the contents of the trunks afterwards no gold was found! 
Some person, or persons, are supposed to have the money, but who, is a secret. While on 
shore, at Long Island, Shinquau and his companions, although hungry, and with arms in 
their hands, would not kill a single animal, or take an article even to satisfy their hunger, 
without paying generously for it. They appeared, it is true, to know very little about the 
value of money, and gave a doubloon for a dog, and a small gold piece for some victuals.
 
J. Com., Sept. 10, 1839.  
   
22.  Attomeys for the Amistad Africans filed an answer to the libel of Gedney and others on Sept. 19, 1839:


--- PAGE 297 ---
That the respondents, being treated on board said ves~el by said Ruiz and Montez and 
their confederates with great cruelty and oppression, and being of right free as aforesaid, 
were incited by the love of liberty natural to all men, and by the desire of returning to 
their families and kindred, to take possession of said vessel while navigating the high 
seas, as they had a right to do, with the intent to return therein to their native country, or 
to seek an asylum in some free state, where slavery did not exist, in order that they might 
enjoy their liberty under the protection of its government; that the schooner, about the 
26th of August, 1839, arrived in the possession of the respondents, at Culloden Point near 
Montauk, and was there anchored near the shore of Long Island, within hailing distance 
thereof, and within the waters and territory of the state of New York; that the 
respondents, Cinque, Carlee, Darnmah, Baah, Monat, Nahguis, Quato, Con, Fajanah, 
Berrie, Gabbo, Fouleaa, Kimbo, Faquarmah, Cononia, otherwise called Ndzarbla, Yaboi, 
Bumah I st, Shurna, Fawne, Peale, Ba, and Sheele, while said schooner lay at anchor as 
aforesaid, went on shore within the state of New York to procure provisions and other 
necessaries, and while there, in a state where slavery is unlawful and does not exist, under 
the protection of the government and laws of said state by which they were all free, 
whether on board of said schooner, or on shore, the respondents were severally seized, 
and well those who were on shore as aforesaid, as those who were on board of and in 
possession of said schooner, by Lieutenant Gedney, his officers, and crew of the United 
States brig Washington, without any lawful warrant or authority whatever, at the instance 
of Ruiz and Montez, with the intent to keep and secure them as slaves to Ruiz and 
Montez, respectively, and to obtain an award of salvage therefor, from this honourable 
Court, as for a meritorious act. That for that purpose, the respondents were, by Lieutenant 
Gedney, his officers and crew, brought to the port of New London; and while there, and 
afterwards, under the subsequent proceedings in this honourable Court taken into the 
custody of the marshal of said district of Connecticut, and confined and held in the jails 
in the cities of New Haven and Hartford, respectively, as aforesaid. Wherefore, the 
respondents pray that they may be set free, as they of fight are and ought to be, and that 
they be released from the custody of the marshal, under the process of this honourable 
Court, under which, or under colour of which they are holden as aforesaid.
 
40 U.S. at 526-27.  
 23.  The Amistad Circuit Court Trial, N.Y. Comm. Advertiser, Sept. 23, 1839 [hereinafter cited as Circuit 
Court Trial]  
 24.  Jones, supra note 4, at 64.  
 25.  Circuit Court Trial, supra note 23.  
 26.  Treaty of Peace and Amity Between His Bfitannic Majesty and the United States of Amefica, Dec. 24, 
1814, U.S.-Gr. Brit., 8 Stat. 218.  
  27.  23 U.S. (10 Wheat.) 66 (1825) (deciding that a foreign slaving vessel captured in peacetime had to be 
restored to her flag state if slaving was not contrary to the laws of that country).  
 28.   Jones, supra. note 4, at 64, 71-72, 74, 76-77.  
 29.  Id. at 100.  
30.   Id. at 102. The testimony of Fordham was reported in several papers, including the Charleston 
Courier, Nov. 26, 1839:  
Fordham testified that two trunks were brought on shore by the blacks. "Joseph Jinqua [Cinque] lifted one


--- PAGE 298 ---
trunk, and I heard the money rattle. Me and another nigger lifted the other trunk, and then I heard some 
more money?So we determined to have the vessel at all hazards?forcibly if we can peaceably if we must."  
31.  Jones, supra note 4, at 102-03.  
32.  Id. at 103-04.  
33. Id. at 104-10.  
34.  Id. at 119-24.  
35.  Id. at 128.  
 36.  16 U.S. (3 Wheat.) 336, 341 (1818).  
 37.   Jones, supra note 4, at 129.  
 38.   Id. at 129-30.  
 39.   Id. at 130-31.  
 40.    Id. at 141-42.  
  41.  40 U.S. at 547. Gilpin's argument is summarized id. at 539-49.  
 42.   Baldwin's argument is summarized id. at 549-66.  
 43.  For a further discussion of Adams' argument, see infra note 51 and accompanying text.  
 44.   Id.  
 45.  40U.S. at 593.  
 46.   Id. at 594.  
 47.  Id. at 597.  
 48.  Id.  
 49.   60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857).  
 50.   The opinion of Justice Story makes clear that had the sale of the Africans in Havana been legal, they 
would have had no choice but to allow their return to Cuba:  
If these negroes were, at the time, lawfully held as slaves under the laws of Spain, and 
recognised by those laws as property capable of being lawfully bought and sold; we see 
no reason why they may not justly be deemed within the intent of the treaty, to be 
included under the denomination of merchandise, and, as such, ought to be restored to 
their claimants [Ruiz and Montes]....


--- PAGE 299 ---
40 U.S. at 593. The Court also suggested at least mild disapproval of the Africans' action in seizing control 
of the schooner: "We may lament the dreadful acts, by which they asserted their liberty, and took 
possession of the Amistad, and endeavoured to regain their native country; but they cannot be deemed 
pirates or robbers in the sense of the law of nations  Id. at 593-94.  
51.  Id. at 566. Subsequently, however, Adams' speech was privately published as a 135-page monograph.  
52.  Guthmann, Middling Passage, S.F. Chron., Dec. 12, 1997, at C I.  
53.  Wuntch, Amistad: Shot at Another Masterpiece Misfires, Dallas Morning News, Dec. 12, 1997, at IC; 
Rosen, "Amistad" Unflinching Look at Slavery's Horrors, Denver Post, Dec. 12,1997, at Fl; Maslin, Pain of 
Captivity Made Starkly Real, N.Y. Times, Dec. 10, 1997, at E2.  
Not that everyone was critical. Rita Kempley of the Washington Post said that the movie was "powerful" 
and demonstrated Spielberg's "flair for bringing lost worlds alive." Kempley, "Amistad": History 
Unshackled, Wash. Post, Dec. 12, 1997, at Cl. Stanley Kauffmann, the film critic for the New Republic, 
found "Amistad" an "engrossing" film that revealed "a vital filmmaking talent ... striking toward the truth.... 
While it's in progress [the movie] envelops us; paradoxically, when it's finished, it seems to stand free, like 
a strong sculpture." Kauffmann, Of Human Bondage, New Republic, Dec. 22, 1997, at 24.  
 54.  163 U.S. 537 (1896).  
 55.   347 U.S. 483 (1954).  
 56.  Wyatt-Brown, supra note 12, at 118, 220. An essay (by the present author) on Lewis Tappan and his 
role in the Amistad case can be found at http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects  
Stephen Spielberg's "Amistad" (1997)  
Cast  
Reviews  
Movie Images  
Amistad Trials Page  
A Dreamworks production  
Director: Stephen Spielberg  
Screenwriter: David Franzoni  
Photography: Janusz Kaminski  
Music: John Williams  
(R, 145 minutes) 
 Cast:


--- PAGE 300 ---
Cinque: Djimon Honsou  
Roger Baldwin: Matthew McConaughey  
John Quincy Adams: Anthony Hopkins  
Theodore Joadson: Morgan Freeman  
Lewis Tappan: Stellan Skarsgard  
President Martin Van Buren: Nigel Hawthorne  
Professor Josiah Gibbs: Austin Pendleton  
Senator John Calhoun: Arliss Howard  
Justice Joseph Story: Justice Harry A. Blackmun  
Queen Isabella: Anna Paquin  
Secretary Forsyth: David Paymer  
William Holabird: Pete Postlethwaite  
British Naval Officer: Peter Firth 
Reviews  
MOVIE REVIEWS OF AMISTAD  
The New Republic, Stanley Kaufmann, December 22, 1997  
Spielberg puts people before us, not costumed actors, and he puts us among those 
people. The very first shot, an intense close-up of a black man, dirt-caked and wet, 
as lightening flashes, as he struggles to pull his shackles loose in the ship's hold, not 
only crystallizes the them; it seizes us with verity, the sense that a vital film making 
talent is striking toward the truth.  
The film depends greatly on the performance of Cinque, and here Spielberg's choice 
can only be called brilliant. Djimon Hounsou is a native of Benin who has been 
living in Paris and has had small roles in French and American films. He is a 
magnificent-looking man, but it is his spirit, more than his physique, that fulfills the 
role.


--- PAGE 301 ---
Amistad, shortcomings and all, is solid, engrossing. While it's in progress, it 
envelops us; paradoxically, when it's finished, it seems to stand free, like a strong 
sculpture.  
The New York Times, Janet Maslin, December 10, 1997  
The diffuse "Amistad" divides its energies among many concerns: the pain and 
strangeness of the captives' experience, the Presidential election in which they 
become a factor, the stirrings of civil war, and the great many bewhiskered 
abolitionists and legal representatives who argue about their fate. The specific, as in 
Cinque's being torn from his family, is overwhelmed by generality. And this is a 
film in which John Quincy Adams, played by Anthony Hopkins as a wise old 
curmudgeon faithfully devoted to his house plants, is the zestiest character by far.  
None of the rhetoric, not even the oratorical heights reached when John Quincy 
Adams takes on the Supreme Court, can compare with the Africans' story. And the 
best parts of "Amistad" are those that simply bring their pride, fear and outrage to 
life.  
The Washington Post, Rita Kempley, December 12, 1997  
Steven Spielberg's powerful "Amistad" again demonstrates the director's flair for 
bringing lost worlds alive. . . . "Amistad" boasts a star-spangled cast that includes 
Nigel Hawthorne as pro-slavery President Martin Van Buren, Anna Paquin as the 
pubescent Queen Isabella of Spain, and Morgan Freeman and Stellan Skarsgard as 
abolitionists who champion the Africans' cause. Though Freeman has a smallish 
part, he leaves an indelible impression. As he searches the Amistad's dank hold for 
evidence, he's staggered by the chains and bloodstains, but most of all by the ghosts 
from his past. Hounsou, a West African model with beauty and presence, but no 
acting experience, carries much of the movie on his broad shoulders with surprising 
skill and strength. His is one of only a few African characters, however, who emerge 
from the rest. And he emerges with dignity intact, even when obliged to become 
teary-eyed upon sniffling an African violet (which has no scent) in Adam's 
greenhouse.  
Star Tribune, (Minneapolis, MN), Jeff Strickler, December 12, 1997 ***** 5 Stars  
The shipboard rebellion is shown in frank, disturbing fashion. Then the movie 
settles into a period-piece courtroom drama. Despite the all-star cast, the 
performance that stands out comes from an unknown: Djimon Hounsou, a native of 
West Africa. He plays Cinque, the Africans' emotional and physical leader. 
Hounsou does an exquisite job of conveying a wide range of emotions--confusion, 
fear, rage, sadness--a task complicated considerably by the fact that his character 
doesn't speak English.  
The San Francisco Chronicle, Edward Guthmann, December 12, 1997


--- PAGE 302 ---
*** 3 Stars  
An admirable but disappointing effort, Spielberg uses a more conventional format 
than he did in the stripped-down, black-and-white "Schindler's List," and delivers a 
film that veers between stoic political correctness and mushy pop-Hollywood 
platitudes.  
Hopkins makes the most of his moments as the crusty but wise Adams, and 
Hounsou, the standout in the cast, brings a magnificent, fierce integrity to Cinque. 
Freeman is wasted, however, as the slave-turned-abolitionist Theodore Joadson, 
while McConaughey is close to embarrassing with his mutton chops, wire-rimmed 
specs and broad gesturing.  
Even with the excesses of Spielberg's showy technique and Hallmark emotion, this is 
a wonderful story that needed to be told.  
The Dallas Morning News, Philip Wuntch, December 12, 1997  
What Amistad lacks is a strong emotional current to flow gracefully with its rush of 
historical detail. There are only a few characters to care about, and your tears are 
for their physical circumstances rather than their individual psyches. Sadly, 
Amistad reinforces its director's primary weakness, an over-dependence on Movie 
Shorthand to flesh out his characters.  
Considering the secrecy that always shrouded the historical event, better a flawed 
Amistad than no Amistad. But you can't shake the gnawing feeling that Amistad 
could have been a masterpiece.  
The Denver Post, Steven Rosen, December 12, 1997  
The story is a complex one, and in following it, the movie loses the kind of thrillingly 
direct narrative thrust that captivates moviegoers.  
"Amistad" is inspired when showing us America through its African prisoners' 
eyes. When a Christian group kneels in front of the imprisoned Africans to pray, the 
bewildered audience wonders if the visitors are "entertainers." When the lowly, 
bumbling real-estate lawyer Roger Baldwin (a very good McConaughey) is 
appointed the Africans' attorney, one says--in Mende--"I have a horrible feeling he 
speaks for us."  
Quincy Adams' final speech to the Supreme Court--condensed and adapted from 
the real one--will give you goosebumps. "If it be civil war, let it come," he says. 
"And if it does, may it be the last battle of the American Revolution."  
The Boston Herald, December 12, 1997


--- PAGE 303 ---
Spielberg has chosen his cast with great care (with the notable exception of a badly 
miscast McConaughey).  
Since Cinque speaks only Mende, Hounsou must deliver an extraordinarily physical 
performance, delivering much of it in a kind of anguished mime. When Hounsou 
stands up in court in one scene and shouts the few crucial words Cinque knows, the 
look on Hounsou's face will rivet you to your seat.  
For his part, Hopkins seems to mumble lines he doesn't like and nail the ones he 
does like an Olympic vaulter.  
Amistad is both entertaining and enlightening.  
The Rocky Mountain News, Maslin, December 19, 1997  
(C+) Steven Spielberg's rendering of history plays like a massive term paper.  
Time, December 29, 1997  
(7th best movie of 1997) Again [Spielberg] unsentimentally places us in touch with 
our best sentiments.  
Entertainment Weekly, January 16, 1998  
(C) Amistad is two and a half hours of black men sitting around in chains waiting to 
be given their freedom.  
THE AMISTAD TRIAL: LINKS & 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
LINKS  
ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
National Archives and Records Administration: The Amistad Case  
(Scanned original documents and background information. Original documents 
include the Libel of Thomas Gedney, Answer of the Proctors for the Amistad 
Africans, and JQA's request for papers.)  
Exploring Amistad  
(Mystic Seaport's excellent educational site.)  
Sierra Leone 
(Information on the country that was home to the Amistads.)


--- PAGE 304 ---
Legal Developments After U. S. vs. Amistad  
Amistad  
(Animated version of the mutiny and links.)  
Amistad Story Ties Into Roots of United Methodist Church in Africa  
(Background information on the missionary work began in Africa as the result of 
the Amistad incident.)  
PROJECT TO BUILD A REPLICA OF THE SCHOONER AMISTAD  
Amistad America, Inc.  
(Information on the project at Mystic Seaport, CT. to build a schooner resembling 
as much as possible the Amistad.)  
BOOKS ABOUT THE AMISTAD AVAILABLE FOR PURCHASE  
Amistad Books  
(List of approximately 20 books about the Amistad case with price information.)  
THE PLAGIARISM CONTROVERSY SURROUNDING THE 
SPIELBERG MOVIE, "AMISTAD"  
The Amistad Case: Outright Plagiarism or Who Owns History?  
(Information and documents pertaining to the copyright infringement suit of 
Barbara Chase-Riboud against Steven Spielberg and Dreamworks.)  
Entertainment Weekly Online: Amistad  
(News and gossip about the plagiarism controversy.)  
     
BOOKS  
Cable, Mary, Black Odyssey: The Case of the Slave Ship Amistad (Viking 
Press, 1971).  
Chase-Riboud, Barbara, "The Echo of the Lions," (1989).  
Jones, Howard, The Mutiny on the Amistad:The Saga of a Slave Revolt and its 
Impact on American Abolition, Law, and Diplomacy (Oxford Univ. Press, 
1987).  
Jurmain, Suzanne, "Freedom's Sons: The True Story of the Amistad Mutiny," 
(1998).


--- PAGE 305 ---
Myers, Walter Dean, "Amistad: A Long Road to Freedom," (1998).  
Owens, William, Slave Mutiny: The Revolt on the Schooner Amistad (J. Day 
Co., 1953).  
Pesci, David, Amistad (1997).  
Zeinert, Karen, The Amistad Slave Revolt and American Abolition (1997).  
NON-LEGAL PERIODICALS  
Jackson, Donald, "Mutiny on the Amistad," Smithsonian (January, 1998).  
Jones, Howard, "The Mutiny on the Amistad," Constitution (Fall, 1988).  
Rosen, G. "Amistad and the Abuse of History," Commentary (Feb., 1998).  
Trudeau, Gary, "Amistad is Important. Discuss," TIME (Dec. 29, 1997).  
NEWSPAPER ARTICLES  
Hugh Thomas, "Amistad as History," Wall Street Journal (1998).  
Zeinert, K. "The Amistad Revolt and American Abolition," N. Y. Times (Aug. 
31, 1997)(Book Review).  
CASES  
United States vs. The Amistad, 40 U. S. 518 (1841).  
INTERNET  
See "Amistad Links" in this site.  
VIDEO  
Amistad (Dreamworks, 1997)(Steven Spielberg, Director.)

