=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Dr. Amos Wilson~Black Child Development Under White Supremacy.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 19
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:45:18.858915
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the  
Western Educational System 
Including an Audio Lecture by The Honorable Dr. Amos Wilson-  
“Black Child Development Under White Supremacy” 
 
Tutorial Designed by RBG 
Street Scholar for Study, 
Sharing and Download


--- PAGE 2 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 2 
Black Child Development 
Under White Supremacy 
 
 
Open the Lecture Playlist 
 
 
In two masterful lectures contained wi thin the pages of this 
modest text, Dr. Wilson challenges the all too pervasive 
assumption and false perception that the "New World Order" is 
somehow ordained -that if Afrikan people are to progress, they 
have no other Alter -native but to remain colonized by White 
Western Inte -rests, This of course is patently false. Dr Wilson 
de-bunks this myth with an insightful analysis of the Legacy of 
Marcus Garvey and the proven validity of Afrikan Centered 
Consciousness as necessary. Please listen to his audio lectur es intently and then 
view/ study the videos in the context of his pearls of wisdom. 
 
 
Areas covered in the book and audio include: 
 Are Black and White Children the same? 
 Are there any significant differences in the mental and physical growth and 
development of Black and White Children? 
 Are such leisure time activities as the playing of certain games, watching T.V., 
going to the movies, listening to the radio, hazardous to the mental health of Black 
Children? 
 Why do Black Children generally score lower than White Children on I.Q. tests? 
 Is the Black Child merely a White Child who "happens" to be "painted" Black?  
 What effects does race awareness have on the mental and personality 
development of Black Children? 
 Is the use of Black English a sign of mental inferiority? 
 Do Black parents socialize their children to be inferior to White Children? 
 Why have integrated schools and busing failed so many Black Children?  
This media was originally provided for a 2007 Lesson by RBG Comrade and Sr. Educator:    
 
Huey Freeman  
(The Maccabean Prince)


--- PAGE 3 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 3 
 
Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
By Hort, September 2007  
   
As African children head back to school to face another school year I would like 
to make an attempt to explain to our community and particularly to young parents 
why and how the African child has been systematically mis -educated in the 
western world during the last 500 years, so that they can better understand the 
root causes of some of the aberrations and self destructive forms of behavior 
they see i n our community and  to help them realize that if they want a brighter 
future for their children and for our community, then it is imperative that they no 
longer leave the education of their children solely in the hands of the western 
educational system, bu t rather to follow the advice of Malcolm X who told us 
years ago that “the black child‟s education starts when the school bells rings at 4 
p.m in the afternoon.” (This may vary depending on what time school ends in 
your country) We didn‟t follow his advice  then and today our youth are suffering 
the consequences. The situation of African children around the planet has 
considerably deteriorated since the days of Malcolm X, so that we are now forced 
to follow the advice of Dr Asa Hilliard one of Africa‟s great  educators who died 
recently and left us these parting words.  "The education of African people is an 
urgent necessity. It is a matter of life and death. We cannot abide another 
generation of children who have no identity and who are ignorant about Africa."  
   
The late Professor Amos Wilson, another one of Africa‟s foremost educators of 
the 20 th century, posed a crucial question that all African parents and our 
community need to ask. What is the purpose of an education? He said that most 
black people have been „trained‟ to think it is „to get a job with one of the „fortune 
500‟ companies”. However, according to Dr. Wilson, they are seriously mistaken, 
because the purpose of an education is to improve and further the interests of 
one‟s own group and to ensure  its survival. Obviously the Indians, the Chinese, 
the Jews and other groups understand this, since that is what they do. Our 
people often look at them and marvel at their unity and wonder why in contrast 
our community seems so fragmented and disorganized.  Yet, when we study 
African civilization we can clearly see that it was well organized and group 
oriented and there is even an African proverb which states “it takes a whole 
village to raise a child.” If it took a whole village to raise a child, it must have been 
because our ancestors worked as a group and understood that on reaching 
adulthood that child would in turn do everything to promote the interests of their 
group. Our ancestors therefore never left the education of their children to 
chance because the cohesiveness of their society was of prime importance.


--- PAGE 4 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 4 
So, how have African people become such a fragmented and disorganized group 
of people today? “Why can‟t we be like the Indians and the Japanese?” the 
question one of my 17 year old nephews asked me some years ago. The answer 
is quite simple. We cannot be like them because we do not have the same 
historical experience.” We do ourselves a great disservice when we compare 
ourselves to other people since we can only compare that which is similar, not  
dissimilar. We are different because Africa was attacked by Arabs and 
Europeans, and our people were forcefully taken to another land and enslaved. 
Neither the Indians nor the Japanese have had that experience and therefore it is 
absolutely pointless to compare ourselves to them.  
   
When slavery and later colonization took place the vision that our ancestors had 
of educating and raising African children was taken out of their control and a new 
way was imposed on African people. Worse, this new system of e ducation ran 
counter to the interests and needs of Africans. As a result, today, as Prof Wilson 
has again pointed out, African people have never had so many talented and 
educated economists, educators, sociologists, doctors, lawyers, artists, etc, yet 
we s uffer the worst health, housing, and education on the planet because our 
education was never designed to promote our interests but rather the goals and 
the interests of our oppressors. The self destructive behavior and derogative 
lyrics of the rap generati on is a striking example of children who have not been 
taught to promote their interests.  
   
Furthermore, our people hold advanced degrees from some of the most 
prestigious Ivy League schools and universities and can solve any myriad of 
problems for other  groups but since they have not received an African centred 
education when it comes to their own, all their knowledge is null and void. 
Sometimes the more educated they become; the more alienated they are from 
African culture and more of a menace to our gr oup, because in their  zeal to 
promote the interests of others they often end up doing harm to their own people. 
So, Colin Powell, who sent African American soldiers to kill other African people 
in Grenada, should never be considered a good role model for o ur children, if we 
want to liberate African people from oppression. If African leaders allow the West 
to take their wealth to feed Europeans and leave Africans to starve and face 
death, it is because they too have been taught to work against their own 
interests. For example, at the end of apartheid instead of putting reparations and 
land redistribution as a top priority for South Africa‟s black victims, reconciliation 
with whites, the criminals, became the main goal. As a result, Nelson Mandela is 
feted all  over the western world and the British even unveiled a statue of him 
recently in London, yet the only thing that South African blacks have received to 
date is some propaganda about living happily in a mythical rainbow colored 
society. This is one of the reasons why African parents must be extremely careful 
with the kind of role models they present to their children. Danny Glover is a 
much better model for our children to emulate than Condoleezza Rice.


--- PAGE 5 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 5 
This new manner of raising and educating black chil dren however has always 
posed a problem in the western world. Once again, Dr. Wilson gives us an 
explanation. It is problematic he says, because African people were not brought 
to the West to be educated. They were brought to be the slaves and servants of 
the people who enslaved them, in other words, to work. I used to teach African 
culture in an after school program several years ago and the first question we 
asked the children was the reason for our people‟s presence here in the West. 
None of them ever responded by saying that African people were here to work as 
servants for white people. In fact, most black people will answer this question by 
a vague “we were brought here as slaves .” Have you ever noticed that anything 
meant for African people is often va gue?  For example, “Jesus is coming back 
soon” or “we are going to reduce poverty in Africa” or “we want to help Africa” 
What date specifically is Jesus coming back? By what date exactly are they 
going to reduce poverty and by how much? or what specific ar ea of activity are 
they planning to focus on? We don‟t know. The language is vague because it‟s 
not meant to be taken seriously and they know that our people will not demand 
anything more specific. In return, we are asked to blindly believe, watch and pray  
and hope for a better day. Also very, very vague.  
   
Yet what black people actually do is very specific. We serve our white masters. In 
sports and in music all the owners are white and the players and singers are 
black. This imbalance exists even in coun tries where the majority of the 
population is black. For example in the Caribbean most of the business and hotel 
owners as well as the tourists are white, while the workers are mostly black. In 
Africa, our people extract the diamonds and gold from the grou nd while Indians, 
Jews, Lebanese and Western businessmen sit in their offices all day and reap 
the benefits. This inability to understand the real reason for our presence in the 
West has led our community to the false assumption that we are here to „live i n 
peace and harmony with whites.‟ How many times have we heard black people 
say “they don‟t see color” yet when they move into a white neighborhood, the 
whites move out, so obviously they do. If we are so mistaken about why we are 
here and our relationship  with its inhabitants is it any wonder that our children 
and our community are so confused and have so many problems in their daily 
lives?  
   
 In 1888, Ernest Renan, a racist French philosopher described Europe‟s 
economic vision of our world when he said,  “Nature has given us a race of 
workers, they are Chinese, a race to till the soil, they are Africans and a race of 
rulers and soldiers, they are Europeans”. This is exactly the world we live in 
today. Yet, this racially organized economic system has exist ed for the last 500 
years but sadly African people are totally unaware of this fact because they are 
kept ignorant and uninformed the world over. It is also this racially segmented 
economic system which is responsible for the persistent poverty and 
underdevelopment in Africa and the other countries where our people reside, but 
because of our ignorance western propaganda has made us believe that it is


--- PAGE 6 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 6 
because our leaders are incompetent and corrupt . We are meant to transfer our 
hatred to our leaders rather t han to the racist economic system that Europeans 
have willfully put in place to impoverish Africans. Luckily, the masses of poor 
people are passive if not there would be thousands of revolts every day, 
everywhere on this planet. To keep African people impo verished the West 
intentionally bypasses Africa and the ghettos where many of our people live and 
invest in the Asian countries. The reason Chinese investment in Africa today 
terrifies the West is because they fear it may actually help lift Africans out of  
poverty and thus threaten their racially segmented economic system. To punish 
the Chinese, the West has simply mounted a propaganda campaign accusing 
them of selling tainted products and of ignoring human rights in Africa, but when 
and where in Africa has  the West ever respected human rights? In fact, most of 
the anti democratic leaders in Africa are still in power because of the West.  
   
Corruption in Africa therefore is not the cause of poverty but a consequence of it. 
People in Africa are corrupt becau se they do not earn enough money to live 
decently and therefore must resort to illegal methods to make ends meet. In fact, 
where ever you see crime take a good look, you will usually find high 
unemployment and intolerable living conditions because it is a consequence and 
not the cause. Improve the living conditions and corruption and crime will quickly 
disappear. It‟s a very simple equation but of course no one is interested in this 
option because the capitalist system, which is really the old Roman slave s ystem 
under a different name, cannot survive without access to a large number of 
unpaid workers or people who are barely paid. Under globalization, its modern 
name, 80% of the world is still exploited by the 20% who still continue to own all 
the wealth. Ch anging the name periodically (feudalism, industrialization, 
capitalism, socialism, communism and now globalization) is simply a strategy 
that the West uses to make us; the ignorant masses believe that there is genuine 
change taking place in society. Now yo u understand why every country you visit 
and in every area of activity the owners and those who make money are always 
white or are close to white, while those who work, serve and are exploited are 
always black or close to it. This is what African parents m ust begin to understand 
so that they can explain to their children why African people are consistently at 
the bottom of the socio-economic ladder.  
   
Now that we know that African people were brought to the West exclusively to 
work and serve whites, and n ot to “live in peace and harmony” with them, where 
did the rationale behind the education of black children come from? After 
Europeans had succeeded in making our ancestors almost as ignorant as the 
animals they said they were after years of chattel slavery, some of them began to 
realize that in order to further their commercial interests, it was better for the 
„negroes‟ to have at least a minimal amount of education. A few continued to 
believe that “negroes should continue to be worked like beasts of burde n and be 
kept in total ignorance,” however they finally agreed that it was in their best 
interest to educate our ancestors. In their original plans Europeans had had no


--- PAGE 7 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 7 
intentions of educating African people. The education of the black child in the 
western educational system therefore was never designed to develop the 
individual personality or the intellect of African children and to help them reach 
their fullest potential. The decision to educate was strictly based on the economic 
requirements of the day which needed a number of educated Africans in order for 
the West to achieve its goals.   
   
We would still be uneducated today if Europeans had not deemed it a necessary 
requirement. In fact, one of the reasons that African children are doing so badly 
in th e educational system is precisely because their education continues to 
depend on the needs of the western economic system. If you listen to 
propaganda however you may easily believe it is because they are intellectually 
inferior and lazy. The stark reality is that the business world is linked to education 
and therefore whatever happens in the economic sphere will have an impact on 
education. The educational system works like a bottleneck to control the flow of 
students entering the workforce. So, if the eco nomy is experiencing a boom, 
more students will graduate from college and university in order to enter the work 
force and if there is a recession, it will do the complete opposite. I.e. fewer 
students will graduate and thus fewer will enter the workforce.   
   
The western economy has not been doing well for several years now because 
the new technology has not been able to provide the large numbers of jobs which 
the old industries like steel and coal did, years ago. This has led economists to 
conclude that l ong term unemployment will now be a permanent fixture of the 
western economy. As a result, universities and colleges have been forced to 
reduce the number of people entering the workforce. It is obvious that if the 
economy is suffering this will have an ad verse effect on African people since our 
education since the days of slavery has been intricately linked to the state of the 
Western economy. This is the real reason why there is very little investment in 
black education because there is an economic impera tive to considerably reduce 
the flow of African children graduating and entering the workforce, since there 
are no available jobs for them and thus it is pointless to waste money educating 
them. Might I remind you that 400 years ago, black unemployment was  totally 
unheard of in the West since every African man, woman and child was fully 
employed from sunrise to sunset.  In fact, Europeans couldn‟t build ships fast 
enough to go to Africa to kidnap Africans and bring them to the West to work. 
Isn‟t it ironic that curbing immigration from Africa is the biggest issue in the West 
today where quotas and fluency in Western languages are requirements for 
emigrating to the West?  In France they are even planning to test the DNA of 
relatives who simply want to rejoin their families. How unfortunate that 
Europeans did not enforce these practices 500 years ago because they would 
have saved Africans a tremendous amount of pain.


--- PAGE 8 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 8 
If we accept that in the western system an individual‟s importance depends on 
their financial worth, then it is clear why African children have become a liability 
rather than an asset and are underachieving in school. Knowing the kind of social 
disruption that able bodied, young men of working age unable to find a job can 
create in society, the  West has decided to channel them into prisons as a 
solution in order to prevent the kind of revolts that occurred in the French 
suburbs 2 years ago. This is why „tolerance zero‟ was introduced and why a 15 
year old African American youth who stole a simpl e chocolate bar would receive 
a 15 year jail sentence from a US court. To deaden the pain of those who have 
lost all hope of a better future, they inject drugs into our communities and pray for 
a quick demise either by a drug overdose or a bullet to the br ain as our young 
men pretend to be mafia bosses fighting over turf.  
   
After the Europeans had finally decided to educate African children, they had to 
deal with the problem of the content of their education. What were they to teach 
these „negroes?‟ All o f the aberrations and self destructive behavioral patterns 
that we see in our community can be traced right back to this moment when 
Europeans had to make a decision about the kind of information they were going 
to transmit to African people. When African children entered the western school 
system for the first time, there was great fear among the slaveholders that if 
Africans were taught „the wrong‟ information, (the truth) they would lose complete 
control over them especially since our ancestors numerically outnumbered whites 
in the new world at that time.( African people have since become the minority.)  
   
To understand why Europeans were so afraid of the content of African education 
we must go further back into our past. Before they had even set foot in  Africa, 
Europeans had heard about its glory and its extraordinary civilization. Philip of 
Macedonia, like the typical warmongering European megalomaniac, decided that 
as he was the most powerful person in the West he had to conquer Egypt, the 
most advanced African civilization at the time and own it for himself. Fortunately, 
he was killed while waging another one of his numerous wars. Unfortunately, his 
son Alexander, who only a twisted mind could call great, decided to fulfill his 
father‟s dream and did e ventually conquer Egypt. When Europeans entered 
Africa for the first time and saw the tremendous civilization our ancestors had 
methodically collected, stored and preserved from millennia they were 
mesmerized. They were overwhelmed by its organization, its opulence, its style, 
its architecture, its creativity, its intelligence, in short, everything but most 
particularly, its tremendous wealth.  
   
Today in the western media we are inundated with propaganda of “a poverty 
stricken Africa” but Europeans knew t hen and still know now how tremendously 
wealthy Africa is. In fact, it is precisely because of Africa‟s genius and its 
tremendous wealth why African people were enslaved in the first place. 
Europeans were envious and wanted to have Africa all for themselve s but they 
also felt ashamed and it was at this moment that the crime which they would


--- PAGE 9 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 9 
carry out later in the 15 th century when they discovered the New World began to 
take shape in their minds. One of the things that struck me as I studied Ancient 
Egyptian civilization was the number of times the word „shame‟ appeared in the 
writings of many of the European travellers to Egypt. It‟s a leitmotiv in their 
writings. Even Jean Francois Champoleon who deciphered the hieroglyphs on 
the Rosetta Stone felt shame wh en he visited the tombs of the Pharaohs in the 
Valley of Kings and saw the different races depicted there. This is what he said.  
   
“We also found Egyptians and other Africans depicted in the same way, which 
could not be otherwise: but there were some imp ortant and strange differences 
between the namou ( the Asians) and the tamhou ( the Europeans) ….. Finally 
(and I am ashamed to say this because our race was the last and most savage of 
all in those ancient times) but we must be honest and admit that we di d not paint 
a very pretty figure in those days. Here I am referring to all the people with 
blonde hair and white skin, living not only in Europe, but in Asia, their place of 
origin. “(Asia here means people from the Middle East and not from China) this 
forces us to ask the following question, “Why did Europeans feel shame when 
they came into contact with Africa? Where did their shame stem from? It is this 
shame which is behind our enslavement and oppression.  
   
In recent years, there has been a lot of talk  about the end of western civilization 
and we have all heard conservative and right wing politicians in the West 
lamenting the loss of western values. But what is Western civilization? What 
exactly are Western values? If you have travelled across Europe as  I have, you 
will see walled cities, military forts, canons, pistols, and guns , all manner of 
swords and statues of war heroes. In short, you will see an arsenal of weaponry 
and materials for waging war. In my opinion, war is not what most people 
imagine when they think about civilization. This may surprise many people but 
the West has never had a civilization if you exclude war from that definition. So 
where did the West get all its architecture, laws, religion, human rights ideas, its 
so called values, et c? .They got them from Africa. Before they visited Africa they 
had none of these things.  
   
In fact, Europeans had spent their time on the planet developing more and more 
lethal weapons to wage war and kill each other. Africans in contrast, had spent 
their time on this planet mapping the stars, studying the changing seasons, 
inventing literature, the arts, architecture, mathematics, writing, inventing the 
calendar, medicine, worshiping their gods, mummifying their dead, preparing for 
the afterlife, even in venting the very wig that so many black women can no 
longer do without today, in short, trying to build the things that we consider today 
as civilization. As a result, when they came into contact with Africa‟s splendor, 
Europeans felt inadequate, ashamed, inferior, because they had built nothing 
similar in Europe, only weapons of war, and so they were envious and started 
plotting to take Africa for themselves and enslave African people and that is 
exactly what they have done. So what has been promoted as We stern civilization


--- PAGE 10 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 10 
during the last 500 years is none other than the civilization of African people 
which they have simply confiscated and claimed as their very own. Today, the 
West has reached the peak of its power and it is still in the warmongering 
business, and still sowing death and destruction in its path. Iraq is a recent 
example and perhaps Iran will be next in line, however, it now prefers to let the 
other races kill each other while it concentrates on supplying all the materials 
necessary for them to accomplish this task and rake in the profits from their 
deaths, especially from the deaths of African people who unfortunately have 
become infected with the western warmongering virus after centuries of close 
contact, to the point where Rwandans extermi nated 4 million of their own people 
in the short space of only 3 months.   
   
As many people are unaware that the West has claimed African civilization as its 
own, they are often confused by the contradictions they see in Western society. 
So they can‟t understand for example how slavery and human rights can co -exist 
side by side but if you understand that one comes from Europe (slavery) and the 
other comes from Africa (human rights), then there is absolutely no contradiction 
whatsoever. Furthermore, as they do not genuinely believe in such concepts they 
often end up only paying lip service to them . Do you remember that Europeans 
were holding a book in their hands which clearly stated „thou shalt not kill‟ while 
they were raping and killing our ancestors? Wor se, the ships our ancestors 
travelled across the Atlantic Ocean on had biblical names such as „the good ship 
Jesus” or “John the Baptist.” Today, Mr. Bush talks about god and drops cluster 
bombs which kill women and children in the same breath. This is exactly what his 
ancestors, the founding fathers, did when they exterminated the Amerindians, the 
original inhabitants of the USA. This dichotomy can be observed in many areas 
in western society because they have simply juxtaposed their warmongering 
culture t o African civilization and promoted it as their own.. Now you can 
understand why there is so much injustice, poverty and exploitation on one hand 
and false philanthropy on the other in our world. If you have ever wondered why 
there are so many humanitarian  and Christian organizations all over Africa 
apparently working to help lift Africans out of poverty, yet Africans still do not 
have access to clean drinking water now you know why. Next time the G8 
countries get together and begin to wax lyrical about how  they intend to lift 
Africans out of poverty, please do yourself a favor and turn off your television.  
.  
The education of the black child caused great fear among the Europeans 
because they knew the genius of the people they had enslaved. What could they 
therefore teach African children whose birthright they had stolen? For a start, 
they certainly couldn‟t allow black and white children to compete equally because 
the white children would have been humiliated by the brilliance of the Africans. 
The problem w as only solved when the minority white population realized they 
were the sole decision makers in terms of what information was to be taught or 
withheld from their black students and furthermore, they had the monopoly in the 
writing and in the publication o f the books, manuals and other materials that


--- PAGE 11 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 11 
black people would read . So, they simply decided to give our children an inferior 
quality of education instead. Professor Wilson says that the education of the 
black child has never been and can never be the sa me as that of the white child 
because the white child must be taught how to rule and dominate others, while 
the black child must be taught how to serve and obey, hence the dual role of the 
western educational system. In spite of all the talk about equality , desegregation 
and. Mr. Bush‟s famous „no child left behind policy,” the educational system in 
the West has not changed one iota since the days of slavery and continues to 
ensure that African children receive an inferior quality of education in comparison  
to their white counterparts. In order to maintain this two tiered system they have 
invented all kinds of covert strategies such as intelligence tests, special 
education classes, hierarchy between schools, etcetera,  In short, they continue 
to teach our ch ildren how to serve and obey which of course our young males 
totally reject. In fact, it is the information they teach in the school system which 
destroys the self esteem and the will to succeed in our children and that is 
exactly what it is intended for. As a result, they lose interest in school, begin to 
experience difficulty and eventually they drop out and become delinquents.  
   
This fear of being humiliated by African people is still very strong today and is 
one reason why many whites abandon certain professions and sports that black 
people enter and why they are so hesitant to allow black people into certain 
professions. When black people dominate an area of activity or profession, 
whites often give the impression that it is really of no value whatsoe ver, however, 
this behavior is simply a self defense mechanism which they adopt in order to 
avoid feelings of inadequacy, inferiority and the pain of being outperformed by 
African people, in other words, the same feelings their ancestors experienced so 
many centuries ago when they first encountered Africans.  
   
Teaching African children about their glorious past would have been 
counterproductive because of their  fear of being humiliated by Africans, 
so instead they decided  to distort both African and  world history by teaching 
falsehood. For example, many people today are unaware that Egyptian 
civilization predates that of Rome by thousands of years because they have 
erroneously been presented as contemporaneous, yet Roman civilization had not 
even begun whe n Pyramid building stopped in Egypt  around the 14th Dynasty. 
Worse, most people still do not know that there are more pyramids in Sudan than 
in Egypt,  or that this is where this  style of architecture originated.  In fact, the 
civilization of Nubia (Sudan) predates that of Egypt ... Since most of our people 
are unaware of the importance Sudan in our history the impending catastrophe 
which the proposed Kajbar Dam represents leaves them totally indifferent. This 
dam, just like in Egypt with the building of the Aswan Dam will erase forever all of 
Africa's ancient history in the Sudan, thus making this knowledge inaccessible  to 
future generations of African people.


--- PAGE 12 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 12 
Today, because of these distortions most black people are totally ignorant about 
their true histo ry. Instead of teaching African children that their ancestors, the 
ancient Egyptians, were the true builders of civilization, (the pyramids, obelisks 
and temples still stand as proof today), they were taught that it was the Greeks 
and Romans. Instead of be ing told that Imhotep the Egyptian was the father of 
medicine, they were taught that it was Hippocrates. Instead of being taught about 
the first universities founded by their ancestors in Timbuktu and Djenne in Mali, 
they were taught that Africans were an oral people who knew nothing about 
writing. Instead of being taught about the great Shona civilization of Zimbabwe 
that built a city bigger than London or the artistic genius of the Nok civilization of 
Nigeria, they were told that their homeland was a “dar k” continent, where their 
primitive, savage, ancestors roamed the wild jungles from morn till night 
practicing cannibalism and that luckily, God sent kind -hearted and charitable 
European Christians (Tarzan) to civilize them and to teach them his word in order 
to save them from themselves. To add insult to injury, they invented a racial 
hierarchy with themselves at the top, and Africans at the bottom and justified it by 
saying they were “god‟s chosen people” and therefore superior and that God had 
given them „a land overflowing with milk and honey‟, (Africa) while our ancestors 
were heathen, devil worshipers who God himself had cursed and therefore we 
deserved to be their slaves. These vicious lies continue to be believed by millions 
of people, both black and  white and is one of the reasons for the rampant and 
chronic racism in our societies today. Today whites continue to promote African 
genius as their own. For example, African people invented rock and rap but it is 
Elvis Presley who is known as the king of rock and roll while Eminem became the 
first rapper to win an Oscar. Likewise, Bill Gates has become a household name 
and a millionaire but without the genius of Dr. Mark Dean and Dr.Philip Emeagali, 
two African scientists, the computer would not have becom e accessible to the 
masses of people on the planet today.  
   
This was how the theft of African civilization, the brainwashing and the 
miseducation of African children and African people took place. If their plan has 
been so successful it is because they k new that in order to succeed they would 
have to target African children at a very early age. They, like our ancestors, 
understood that if you „train up a child in the way that you want it to go, when it is 
old it will not depart from it‟ and that is why fr om the beginning of slavery, African 
children were divested of their names and their languages. Furthermore, to 
submit Africans to their authority, they used religion to terrify African children by 
teaching them the fictitious story of the bible, plagiariz ed from the Egyptian 
Osirian myth, as fact. This story promised African children a life of suffering (hell) 
if they were disobedient to their master, (the slave master, not a supreme being 
as many black people mistakenly believe) but heavenly wealth after death if they 
obeyed.(paradise)


--- PAGE 13 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 13 
The real tragedy is that this distorted African story that generations of black 
children were forced to memorize, continue to be taken literally by millions of 
African people around the globe, who have spent their entir e lives waiting for this 
ancient Superman named Jesus Christ to burst through the clouds and deliver 
them from evildoers. The tragic irony is that today it is African people, the victims, 
who are keeping this religion which was forcefully imposed upon our children 
during slavery, alive. They  are its most fanatical adherents in contrast to their 
oppressors own people who have long since stopped believing in this myth. 
Reparations can never ever compensate for the incalculable damage this myth 
has caused to m illions of African people who have literally put their lives on hold 
in our world because they sincerely believe that only after death will they truly 
begin to live.  
   
The Western educational system therefore will always produce dysfunctional 
African chi ldren because having committed the most horrendous crime on this 
planet and lied about it they are forced to continue. Their propaganda machine 
must continue to make African people believe in the fantasy of the bible, believe 
that whites are superior, that  western civilization is better than their own, believe 
they must fight in the illegal wars waged by the West all around the planet, 
believe that Africa is a continent without a future, believe Africa is poor, believe 
that poverty, injustice and exploitati on has always existed in our world, believe 
that Africa is facing a demographic explosion (overpopulation) and dying from 
Aids (depopulation) at the same time (an illogical equation), believe they must 
work hard to promote Western interests and all the oth er fantasies which our 
people accept as fact which are too numerous to mention here. This is the 
reason their media feed our children negative information 24 hours a day that is 
designed to sap their energy, destroy their confidence, intensify their feelin gs of 
worthlessness and self hatred and increase their admiration for the West. The 
goal is to make every African child a Michael Jackson This is the strategic 
destruction of the African psyche that the West has put into place and why it is 
important that African parents and the African community understand these 
negative forces which are working to destroy our children in order to delay the 
liberation of African people.  
   
This is also the reason they treat us in the most despicable manner. We suffer 
the worst health, live in the most horrible conditions imaginable, are the most 
disrespected and abused people and do not live life as it should be lived. That is 
why black churchgoers often say „we are only passing through‟ in this world. 
What else can they s ay considering the lives that most of our people lead? On 
the other hand, Westerners live comfortably, eat properly, enjoy good health and 
live long and happy lives. In short, they are alive while we are dead because they 
have killed us. But we can be resu rrected by erasing them from our minds in the 
same way that they erased African history from ours. This is what I believe Dr 
Kamau Kambon was trying to get across when he said 2 years ago that “the 
solution to the black man‟s problem was the white man‟s ex termination”. Many


--- PAGE 14 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 14 
people in their ignorance thought he meant the physical extermination of white 
people. It is ludicrous to think he was talking about their physical elimination 
since the West has weapons which can annihilate every single African person o n 
the planet. What he obviously meant was that in order for African people to come 
out of their comatose, zombied state and lead happy and fulfilling lives, they must 
kill the white man metaphorically, mentally by replacing his lies with the truth.  
   
The West will never willingly admit the truth because they have too much to lose. 
They would have to admit the theft of African civilization, the mass murder of 
African people and the perpetuation of lies. Furthermore it would raise too many 
questions. For example, if the Bible is fiction, then who are its real authors? Is it 
true that Shakespeare was one of its writers and that is why he is known as the 
most famous writer ever? If there are no chosen people, then who are the people 
in Israel parading as Jews?  Why have they been placed there? Why does the 
USA defend them so stubbornly? What is the real purpose of the pope? What 
information are they hiding in the Vatican? What have they done with the 
information they took out of Africa? What really happened duri ng the Second 
World War? Who was Hitler? Why did the church protect neo -Nazis? That would 
raise more questions about the recent past such as, who really destroyed the 
world trade centre building on September 11th. Why was it destroyed? Who is 
Ben Laden? Why have they been unable to find him, although seriously ill? Does 
he really exist? Why did the West lie about the war in Kuwait? Why was the world 
made to believe that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction when 
he didn‟t? Why was he killed? What i s the real reason behind the so called war 
on terrorism? Why are they now picking on Iran? What are they hiding? Who can 
tell us the truth? These questions and a million more is what the Western world 
would rather not have to answer African people and the rest of the world after 
500 years of telling them nothing but lies.  
   
On the internet under the bible story about the stolen birthright this is the warning 
that you will read “It never pays to tell a lie. Once you tell a lie you must tell 
another, and another to cover up the first lie. Not only will all these lies catch up 
with you, but they can cause you many troubles, just like it did for Jacob and 
Rebecca”. That is what the West has done but their lies are catching up with 
them and they will have to pa y the consequences. We must no longer allow the 
West to claim African civilization as their own because our ancestors spent 
millions of years painstakingly observing, collecting, recording, creating and 
preserving it for us, their heirs, to allow Western b ullies who refused to do the 
same for their people to simply come along, steal it and claim it as their own 
simply because they had more advanced weapons than our ancestors. .More 
and more African people are only just beginning to realize this. We must tel l the 
truth. We must reclaim our pyramids, our obelisks, our medicine, mathematics, 
astronomy, physics, writing, our administration, our laws and our concepts. We 
must reclaim the famous 10 commandments which we have been taught god 
gave to a man named Mos es. They come from Africa and there are 42 of them


--- PAGE 15 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 15 
which our ancestors called the MAAT (the divine principles of peace, harmony, 
balance and justice) while the West calls them the „negative confessions.‟ Even 
the very cross that the church uses is African.  It‟s called the „Ankh.‟ We must 
study African history to find out what our ancestors left for us and every single 
concept or object that they invented we must take back. Our ancestors demand 
that we reclaim our birthright that was stolen from us.  
   
We will know that our people have reclaimed their birthright when African people 
want to study and receive diplomas from African schools and universities rather 
than those in the West, when African people want to work for African companies 
rather than western multinationals, when our young men and women especially 
our famous people want to marry African people rather than European men and 
women, when African parents prefer to give their children African looking dolls 
rather than European ones, when African peop le stop bleaching their skin 
because they prefer their own, when they prefer to give their children African 
names rather than European ones, when they prefer to pray to an African god 
rather than a European one, when Africans reject the warmongering religi ons of 
their enemies and return to the religions of their ancestors, when they feel 
empathy and compassion for African people first before they feel them for 
Europeans, when they love Africans first before loving Europeans, when Africans 
want to use their resources to develop and improve the lives of their people first 
before the lives of Europeans, when Africans set up their own economic system, 
their own political system, their own laws and their own currency rather than 
continue to use those of the West,  when they remove the artificial borders 
created by the west and return to Africa‟s natural borders, when they want 
African languages to be the official languages of Africa and teach them to their 
children rather than those of the West, when African men st op Europeans and 
Arabs from sexually abusing and enslaving African women and children, when 
Africans stop saying „they don‟t see color‟ and are proud to be Africans, when 
African people want to defend Africa before they defend the West, and finally, 
when they want to study African history before they study the history of the west. 
This is what our ancestors did because this is how normal human beings behave. 
This is also what the Japanese, the Indians and the Jews that our community 
admires so much actually  do and is the secret of their success. This is why they 
seem so unified and organized as a people.  
   
We don‟t behave like them because Europeans did not tamper with their normal 
behavior patterns in order to subjugate them and use them to further Wester n 
interests. How do you think they were able to conquer Africa and bring us to the 
West to be their servants so that most of us today only want „to live in peace and 
harmony with our enemies?‟ Do you think it was by whispering sweet words in 
our ears?  It was by exterminating 600 million Africans and turning us into 
abnormal human beings. That is the price that our ancestors paid and our people 
continue to pay for the theft of our land, our wealth and our subjugation. Their 
propaganda has made us believe th at the worst holocaust on this planet was in


--- PAGE 16 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 16 
Nazi Germany where 8 million died. In fact, we need to find out the real reason 
why they have poked that down our throats. The Iranian president Ahmadinejad 
has said that “the Jewish holocaust is a myth” and oth er people who have raised 
questions about this are immediately sent to prison or accused of antisemetism, 
however, considering that we have been taught nothing but lies during the last 
500 years, we should be very suspicious of every single thing that we h ave been 
told. Why do they want to start a war in Iran today and remove Ahmadinejad? 
Does he know too much? What exactly do they not want the world to know? Why 
did they kill Saddam Hussein so quickly? I‟m sure it has nothing to do with the 
death of the Ku rds. We should want to know the answers to these questions. 
That is why each person of African descent must become a modern day sleuth to 
find out exactly what happened on this planet.  
   
All the aberrations that we see in our community and which makes us  so 
fragmented and disorganized is a result of this horrendous crime. It is this “slave 
mentality” which has been passed down from generation to generation which 
makes us behave in such self destructive ways although slavery was abolished 
years ago. The on ly way for African people to stop to behaving unnaturally is to 
learn how that process took place, to talk about it and then to make a conscious 
effort to practice the above mentioned behavior, but we cannot heal if we 
continue to deny that we were intenti onally made to behave in an abnormal 
manner by our enemy because it was the only way to subjugate us and to steal 
our land and our wealth.. In a war, you do whatever is necessary to destroy your 
adversary and that is what Europe did.  
   
Finally, when we b ecome Africans again most of us will want to live in Africa 
rather than in the West. This is the nightmare of the western world as it means 
they will lose their entire low paid labor force which they have depended on for 
the last 500 years. Can you imagine  the economic catastrophe that will take 
place in the West when African people wake up from their anesthesia and decide 
to return home to Africa? Who will cook their food, look after their children, clean 
their homes and their streets, and provide their en tertainment? Who will provide 
jobs for their police, their judges, their sociologists, their teachers, and etcetera? 
Who will buy their products? Who will they abuse, brutalize murder and rape with 
impunity when we leave?  How many Jenna 6‟s do you think t hey will have when 
we go back to Africa? Who will fill up their prisons? Who will do all the jobs that 
African people have done for them during the last 500 years? In short, who will 
become their new slaves when we decide to return home to Africa?  The Asians? 
The Arabs? I doubt it. That is why the return to Africa must be handled with 
extreme caution because African people are in grave danger of being re -
enslaved when they finally come out of their daze and decide to return home.


--- PAGE 17 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 17 
This is what the end of Western civilization means. It‟s not about some 
Superman coming out of the skies, that‟s what their propaganda would like you to 
continue believing. In spite of all the propaganda about the laziness of African 
people, it is our labor and our ignorance that has kept the West strong for so long 
and it is only African people who can destroy what is erroneously known as 
western civilization? If Africans around the globe decide tomorrow not to work, 
the western economy will collapse overnight, but propaganda has made us 
believe that without the West nothing can function on this planet. Wall Street and 
the City are only betting shops where you place your bet; if the horse and the 
jockey don‟t run (world wide African labor force refuses to work) there will be no  
race. (no profits for Western investors) It was our capacity for hard work why 
Europeans exterminated the Amerindians of the new world and brought us to be 
their servants. They were familiar with our workmanship. They admired our 
temples, our obelisks, ou r pyramids, etc, while they were unfamiliar with the 
workmanship of the people of the new world. That is why our lives have been 
spared. It‟s not because they want to live in „peace  and harmony with us.‟ It‟s 
because we are their workhorses.  
   
What will the West replace African civilization and African people with when our 
people finally decide to bring their oppressive system to an end?  What will be the 
reaction of the masses of white people when they find out that what they have 
believed to be their civ ilization for the last 500 years is nothing more than the 
civilization of African people which their ancestors stole, since they too have 
been kept in total ignorance of the truth? What will their reaction be when their 
shame is exposed to the entire plane t? Their ancestors wrote down in their 
guidebook, the bible, what the consequences will be when the truth is finally 
revealed and their crime exposed to the whole world. “There will be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth”. It will be painful, as the truth always is.  
   
Do you now understand why the Miseducation of the black child is so important 
and why the West has spent so many centuries ensuring that black children 
believe western propaganda. How were African people to know that somewhere 
in their development the Aryan (white) race became lazy and decided to adopt a 
“get rich quick” mentality without having to “lift a straw” This is a criticism which is 
often directed at young people in our society today, however, isn‟t this the 
essence of western society? Isn ‟t this how the West got rich? Once again 
propaganda has made us believe that it is due to hard work that the West is 
wealthy today, when in reality it is because African people have been working 
and are still working to enrich them. This also demonstrates  the absolute power 
of propaganda which is to „make people believe that which is not true.‟ In fact, 
western society is nothing more than a vast propaganda machine. The motto of 
the Europeans became “war means wealth, peace means poverty.” They 
decided to wage war and enslave and exploit each other in order to acquire this 
wealth, and eventually when they came into contact with the peaceful peoples of


--- PAGE 18 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 18 
the New World, Africa and the Pacific Islands it was very easy for them to 
accomplish their goal.  
   
Before the racist government in South Africa bludgeoned Steve Biko to death, he 
stated that “the most potent weapon in the hands of the oppressor is the mind of 
the oppressed.” That is exactly why the West from the very beginning of slavery 
and colonialism targ eted African children and never left their education in the 
hands of African people? It is through the educational system they have been 
able to organize our children‟s education around their interests and goals in 
detriment to our own in order to maintain  their control. The time has come for our 
community to educate African children according to the goals and aspirations of 
African people. African parents must teach their children the true history of Africa 
because only when they do, will they want to prom ote our interests and not the 
interests of others. Promoting the interests of African people is one of the 
greatest fears of the western world because they know that when people feel 
confident and good about themselves it is very difficult to manipulate an d control 
them, and that is the reason they have always ensured that African children 
receive an inferior quality of education which denigrate their motherland and the 
achievements of their people.  
   
In conclusion, there is a macabre ritual which takes p lace after every general 
election in the industrialized countries which have nuclear weapons. The 
outgoing and the incoming president are left alone for 15 minutes as they share a 
secret code which only the president has access to. According to the theory,  
when there are no other options left, the president will simply type in the secret 
code, press a button and release nuclear weapons which can obliterate almost 
the entire planet. In their bible, the West has already told us what their solution 
will be when the end comes, and their world falls apart .This ritual is a warning to 
African people that if we do not want this planet obliterated by people who have 
never had any respect whatsoever for human life, we do not have another instant 
to lose. Professor Wi lson warned us before he died that our days on this planet 
are numbered if African people refuse to make the strategic decisions and the 
right choices required today.  
   
That is why there must be a complete paradigm shift in the way of thinking in the 
African communities around the world. And that paradigm shift will only come 
when our people have the right information. It is my hope that this article will 
contribute in some small way to helping African people and especially African 
parents get the right information in order to save our children and hasten the end 
of the unfair western capitalist system. Black parents must understand that an 
African centred education is an absolute necessity for African children if we are 
to offset the damage from the slave  school which we now know was never 
intended to educate African children to become wholesome, functioning 
members of society in the first place.


--- PAGE 19 ---
February 4, 2011 
 Why and How the African Child is  
Miseducated in the Western Educational System 
Page 19 
We should already be preparing to restore the African system that our ancestors 
left us in its untainted fo rm after the coming tsunami has passed since it is 
undoubtedly one of the best that humans have ever invented. In other words, the 
New World Order. It was Africa‟s genius which attracted her oppressors to her 
shores, it was her tremendous wealth and the ge nius of her people why they 
were enslaved, and it will be the genius of African people again that will liberate 
them from Western tyranny and bring peace back to this planet. That is why it is 
no accident that Africans were the first inhabitants of this planet.  
   
This article is dedicated to the memory of George G.M James author of  Stolen 
Legacy who paid the ultimate price because he dared to tell African people the 
truth and to my nieces and nephews generation, who are soon to be or are 
already parents,  so that their children do not grow up as ignorant as my 
generation and their generation were concerning the history of African people 
and of the world.  
   
You can stop the messenger but you can never stop the message. Today luckily 
we have a formidable messenger in the internet to spread that message.   
   
The 42 divine principles of MAAT: http://www.nubeing.com/unblind2/42.htm  
   
Related Articles on this site: „ Skin bleaching‟  This behavior is a direct 
consequence of children who did not receive an African centred education.  
   
To be distributed widely, especially to parents with school age children. This 
article may also be posted on blogs and websites or in any printed material 
around the globe without the permission of the author. It should also be 
translated into African languages and read aloud in areas where our people are 
unable to read and write.

