=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Dr. Bobby E Wright- Reach One-Teach-One-and-The-Psychopathic-Racial-Personality.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 5
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:55:51.149369
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 5 
 
Dr. Bobby E. Wright "Reach One Teach One" 
Dr. Bobby E. Wright "Reach One Teach One" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Click and Play / Download mp3s 
 
Play Dr. Bobby Wright- White Psychopathology 
Play Dr. Bobby Wright -Psychopathic Racial 
Personality 1 
Play Dr. Bobby Wright -Psychopathic Racial 
Personality 2


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 5 
 
Dr. Bobby E. Wright "Reach One Teach One" 
 "Dr. Bobby E. Wright was a "Black" Afrikan psychologist, so  labeled 
not just because he was both "Black" Afrikan  and a psychologist, but 
because he used his education, training, intellectual knowledge and 
skills always in the best interest of "Black" Afrikan  people all over the 
world." 
 
Dr. Wright tells us that the answer to Blacks’ problems can be found in 
the works and lives of people like Shaka Zulu, Martin Delany, Marcus 
Garvey, H. Rap Brown, Malcolm X, Chancellor Williams and others.  
 
Dr. Bobby Wright was one of the greatest analytical thinkers of the 20th Century. He not only 
skillfully identified the problems that face Afrikan people today but also had a clear solution to 
help solve our problem. Dr. Bobby Wright developed a Black Social Theory that would combat 
white supremacy. Dr. Bobby Wright said, "The Black Social Theory determines the destiny of a 
people by establishing guidelines of life. It defines their relationship with other living things, It 
defines values and rituals, methods of education, and how enemies are dealt with, etc." Also, 
Dr. Wright c oncept of Mentacide explains some of the self destructive behavior exhibited by 
African people worldwide. Unfortunately for us, Dr. Wright made the transition to our ancestors 
in 1982, but his spirit and wisdom will be with us forever. 
 
Recognized for his  activism, he was a special guest on the Committee of Science and 
Technology at the Sixth Pan -African Congress held at Tanzania in 1974. As a social scientist, 
he sought an all -encompassing social theory for Black people and formulated the concept of 
mentacide. To paraphrase, he defined mentacide as "the planned and systematic destruction of 
a group's mentality aimed at the destruction of the group." Thus, Black folk alienated from their 
culture and history eventually lose their sense of purpose and directi on, the symptoms of 
mentacide. Well aware of the implications of technical advances such as behavior modification 
and genetic engineering, he presented science as a tool serving greater ends (such as 
controlling the outcasts of white society), neither objective nor neutral.  
Being an uncompromising critic of Western society, he wrote the following on the relation of 
religion to prejudice from "The Psychopathic Racial Personality"  in the Fall 1974 issue of 
Black Books Bulletin: Because of their lack of ethica l or moral development, there is no conflict 
between the white's religion and racial oppression. “The white race had historically oppressed, 
exploited, and killed black people, all in the name of their god Jesus Christ and with the sanction


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 5 
 
Dr. Bobby E. Wright "Reach One Teach One" 
of their churche s. For example, it is generally overlooked that the Ku Klux Klan is primarily a 
religious organization. Also, blacks should never forget the Pope [Pius XI] blessing the Italian 
planes and pilots on their way to bombing Ethiopian men, women, and children w ho only had 
spears to defend themselves...”  
 
The Psychopathic Racial Personality and Other Essays by Bobby E. Wright Ph.D. 
(44 pages) 
 
Published by Haki R. Madhubuti (Third World Press) 1984  
 
Haki Madhubuti describes esteemed ancestor Dr. Bobby Wright as 
"one of the few Black people who dared to ask the penetrating 
questions and demand answers and corrective actions to the racial 
situation in the United States and the world." In these essays, 
psychologit Dr. Bobby Wright coins the term "mentacide" which he 
defines as the "deliberate and systematic destruction of a group’s 
minds with the ultimate objective being the extirpation of the group." 
"Mentacide," says Dr. Wright , is a worldwide phenomena being 
implemented against the entire Black race. "Therefore," he says, 
"Blacks in Africa will begin to manifest the behavior of Blacks in the 
United States. Dr. Wright "was a thorn in the brain of Black men and 
women posing as leaders." And his last words were a warning to his 
friends and associates, "Watch the leadership, especially those proclaiming their God -given 
answer to the problems of Black people." "Dr. Bobby E. Wright was a "Black" psychologist, so 
labeled not just becau se he was both Black and a psychologist, but because he used his 
education, training, intellectual knowledge and skills always in the best interest of Black people 
all over the world." Just as Brother Haki considered it an honor to publish Dr. Wright, it w as an 
honor for me to study and draw lessons from this revolutionary and thought provoking work.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 5 
 
Dr. Bobby E. Wright "Reach One Teach One" 
Dr. Wright poignantly begins the title essay, The Psychopathic Racial Personality, with 
the following narrative; 
 
"In a bullfight, after being brutalized whil e making innumerable charges at the movement of a 
cape, there comes a time when the bull finally turns and faces his adversary with the only 
movement being his heaving bloody sides. It is believed that for the first time he really sees the 
matador. This fi nal confrontation is known as "the moment of truth." For the bull, this moment 
comes too late." According to Dr. Wright, the experience of Black people all over the world 
presents an analogous situation. For hundreds of years, our European (white) matadors  have 
been holding up the capes of democracy, capitalism, Marxism, religion and education and for 
hundreds of years we have been charging at the movement of these "capes." Like the bull, we 
too are suffering from near fatal wounds and "indeed have arrived at our "moment of truth."  
 
Sisters and brothers, it is time for us to look at the matador and Dr. Wright tries to sharpen our 
vision. He defines a psychopath as "an individual who is constantly in conflict with other persons 
or groups. He is unable to exp erience guilt, he is completely selfish and callous, and he has a 
total disregard for the rights of others." Dr. Wright says Black leaders are reluctant to measure 
psychopathic traits of the White race in their dealings with Blacks when there is a threat 
involved. "For example", says Dr. Wright, "everywhere one finds Whites and Blacks in close 
proximity to each other, Whites are in control, whether it is Chicago or Zimbabwe." And our 
leaders rarely question this "extraordinary universal phenomenon" which Dr . Wright says "defies 
every known statistical law of probability." He also analyzes some of our so -called intellectual 
leaders and comments that, "Black intellectual enlightenment does not always lead to genuine 
insight and it can be very damaging to the i ntellect as reflected by the behavior and attitudes of 
many eminent Black scientists." As a result of the confusion, Dr. Wright concludes that Blacks 
have become disoriented and the result is various inadequate and dangerous behavioral 
patterns. "Some have  become catatonic and do not move at all but wait for divine intervention; 
others place their faith and energies in charismatic guides who are just as lost as they." Dr. 
Wright tells us that the answer to Blacks’ problems can be found in the works and live s of 
people like Shaka Zulu, Martin Delany, Marcus Garvey, H. Rap Brown, Malcolm X, Chancellor 
Williams and others. For they all looked at the matador or psychopath for what he was and is 
and moved against him." The "other essays", deal with Black Suicide,  Educating the Black Child 
and The Black Child: A Destiny in Jeopardy. These excellent essays reinforce the notions 
discussed in the title essay. Dr. Wright quotes the Afrikan proverb that warns the traveler of life,


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 5 
 
Dr. Bobby E. Wright "Reach One Teach One" 
"if you don’t know where you are going,  any road will get you there." He says a social theory 
determines the destiny of a people by establishing guidelines of life and Blacks should therefore 
develop a "Black Social Theory." He warns, however, the ultimate achievement of a Black social 
theory would be the recreation of Black culture and that is a very difficult task. Professor Jacob 
Carruthers (RIU), who reviewed the book said, "brainwashed Blacks who are awestruck by 
European theory and theorists cannot accomplish this task……and Bobby Wright’s concepts of 
the ‘psychopathic racial personality’ and ‘mentacide’ are major contributions to this culture 
recreation process." Since its publication in 1984, The Psychopathic Racial Personality has 
proved to be a revolutionary, groundbreaking work on race relations. It is one of the works that 
should be read by serious minded Africans everywhere who are dedicated and committed to 
rebuilding the Afrikan world order.

