=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Dr-Ivan-Van-Sertima-Tribute-A-Historical-Event-Document.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 6
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:59:03.637260
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
ASCAC Mid-Atlantic Region
PRAXIS Newsletter
Ivan Van Sertima Tribute
Report
Written by William HT Bailey
for March/April 2002 issue
On Saturday January 26, 2002, ASCAC Mid-Atlantic conducted a bus trip to the Dr. Ivan
Van Sertima tribute at Medgar Evers College, CUNY in Brooklyn, New York. The
exquisitely hosted trip along with the magnificent weather and historic event created a
momentous experienced for the approximately twenty-five participants.
A distinguished list of living legends gathered - at their own expense - to attempt to
articulate the magnitude of Dr. Van Sertima's contribution to our collective psychological
healing process. His 1977 seminal work, They Came Before Columbus, was explosive.
Although he stood on the shoulders of two centuries of African-centered scholars, the
timeliness, readability and impeccable analytical nature of his work made it stand out. It
exploded the twin myths of Western superiority and African inferiority for a wide
audience. As a follow-up, in 1979 he created a locus for African-centered scholarship
with his Journal of African Civilizations. He motivated a generation of scholars.
The following is the list of speakers and overview of each message.
Dr. Clinton Crawford opened the proceedings.
Minister Clemson Brown offered libations.
Ralph Carter led us in the singing of the Black National Anthem.
Dr. Runoko Rashidi presented a chronology of the Journal of African Civilizations.
Dr. Jose Bey expressed the honor he felt when Dr. Van Sertima asked him to contribute
an essay on Moorish history. He described the positive influence his association with
scholars had on his life.
Dr. Wayne Chandler told us of his surprise at finding nothing depicting Hannibal as a
Black African, while conducting research on him. He had to go to Latin and French
sources to find those depictions. Later in his career, he was informed that there are in fact
active efforts to censor history book material.
Aisha Finch, daughter of Dr. Charles Finch, read a tribute by her father entitled "Ivan
Van Sertima: An African Man for His Time". He described how They Came Before
Columbus shook Western establishment and uplifted African-centered scholars.
Image embellishment  and attachment Website by dr_imhotep 
1


--- PAGE 2 ---
Gil Nobles said that African-centered scholars play the role of terrorists, when they
expose fallacies in Western beliefs. He called Black scholars, who advocate Western
worldviews, political transvestites. He recounted some of the troubles he faced through
the years by serving our community with his show "Like It Is".
Dr. James Crawford revealed that he was transformed the first time he heard Dr. Van
Sertima speak. Dr. Crawford advised that reclaiming the science and values of ancient
Africans would serve us as a people.
Dr. Rosalind Jeffries said that Dr. Van Sertima teaches excellence.
Dr. Leonard Jeffries told us that we must establish support systems for our scholars. By
serving us, they gave up the material rewards their talent could have brought them. We
must also support our young scholars as we pull generations together, build human
pyramids and establish schools of knowledge everywhere.
Dr. Ben admonished us for routinely paying homage to a male deity but rarely to a
female one - we must balance our perspective. He discussed the price that African
centered scholars have had to pay for refusing to compromise with the West's distortions.
His response was always, "No! You're lying!" The result was not one merit raise in his
academic career.
A Guyanian folk singer sang a song to commemorate Dr. Van Sertima's birthday.
Camille Yarbrough said that Dr. Van Sertima's works filled in missing pieces; it is up to
us to tell our story. She related how during our enslavement, the oppressor would
undermine our unity by giving selected ones favorable treatment in the "big house". She
pointed out that those "master's tricks" are being employed today.
Tehut-Nine rendered his poem Scary Movie. It was a moving and brilliantly crafted
collage of movie and television show titles. Its message was that although the Western
establishment views conscious Africans as threats, we must maintain our self
development efforts.
Dr. Asa Hilliard read a tribute from Nzinga Ratibisha Heru - international president of
ASCAC. He then announced ASCAC's international conference scheduled for March 14-
17 in Philadelphia. Dr. Hilliard impressed upon us that we are engaged in a serious
culture war. And the Heritage Foundation is a primary antagonist. He related Brazil's
conscious campaign - articulated in 1914 - to eliminate African culture. It would be done
by absorbing people of African descent into a Brazilian culture. He gave examples of a
similar campaign in America.
Dr. Jan Carew - fellow Guyanian and longtime friend of Dr. Van Sertima - said that the
imperialists tore pages out of the book of the universe, but Dr. Van Sertima put them
back. He said that we must write our own history, if we want the truth. He guides his life
with something his grandmother told him: "Vision without action is hallucination".
Image embellishment  and attachment Website by dr_imhotep 
2


--- PAGE 3 ---
Jacqueline Van Sertima - wife of Dr. Van Sertima - told us that there are no such things
as accidents. She related the circumstances that weaved their lives together.
Dr. Ivan Van Sertima recounted experiences from his investigative researches. He said
that, with effort, our history that has been denied, distorted and buried could be
recovered.
Dr. Ishakamusa Barashango led us as we collectively projected a blessing towards Dr.
Ivan Van Sertima.
Image embellishment  and attachment Website by dr_imhotep 
3


--- PAGE 4 ---
THE GLOBAL AFRICAN COMMUNITY
H I S T O R Y   N O T E S
A TRIBUTE TO DR. IVAN VAN SERTIMA
By RUNOKO RASHIDI
"We have come to reclaim the house of history.   We are  dedicated to the revision of the role
of the African in the world's great civilizations, the contribution of Africa to the achievement
of man in the arts and sciences.   We shall
 emphasize what Africa has given to the world, not
what it has lost."
--Ivan Van Sertima
With absolute certainty it can stated that, due to his consistent and unrelenting scholarship over the past
twenty-five years in the rewriting of African history and the reconstruction of the African's place in world
history, particularly in the field of the African presence in ancient America, Ivan Van Sertima has
cemented his position as one of our greatest living scholars.
  Indeed, during
 this turbulent and exciting
period, he has been in the vanguard of those scholars fighting to place African history in a new light.
Simply put, Van Sertima's clarion call has been: "We shall follow the trail of the African in Europe, in
Asia, and in every corner of the New World, seeking to set the record straight.
  This is
 no romantic
exploration of antiquities.  It is
 a search for roots."
Ivan Van Sertima was born in Kitty Village, Guyana, South America on January 26, 1935. He was
educated at the School of Oriental and African Studies at London University where he graduated with
honors.
  From 1957 to
 1959, he served as a Press and Broadcasting Officer in the Guyana Information
Services.  During the
 decade of the 1960s, he broadcasted weekly from Britain to both Africa and the
4


--- PAGE 5 ---
Caribbean.  He came to the United States in 1970, where he completed his post graduate studies at Rutgers
University in New Jersey.  Dr. Van  Sertima began his teaching career as an instructor at Rutgers in 1972,
and he is now Professor of African studies in the Department of Africana Studies.
Van Sertima is a literary critic, a linguist, and an anthropologist, and has made a name for himself in all
three fields.  As a
 linguist, he is the compiler of the Swahili Dictionary of Legal Terms , based on his field
word in Tanzania, East Africa in 1967. As a literary critic, he is the author of Caribbean Writers , a
collection of critical essays on the Caribbean novel.   He is
 also the author of several major literary reviews
published in Denmark, India, Britain, and the United States.   He was
 recognized for his work in this field
by being requested by the Nobel Committee of the Swedish Academy to nominate candidates for the
Nobel Prize in Literature from 1976 to 1980.
The cornerstone of Dr. Van Sertima's legacy will probably be his authorship of They Came Before
Columbus: The African Presence in Ancient America.
  According to
 Van Sertima:
"The African presence in America before Columbus is of importance not only to African and
American history, but to the history of world civilizations. The African presence is proven by
stone heads, terra cottas, skeletons, artifacts, techniques and inscriptions, by oral traditions and
documented history, by botanical, linguistic and cultural data."
They Came Before Columbus is a groundbreaking historical work and a literary hallmark.
  The ideas
 and
themes presented in They Came Before Columbus were not novel.  Indeed,  many people
 had written on
the African presence in pre-Columbian America before Van Sertima, notably Leo Wiener, Kofi Wangara,
R.A. Jairazbhoy, Legrand H. Clegg II, and Floyd W. Hayes III, but Van Sertima's book was the first such
work of its type written by an African to comprehensively address the subject.
  In his
 own words, Van
Sertima notes that:
"What I have sought to do in this book, therefore, is to present the whole picture emerging
from these disciplines, all the facts that are now known about the links between Africa and
America in pre-Columbian times."
They Came Before Columbus has now gone through more than twenty printings.
  It was
 published in
French in 1981, and in the same year was awarded the Clarence L. Holt Prize, a prize awarded every two
years "for a work of excellence in literature and the humanities relating to the the cultural heritage of
Africa and the African diaspora."
  In 1979 Dr.
 Chancellor Williams received the Clarence L. Holte prize
for the Destruction of Black  Civilization.
Following upon the publication of They Came Before Columbus , and equally momentous, in 1979 Dr.
Van Sertima founded the Journal of African Civilizations  which quickly gained "a reputation for
excellence and uniqueness among historical and anthropological journals.   It is
 recognized as a valuable
information source for both the layman and student."   The late
 St. Clair Drake described the  Journal of
African Civilizations as "one of the most important events in the development of research and publication
from the perspective of Pan-African scholarship."   Van Sertima
 set the tone early on when he stated that:
"The destruction of African high-cultures after the massive and continuous invasions of
Europe left many Africans surviving on the periphery or outer ring of what constituted the
best in African civilizations.
  New facts
 that challenge this image create such consternation
and incredulity that an extraordinarily emotional campaign is mounted by some of the most
respected voices in the scientific establishment to explain away the new data.
That drift of dynastic Egypt from Africa has now dramatically slowed.
  Recent archeological
finds have
 caught up with the mythmakers.   More and
 more the history of Africa is being
reconstructed upon the basis of hard, objective data rather than upon the self-serving
speculations and racist theories about the black barbarians."
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
Since 1979 the Journal of African Civilizations has published works by and about many of the world's
finest Africanist scholars in a series of magnificent anthologies.   These  works include Blacks in Science ,
Nile Valley Civilizations, African Presence in Early America, Black Women in Antiquity , Egypt
Revisited, Egypt: Child of Africa, African Presence in Early Europe , Golden Age of the Moor , African
Presence in the Art of the Americas , Great Black Leaders , Great African Thinkers (coedited with Larry
Obadele Williams), and African Presence in Early Asia  (coedited with  Runoko
 Rashidi).  In
 1998
Transaction Press produced  produced Van Sertima's newest text-- Early America Revisited--the definitive
statement on the subject.
On July 7, 1987 Dr. Van Sertima appeared before a Congressional Committee to challenge the Columbus
myth.  In
 November 1991 he defended his thesis in an address to the Smithsonian Institute.   In
 this arena
Ivan Van Sertima has emerged as an undefeated champion.
SOURCES:
They Came Before Columbus and Early Early America Revisited , by Ivan Van Sertima
Return to the GLOBAL AFRICAN PRESENCE Home Page
Copyright © 1998 Runoko Rashidi. All rights reserved.
Revised: April 24, 2003.
Webpage design: Kenneth Ritchards
Image embellishment dr_imhotep 
6

