=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Dr-John-Henrik-Clarke's Impact-on-the-Hip-Hop-Generation.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 6
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:53:36.540943
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 6  
 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation                                               RBG Street Scholar 
 
By RBG Street Scholar 
“…And it is the present-day socio-political genre of hip hop, known affectionately as the 
RBG Movement/ aka the Marcus Mosiah Garvey Revival  /aka the Re-Afrikanization 
Renaissance that Dr. Clarke is the SPIRIT-FORCE of…” 
The hip hop historian and writer Bakari Kitwana describes the "hip hop generation"  as the 
generation born between 1964 and 1984. Thi s group is to be distinguished from the so -called 
Generation X, since it mostly refers to Afri kan-Americans and New Afrikan urban communities. 
In sharp distinction from the generation that preceded them, the hip hop generation faced a new 
series of internal and external challenges and historical crises. 
*Background 
o The generation entering maturity in the 1950s and 1960s were known as the "civil 
rights and Black Power  generation," since their soci opolitical activism and 
revolutionary mentality  resulted in things like President Lyndon B. Johnson 
eventually signing the Civil Rights Act of 1964  and the Voters Right Act of 1965 . 
Segregation and institutional racism were ou tlawed. Things like passing literacy 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation 
Note * The Hip Hop generation experience in America is not separate  from that of their parents, rather, they are linked in a 
chain of events which imposes socioeconomic, political and historical realities encompassing the criteria by which we can 
best appreciate Dr. Clarke’s present impact upon them, as we should be reminded , Dr.  Clarke’s writings, teaching and 
mentorship reach as far back as the 1930’s. Of particular note; he was the history advisor to Minister Malcolm X.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 6  
 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation                                               RBG Street Scholar 
test in order to vote  were now outlawed ; but nonetheless, socio-structural and 
institutional racism (white supremacy) and  police terrorism against Black people 
continued unabated.  
o Malcolm X was assassinated in 1965 essentially for his Black Nationalist ideology; 
i.e. his calling for self -reliance, self -respect and self -defense. Whatever the 
complicit elements  in his murder were , it was his movement towards Afrikan 
Internationalism that made cointelpro physically eliminate him. 
o Consequently, the Black Power Movement was born as an outgrowth of the 
failures of the civil rights movement ’s “turn the other cheek , appeal to their 
Christian conscious” tactics. 
o The BPM of the 1960s  and early 70s resonated throughout the U.S. chocolate 
cities. It inspired black and radical white people  (Students for a Democratic 
Society) alike throughout the United States and had a marked impact and positive 
influence on oppress people  fighting for liberation  throughout the world. 
Essentially, it was the teachings and  assassinations of Malcolm X  and, a few 
years later, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. that were  the impetus and SPIRIT of 
the Black Power Movement.  
o However, c ointelpro and narcotization of our communities with heroin crushed 
revolutionary organizations like the BPP before our struggle and movement  could 
reach a critical level of maturity. Youth that were feeding and educating our people 
due to the failures of the United States  government; youth that were  fighting for 
human rights and civil rights (to make the U.S. government live up the constitution 
of the United States and Bill of Rights  where Black people were concern ), and 
youth that were fighting against police terrorism and white world terror domination 
(the Vietnam War) were killed, falsely imprisoned and ran into exile. And many of 
them, as you are well aware, are still languishing in U.S. gulags to this very day.  
o  . The children of the Civil Right -Black Power generation , i.e., the "Hip Hop 
generation," experienced a different set of problems  (repression) secondary to a 
1980 white right-wing backlash and re -emergence of willful neglect under the 
auspices of so-called *Reaganomics. The exporting out of  jobs meant skyrocketing 
inner-city crime and intrapersonal violence. These  problems were facilitated and 
exacerbated by chemical warfare when the CIA threw crack-cocaine in the mix , 
thus establishing the pre -text for the “re-constitution of slavery in the form of the 
Prison Industrial Complex”. Also important to note is that t hey were also hit with  
biological warfare . HIV/AIDS has devastated us here  in the U.S.  and in Sub -
Saharan Africa with millions of death and the fallout continues as I write. (See THE 
STRECKER MEMORANDUM ) But, the hip -hop generation f ought back with Hip 
Hop Culture.  
Emergence of Hip Hop Culture 
o From the early 1970s, the DJ Kool Herc  and Afrika Bambaataa began organizing 
hip hop music parties in New York City's Bronx borough. They were responsible 
for a number of Afrikan cultural innovations, including sampling the drum beat of 
hard funk labels. Then, Grandma ster Flash, refined a technique for "scratching" 
records, or shifting the record on the  turntable to create a distinct phraseology. In 
Note *“From Reaganomics to Ebonics: The Urban Cultural Dissonance of Hip-Hop” A University of Utah study  that 
seeks to understand the genesis of politically charged, or "conscious" hip-hop from a social, cultural, and political 
standpoint.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 6  
 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation                                               RBG Street Scholar 
addition to innovations in live music, the 5 Core Elements of Hip Hop were born-
DJing, MC ing, Urban Art (aka graffiti art), break dancing (B -Boys) and 
Knowledge (of self-Afrikan and Afrikan American history and cultural teachings). 
Socio-political Conditions for the Hip Hop Generation 
o Between the late 1970s and 1980s, cities such as Oakland, New York City and 
Detroit, Newark, Chicago etc.  experienced a massive crime wave, with gang 
violence and murders becoming unprecedented;  especially because of the  rise of 
crack-cocaine. By 1980, the crack epidemic, which mostly affected the same 
African-American communities, was underway on  East Coast as well as the West . 
As hip hop historian Bakari Kitwana writes in The Hip Hop Generation  “hip hop was a 
way and opportunity for youths to avoid becoming involved with gang violence or 
heavy drug use.” 
Global Spread and Socio-political Maturity of Hip Hop 
o Now the oldest of the h ip hop  generation (40-45 years old)  have chil dren and 
grandchildren that are still going strong. T hus, hip hop  represents the longest 
running Black Cultural  Arts (and socio-political movement) in the history of 
America. It has found a g lobal audience  with counties as diverse as Nigeria to 
Albania having distinct hip hop sub-cultures. And what is most, it is the present-
day socio-political genre of hip hop, known affectionately as *The RBG 
Movement/aka the Marcus  Mosiah Garvey Revival / aka the Re -
Afrikanization Renaissance that Dr. Clarke is the SPIRIT -FORCE of. And I 
am pleased to say that this conscious hip hop community and knowledge seekers 
are growing quite rapidly every day within this information and technology era. 
o The SPIRITS of Dr. Ben, Dr. Clarke, Dr. Chancellor Williams, and Dr. John 
Jackson are the pillars of  the RBG Movement’s  foundation. Great ones  like 
Robert F. Williams, Malcolm X, the Black Panther Party and Black Power 
Movement, along with their music  and poets, like  Curtis Mayfiel d, Dr. Amiri 
Baraka, Jazz, Gil Scott-Heron and The Last  Poets are back in full affect.  Raptivist 
like Tupac Shakur , Outlawz, Chuck D, Paris, Dead Prez and the rest of the  New 
Age RBG Rap Music Crew  are droppin madd science and uplifting our people  
consistently with beautiful  and positive music and spoken word . Our Afri-centric 
scholars, all taught, influenced and mentored by Dr. Clarke in some formal or 
informal fashion have literally gone viral on the World Wide Web due to the work 
of the hip hop generation. Scholars like Dr. Wade Nobles, Ivan Van Sertima , Dr. 
Molefi Asante, Dr. Niam Akbar, and Dr. Jacob Curruthers, Dr. Asa Hilliard III, Dr. 
Leonard Jeffries, James Turne r and many other RBG Movement  professors are 
conscious hip hop heads  new leaders, teachers and guides. For the hip hop 
generation and their children the Africentric knowledge element has broaden and 
coalesced with the activism  and lessons of  Afrikan revolutionary elders and 
ancestors like Chairman Omali Yeshitela, George Jackson, Nana Kunta ( The War 
Correspondent, Del Jones), Dr. Amos Wilson, Dr. Marimba Ani, Assata Shakur, 
Dr. Imari Obedele,  Dr. Mutulu Shakur , Sundiata  Acoli, Jalil Muntaqim , Imam 
*Note: Harvard University professor Orlando Patterson has studied rap as a "cultural response to historic oppression and 
racism, a system for communication among black communities throughout the United States." Patterson also describes 
how rap has taken advantage of globalized systems of mass communication. Furthermore, Dr. Errol Henderson brought 
much clarity to the movement with his classic essay entitled “Black Nationalism and Rap Music”


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 6  
 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation                                               RBG Street Scholar 
Jamal Al-Amin, Mumia Abu-Jamal, Dr. Kwame Toure, Dr. Huey P Newton,  Dr. 
Khallid Abdul Muhammad, and many more , and become a  more unified 21st 
century New Afrikan Revolutionary mentality  and Black Liberation through 
Proper Education Movement (the New Afrikan Independence Movement).  
Criticisms and Concerns Regarding Hip Hop (Hip Hop Culture vs. Hip Hop Industry) 
o The hip hop generation has been criticized for what is perceived 
as commercialism at the expense of conscious artistry, and the 
encouragement of  Black on Black violence . The criticism of 
over-commercialized music became particularly pointed when 
the hip hop niche went from underground  and socio-political to 
being "found everywhere from a Burger King commercial to 
episodes of NYPD Blue." After, Tupac and Biggie were killed in 
a span of seven months in 1996 and 1997, hip hop music was the 
subject of a strong backlash, especially since gangsta rap (a white 
Ivy League and thus, corporate creation) became the new controlling subgenre.  
See: Exposin' the Hip Hop Hood Hoax -TRUTH Minista Paul Scott 
Hip Hop: The Culture vs. The Industry and The White Supremacy Factor, RBG 
Street Scholar 
Resources for further study: 
o Bakari Kitwana. The Hip Hop Generation: Young Blacks and the Crisis in African American 
Culture. Basic Civitas, 2003 
o Youth Culture, Hip Hop and Resistance Toward Capital Globalization, Haworth et. al. 
o Black Nationalism and Rap Music Dr. Errol A. Henderson 
Conclusion 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Affect and Effect on the Hip Hop Generation 
So, with all that being said, in order for us to fully appreciate and over-stand “*Dr. Clarke’s 
Impact on the Hip Hop Generation ”, is to be clear on both his affect and effect. To affect is 
to have an influence on or cause a change in . Dr. Clarke has unquestionable been our modern 
day champion in th is regard. His e ducation for Afrikan Liberation paradigm is the conscious 
community’s order of the day. Dr. Clarke is presently influencing, moving and changing the Hip 
Hop Generation and their children for the better by touching their emotions with love of Afrikan 
people; with his knowledge, wisdom and over -standing of who we really are . As an Afrikan 
historian and uncompromising revolutionary scholar he has attack “The Great White Lie” that 
our history only commenced with slavery with razor sharp intelligence and peerless scholarship.  
The word effect has a different meaning. It means something brought about by a cause or agent ; 
the power to produce an outcome or achieve a result, such as a drug. In this regard, Dr. Clarke is 
a Hip Hop change agent.  Allegorically speaking, he is a new age drug, as the people are getting 
 
Just A Minstrel 
jasirix 
 
*Note:  Of course when I speak here of Dr. Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation, I am referring to the conscious 
fold. Those seeking knowledge of self and those that realize the difference between Euro -indoctrination masked as 
education and true Education for Nationhood and Afrikan Liberation.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 6  
 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation                                               RBG Street Scholar 
high off his teachings. Dr. Clarke and company have given the Hip Hop Generation, Black (New 
Afrikan) people in general and people of Afrikan ancestry throughout the world back our self-
esteem, self-image and self-concept as Afrikans.  Dr. John Henrik Clarke was a  Black Nationalist 
Pan-Afrikanist warrior scholar, historian, prolific writer, educator and mentor of international proportions. 
His Education towards Afrikan Liberation paradigm and praxis  has inspired for generations past and will 
continue to inspire for generations to come.  Although he was Professor of African 
World History that in 1969 became the founding chairman of the Department of 
Black and Puerto Rican Studies at Hunter College of the City University of New 
York, we must remember , he was one of our last self -taught scholars. He was the 
Carter G. Wo odson Distinguished Visiting Professor of African History at Cornell 
University’s Africana Studies and Research Center. And in  1968 Dr. Clarke 
founded the African Heritage Studies Association.  And with all that high–powered 
accomplishment, all that scholarship  at his command ; I can still vividly recall Dr. 
Clarke once saying “my greatest hour in education i s not as a Chairman, not as 
Assist Dean, but in that classroom watching those eyes come alive as I pour out 
information and make it significant to them, so they could become different and 
better human being; giving them the strength to challenge that world out there.”   
So, as  far as Impact is concern, “Dr. Clarke is a Hip Hop Phenomenon  and Savior to Afrikan 
People.” I think!!! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bang Bang - Dr. Clarke 
Da Official Black History 
Mixtape 
Produced by BroCadence 
 
This brief interactive essay is a companion to: 
 John Henrik Clarke: the Harlem connection to the founding of 
Africana Studies, by Dr. Jacob Carruthers


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 6  
 
Dr. John Henrik Clarke’s Impact on the Hip Hop Generation                                               RBG Street Scholar 
 
POST SCRIPT:  
RBG HAS TWO MAJOR ACADEMIC FEATURES IN HONOR OF DR. CLARKE THAT 
THOUSANDS OF THE HIP HOP GENERATION DRAWS LESSONS FROM DAILY. 
( I COIN DR. CLARKE AS RBG COMMUNIVERSITY'S DEAN BLK AND AFRIKANA STUDIES ).  
THEY ARE BOTH PROJECTS IN EVOLUTION AND ALWAYS UNDER CONSTRUCTION. 
RBG BLACK HISTORY MONTH 24/7/365 
A FULL FEATURES WIKIZINE HOSTED BY ZIMBIO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RBG DR JOHN HENRIK CLARKE STUDIES COLLECTION 
ALL FREE INTERACTIVE MULTI-MEDIA PUBLICATIONS FOR STUDY, SHARING AND 
DOWNLOADS

